

BONES OF HAND


The skeleton of the human hand consists of 27 bones:

the eight short carpal bones of the wrist are organized into a proximal row (scaphoid, lunate, triquetral and pisiform) which articulates with the bones of the forearm, and a distal row (trapezium, trapezoid, capitate and hamate), which articulates with the bases of the five metacarpal bones of the hand. 
    
The heads of the metacarpals will each in turn articulate with the bases of the proximal phalanx of the fingers and thumb. 

These articulations with the fingers are the metacarpophalangeal joints known as the knuckles. 

At the palmar aspect of the first metacarpophalangeal joints are small, almost spherical bones called the sesamoid bones. 

The fourteen phalanges make up the fingers and thumb, and are numbered I-V (thumb to little finger) when the hand is viewed from an anatomical position (palm up). 

The four fingers each consist of three phalanx bones: proximal, middle, and distal. 

The thumb only consists of a proximal and distal phalanx. 

Together with the phalanges of the fingers and thumb these metacarpal bones form five rays or poly-articulated chains.

Because supination and pronation (rotation about the axis of the forearm) are added to the two axes of movements of the wrist, the ulna and radius are sometimes considered part of the skeleton of the hand.

There are numerous sesamoid bones in the hand, small ossified nodes embedded in tendons; the exact number varies between people:

whereas a pair of sesamoid bones are found at virtually all thumb metacarpophalangeal joints, sesamoid bones are also common at the interphalangeal joint of the thumb (72.9%) and at the metacarpophalangeal joints of the little finger (82.5%) and the index finger (48%). 

In rare cases, sesamoid bones have been found in all the metacarpophalangeal joints and all distal interphalangeal joints except that of the long finger.

The articulations are:

    -interphalangeal articulations of hand (the hinge joints between the bones of the digits)
    -metacarpophalangeal joints (where the digits meet the palm)
    -intercarpal articulations (where the palm meets the wrist)
    -wrist (may also be viewed as belonging to the forearm).

ARCHES

Arches of the hand
Red: one of the oblique arches
Brown: one of the longitudinal arches of the digits
Dark green: transverse carpal arch
Light green: transverse metacarpal arch

The fixed and mobile parts of the hand adapt to various everyday tasks by forming bony arches: 
    
longitudinal arches (the rays formed by the finger bones and their associated metacarpal bones), transverse arches (formed by the carpal bones and distal ends of the metacarpal bones), and oblique arches (between the thumb and four fingers):

Of the longitudinal arches or rays of the hand, that of the thumb is the most mobile (and the least longitudinal). 

While the ray formed by the little finger and its associated metacarpal bone still offers some mobility, the remaining rays are firmly rigid. 

The phalangeal joints of the index finger, however, offer some independence to its finger, due to the arrangement of its flexor and extension tendons.

The carpal bones form two transversal rows, each forming an arch concave on the palmar side. 

Because the proximal arch simultaneously has to adapt to the articular surface of the radius and to the distal carpal row, it is by necessity flexible. 

In contrast, the capitate, the "keystone" of the distal arch, moves together with the metacarpal bones and the distal arch is therefore rigid. 

The stability of these arches is more dependent of the ligaments and capsules of the wrist than of the interlocking shapes of the carpal bones, and the wrist is therefore more stable in flexion than in extension. 

The distal carpal arch affects the function of the CMC joints and the hands, but not the function of the wrist or the proximal carpal arch. 

The ligaments that maintain the distal carpal arches are the transverse carpal ligament and the intercarpal ligaments (also oriented transversally). 

These ligaments also form the carpal tunnel and contribute to the deep and superficial palmar arches. 

Several muscle tendons attaching to the TCL and the distal carpals also contribute to maintaining the carpal arch.

Compared to the carpal arches, the arch formed by the distal ends of the metacarpal bones is flexible due to the mobility of the peripheral metacarpals (thumb and little finger). 

As these two metacarpals approach each other, the palmar gutter deepens. The central-most metacarpal (middle finger) is the most rigid. 

It and its two neighbors are tied to the carpus by the interlocking shapes of the metacarpal bones. 

The thumb metacarpal only articulates with the trapezium and is therefore completely independent, while the fifth metacarpal (little finger) is semi-independent with the fourth metacarpal (ring finger) which forms a transitional element to the fifth metacarpal.

Together with the thumb, the four fingers form four oblique arches, of which the arch of the index finger functionally is the most important, especially for precision grip, while the arch of the little finger contribute an important locking mechanism for power grip. 

The thumb is undoubtedly the "master digit" of the hand, giving value to all the other fingers. 

Together with the index and middle finger, it forms the dynamic tridactyl configuration responsible for most grips not requiring force. The ring and little fingers are more static, a reserve ready to interact with the palm when great force is needed.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hand