

CARPOMETACARPAL JOINT OF THUMB


The CMC joint of the thumb or the first CMC joint, also known as the trapeziometacarpal (TMC) joint, differs significantly from the other four CMC joints and is therefore described separately.


== Thumb ==


The carpometacarpal joint of the thumb (pollex), also known as the first carpometacarpal joint, or the trapeziometacarpal joint (TMC) because it connects the trapezium to the first metacarpal bone, plays an irreplaceable role in the normal functioning of the thumb. 

The most important joint connecting the wrist to the metacarpus, osteoarthritis of the TMC is a severely disabling condition; up to twenty times more common among elderly women than in average.

Pronation-supination of the first metacarpal is especially important for the action of opposition. 

The movements of the first CMC are limited by the shape of the joint, by the capsulo-ligamentous complex surrounding the joint, and by the balance among involved muscles. 

If the first metacarpal fails to sit well 'on the saddle', for example because of hypoplasia, the first CMC joint tends to be subluxated (i.e. slightly displaced) towards the radius.

The capsule is sufficiently slack to allow a wide range of movements and a distraction of roughly 3 mm, while reinforcing ligaments and tendons give stability to the joint. 

It is slightly thicker on its dorsal side than on the other.

The first carpometacarpal joint is a frequent site of osteoarthritis in postmenopausal women.


Ligaments

The description of the number and names of the ligaments of the first CMC varies considerably in anatomical literature. Imaeda et al. 

1993 describe three intracapsular and two extracapsular ligaments to be most important in stabilizing the thumb:

Anterior oblique ligament (AOL)

    A strong, thick, and intracapsular ligament originating on the palmar tubercle of the trapezium to be inserted on the palmar tubercle of the first metacarpal. 
    
    It is taut in abduction, extension, and pronation, and has been reported to have an important retaining function and to be elongated or absent in CMC joint arthritis.

Ulnar collateral ligament (UCL)

    An extracapsular ligament, the UCL is located ulnarly to the AOL. 
    
    It has its origin on the flexor retinaculum and is inserted on the ulnopalmar tubercle of the first metacarpal. 
    
    It is taut in abduction, extension, and pronation, and often found elongated in connection to CMC joint arthritis. The importance ascribed to the UCL varies considerably among researchers.

First intermetacarpal ligament (IML)

    Connecting the bases of the second and first metacarpals, this ligament inserts onto the ulnopalmar tubercle of the first metacarpal where its fibers intermingle with those of the UCL.
    
     It is taut in abduction, opposition, and supination. 
     
     It has been reported to be the most important restraining structure of the first CMC joint by several researchers. 
     
     Some consider it too weak to be able to stabilize the joint by itself, yet accept that together with the UCL it represents an important restraining structure.

Posterior oblique ligament (POL)

    An intracapsular ligament stretching from the dorsoulnar side of the trapezium to the ulno-palmar tubercle of the first metacarpal. Not considered an important ligament to the first CMC joint, it tightens during forced adduction and radial abduction.

Dorsoradial ligament (DRL)

    Like the previous ligament, the DRL is not considered important to the first CMC. 
    
    It connects the dorsal sides of the trapezium and the first metacarpal.

Early, anatomically correct drawings of the ligaments of the first carpometacarpal joints were produced by Weitbrecht 1742.

Movements

In this articulation the movements permitted are flexion and extension in the plane of the palm of the hand, abduction and adduction in a plane at right angles to the palm, circumduction, and opposition.

    It is by the movement of opposition that the tip of the thumb is brought into contact with the volar surfaces of the slightly flexed fingers. 
    
    This movement is effected through the medium of a small sloping facet on the anterior lip of the saddle-shaped articular surface of the greater multangular (trapezium). 
    
    The flexor muscles pull the corresponding part of the articular surface of the metacarpal bone on to this facet, and the movement of opposition is then carried out by the adductors.
    
    Flexion of this joint is produced by the flexor pollicis longus and brevis, assisted by the opponens pollicis and the adductor pollicis.
    
    Extension is effected mainly by the abductor pollicis longus, assisted by the extensores pollicis longus and brevis.
    
    Adduction is carried out by the adductor; abduction mainly by the abductor pollicis longus and brevis, assisted by the extensors.

Range of motion for the first CMC is 53° of flexion/extension, 42° of abduction/adduction, and 17° of rotation.[4]

Planes and axes of movements

The thumb's MP and CMC joints abduct and adduct in a plane perpendicular to the palm, a movement also referred to as "palmar abduction." 

The same joints flex and extend in a plane parallel to the palm, also referred to as "radial abduction," because the thumb moves toward the hand's radial side. 

Abduction and adduction occur around an antero-posterior axis, while flexion and extension occur around a lateral axis.

For ease of orientation, the thumbnail can be considered as resting in the thumb's frontal plane. 

Abduction and adduction of the first CMC (and MP) joint(s) occur in this plane; flexion and extension of the first CMC, MP, and IP joints occur in a plane that is perpendicular to the thumbnail. 

This remains true regardless of how the first metacarpal bone is being rotated during opposition and reposition.

Sexual dimorphism

Male and female thumb CMC joints are different in some aspects. In women, the trapezial articular surface is significantly smaller than the metacarpal surface, and its shape also differs from that of males. While most thumb CMC joints are more congruent in the radioulnar direction than the dorsovolar, female CMC joints are less globally congruent than male joints.

Evolution

A primitive autonomisation of the first ray took place in dinosaurs, while a real differentiation appeared in primitive primates approximately 70 million years ago. 

The shape of the human TMC joint dates back about 5 million years ago. 

As a result of evolution, the human thumb CMC joint has positioned itself at 80° of pronation, 40° of abduction, and 50° of flexion in relation to an axis passing through the stable second and third CMC joints.
