

CARPOMETACARPAL JOINT


The carpometacarpal (CMC) joints are five joints in the wrist that articulate the distal row of carpal bones and the proximal bases of the five metacarpal bones.

The carpometacarpal joint of thumb or the first CMC joint, also known as the trapeziometacarpal (TMC) joint, differs significantly from the other four CMC joints and is therefore described separately.


== Fingers ==

The second metacarpal articulates primarily with the trapezoid and secondarily with the trapezium and capitate.

The third metacarpal articulates primarily with the capitate,

The fourth metacarpal articulates with the capitate and hamate.

The fifth metacarpal articulates with the hamate.

Among themselves, the four ulnar metacarpals also articulates with their neighbours at the intermetacarpal articulations.


=== Ligaments ===

These four CMC joints are supported by strong transverse and weaker longitudinal ligaments: the dorsal carpometacarpal ligaments and the volar or palmar carpometacarpal ligaments.

The interosseous ligaments consist of short, thick fibers, and are limited to one part of the carpometacarpal articulation; they connect the contiguous inferior angles of the capitate and hamate with the adjacent surfaces of the third and fourth metacarpal bones.


=== Movements ===

The carpometacarpal joints of second through fifth digits are arthrodial. 

The movements permitted in the second through fifth carpometacarpal joints most readily observable in the (distal) heads of the metacarpal bones. 

The range of motions in these joints decrease from the fifth to the second CMCs.

The second to fifth joints are synovial ellipsoidal joints with a nominal degree of freedom (flexion/extension). 

The second and third joints are however essentially immobile and can be considered to have zero degrees of freedom in practice. 

These two CMC provide the other three CMCs with a fixed and stable axis. 

While the mobility of the fourth CMC joint thus is perceptible, the first joint is a saddle joint with two degrees of freedom which except flexion/extension also enable abduction/adduction and a limited amount of opposition. 

Together the movements of the fourth and fifth CMCs facilitates for their fingers to oppose the thumb.


=== Function ===

The function of the finger carpometacarpal joints and their segments overall is to contribute to the palmar arch system together with the thumb. 

The proximal transverse arch of the palm is formed by the distal row of carpal bones. 

The concavity of this arch is augmented at the level of the metacarpal heads by the flexibility of the first, fourth, and fifth metacarpal heads around the fixed second and third metacarpal heads; a flexible structure called the distal transverse arch. 

For each finger there is also a longitudinal arch. 

Together, these arches allow the palm and the digits to conform optimally to objects as we grasp them (so-called palmar cupping). 

Furthermore, as the amount of surface contact is maximized, stability is enhanced and sensory feedback increases. 

The deep transverse metacarpal ligament stabilises the mobile parts of the palmar arch system.

As the fingers are being flexed, palmar cupping is contributed to by muscles crossing the carpometacarpal joints when they act on the mobile parts of the palmar arch system. 

The oblique opponens digiti minimi muscle acts on the fifth carpometacarpal joint and is the only muscle that act on the carpometacarpal joints alone. 

It is optimally positioned to flex and rotate the fifth metacarpal bone about its long axis. 

Palmar arching is further increased when [flexor carpi ulnaris] (which is attached to the pisiform) and intrinsic hand muscles attached to the transverse carpal ligament acts on the arch system. 

The fixed second and third carpometacarpal joints are crossed by the radial wrist muscles (flexor carpi radialis, extensor carpi radialis longus, and extensor carpi radialis brevis). 

The stability of these two carpometacarpal joints is a functional adaptation that enhances the efficiency of these muscles at the midcarpal and radiocarpal joints.


== Synovial membranes ==

The synovial membrane is a continuation of that of the intercarpal joints. 

Occasionally, the joint between the hamate and the fourth and fifth metacarpal bones has a separate synovial membrane.

The synovial membranes of the wrist and carpus are thus seen to be five in number:
    
The first passes from the lower end of the ulnar to the ulnar notch of the radius, and lines the upper surface of the articular disk.

The second passes from the articular disk and the lower end of the radius above, to the bones of the first row below.

The third, the most extensive, passes between the contiguous margins of the two rows of carpal bones, and sometimes, in the event of one of the interosseous ligaments being absent, between the bones of the second row to the carpal extremities of the second, third, fourth, and fifth metacarpal bones.

The fourth extends from the margin of the greater multangular to the metacarpal bone of the thumb.

The fifth runs between the adjacent margins of the triangular and pisiform bones.

Occasionally the fourth and fifth carpometacarpal joints have a separate synovial membrane.


== Clinical significance ==

Osteoarthritis of the carpometacarpal joints is a type of joint disease that results from breakdown of joint cartilage and underlying bone. 

When it affects the thumb it is termed trapeziometacarpal osteoarthritis.

Carpometacarpal bossing is the presence of a small immovable protuberance over the joint.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Carpometacarpal_joint