

EIGHTH RIB


== Structure of the rib cage ==

Ribs are described based on their location and connection with the sternum. 

All ribs are attached posteriorly to the thoracic vertebrae and are numbered accordingly one to twelve. 

Ribs that articulate directly with the sternum are called true ribs, whereas those that do not articulate directly are termed false ribs. 


=== Attachment of the rib cage ===

The terms true ribs and false ribs describe rib pairs that are directly or indirectly attached to the sternum. 

The first seven rib pairs known as the fixed or vertebrosternal ribs are the true ribs (Latin: costae verae) as they connect directly to the sternum; the next five pairs (eighth to twelfth) are the false ribs (Latin: costae spuriae). 


=== Parts of rib (general) ===

Each rib consists of a head, neck, and a shaft. 

All ribs are attached posteriorly to the thoracic vertebrae. 

They are numbered to match the vertebrae they attach to – one to twelve, from top (T1) to bottom. 

The head of the rib is the end part closest to the vertebra with which it articulates. 

It is marked by a kidney-shaped articular surface which is divided by a horizontal crest into two articulating regions. 

The upper region articulates with the inferior costal facet on the vertebra above, and the larger region articulates with the superior costal facet on the vertebra with the same number. 

The transverse process of a thoracic vertebra also articulates at the transverse costal facet with the tubercle of the rib of the same number. 

The crest gives attachment to the intra-articular ligament.The neck of the rib is the flattened part that extends laterally from the head. 

The neck is about 3 cm long. 

Its anterior surface is flat and smooth, whilst its posterior is perforated by numerous foramina and its surface rough, to give attachment to the ligament of the neck. 

Its upper border presents a rough crest (crista colli costae) for the attachment of the anterior costotransverse ligament; its lower border is rounded.

On the posterior surface at the neck, is an eminence—the tubercle that consists of an articular and a non-articular portion. 

The articular portion is the lower and more medial of the two and presents a small, oval surface for articulation with the transverse costal facet on the end of the transverse process of the lower of the two vertebrae to which the head is connected. 

The non-articular portion is a rough elevation and affords attachment to the ligament of the tubercle. 

The tubercle is much more prominent in the upper ribs than in the lower ribs.

The angle of a rib (costal angle) may both refer to the bending part of it, and a prominent line in this area, a little in front of the tubercle. 

This line is directed downward and laterally; this gives attachment to a tendon of the iliocostalis muscle. 

At this point, the rib is bent in two directions, and at the same time twisted on its long axis.

The distance between the angle and the tubercle is progressively greater from the second to the tenth ribs. 

The area between the angle and the tubercle is rounded, rough, and irregular, and serves for the attachment of the longissimus dorsi muscle.


==== Ribs and vertebrae ====

The first rib (the topmost one) is the most curved and usually the shortest of all the ribs; it is broad and flat, its surfaces looking upward and downward, and its borders inward and outward.
        
The head is small and rounded, and possesses only a single articular facet, for articulation with the body of the first thoracic vertebra. 

The neck is narrow and rounded. 

The tubercle, thick and prominent, is placed on the outer border. 

It bears a small facet for articulation with the transverse costal facet on the transverse process of T1. 

There is no angle, but at the tubercle, the rib is slightly bent, with the convexity upward, so that the head of the bone is directed downward. 

The upper surface of the body is marked by two shallow grooves, separated from each other by a slight ridge prolonged internally into a tubercle, the scalene tubercle, for the attachment of the anterior scalene; the anterior groove transmits the subclavian vein, the posterior the subclavian artery and the lowest trunk of the brachial plexus. 

Behind the posterior groove is a rough area for the attachment of the medial scalene. 

The under surface is smooth and without a costal groove. 

The outer border is convex, thick, and rounded, and at its posterior part gives attachment to the first digitation of the serratus anterior. 

The inner border is concave, thin, and sharp, and marked about its center by the scalene tubercle. 

The anterior extremity is larger and thicker than that of any of the other ribs.


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rib_cage