

FEMORAL VEIN


In the human body, the femoral vein is a blood vessel that accompanies the femoral artery in the femoral sheath. 

It begins at the adductor hiatus (an opening in the adductor magnus muscle) and is a continuation of the popliteal vein. 

It ends at the inferior margin of the inguinal ligament, where it becomes the external iliac vein. 

The femoral vein bears valves which are mostly bicuspid and whose number is variable between individuals and often between left and right leg.


== Segments ==


The common femoral vein is the segment of the femoral vein between the branching point of the deep femoral vein and the inferior margin of the inguinal ligament.
The subsartorial vein or superficial femoral vein are designations for the segment between the adductor hiatus and the branching point of the deep femoral vein, passing through the subsartorial canal. 

However, usage of the term superficial femoral vein is discouraged by many physicians because it leads to confusion among general medical practitioners. 

In particular, the femoral vein is clinically a deep vein, where deep vein thrombosis indicates anticoagulant or thrombolytic therapy, but the adjective "superficial" leads many physicians to falsely believe it is a superficial vein, which has resulted in patients with femoral thrombosis being denied proper treatment. 

Therefore, the term subsartorial vein has been suggested for the femoral vein distally to the branching point of the deep femoral vein.


== Drainage ==

Several large veins drain into the femoral vein:

Great saphenous vein, into the common femoral vein.
Deep vein of the thigh, whose entry marks the border between the subsartorial vein and common femoral vein.
Popliteal vein, becoming the subsartorial or superficial femoral vein at the adductor hiatus.


== Clinical significance ==

Occlusion of the femoral vein can be life-threatening due to its size. 

For example, deep vein thrombosis of the femoral vein can cause pulmonary embolism, with a higher risk when the thrombus is located in the common femoral vein than in the subsartorial vein.The femoral vein is often used to place central venous lines. 

This is associated with a significant risk of infection.The practice of delivering recreational drugs intravenously using the femoral vein is relatively common amongst injecting drug users (IDUs).



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Femoral_vein