

LATERAL FEMORAL CUTANEOUS NERVE


The lateral cutaneous nerve of the thigh (also called the lateral femoral cutaneous nerve) is a cutaneous nerve of the thigh. 

It originates from the dorsal divisions of the second and third lumbar nerves from the lumbar plexus. 

It passes under the inguinal ligament to reach the thigh. 

It supplies the skin on the lateral part of the thigh. 

Nerve compression can cause meralgia paraesthetica.


== Structure ==

The lateral cutaneous nerve of the thigh is a nerve of the lumbar plexus. 

It arises from the dorsal divisions of the second and third lumbar nerves (L2-L3). 

It emerges from the lateral border of the psoas major muscle at about its middle. 

It crosses the iliacus muscle obliquely, toward the anterior superior iliac spine (ASIS). 

It then passes under the inguinal ligament. 

It passes through the muscular lacuna, and then over the sartorius muscle into the thigh. 

It divides into an anterior and a posterior branch.

The anterior branch becomes superficial about 10 cm below the inguinal ligament, and divides into branches which are distributed to the skin of the anterior and lateral parts of the thigh, as far as the knee. 

The terminal filaments of this nerve frequently communicate with the anterior cutaneous branches of the femoral nerve, and with the infrapatellar branch of the saphenous nerve, forming with them the peripatellar plexus.

The posterior branch pierces the fascia lata, and subdivides into filaments which pass backward across the lateral and posterior surfaces of the thigh, supplying the skin from the level of the greater trochanter to the middle of the thigh.


== Function ==

The lateral cutaneous nerve of the thigh is a sensory nerve. 

It supplies the skin on the lateral (outer) part of the thigh.


== Clinical significant ==

Entrapment of the lateral cutaneous nerve of the thigh is caused by compression of the nerve near the anterior superior iliac spine and the inguinal ligament. 

This causes meralgia paraesthetica (Bernhardt-Roth syndrome).



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lateral_cutaneous_nerve_of_thigh