

MALLEOLUS


A malleolus is the bony prominence on each side of the human ankle.

Each leg is supported by two bones, the tibia on the inner side (medial) of the leg and the fibula on the outer side (lateral) of the leg. 

The lateral malleolus is the prominence on the outer side of the ankle, formed by the lower end of the fibula.

The word malleolus (), plural malleoli (), comes from Latin and means "small hammer". (It is cognate with mallet.)


== Lateral malleolus ==

The lateral malleolus is found at the foot end of the fibula, of a pyramidal form, and somewhat flattened from side to side; it descends to a lower level than the medial malleolus.

The medial surface presents in front a smooth triangular surface, convex from above downward, which articulates with a corresponding surface on the lateral side of the talus. 

Behind and beneath the articular surface is a rough depression, which gives attachment to the posterior talofibular ligament.

The lateral surface is convex, subcutaneous, and continuous with the triangular, subcutaneous surface on the lateral side of the body.

The anterior border is thick and rough and marked below by a depression for the attachment of the anterior talofibular ligament.

The posterior border is broad and presents the shallow malleolar sulcus, for the passage of the tendons of the Peronæi longus and brevis.

The summit is rounded and gives attachment to the calcaneofibular ligament.A major structure that is located between the lateral malleolus and the Achilles tendon is the sural nerve.


== Clinical significance ==


=== Fracture ===

A bimalleolar fracture is a fracture of the ankle that involves the lateral malleolus and the medial malleolus. 

Studies have shown that bimalleolar fractures are more common in women, people over 60 years of age, and patients with existing comorbidities.

A trimalleolar fracture is a fracture of the ankle that involves the lateral malleolus, the medial malleolus, and the distal posterior aspect of the tibia, which can be termed the posterior malleolus. 

The trauma is sometimes accompanied by ligament damage and dislocation.


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Malleolus