

LONG THORACIC NERVE


The long thoracic nerve (external respiratory nerve of Bell; posterior thoracic nerve) innervates the serratus anterior muscle.


== Structure ==

The long thoracic nerve arises from the anterior rami of the C5, C6, and C7 cervical spinal nerve. 

The root from C7 may occasionally be absent. 

The roots from C5 and C6 pierce through the scalenus medius, while the C7 root passes in front of the muscle.

The long thoracic nerve descends through the cervicoaxillary canal. 

It is posterior to the brachial plexus, and the axillary artery and vein. 

This takes it deep to the clavicle. 

It rests on the outer surface of the serratus anterior muscle. 

It extends along the side of the thorax to the lower border of the serratus anterior muscle. 

It supplies filaments to each of its digitations (finger-like projections).


== Function ==

The long thoracic nerve innervates the serratus anterior muscle.


== Clinical significance ==

Due to its long, relatively superficial course, the long thoracic nerve is susceptible to injury, either through direct trauma or stretch. 

Mechanisms of injury include:

-nerve lesions.

-various sports injuries, typically occurring from a blow to the ribs underneath an outstretched arm.

-surgery for breast cancer, specifically radical mastectomies that involve removal of axillary lymph nodes.

-carrying weight, such as heavy bags, over the shoulder for a prolonged time.

-Parsonage Turner Syndrome, an autoimmune disease.

-Symptoms are often minimal – if symptomatic, a posterior shoulder or scapular burning type of pain may be reported. 

Some injuries, particularly lesions, can paralyse the serratus anterior muscle to produce a winged scapula. 

This is most prominent when the arm is lifted forward or when the patient pushes the outstretched arm against a wall. 

However, even winging may not be evident until the trapezius stretches enough to reveal an injury several weeks later.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Long_thoracic_nerve