

NASAL SEPTAL CARTILAGE


The nasal cartilages are structures within the nose that provide form and support to the nasal cavity. 

The nasal cartilages are made up of a flexible material called hyaline cartilage (packed collagen) in the distal portion of the nose. 

There are five individual cartilages that make up the nasal cavity: septal nasal cartilage, lateral nasal cartilage, major alar cartilage (greater alar cartilage, or cartilage of the aperture), minor alar cartilage (lesser alar cartilage, sesamoid, or accessory cartilage), and vomeronasal cartilage (Jacobson's cartilage).

The nasal cartilages associate with other cartilage structures of the nose or with bones of the facial skeleton. 

These associations create vent-like structures within the nose so that air can flow from the nasal cavity to the lungs or vice versa. 

Therefore, the nasal cartilages are structures that aid the body in respiratory functions to intake oxygen or expire carbon dioxide.

Abnormalities or defects in the nasal cartilages affect airflow through the nasal cavity, resulting in respiratory issues. 

Surgical techniques have been produced to adjust the position or repair the nasal cartilages so that maximal airflow is once again accomplished. 


=== Septal Nasal Cartilage ===


The septal nasal cartilage is a flat, quadrilateral piece of hyaline cartilage that separates both nasal cavities from one another. 

The septal nasal cartilage fits in a place between the perpendicular plate of the ethmoid and vomer bones while also being covered by an internal mucous membrane. 

The superior portion of the septal nasal cartilage attaches to the nasal bones, while the inferior portion attaches to the alar cartilages via fibrous tissues. 

The septal nasal cartilage separates both right and left nasal cavities, which allows air to pass through them. 

Providing two cavities generates turbulence within the tight spaces, allowing air to flow quicker bidirectionally. 

The septal nasal cartilage is also the main structure that provides the orientation of the nose, being the midline structure of the organ. 

With an offset septal nasal cartilage, the nose will appear crooked to the viewer. 

A crooked nose can block airflow coming from the nares to the lungs or vice versa. 

This can lead to respiratory issues due to low oxygen but high carbon dioxide counts within the body. 

A surgical procedure to correct this issue is called septoplasty.


=== Septoplasty ===


Septoplasty is a surgical procedure that straightens the septal nasal cartilage within the center of the nose. 

With a crooked septum, it is more difficult for an individual to breathe and the risk for getting a sinus infection increases. 

Also called a deviated septum, a crooked nose will block one or both sides of the nose, affecting the quality of life. 

However, a deviated septum is very common and does not always create respiratory issues. 

Respiratory issues usually occur in more severe cases, requiring surgery to repair. 

Surgery is also permitted to individuals that seek cosmetic changes due to moderate cases of a deviated septum. 

Surgery may require a surgeon to cut and remove parts of the septal nasal cartilages, replacing them later in a reconstructed format. 

This will allow the individual to receive more airflow through the nostrils when the surgery fully heals after 3 to 6 months. 

However, there are some risks correlated with this surgical procedure. 

These risks include a change in the shape of the nose, excessive bleeding, vacant space in the septum, trouble smelling, blood clots that need to be removed, and numbness by the facial region. 

Smoking can also cause further damage during the healing process of septoplastic surgery.


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nasal_cartilages