

PARIETAL BONE

The parietal bones are two bones in the skull which, when joined together at a fibrous joint, form the sides and roof of the cranium. 

In humans, each bone is roughly quadrilateral in form, and has two surfaces, four borders, and four angles. 

It is named from the Latin paries (-ietis), wall. 

    EXTERNAL SURFACE:

The external surface [Fig. 1] is convex, smooth, and marked near the center by an eminence, the parietal eminence (tuber parietale), which indicates the point where ossification commenced.

Crossing the middle of the bone in an arched direction are two curved lines, the superior and inferior temporal lines; the former gives attachment to the temporal fascia, and the latter indicates the upper limit of the muscular origin of the temporal muscle.

Above these lines the bone is covered by a tough layer of fibrous tissue – the epicranial aponeurosis; below them it forms part of the temporal fossa, and affords attachment to the temporal muscle.

At the back part and close to the upper or sagittal border is the parietal foramen which transmits a vein to the superior sagittal sinus, and sometimes a small branch of the occipital artery; it is not constantly present, and its size varies considerably.

    INTERNAL SURFACE:

The internal surface is concave; it presents depressions corresponding to the cerebral convolutions, and numerous furrows (grooves) for the ramifications of the middle meningeal artery; the latter run upward and backward from the sphenoidal angle, and from the central and posterior part of the squamous border.

Along the upper margin is a shallow groove, which, together with that on the opposite parietal, forms a channel, the sagittal sulcus, for the superior sagittal sinus; the edges of the sulcus afford attachment to the falx cerebri.

Near the groove are several depressions, best marked in the skulls of old persons, for the arachnoid granulations (Pacchionian bodies).

In the groove is the internal opening of the parietal foramen when that aperture exists. 

    BORDERS:

    -The sagittal border, the longest and thickest, is dentated (has toothlike projections) and articulates with its fellow of the opposite side, forming the sagittal suture.
    
    -The frontal border is deeply serrated, and bevelled at the expense of the outer surface above and of the inner below; it articulates with the frontal bone, forming half of the coronal suture. The point where the coronal suture intersects with the sagittal suture forms a T-shape and is called the bregma.
    
    -The squamous border is divided into three parts: of these:
        -the anterior is thin and pointed, bevelled at the expense of the outer surface, and overlapped by the tip of the great wing of the sphenoid;
        -the middle portion is arched, bevelled at the expense of the outer surface, and overlapped by the squama of the temporal;
        -the posterior part is thick and serrated for articulation with the mastoid portion of the temporal.
    
    -The occipital border, deeply denticulated (finely toothed), articulates with the occipital bone, forming half of the lambdoid suture. 
    
    That point where the sagittal suture intersects the lambdoid suture is called the lambda, because of its resemblance to the Greek letter.
    
    
    
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parietal_bone