

PULMONARY CIRCULATION


The pulmonary circulation is a division of the circulatory system in all vertebrates. 

The circuit begins with deoxygenated blood returned from the body to the right atrium of the heart where it is pumped out from the right ventricle to the lungs. 

In the lungs the blood is oxygenated and returned to the left atrium to complete the circuit.

The other division of the circulatory system is the systemic circulation that begins with receiving the oxygenated blood from the pulmonary circulation into the left atrium. 

From the atrium the oxygenated blood enters the left ventricle where it is pumped out to the rest of the body, returning as deoxygenated blood back to the pulmonary circulation.

The blood vessels of the pulmonary circulation are the pulmonary arteries and the pulmonary veins.

A separate circulatory circuit known as the bronchial circulation supplies oxygenated blood to the tissue of the larger airways of the lung.


== Structure ==
 
Deoxygenated blood leaves the heart, goes to the lungs, and then re-enters the heart; deoxygenated blood leaves through the right ventricle through the pulmonary artery. 

From the right atrium, the blood is pumped through the tricuspid valve (or right atrioventricular valve) into the right ventricle. 

Blood is then pumped from the right ventricle through the pulmonary valve and into the main pulmonary artery.


=== Lungs ===

The pulmonary arteries carry deoxygenated blood to the lungs, where carbon dioxide is released and oxygen is picked up during respiration. 

Arteries are further divided into very fine capillaries which are extremely thin-walled. 

The pulmonary veins return oxygenated blood to the left atrium of the heart.


=== Veins ===

The oxygenated blood then leaves the lungs through pulmonary veins, which return it to the left part of the heart, completing the pulmonary cycle. 

This blood then enters the left atrium, which pumps it through the mitral valve into the left ventricle. 

From the left ventricle, the blood passes through the aortic valve to the aorta. 

The blood is then distributed to the body through the systemic circulation before returning again to the pulmonary circulation.


=== Arteries ===

From the right ventricle, blood is pumped through the semilunar pulmonary valve into the left and right main pulmonary artery (one for each lung), which branch into smaller pulmonary arteries that spread throughout the lungs.


== Development ==

The pulmonary circulation loop is virtually bypassed in fetal circulation. 

The fetal lungs are collapsed, and blood passes from the right atrium directly into the left atrium through the foramen ovale (an open conduit between the paired atria) or through the ductus arteriosus (a shunt between the pulmonary artery and the aorta).

When the lungs expand at birth, the pulmonary pressure drops and blood is drawn from the right atrium into the right ventricle and through the pulmonary circuit. 

Over the course of several months, the foramen ovale closes, leaving a shallow depression known as the fossa ovalis.


== Clinical significance ==

A number of medical conditions may affect the pulmonary circulation:

Pulmonary hypertension describes an increase in resistance in the pulmonary arteries.

Pulmonary embolism is occlusion or partial occlusion of the pulmonary artery or its branches by an embolus, usually from the embolization of a blood clot from deep vein thrombosis. 

It can cause difficulty breathing or chest pain, is usually diagnosed through a CT pulmonary angiography or V/Q scan, and is often treated with anticoagulants such as heparin and warfarin.

Cardiac shunt is an unnatural connection between parts of the heart that leads to blood flow that bypasses the lungs.
Vascular resistance
Pulmonary shunt



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pulmonary_circulation