

RING FINGER


The ring finger is the fourth digit of a human hand. 

It is located between the pinkie and the middle finger. 

It is so named for its traditional association with wedding rings in many cultures, though not all cultures use this digit as the ring finger. 

Traditionally, a wedding ring was worn only by the bride/wife, but in recent times more men also wear a wedding ring. 

It is also the custom in some cultures to wear an engagement ring on the ring finger.
In anatomy, the ring finger is called digitus medicinalis, the fourth digit, digitus annularis, digitus quartus, or digitus IV. 

In Latin, the word anulus means "ring", digitus means "digit", and quartus means "fourth".


== Etymology ==

The origin of the selection of the fourth digit as the ring finger is not definitively known. 

According to László A. 

Magyar, the names of the ring finger in many languages reflect an ancient belief that it is a magical finger. 

It is named after magic or rings, or called nameless (for example, in Chinese: 無名指 / 无名指; pinyin: wúmíng zhǐ; lit. 'unnamed finger'). 

In Japanese it is called 薬指 (kusuri yubi, "medicine finger"), deriving its name from the fact that it was frequently used when taking traditional powdered medicine, as it was rarely used otherwise and hence was considered the cleanest of all.In Sanskrit and other languages like Finnish or Russian, the ring finger is called respectively - "Anamika", "nimetön" and "Безымянный" ("nameless"). 

In Arabic and Hebrew, the ring finger is called respectively – bansur (meaning "victory") – and kmitsa (meaning "taking a handful").


== History ==


Before medical science discovered how the circulatory system functioned, people believed that a vein ran directly from the fourth digit on the left hand to the heart. 

Because of the hand–heart connection, they chose the descriptive name vena amoris, Latin for the vein of love, for this particular vein.Based upon this name, their contemporaries, purported experts in the field of matrimonial etiquette, wrote that it would only be fitting that the wedding ring be worn on this digit. 

By wearing the ring on the fourth digit of the left hand, a married couple symbolically declares their eternal love for each other.
In Britain, only women tended to wear a wedding ring until after the World Wars, when married male soldiers started to wear rings to remind them of their partner.


== Contemporary customs ==



=== Western customs ===

In Western cultures, a wedding ring is traditionally worn on the fourth digit, commonly called the "ring finger". 

This developed from the Roman anulus pronubis when a man would give a ring to the woman at their betrothal ceremony. 

Blessing the wedding ring and putting it on the bride's finger dates from the 11th century. 

In medieval Europe, during the Christian wedding ceremony the ring was placed in sequence on the thumb, index, middle, and ring fingers of the left hand. 

The ring was then left on the ring finger. 

In a few European countries, the ring is worn on the left hand prior to marriage, then transferred to the right during the ceremony. 

For example, a Eastern Orthodox Church bride wears the ring on the left hand prior to the ceremony, then moves it to the right hand after the wedding. 

In England, the 1549 Prayer Book declared "the ring shall be placed on the left hand". 

By the 17th and 18th centuries, the ring could be found on any digit after the ceremony — even on the thumb.
The wedding ring is generally worn on the ring finger of the left hand in the former British Empire, certain parts of Western Europe, certain parts of Catholic Mexico, Bolivia, Chile and Central and Eastern Europe. 

These include: Australia, Botswana, Canada, Egypt, Ireland, New Zealand, South Africa, the UK, and the US; France, Italy, Portugal, Sweden, Finland, Czech Republic, Slovakia, Switzerland, Netherlands [if Catholic], Croatia, Slovenia, and Romania. 

Also in Catalonia, Valencia and the Balearic Islands (in Spain it's generally worn on the right).
The wedding ring is worn on the ring finger of the right hand in some Orthodox and a small number of Catholic European countries, some Protestant Western European, as well as some Central and South American Catholic countries. 

In Eastern Europe, these include: Belarus, Bulgaria, Greece, Georgia, Latvia, Lithuania, North Macedonia, Russia, Serbia and Ukraine. 

In Central or Western Europe, these include: Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Germany, Hungary, Poland, Netherlands [if not Catholic], Norway and Spain (except in the Catalan-speaking regions). 

In Central or South America, these include: Colombia, Cuba, Peru, Venezuela.
The ring is worn on the right hand until the actual wedding day, when it is moved to the left hand in Turkey, Lebanon, and Syria as well as in Romania and Brazil.
In western music, for instance the guitar, "I-M-A" is a style of plucking guitar strings, where "I" means index finger, "M" means middle finger, and "A" means ring finger. 

This is a popular type of "finger style" guitar playing, where the "A" comes from Latin, where the word anulus means ring.


=== Middle Eastern, Jewish and South Asian customs ===

In Sinhalese and Tamil culture, the groom wears the wedding ring on his right hand and bride wears it on her left hand ring finger. 

This can be seen in countries like Sri Lanka where there is a rich Sinhalese and Tamil cultural influence in the society.A wedding ring is not a traditional part of the religious Muslim wedding and wedding rings are not included in most Islamic countries. 

However, if a wedding ring is worn in an Islamic country, it may be worn on either the left (such is the custom in Iran) and for example (in Jordan the right ring finger for engagement and the left ring finger for marriage). 

As opposed to the wedding ring, use of a ring to denote betrothal or engagement is quite prevalent in Muslim countries, especially those in West and South Asia. 

These rings may be worn on the ring finger of either the right or left hand by both men and women. 
In a traditional Jewish wedding ceremony, the wedding ring is placed on the bride's righthand index finger, but other traditions place it on the middle finger or the thumb, most commonly in recent times. 

Today, the ring usually is moved to the left hand ring finger after the ceremony. 

Some Jewish grooms have adopted wearing a wedding ring. 

However, in Orthodox Judaism, most men do not wear wedding rings.
Rings are not traditional in an Indian wedding. 

However, in modern society, it is becoming a practice to wear rings for engagements and not for actual marriage. 

Though the left hand is considered inauspicious for religious activities, a ring (not to be called wedding ring) is still worn on the left hand. 

Men generally wear the rings on the right hand and women on the left hands.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ring_finger