

SEPTAL NUCLEI (SEPTAL AREA)


The septal area (medial olfactory area), consisting of the lateral septum and medial septum, is an area in the lower, posterior part of the medial surface of the frontal lobe, and refers to the nearby septum pellucidum.

The septal nuclei are located in this area. 

The septal nuclei are composed of medium-size neurons which are classified into dorsal, ventral, medial, and caudal groups. 

The septal nuclei receive reciprocal connections from the olfactory bulb, hippocampus, amygdala, hypothalamus, midbrain, habenula, cingulate gyrus, and thalamus. 

The septal nuclei are essential in generating the theta rhythm of the hippocampus.

The septal area (medial olfactory area) has no relation to the sense of smell, but it is considered a pleasure zone in animals.
The septal nuclei play a role in reward and reinforcement along with the nucleus accumbens. 

In the 1950s, Olds & Milner showed that rats with electrodes implanted in this area will self-stimulate repeatedly (i.e., press a bar to receive electric current that stimulate the neurons). 

Experiments on the septal area of humans have taken place since the 1960s.


== Connections ==

The septal area is located on the lower posterior part of the frontal lobe. 

The septal area refers to the nearby septum pellucidum. 

It is located underneath the corpus callosum and in front of the lamina terminalis. 

The lamina terminalis is a layer of gray matter that connects the optic chiasma and the anterior commissure. 

The septal nuclei are in the septal area, and are essential
in generating the theta rhythm of the hippocampus.

The dorsal septum projects to the lateral preoptic area, lateral hypothalamus, periventricular hypothalamus and midline thalamus.

Fibers from the ventral half of the septum project topographically to the hippocampal formation, thalamus, hypothalamus and midbrain. 

Specifically, neurons located along the midline in the vertical limb of the diagonal band of Broca project through the dorsal fornix to all CA fields of the dorsal hippocampus and adjacent subicular cortex. 

Other fibers from this region project through the stria medullaris to the medial and lateral habenular nuclei, the paratenial and anteromedial nucleus of the thalamus, and through the medial forebrain bundle to the pars posterior of the medial mammillary nucleus.

Cells located in the intermediolateral septum also project through the lateral part of the fimbria to all CA fields of the ventral hippocampus and adjacent subicular and entorhinal cortices. 

These cells also send fibers through the stria medullaris to the lateral habenular nucleus and mediodorsal thalamic nucleus. 

Other axons arising from these cells descend through the medial forebrain bundle to terminate in a region dorsal to the interpeduncular nucleus.

The lateral septum is a relay center for connections from the CA3 of the hippocampus to the ventral tegmental area. 

These connections help link reward signals with the context in which they occur.Fibers from the most lateral part of the ventral septum (i.e., bed nucleus of the anterior commissure) project through the stria terminalis to the ventral subiculum. 

In addition, cells located in the horizontal limb of the diagonal band project massively to the pars posterior of the medial mammillary nucleus, the ventral tegmental area, and amygdala.


== Functions of the lateral septum ==

=== The lateral septum and movement and reward ===

The lateral septum is involved in a variety of functions, including emotional, motivational, and spatial behavior. 

It has been suggested that the LS may regulate interactions between the hippocampus and other regions that mediate goal directed behavior, such as the ventral tegmental area. 

Firing of LS neurons is modulated by both speed and acceleration and spatial location, and that firing is also related to reward and context. 

It has thus been suggested that the lateral septum may incorporate movement into the evaluation of environmental context with respect to motivation and reward.


=== Lateral septum and social behavior ===

Inhibitory GABA, and excitatory glutamate, which regulate lateral septum (LS) activity, have been found to be increased during social play in juvenile rats. 

No sex differences were found in extracellular GABA concentrations during social playing, however, glutamate plays a major role in female social playing. 

When glutamate receptors are blocked in the LS pharmacologically, there is a significant decrease in female social playing, while males had no decrease in playing. 

This suggests that in the lateral septum, GABA neurotransmission is involved in social play behavior regulation in both sexes, while glutamate neurotransmission is sex-specific, involved in regulation of social play only in female juvenile rats.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Septal_area