

SKELETAL SYSTEM/
SKELETON

Human:

The skeleton consists of both fused and individual bones supported and supplemented by ligaments, tendons, muscles and cartilage. 

It serves as a scaffold which supports organs, anchors muscles, and protects organs such as the brain, lungs, heart and spinal cord. 

Although the teeth do not consist of tissue commonly found in bones, the teeth are usually considered as members of the skeletal system.

The biggest bone in the body is the femur in the upper leg, and the smallest is the stapes bone in the middle ear. 

In an adult, the skeleton comprises around 13.1% of the total body weight,[8] and half of this weight is water.

Fused bones include those of the pelvis and the cranium. 

Not all bones are interconnected directly: 
    There are three bones in each middle ear called the ossicles that articulate only with each other. 
    
The hyoid bone, which is located in the neck and serves as the point of attachment for the tongue, does not articulate with any other bones in the body, being supported by muscles and ligaments.

There are 206 bones in the adult human skeleton, although this number depends on whether the pelvic bones (the hip bones on each side) are counted as one or three bones on each side (ilium, ischium, and pubis), whether the coccyx or tail bone is counted as one or four separate bones, and does not count the variable wormian bones between skull sutures. 

Similarly, the sacrum is usually counted as a single bone, rather than five fused vertebrae. 

There is also a variable number of small sesamoid bones, commonly found in tendons. 

The patella or kneecap on each side is an example of a larger sesamoid bone. 

The patellae are counted in the total, as they are constant. 

The number of bones varies between individuals and with age – newborn babies have over 270 bones some of which fuse together.

These bones are organized into a longitudinal axis, the axial skeleton, to which the appendicular skeleton is attached.

The human skeleton takes 20 years before it is fully developed, and the bones contain marrow, which produces blood cells.

There exist several general differences between the male and female skeletons. 

The male skeleton, for example, is generally larger and heavier than the female skeleton. 

In the female skeleton, the bones of the skull are generally less angular. The female skeleton also has wider and shorter breastbone and slimmer wrists. 

There exist significant differences between the male and female pelvis which are related to the female's pregnancy and childbirth capabilities. 

The female pelvis is wider and shallower than the male pelvis. 

Female pelvises also have an enlarged pelvic outlet and a wider and more circular pelvic inlet. 

The angle between the pubic bones is known to be sharper in males, which results in a more circular, narrower, and near heart-shaped pelvis.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Skeleton#Humans