

SUTURE


A suture is a type of fibrous joint that is only found in the skull (cranial suture). 

The bones are bound together by Sharpey's fibres. 

A tiny amount of movement is permitted at sutures, which contributes to the compliance and elasticity of the skull. 

These joints are synarthroses.

It is normal for many of the bones of the skull to remain unfused at birth. 

The fusion of the skull's bones before birth is known as craniosynostosis. 

The term "fontanelle" is used to describe the resulting "soft spots".

The relative positions of the bones continue to change during the life of the adult (though less rapidly), which can provide useful information in forensics and archaeology. 

In old age, cranial sutures may ossify (turn to bone) completely.

The joints between the teeth and jaws (gomphoses) and the joint between the mandible and the cranium, the temporomandibular joint, form the only non-sutured joints in the skull.

Types of sutures

    Plane sutures – edges of the bones are flush with each other as in a normal butt joint. Eg: Internasal suture.
    
    Limbous sutures – edges are bevelled so the plane of the suture is sloping as in a mitre joint. Eg: Temporo-parietal suture.
    
    Schindylesis – formed by two bones fitting into each other similar to a bridle joint. Eg: Palatomaxillary suture.
    
    Denticulate sutures – the edges slot into each other as in a finger joint. Eg: Lambdoid suture.
    
    Serrate sutures – similar to a denticulate suture but the interlocking regions are serrated rather than square. Eg: Coronal suture.

List of sutures
Cranial sutures viewed from top of head

Most sutures are named for the bones they articulate, but some have special names of their own.

Visible from the side

    Coronal suture – between the frontal and parietal bones
    Lambdoid suture – between the parietal and occipital bones and continuous with the occipitomastoid suture
    Occipitomastoid suture – between the occipital and temporal bones and continuous with the lambdoid suture
    Sphenofrontal suture
    Sphenoparietal suture
    Sphenosquamosal suture
    Sphenozygomatic suture
    Squamosal suture – between the parietal and the temporal bone
    Zygomaticotemporal suture
    Zygomaticofrontal suture

Visible from the front or above

    Frontal suture / Metopic suture – between the two frontal bones, prior to the fusion of the two into a single bone
    
    Sagittal suture – along the midline, between parietal bones

Visible from below or inside

    Frontoethmoidal suture
    Petrosquamous suture
    Sphenoethmoidal suture
    Sphenopetrosal suture