

AMYGDALOID BODY (AMYGDALA)


The amygdala (; plural: amygdalae or amygdalas; also corpus amygdaloideum; Latin from Greek, ἀμυγδαλή, amygdalē, 'almond', 'tonsil') is one of two almond-shaped clusters of nuclei located deep and medially within the temporal lobes of the brain's cerebrum in complex vertebrates, including humans. 

Shown to perform a primary role in the processing of memory, decision making, and emotional responses (including fear, anxiety, and aggression), the amygdalae are considered part of the limbic system. 

The term amygdala was first introduced by Karl Friedrich Burdach in 1822.


== Structure ==


The regions described as amygdala nuclei encompass several structures of the cerebrum with distinct connectional and functional characteristics in humans and other animals. 

Among these nuclei are the basolateral complex, the cortical nucleus, the medial nucleus, the central nucleus, and the intercalated cell clusters. 

The basolateral complex can be further subdivided into the lateral, the basal, and the accessory basal nuclei.Anatomically, the amygdala, and more particularly its central and medial nuclei, have sometimes been classified as a part of the basal ganglia.


=== Hemispheric specializations ===

In one study, electrical stimulations of the right amygdala induced negative emotions, especially fear and sadness. 

In contrast, stimulation of the left amygdala was able to induce either pleasant (happiness) or unpleasant (fear, anxiety, sadness) emotions. 

Other evidence suggests that the left amygdala plays a role in the brain's reward system.Each side holds a specific function in how we perceive and process emotion. 

The right and left portions of the amygdala have independent memory systems, but work together to store, encode, and interpret emotion.
The right hemisphere of the amygdala is associated with negative emotion. 

It plays a role in the expression of fear and in the processing of fear-inducing stimuli. 

Fear conditioning, which occurs when a neutral stimulus acquires aversive properties, occurs within the right hemisphere. 

When an individual is presented with a conditioned, aversive stimulus, it is processed within the right amygdala, producing an unpleasant or fearful response. 

This emotional response conditions the individual to avoid fear-inducing stimuli and more importantly, to assess threats in the environment.
The right hemisphere is also linked to declarative memory, which consists of facts and information from previously experienced events and must be consciously recalled. 

It also plays a significant role in the retention of episodic memory. 

Episodic memory consists of the autobiographical aspects of memory, permitting recall of emotional and sensory experience of an event. 

This type of memory does not require conscious recall. 

The right amygdala plays a role in the association of time and places with emotional properties.


== Development and sex distinction ==


The amygdala is one of the best-understood brain regions with regard to differences between the sexes. 

The amygdala is larger in males than females in children aged 7 to 11, adult humans, and adult rats.There is considerable growth within the first few years of structural development in both male and female amygdalae. 

Within this early period, female limbic structures grow at a more rapid pace than the male ones. 

Amongst female subjects, the amygdala reaches its full growth potential approximately 1.5 years before the peak of male development. 

The structural development of the male amygdala occurs over a longer period than in women. 

Despite the early development of female amygdalae, they reach their growth potential sooner than males, whose amygdalae continue to develop. 

The larger relative size of the male amygdala may be attributed to this extended developmental period.
Hormonal factors may also contribute to sex-specific developmental differences. 

The amygdala is rich in androgen receptors – nuclear receptors that bind to testosterone. 

Androgen receptors play a role in the DNA binding that regulates gene expression. 

Though testosterone is present within the female hormonal systems, women have lower levels of testosterone than men. 

The abundance of testosterone in the male hormonal system may contribute to development. 

In addition, the grey matter volume on the amygdala is predicted by testosterone levels, which may also contribute to the increased mass of the male amygdala.
There are observable developmental differences between the right and left amygdala. 

The left amygdala reaches its developmental peak approximately 1.5–2 years prior to the right amygdala. 

Despite the early growth of the left amygdala, the right increases in volume for a longer period of time. 

The right amygdala is associated with response to fearful stimuli as well as face recognition. 

It is inferred that the early development of the left amygdala functions to provide infants the ability to detect danger. 

In childhood, the amygdala is found to react differently to same-sex versus opposite-sex individuals. 

This reactivity decreases until a person enters adolescence, where it increases dramatically at puberty.Other functional and structural differences between male and female amygdalae have been observed. 

Subjects' amygdala activation was observed when watching a horror film and subliminal stimuli. 

The results of the study showed a different lateralization of the amygdala in men and women. 

Enhanced memory for the film was related to enhanced activity of the left, but not the right, amygdala in women, whereas it was related to enhanced activity of the right, but not the left, amygdala in men. 

Similarly, a study of decision-making ability in patients with unilateral amygdala damage suggested that men with right (but not left) amygdala damage were more likely to be impaired in decision-making ability, while women with left (but not right) amygdala damage were more likely to be impaired in decision-making ability. 

One study found evidence that on average, women tend to retain stronger memories for emotional events than men.


== Function ==



=== Connections ===

A simple view of the information processing through the amygdala follows as: the amygdala sends projections to the hypothalamus, the dorsomedial thalamus, the thalamic reticular nucleus, the nuclei of the trigeminal nerve and the facial nerve, the ventral tegmental area, the locus coeruleus, and the laterodorsal tegmental nucleus. 

The basolateral amygdala projects to the nucleus accumbens, including the medial shell.

The medial nucleus is involved in the sense of smell and pheromone-processing. 

It receives input from the olfactory bulb and olfactory cortex. 

The lateral amygdalae, which send impulses to the rest of the basolateral complexes and to the centromedial nuclei, receive input from the sensory systems. 

The centromedial nuclei are the main outputs for the basolateral complexes, and are involved in emotional arousal in rats and cats.


=== Emotional learning ===


In complex vertebrates, including humans, the amygdalae perform primary roles in the formation and storage of memories associated with emotional events. 

Research indicates that, during fear conditioning, sensory stimuli reach the basolateral complexes of the amygdalae, particularly the lateral nuclei, where they form associations with memories of the stimuli. 

The association between stimuli and the aversive events they predict may be mediated by long-term potentiation, a sustained enhancement of signaling between affected neurons. 

There have been studies that show that damage to the amygdala can interfere with memory that is strengthened by emotion. 

One study examined a patient with bilateral degeneration of the amygdala. 

He was told a violent story accompanied by matching pictures and was observed based on how much he could recall from the story. 

The patient had less recollection of the story than patients with functional amygdala, showing that the amygdala has a strong connection with emotional learning.Emotional memories are thought to be stored in synapses throughout the brain. 

Fear memories, for example, are considered to be stored in the neuronal connections from the lateral nuclei to the central nucleus of the amygdalae and the bed nuclei of the stria terminalis (part of the extended amygdala). 

These connections are not the sole site of fear memories given that the nuclei of the amygdala receive and send information to other brain regions that are important for memory such as the hippocampus. 

Some sensory neurons project their axon terminals to the central nucleus. 

The central nuclei are involved in the genesis of many fear responses such as defensive behavior (freezing or escape responses), autonomic nervous system responses (changes in blood pressure and heart rate/tachycardia), neuroendocrine responses (stress-hormone release), etc. 

Damage to the amygdalae impairs both the acquisition and expression of Pavlovian fear conditioning, a form of classical conditioning of emotional responses. 

Accumulating evidence has suggested that multiple neuromodulators acting in the amygdala regulates the formation of emotional memories.The amygdalae are also involved in appetitive (positive) conditioning. 

It seems that distinct neurons respond to positive and negative stimuli, but there is no clustering of these distinct neurons into clear anatomical nuclei. 

However, lesions of the central nucleus in the amygdala have been shown to reduce appetitive learning in rats. 

Lesions of the basolateral regions do not exhibit the same effect. 

Research like this indicates that different nuclei within the amygdala have different functions in appetitive conditioning.
Nevertheless, researchers found an example of appetitive emotional learning showing an important role for the basolateral amygdala: The naïve female mice are innately attracted to non-volatile pheromones contained in male-soiled bedding, but not by the male-derived volatiles, become attractive if associated with non-volatile attractive pheromones, which act as unconditioned stimulus in a case of Pavlovian associative learning. 

In the vomeronasal, olfactory and emotional systems, Fos (gene family) proteins show that non-volatile pheromones stimulate the vomeronasal system, whereas air-borne volatiles activate only the olfactory system. 

Thus, the acquired preference for male-derived volatiles reveals an olfactory-vomeronasal associative learning. 

Moreover, the reward system is differentially activated by the primary pheromones and secondarily attractive odorants. 

Exploring the primary attractive pheromone activates the basolateral amygdala and the shell of nucleus accumbens but neither the ventral tegmental area nor the orbitofrontal cortex. 

In contrast, exploring the secondarily attractive male-derived odorants involves activation of a circuit that includes the basolateral amygdala, prefrontal cortex and ventral tegmental area. 

Therefore, the basolateral amygdala stands out as the key center for vomeronasal-olfactory associative learning.


=== Reward ===

Glutamatergic neurons in the basolateral amygdala send projections to the nucleus accumbens shell and core. 

Activation of these projections drive motivational salience. 

The ability of these projections to drive incentive salience is dependent upon dopamine receptor D1.


=== Memory modulation ===

The amygdala is also involved in the modulation of memory consolidation. 

Following any learning event, the long-term memory for the event is not formed instantaneously. 

Rather, information regarding the event is slowly assimilated into long-term (potentially lifelong) storage over time, possibly via long-term potentiation. 

Recent studies suggest that the amygdala regulates memory consolidation in other brain regions. 

Also, fear conditioning, a type of memory that is impaired following amygdala damage, is mediated in part by long-term potentiation.During the consolidation period, the memory can be modulated. 

In particular, it appears that emotional arousal following the learning event influences the strength of the subsequent memory for that event. 

Greater emotional arousal following a learning event enhances a person's retention of that event. 

Experiments have shown that administration of stress hormones to mice immediately after they learn something enhances their retention when they are tested two days later.The amygdala, especially the basolateral nuclei, are involved in mediating the effects of emotional arousal on the strength of the memory for the event, as shown by many laboratories including that of James McGaugh. 

These laboratories have trained animals on a variety of learning tasks and found that drugs injected into the amygdala after training affect the animals' subsequent retention of the task. 

These tasks include basic classical conditioning tasks such as inhibitory avoidance, where a rat learns to associate a mild footshock with a particular compartment of an apparatus, and more complex tasks such as spatial or cued water maze, where a rat learns to swim to a platform to escape the water. 

If a drug that activates the amygdalae is injected into the amygdalae, the animals had better memory for the training in the task. 

If a drug that inactivates the amygdalae is injected, the animals had impaired memory for the task.
In rats, DNA damage was found to increase in the amygdala immediately after exposure to stress. 

Stress was induced by 30 minutes of restraint or by forced swimming. 

By seven days after exposure to these stresses, increased DNA damage was no longer detectable in the amygdala, probably because of DNA repair.Buddhist monks who do compassion meditation have been shown to modulate their amygdala, along with their temporoparietal junction and insula, during their practice. 

In an fMRI study, more intensive insula activity was found in expert meditators than in novices. 

Increased activity in the amygdala following compassion-oriented meditation may contribute to social connectedness.Amygdala activity at the time of encoding information correlates with retention for that information. 

However, this correlation depends on the relative "emotionalness" of the information. 

More emotionally arousing information increases amygdalar activity, and that activity correlates with retention. 

Amygdala neurons show various types of oscillation during emotional arousal, such as theta activity. 

These synchronized neuronal events could promote synaptic plasticity (which is involved in memory retention) by increasing interactions between neocortical storage sites and temporal lobe structures involved in declarative memory.

Research using Rorschach test blot 03 finds that the number of unique responses to this random figure links to larger sized amygdalae. 

The researchers note, "Since previous reports have indicated that unique responses were observed at higher frequency in the artistic population than in the nonartistic normal population, this positive correlation suggests that amygdalar enlargement in the normal population might be related to creative mental activity."


== Neuropsychological correlates of amygdala activity ==

Early research on primates provided explanations as to the functions of the amygdala, as well as a basis for further research. 

As early as 1888, rhesus monkeys with a lesioned temporal cortex (including the amygdala) were observed to have significant social and emotional deficits. 

Heinrich Klüver and Paul Bucy later expanded upon this same observation by showing that large lesions to the anterior temporal lobe produced noticeable changes, including overreaction to all objects, hypoemotionality, loss of fear, hypersexuality, and hyperorality, a condition in which inappropriate objects are placed in the mouth. 

Some monkeys also displayed an inability to recognize familiar objects and would approach animate and inanimate objects indiscriminately, exhibiting a loss of fear towards the experimenters. 

This behavioral disorder was later named Klüver-Bucy syndrome accordingly, and later research proved it was specifically due to amygdala lesions. 

Monkey mothers who had amygdala damage showed a reduction in maternal behaviors towards their infants, often physically abusing or neglecting them. 

In 1981, researchers found that selective radio frequency lesions of the whole amygdala caused Klüver-Bucy syndrome.With advances in neuroimaging technology such as MRI, neuroscientists have made significant findings concerning the amygdala in the human brain. 

A variety of data shows the amygdala has a substantial role in mental states, and is related to many psychological disorders. 

Some studies have shown children with anxiety disorders tend to have a smaller left amygdala. 

In the majority of the cases, there was an association between an increase in the size of the left amygdala with the use of SSRIs (antidepressant medication) or psychotherapy. 

The left amygdala has been linked to social anxiety, obsessive and compulsive disorders, and post traumatic stress, as well as more broadly to separation and general anxiety. 

In a 2003 study, subjects with borderline personality disorder showed significantly greater left amygdala activity than normal control subjects. 

Some borderline patients even had difficulties classifying neutral faces or saw them as threatening. 

Individuals with psychopathy show reduced autonomic responses to instructed fear cues than otherwise healthy individuals. 

In 2006, researchers observed hyperactivity in the amygdala when patients were shown threatening faces or confronted with frightening situations. 

Patients with severe social phobia showed a correlation with increased response in the amygdala. 

Similarly, depressed patients showed exaggerated left amygdala activity when interpreting emotions for all faces, and especially for fearful faces. 

This hyperactivity was normalized when patients were administered antidepressant medication. 

By contrast, the amygdala has been observed to respond differently in people with bipolar disorder. 

A 2003 study found that adult and adolescent bipolar patients tended to have considerably smaller amygdala volumes and somewhat smaller hippocampal volumes. 

Many studies have focused on the connections between the amygdala and autism.Studies in 2004 and 2006 showed that normal subjects exposed to images of frightened faces or faces of people from another race will show increased activity of the amygdala, even if that exposure is subliminal. 

However, the amygdala is not necessary for the processing of fear-related stimuli, since persons in whom it is bilaterally damaged show rapid reactions to fearful faces, even in the absence of a functional amygdala.


=== Sexual orientation ===

Recent studies have suggested possible correlations between brain structure, including differences in hemispheric ratios and connection patterns in the amygdala, and sexual orientation. 

Homosexual men tend to exhibit more feminine patterns in the amygdala than heterosexual males do, just as homosexual females tend to show more masculine patterns in the amygdala than heterosexual women do. 

It was observed that amygdala connections were more widespread from the left amygdala in homosexual males, as is also found in heterosexual females. 

Amygdala connections were more widespread from the right amygdala in homosexual females, as in heterosexual males.


=== Social interaction ===

Amygdala volume correlates positively with both the size (the number of contacts a person has) and the complexity (the number of different groups to which a person belongs) of social networks. 

Individuals with larger amygdalae had larger and more complex social networks. 

The amygdala is responsible for facial recognition and allows others to respond appropriately to different emotional expressions. 

They were also better able to make accurate social judgments about other persons' faces. 

The amygdala's role in the analysis of social situations stems specifically from its ability to identify and process changes in facial features. 

It does not, however, process the direction of the gaze of the person being perceived.The amygdala is also thought to be a determinant of the level of a person's emotional intelligence. 

It is particularly hypothesized that larger amygdalae allow for greater emotional intelligence, enabling greater societal integration and cooperation with others.The amygdala processes reactions to violations concerning personal space. 

These reactions are absent in persons in whom the amygdala is damaged bilaterally. 

Furthermore, the amygdala is found to be activated in fMRI when people observe that others are physically close to them, such as when a person being scanned knows that an experimenter is standing immediately next to the scanner, versus standing at a distance.


=== Aggression ===

Animal studies have shown that stimulating the amygdala appears to increase both sexual and aggressive behavior. 

Likewise, studies using brain lesions have shown that harm to the amygdala may produce the opposite effect. 

Thus, it appears that this part of the brain may play a role in the display and modulation of aggression.


=== Fear ===

There are cases of human patients with focal bilateral amygdala lesions due to the rare genetic condition Urbach-Wiethe disease. 

Such patients fail to exhibit fear-related behaviors, leading one, S.M., to be dubbed the "woman with no fear". 

This finding reinforces the conclusion that the amygdala "plays a pivotal role in triggering a state of fear".


=== Alcoholism and binge drinking ===

The amygdala appears to play a role in binge drinking, being damaged by repeated episodes of intoxication and withdrawal. 

Protein kinase C-epsilon in the amygdala is important for regulating behavioral responses to morphine, ethanol, and controlling anxiety-like behavior. 

The protein is involved in controlling the function of other proteins and plays a role in development of the ability to consume a large amount of ethanol. 

The duration of chronic alcohol consumption and abstinence may affect dynamic brain network adaptations. 

When excessive drinking occurs, the amygdala is affected through behavioral changes and reduces the brains plasticity. 

Brain plasticity is how our brain grows and develops; it is also how our neurons can make connections with other neurons. 

This ultimately increases our neural pathways allowing us to increase our knowledge of the world around us. 

When our brain plasticity decreases it makes it difficult for neurons to make connections to other neurons. 

Often when binge drinking, or alcoholism occurs, our amygdala is affected and leads to behavior damage. 

These behavioral damages can be lack of control, inability to conduct oneself in a mature manner, aggressive behavior, loss of conduct, anxiety, depression, personality disorders, excessive drug intake, bi-polar disorder, confusion, higher tolerance levels, irritability, and inappropriate sexual behaviors with others and self. 


=== Anxiety ===

There may also be a link between the amygdala and anxiety. 

In particular, there is a higher prevalence of females that are affected by anxiety disorders. 

In an experiment, degu pups were removed from their mother but allowed to hear her call. 

In response, the males produced increased serotonin receptors in the amygdala but females lost them. 

This led to the males being less affected by the stressful situation.
The clusters of the amygdala are activated when an individual expresses feelings of fear or aggression. 

This occurs because the amygdala is the primary structure of the brain responsible for fight or flight response. 

Anxiety and panic attacks can occur when the amygdala senses environmental stressors that stimulate fight or flight response. 

The amygdala is directly associated with conditioned fear. 

Conditioned fear is the framework used to explain the behavior produced when an originally neutral stimulus is consistently paired with a stimulus that evokes fear. 

The amygdala represents a core fear system in the human body, which is involved in the expression of conditioned fear. 

Fear is measured by changes in autonomic activity including increased heart rate, increased blood pressure, as well as in simple reflexes such as flinching or blinking.
The central nucleus of the amygdala has direct correlations to the hypothalamus and brainstem – areas directly related to fear and anxiety. 

This connection is evident from studies of animals that have undergone amygdalae removal. 

Such studies suggest that animals lacking an amygdala have less fear expression and indulge in non-species-like behavior. 

Many projection areas of the amygdala are critically involved in specific signs that are used to measure fear and anxiety.
Mammals have very similar ways of processing and responding to danger. 

Scientists have observed similar areas in the brain – specifically in the amygdala – lighting up or becoming more active when a mammal is threatened or beginning to experience anxiety. 

Similar parts of the brain are activated when rodents and when humans observe a dangerous situation, the amygdala playing a crucial role in this assessment. 

By observing the amygdalae's functions, it can determined why one rodent may be much more anxious than another. 

There is a direct relationship between the activation of the amygdala and the level of anxiety the subject feels.
Feelings of anxiety start with a catalyst – an environmental stimulus that provokes stress. 

This can include various smells, sights, and internal sensations that result in anxiety. 

The amygdala reacts to this stimuli by preparing to either stand and fight or to turn and run. 

This response is triggered by the release of adrenaline into the bloodstream. 

Consequently, blood sugar rises, becoming immediately available to the muscles for quick energy. 

Shaking may occur in an attempt to return blood to the rest of the body. 

Apart from initiation of stress, long-term changes in amygdala neurons may also increase anxiety after long-term or traumatic stress, led by the action of stress-related hormones within the amygdala. 

On the flip side, blocking the action of stress hormones in the amygdala reduces anxiety. 

A better understanding of the amygdala and its various functions may lead to a new way of treating clinical anxiety.


=== Posttraumatic stress disorder ===

There seems to be a connection with the amygdalae and how the brain processes posttraumatic stress disorder. 

Multiple studies have found that the amygdalae may be responsible for the emotional reactions of PTSD patients. 

One study in particular found that when PTSD patients are shown pictures of faces with fearful expressions, their amygdalae tended to have a higher activation than someone without PTSD.


=== Bipolar disorder ===

Amygdala dysfunction during face emotion processing is well-documented in bipolar disorder. 

Individuals with bipolar disorder showed greater amygdala activity (especially the amygdala/medial-prefrontal-cortex circuit).


=== Political orientation ===

Amygdala size has been correlated with cognitive styles with regard to political thinking. 

A study found that "greater liberalism was associated with increased gray matter volume in the anterior cingulate cortex, whereas greater conservatism was associated with increased volume of the right amygdala." These findings suggest that the volume of the amygdala and anterior cingulate gyrus may be associated with an individual's ability to tolerate uncertainty and conflict.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Amygdala
;;;ES;;;



CUERPO AMIGDALOIDE (AMÍGDALA)


La amígdala (plural: amygdalae o amygdalas; también corpus amygdaloideum; latín del griego, ἀμυγδαλή, amygdalē, 'almendra', 'amigdala') es uno de los dos grupos de núcleos en forma de almendra ubicados profunda y medialmente dentro de los lóbulos temporales del cerebro del cerebro en vertebrados complejos, incluidos los humanos.

Se ha demostrado que desempeña un papel principal en el procesamiento de la memoria, la toma de decisiones y las respuestas emocionales (incluido el miedo, la ansiedad y la agresión), las amígdalas se consideran parte del sistema límbico.

El término amígdala fue introducido por primera vez por Karl Friedrich Burdach en 1822.


== Estructura ==


Las regiones descritas como núcleos de la amígdala abarcan varias estructuras del cerebro con distintas características funcionales y de conexión en humanos y otros animales.

Entre estos núcleos se encuentran el complejo basolateral, el núcleo cortical, el núcleo medial, el núcleo central y los cúmulos celulares intercalados.

El complejo basolateral se puede subdividir en los núcleos lateral, basal y basal accesorio. Anatómicamente, la amígdala, y más particularmente sus núcleos central y medial, a veces se han clasificado como parte de los ganglios basales.


=== Especializaciones hemisféricas ===

En un estudio, las estimulaciones eléctricas de la amígdala derecha indujeron emociones negativas, especialmente miedo y tristeza.

Por el contrario, la estimulación de la amígdala izquierda fue capaz de inducir emociones agradables (felicidad) o desagradables (miedo, ansiedad, tristeza).

Otra evidencia sugiere que la amígdala izquierda juega un papel en el sistema de recompensa del cerebro. Cada lado tiene una función específica en la forma en que percibimos y procesamos las emociones.

Las porciones derecha e izquierda de la amígdala tienen sistemas de memoria independientes, pero trabajan juntas para almacenar, codificar e interpretar las emociones.
El hemisferio derecho de la amígdala está asociado con la emoción negativa.

Desempeña un papel en la expresión del miedo y en el procesamiento de los estímulos que inducen el miedo.

El condicionamiento del miedo, que ocurre cuando un estímulo neutral adquiere propiedades aversivas, ocurre dentro del hemisferio derecho.

Cuando a un individuo se le presenta un estímulo aversivo condicionado, se procesa dentro de la amígdala derecha, produciendo una respuesta desagradable o temerosa.

Esta respuesta emocional condiciona al individuo a evitar los estímulos que le inducen miedo y, lo que es más importante, a evaluar las amenazas del entorno.
El hemisferio derecho también está vinculado a la memoria declarativa, que consiste en hechos e información de eventos experimentados previamente y debe recordarse conscientemente.

También juega un papel importante en la retención de la memoria episódica.

La memoria episódica consiste en los aspectos autobiográficos de la memoria, que permiten recordar la experiencia emocional y sensorial de un evento.

Este tipo de memoria no requiere recuerdo consciente.

La amígdala derecha juega un papel en la asociación de tiempo y lugares con propiedades emocionales.


== Desarrollo y distinción de sexos ==


La amígdala es una de las regiones del cerebro mejor entendidas con respecto a las diferencias entre los sexos.

La amígdala es más grande en los hombres que en las mujeres en niños de 7 a 11 años, humanos adultos y ratas adultas. Hay un crecimiento considerable durante los primeros años de desarrollo estructural tanto en la amígdala masculina como en la femenina.

Dentro de este período inicial, las estructuras límbicas femeninas crecen a un ritmo más rápido que las masculinas.

Entre las mujeres, la amígdala alcanza su máximo potencial de crecimiento aproximadamente 1,5 años antes del pico del desarrollo masculino.

El desarrollo estructural de la amígdala masculina ocurre durante un período más largo que en las mujeres.

A pesar del desarrollo temprano de las amígdalas femeninas, alcanzan su potencial de crecimiento antes que los machos, cuyas amígdalas continúan desarrollándose.

El tamaño relativo más grande de la amígdala masculina puede atribuirse a este período de desarrollo prolongado.
Los factores hormonales también pueden contribuir a las diferencias de desarrollo específicas del sexo. 

La amígdala es rica en receptores de andrógenos, receptores nucleares que se unen a la testosterona. 

Los receptores de andrógenos juegan un papel en la unión del ADN que regula la expresión génica. 

Aunque la testosterona está presente en los sistemas hormonales femeninos, las mujeres tienen niveles más bajos de testosterona que los hombres. 

La abundancia de testosterona en el sistema hormonal masculino puede contribuir al desarrollo. 

Además, el volumen de materia gris en la amígdala se predice por los niveles de testosterona, lo que también puede contribuir al aumento de la masa de la amígdala masculina.
Hay diferencias de desarrollo observables entre la amígdala derecha e izquierda. 

La amígdala izquierda alcanza su punto máximo de desarrollo aproximadamente 1,5 a 2 años antes que la amígdala derecha. 

A pesar del crecimiento temprano de la amígdala izquierda, la derecha aumenta de volumen durante un período de tiempo más prolongado. 

La amígdala derecha está asociada con la respuesta a los estímulos temerosos, así como con el reconocimiento de rostros. 

Se infiere que el desarrollo temprano de la amígdala izquierda funciona para brindar a los bebés la capacidad de detectar el peligro. 

En la infancia, se encuentra que la amígdala reacciona de manera diferente a las personas del mismo sexo que a las del sexo opuesto. 

Esta reactividad disminuye hasta que una persona entra en la adolescencia, donde aumenta dramáticamente en la pubertad. Se han observado otras diferencias funcionales y estructurales entre las amígdalas masculinas y femeninas. 

Se observó la activación de la amígdala de los sujetos al ver una película de terror y estímulos subliminales. 

Los resultados del estudio mostraron una lateralización diferente de la amígdala en hombres y mujeres. 

La memoria mejorada para la película se relacionó con una mayor actividad de la amígdala izquierda, pero no de la derecha, en las mujeres, mientras que se relacionó con una mayor actividad de la amígdala derecha, pero no de la izquierda, en los hombres. 

De manera similar, un estudio de la capacidad de toma de decisiones en pacientes con daño unilateral en la amígdala sugirió que los hombres con daño en la amígdala derecha (pero no en la izquierda) tenían más probabilidades de verse afectados en la capacidad de toma de decisiones, mientras que las mujeres con daño en la amígdala izquierda (pero no en la derecha) eran más propensos a verse afectados en la capacidad de toma de decisiones. 

Un estudio encontró evidencia de que, en promedio, las mujeres tienden a retener recuerdos más fuertes de eventos emocionales que los hombres.


== Función ==



=== Conexiones ===

Una vista simple del procesamiento de la información a través de la amígdala es la siguiente: la amígdala envía proyecciones al hipotálamo, el tálamo dorsomedial, el núcleo reticular talámico, los núcleos del nervio trigémino y el nervio facial, el área tegmental ventral, el locus coeruleus, y el núcleo tegmental laterodorsal.

La amígdala basolateral se proyecta hacia el núcleo accumbens, incluida la capa medial.

El núcleo medial está involucrado en el sentido del olfato y el procesamiento de feromonas.

Recibe información del bulbo olfativo y la corteza olfativa.

Las amígdalas laterales, que envían impulsos al resto de los complejos basolaterales ya los núcleos centromediales, reciben información de los sistemas sensoriales.

Los núcleos centromediales son las principales salidas de los complejos basolaterales y están involucrados en la excitación emocional en ratas y gatos.


=== Aprendizaje emocional ===


En vertebrados complejos, incluidos los humanos, las amígdalas desempeñan un papel principal en la formación y el almacenamiento de recuerdos asociados con eventos emocionales. 

Las investigaciones indican que, durante el condicionamiento del miedo, los estímulos sensoriales alcanzan los complejos basolaterales de la amígdala, particularmente los núcleos laterales, donde forman asociaciones con los recuerdos de los estímulos. 

La asociación entre los estímulos y los eventos aversivos que predicen puede estar mediada por la potenciación a largo plazo, una mejora sostenida de la señalización entre las neuronas afectadas. 

Ha habido estudios que muestran que el daño a la amígdala puede interferir con la memoria que se fortalece con la emoción. 

Un estudio examinó a un paciente con degeneración bilateral de la amígdala. 

Se le contó una historia violenta acompañada de imágenes coincidentes y se le observó en función de cuánto podía recordar de la historia.

El paciente recordaba menos la historia que los pacientes con amígdala funcional, lo que demuestra que la amígdala tiene una fuerte conexión con el aprendizaje emocional. Se cree que los recuerdos emocionales se almacenan en sinapsis en todo el cerebro.

Se considera que los recuerdos del miedo, por ejemplo, se almacenan en las conexiones neuronales desde los núcleos laterales hasta el núcleo central de la amígdala y los núcleos del lecho de la estría terminal (parte de la amígdala extendida).

Estas conexiones no son el único sitio de los recuerdos del miedo, ya que los núcleos de la amígdala reciben y envían información a otras regiones del cerebro que son importantes para la memoria, como el hipocampo.

Algunas neuronas sensoriales proyectan sus terminales de axón al núcleo central. 

Los núcleos centrales están involucrados en la génesis de muchas respuestas de miedo, como el comportamiento defensivo (respuestas de congelación o escape), respuestas del sistema nervioso autónomo (cambios en la presión arterial y frecuencia cardíaca/taquicardia), respuestas neuroendocrinas (liberación de hormonas del estrés), etc. 

El daño a la amígdala afecta tanto la adquisición como la expresión del condicionamiento del miedo pavloviano, una forma de condicionamiento clásico de las respuestas emocionales. 

La evidencia acumulada ha sugerido que múltiples neuromoduladores que actúan en la amígdala regulan la formación de recuerdos emocionales. Las amígdalas también están involucradas en el condicionamiento apetitivo (positivo). 

Parece que distintas neuronas responden a estímulos positivos y negativos, pero no hay agrupación de estas distintas neuronas en núcleos anatómicos claros.

Sin embargo, se ha demostrado que las lesiones del núcleo central en la amígdala reducen el aprendizaje apetitivo en ratas.

Las lesiones de las regiones basolaterales no presentan el mismo efecto.

Investigaciones como esta indican que diferentes núcleos dentro de la amígdala tienen diferentes funciones en el condicionamiento del apetito.
Sin embargo, los investigadores encontraron un ejemplo de aprendizaje emocional apetitivo que muestra un papel importante para la amígdala basolateral: los ratones hembra ingenuos se sienten atraídos de forma innata por las feromonas no volátiles contenidas en la ropa de cama sucia de machos, pero no por los volátiles derivados de machos, se vuelven atractivos si asociado con feromonas atractivas no volátiles, que actúan como estímulo incondicionado en un caso de aprendizaje asociativo pavloviano.

En los sistemas vomeronasal, olfativo y emocional, las proteínas Fos (familia de genes) muestran que las feromonas no volátiles estimulan el sistema vomeronasal, mientras que las volátiles transportadas por el aire activan solo el sistema olfativo.

Así, la preferencia adquirida por los volátiles de origen masculino revela un aprendizaje asociativo olfativo-vomeronasal.

Además, el sistema de recompensa se activa diferencialmente por las feromonas primarias y los olores atractivos secundarios. 

La exploración de la feromona de atracción primaria activa la amígdala basolateral y la capa del núcleo accumbens, pero no el área tegmental ventral ni la corteza orbitofrontal. 

Por el contrario, la exploración de los odorantes masculinos secundariamente atractivos implica la activación de un circuito que incluye la amígdala basolateral, la corteza prefrontal y el área tegmental ventral. 

Por lo tanto, la amígdala basolateral se destaca como el centro clave para el aprendizaje asociativo vomeronasal-olfatorio.


=== Recompensa ===

Las neuronas glutamatérgicas en la amígdala basolateral envían proyecciones a la cubierta y el núcleo del núcleo accumbens. 

La activación de estas proyecciones impulsa la prominencia motivacional. 

La capacidad de estas proyecciones para impulsar la prominencia de incentivos depende del receptor de dopamina D1.


=== Modulación de memoria ===

La amígdala también está involucrada en la modulación de la consolidación de la memoria.

Después de cualquier evento de aprendizaje, la memoria a largo plazo del evento no se forma instantáneamente.

Más bien, la información sobre el evento se asimila lentamente al almacenamiento a largo plazo (potencialmente de por vida) a lo largo del tiempo, posiblemente a través de la potenciación a largo plazo.

Estudios recientes sugieren que la amígdala regula la consolidación de la memoria en otras regiones del cerebro.

Además, el condicionamiento del miedo, un tipo de memoria que se deteriora después del daño de la amígdala, está mediado en parte por la potenciación a largo plazo. Durante el período de consolidación, la memoria puede modularse.

En particular, parece que la excitación emocional que sigue al evento de aprendizaje influye en la fuerza del recuerdo subsiguiente de ese evento. 

Una mayor excitación emocional después de un evento de aprendizaje mejora la retención de ese evento por parte de una persona. 

Los experimentos han demostrado que la administración de hormonas del estrés a ratones inmediatamente después de que aprenden algo mejora su retención cuando se les evalúa dos días después. el evento, como lo muestran muchos laboratorios, incluido el de James McGaugh. 

Estos laboratorios han entrenado animales en una variedad de tareas de aprendizaje y encontraron que las drogas inyectadas en la amígdala después del entrenamiento afectan la retención posterior de la tarea por parte de los animales. 

Estas tareas incluyen tareas básicas de condicionamiento clásico, como la evitación inhibitoria, en la que una rata aprende a asociar un choque leve en las patas con un compartimento particular de un aparato, y tareas más complejas, como un laberinto espacial o de agua con claves, en el que una rata aprende a nadar hacia una plataforma. para escapar del agua. 

Si se inyecta en la amígdala un fármaco que activa la amígdala, los animales tienen mejor memoria para el entrenamiento en la tarea. 

Si se inyecta un fármaco que inactiva la amígdala, los animales tenían problemas de memoria para la tarea.
En ratas, se encontró que el daño en el ADN aumentaba en la amígdala inmediatamente después de la exposición al estrés. 

El estrés fue inducido por 30 minutos de restricción o por natación forzada. 

Siete días después de la exposición a estas tensiones, ya no se detectó un mayor daño en el ADN de la amígdala, probablemente debido a la reparación del ADN. práctica. 

En un estudio de fMRI, se encontró una actividad de la ínsula más intensa en meditadores expertos que en novatos. 

El aumento de la actividad en la amígdala después de la meditación orientada a la compasión puede contribuir a la conexión social. La actividad de la amígdala en el momento de codificar la información se correlaciona con la retención de esa información. 

Sin embargo, esta correlación depende de la "emocionalidad" relativa de la información. 

Más información emocionalmente excitante aumenta la actividad de la amígdala, y esa actividad se correlaciona con la retención. 

Las neuronas de la amígdala muestran varios tipos de oscilación durante la excitación emocional, como la actividad theta. 

Estos eventos neuronales sincronizados podrían promover la plasticidad sináptica (que está involucrada en la retención de la memoria) al aumentar las interacciones entre los sitios de almacenamiento neocortical y las estructuras del lóbulo temporal involucradas en la memoria declarativa.

La investigación que utiliza la transferencia de prueba de Rorschach 03 encuentra que el número de respuestas únicas a esta cifra aleatoria se relaciona con amígdalas de mayor tamaño. 

Los investigadores señalan: "Dado que los informes anteriores han indicado que se observaron respuestas únicas con mayor frecuencia en la población artística que en la población normal no artística, esta correlación positiva sugiere que el agrandamiento de la amígdala en la población normal podría estar relacionado con la actividad mental creativa".


== Correlatos neuropsicológicos de la actividad de la amígdala ==

Las primeras investigaciones sobre primates proporcionaron explicaciones sobre las funciones de la amígdala, así como una base para futuras investigaciones.

Ya en 1888, se observó que los monos rhesus con una corteza temporal lesionada (incluida la amígdala) tenían importantes déficits sociales y emocionales.

Más tarde, Heinrich Klüver y Paul Bucy ampliaron esta misma observación al mostrar que las lesiones grandes en el lóbulo temporal anterior producían cambios notables, incluida una reacción exagerada a todos los objetos, hipoemocionalidad, pérdida del miedo, hipersexualidad e hiperoralidad, una condición en la que se colocan objetos inapropiados. en la boca.

Algunos monos también mostraban una incapacidad para reconocer objetos familiares y se acercaban indiscriminadamente a objetos animados e inanimados, mostrando una pérdida de miedo hacia los experimentadores.

En consecuencia, este trastorno del comportamiento se denominó síndrome de Klüver-Bucy, y la investigación posterior demostró que se debía específicamente a lesiones en la amígdala. 

Las madres de monos que tenían daño en la amígdala mostraron una reducción en los comportamientos maternos hacia sus bebés, a menudo abusando físicamente de ellos o descuidándolos. 

En 1981, los investigadores descubrieron que las lesiones selectivas por radiofrecuencia de toda la amígdala causaban el síndrome de Klüver-Bucy. Con los avances en la tecnología de neuroimágenes, como la resonancia magnética, los neurocientíficos han realizado hallazgos significativos sobre la amígdala en el cerebro humano. 

Una variedad de datos muestra que la amígdala tiene un papel importante en los estados mentales y está relacionada con muchos trastornos psicológicos. 

Algunos estudios han demostrado que los niños con trastornos de ansiedad tienden a tener una amígdala izquierda más pequeña. 

En la mayoría de los casos, hubo asociación entre el aumento del tamaño de la amígdala izquierda con el uso de ISRS (medicamentos antidepresivos) o psicoterapia.

La amígdala izquierda se ha relacionado con la ansiedad social, los trastornos obsesivos y compulsivos y el estrés postraumático, así como más ampliamente con la separación y la ansiedad general.

En un estudio de 2003, los sujetos con trastorno límite de la personalidad mostraron una actividad de la amígdala izquierda significativamente mayor que los sujetos de control normales.

Algunos pacientes límite incluso tenían dificultades para clasificar las caras neutrales o las veían como amenazantes.

Las personas con psicopatía muestran respuestas autonómicas reducidas a las señales de miedo instruidas que las personas sanas.

En 2006, los investigadores observaron hiperactividad en la amígdala cuando a los pacientes se les mostraban caras amenazantes o se enfrentaban a situaciones aterradoras.

Los pacientes con fobia social severa mostraron una correlación con una mayor respuesta en la amígdala.

De manera similar, los pacientes deprimidos mostraron una actividad exagerada de la amígdala izquierda al interpretar las emociones para todos los rostros, y especialmente para los rostros temerosos.

Esta hiperactividad se normalizó cuando a los pacientes se les administró medicación antidepresiva.

Por el contrario, se ha observado que la amígdala responde de manera diferente en personas con trastorno bipolar.

Un estudio de 2003 encontró que los pacientes bipolares adultos y adolescentes tendían a tener volúmenes de amígdala considerablemente más pequeños y volúmenes de hipocampo algo más pequeños.

Muchos estudios se han centrado en las conexiones entre la amígdala y el autismo. Los estudios realizados en 2004 y 2006 mostraron que los sujetos normales expuestos a imágenes de rostros asustados o rostros de personas de otra raza mostrarán una mayor actividad de la amígdala, incluso si esa exposición es subliminal. 

Sin embargo, la amígdala no es necesaria para el procesamiento de estímulos relacionados con el miedo, ya que las personas en las que está dañada bilateralmente muestran reacciones rápidas ante rostros temerosos, incluso en ausencia de una amígdala funcional.


=== Orientación sexual ===

Estudios recientes han sugerido posibles correlaciones entre la estructura del cerebro, incluidas las diferencias en las proporciones hemisféricas y los patrones de conexión en la amígdala, y la orientación sexual. 

Los hombres homosexuales tienden a mostrar más patrones femeninos en la amígdala que los hombres heterosexuales, al igual que las mujeres homosexuales tienden a mostrar más patrones masculinos en la amígdala que las mujeres heterosexuales. 

Se observó que las conexiones de la amígdala estaban más extendidas desde la amígdala izquierda en los hombres homosexuales, al igual que en las mujeres heterosexuales. 

Las conexiones de la amígdala estaban más extendidas desde la amígdala derecha en las mujeres homosexuales que en los hombres heterosexuales.


=== Interacción social ===

El volumen de la amígdala se correlaciona positivamente tanto con el tamaño (la cantidad de contactos que tiene una persona) como con la complejidad (la cantidad de grupos diferentes a los que pertenece una persona) de las redes sociales. 

Las personas con amígdalas más grandes tenían redes sociales más grandes y complejas. 

La amígdala es responsable del reconocimiento facial y permite que otros respondan apropiadamente a diferentes expresiones emocionales.

También eran más capaces de hacer juicios sociales precisos sobre los rostros de otras personas.

El papel de la amígdala en el análisis de situaciones sociales se deriva específicamente de su capacidad para identificar y procesar cambios en los rasgos faciales.

Sin embargo, no procesa la dirección de la mirada de la persona que se percibe. También se cree que la amígdala es un factor determinante del nivel de inteligencia emocional de una persona.

En particular, se plantea la hipótesis de que las amígdalas más grandes permiten una mayor inteligencia emocional, lo que permite una mayor integración social y cooperación con los demás. La amígdala procesa las reacciones a las violaciones relacionadas con el espacio personal.

Estas reacciones están ausentes en personas en las que la amígdala está dañada bilateralmente. 

Además, se encuentra que la amígdala se activa en la resonancia magnética funcional cuando las personas observan que otros están físicamente cerca de ellos, como cuando una persona que está siendo escaneada sabe que un experimentador está parado inmediatamente al lado del escáner, en lugar de estar parado a cierta distancia.


=== Agresión ===

Los estudios en animales han demostrado que estimular la amígdala parece aumentar tanto el comportamiento sexual como el agresivo. 

Asimismo, los estudios que utilizan lesiones cerebrales han demostrado que el daño a la amígdala puede producir el efecto contrario. 

Por lo tanto, parece que esta parte del cerebro puede desempeñar un papel en la manifestación y modulación de la agresión.


=== Miedo ===

Hay casos de pacientes humanos con lesiones focales bilaterales de la amígdala debido a la rara condición genética de la enfermedad de Urbach-Wiethe. 

Tales pacientes no muestran comportamientos relacionados con el miedo, lo que lleva a una, SM, a ser apodada la "mujer sin miedo". 

Este hallazgo refuerza la conclusión de que la amígdala "desempeña un papel fundamental en el desencadenamiento de un estado de miedo".


=== Alcoholismo y borrachera ===

La amígdala parece jugar un papel en los atracones de bebida, siendo dañada por episodios repetidos de intoxicación y abstinencia. 

La proteína quinasa C-épsilon en la amígdala es importante para regular las respuestas conductuales a la morfina, el etanol y controlar el comportamiento similar a la ansiedad. 

La proteína participa en el control de la función de otras proteínas y juega un papel en el desarrollo de la capacidad de consumir una gran cantidad de etanol. 

La duración del consumo crónico de alcohol y la abstinencia pueden afectar las adaptaciones dinámicas de la red cerebral. 

Cuando se bebe en exceso, la amígdala se ve afectada a través de cambios de comportamiento y reduce la plasticidad del cerebro.

La plasticidad cerebral es cómo nuestro cerebro crece y se desarrolla; también es cómo nuestras neuronas pueden hacer conexiones con otras neuronas.

En última instancia, esto aumenta nuestras vías neuronales, lo que nos permite aumentar nuestro conocimiento del mundo que nos rodea.

Cuando la plasticidad de nuestro cerebro disminuye, a las neuronas les resulta difícil establecer conexiones con otras neuronas.

A menudo, cuando se producen atracones de bebida o alcoholismo, nuestra amígdala se ve afectada y provoca daños en el comportamiento.

Estos daños conductuales pueden ser falta de control, incapacidad para comportarse de manera madura, comportamiento agresivo, pérdida de conducta, ansiedad, depresión, trastornos de personalidad, ingesta excesiva de drogas, trastorno bipolar, confusión, niveles de tolerancia más altos, irritabilidad y conductas sexuales inapropiadas con los demás y consigo mismo.


=== Ansiedad ===

También puede haber un vínculo entre la amígdala y la ansiedad.

En particular, hay una mayor prevalencia de mujeres afectadas por trastornos de ansiedad.

En un experimento, las crías de degu fueron separadas de su madre pero se les permitió escuchar su llamada.

En respuesta, los machos produjeron un aumento de los receptores de serotonina en la amígdala, pero las hembras los perdieron.

Esto hizo que los machos se sintieran menos afectados por la situación estresante.
Los grupos de la amígdala se activan cuando un individuo expresa sentimientos de miedo o agresión. 

Esto ocurre porque la amígdala es la estructura principal del cerebro responsable de la respuesta de lucha o huida. 

Los ataques de ansiedad y pánico pueden ocurrir cuando la amígdala detecta factores estresantes ambientales que estimulan la respuesta de lucha o huida. 

La amígdala está directamente asociada con el miedo condicionado. 

El miedo condicionado es el marco utilizado para explicar el comportamiento que se produce cuando un estímulo originalmente neutral se empareja constantemente con un estímulo que provoca miedo. 

La amígdala representa un sistema de miedo central en el cuerpo humano, que está involucrado en la expresión del miedo condicionado. 

El miedo se mide por los cambios en la actividad autonómica, incluido el aumento de la frecuencia cardíaca, el aumento de la presión arterial, así como en reflejos simples como estremecerse o parpadear.
El núcleo central de la amígdala tiene correlaciones directas con el hipotálamo y el tronco encefálico, áreas directamente relacionadas con el miedo y la ansiedad. 

Esta conexión es evidente a partir de estudios de animales a los que se les ha extraído la amígdala. 

Dichos estudios sugieren que los animales que carecen de amígdala tienen menos expresión de miedo y se entregan a un comportamiento que no es similar al de una especie. 

Muchas áreas de proyección de la amígdala están involucradas críticamente en signos específicos que se usan para medir el miedo y la ansiedad.
Los mamíferos tienen formas muy similares de procesar y responder al peligro. 

Los científicos han observado áreas similares en el cerebro, específicamente en la amígdala, que se iluminan o se vuelven más activas cuando un mamífero se ve amenazado o comienza a experimentar ansiedad. 

Partes similares del cerebro se activan cuando los roedores y los humanos observan una situación peligrosa, y la amígdala juega un papel crucial en esta evaluación. 

Al observar las funciones de la amígdala, se puede determinar por qué un roedor puede estar mucho más ansioso que otro. 

Existe una relación directa entre la activación de la amígdala y el nivel de ansiedad que siente el sujeto.
Los sentimientos de ansiedad comienzan con un catalizador: un estímulo ambiental que provoca estrés. 

Esto puede incluir varios olores, vistas y sensaciones internas que resultan en ansiedad. 

La amígdala reacciona a estos estímulos preparándose para ponerse de pie y luchar o para darse la vuelta y correr. 

Esta respuesta se desencadena por la liberación de adrenalina en el torrente sanguíneo. 

En consecuencia, el azúcar en la sangre aumenta, quedando inmediatamente disponible para los músculos para obtener energía rápida. 

Se pueden producir temblores en un intento de devolver la sangre al resto del cuerpo. 

Además del inicio del estrés, los cambios a largo plazo en las neuronas de la amígdala también pueden aumentar la ansiedad después del estrés traumático o a largo plazo, provocado por la acción de las hormonas relacionadas con el estrés dentro de la amígdala. 

Por otro lado, el bloqueo de la acción de las hormonas del estrés en la amígdala reduce la ansiedad. 

Una mejor comprensión de la amígdala y sus diversas funciones puede conducir a una nueva forma de tratar la ansiedad clínica.


=== Trastorno de estrés postraumático ===

Parece haber una conexión con la amígdala y cómo el cerebro procesa el trastorno de estrés postraumático. 

Múltiples estudios han encontrado que la amígdala puede ser responsable de las reacciones emocionales de los pacientes con PTSD. 

Un estudio en particular encontró que cuando a los pacientes con PTSD se les muestran imágenes de rostros con expresiones de miedo, sus amígdalas tienden a tener una mayor activación que alguien sin PTSD.


=== Trastorno bipolar ===

La disfunción de la amígdala durante el procesamiento de las emociones faciales está bien documentada en el trastorno bipolar. 

Las personas con trastorno bipolar mostraron una mayor actividad de la amígdala (especialmente el circuito de la amígdala/corteza prefrontal medial).


=== Orientación política ===

El tamaño de la amígdala se ha correlacionado con los estilos cognitivos con respecto al pensamiento político. 

Un estudio encontró que "un mayor liberalismo se asoció con un mayor volumen de materia gris en la corteza cingulada anterior, mientras que un mayor conservadurismo se asoció con un mayor volumen de la amígdala derecha". Estos hallazgos sugieren que el volumen de la amígdala y la circunvolución cingulada anterior pueden estar asociados con la capacidad de un individuo para tolerar la incertidumbre y el conflicto.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Amígdala

;;;FR;;;



CORPS AMYGDALOÏDE (AMYGDALA)


L'amygdale (; pluriel : amygdalae ou amygdalas ; également corpus amygdaloideum ; latin du grec, ἀμυγδαλή, amygdalē, « amande », « amygdale ») est l'un des deux groupes de noyaux en forme d'amande situés profondément et médialement dans les lobes temporaux du le cerveau du cerveau chez les vertébrés complexes, y compris les humains. 

Il a été démontré qu'elles jouent un rôle primordial dans le traitement de la mémoire, la prise de décision et les réponses émotionnelles (y compris la peur, l'anxiété et l'agressivité), les amygdales sont considérées comme faisant partie du système limbique. 

Le terme amygdale a été introduit pour la première fois par Karl Friedrich Burdach en 1822.


== Structure ==


Les régions décrites comme des noyaux d'amygdale englobent plusieurs structures du cerveau avec des caractéristiques connexionnelles et fonctionnelles distinctes chez l'homme et d'autres animaux. 

Parmi ces noyaux figurent le complexe basolatéral, le noyau cortical, le noyau médial, le noyau central et les amas cellulaires intercalés.

Le complexe basolatéral peut être subdivisé en noyaux latéral, basal et accessoire basal.Anatomiquement, l'amygdale, et plus particulièrement ses noyaux central et médial, ont parfois été classées comme faisant partie des ganglions de la base.


=== Spécialisations hémisphériques ===

Dans une étude, des stimulations électriques de l'amygdale droite ont induit des émotions négatives, en particulier la peur et la tristesse.

En revanche, la stimulation de l'amygdale gauche a pu induire des émotions agréables (bonheur) ou désagréables (peur, anxiété, tristesse).

D'autres preuves suggèrent que l'amygdale gauche joue un rôle dans le système de récompense du cerveau. Chaque côté détient une fonction spécifique dans la façon dont nous percevons et traitons les émotions.

Les parties droite et gauche de l'amygdale ont des systèmes de mémoire indépendants, mais travaillent ensemble pour stocker, encoder et interpréter les émotions.
L'hémisphère droit de l'amygdale est associé à une émotion négative.

Il joue un rôle dans l'expression de la peur et dans le traitement des stimuli induisant la peur.

Le conditionnement de la peur, qui se produit lorsqu'un stimulus neutre acquiert des propriétés aversives, se produit dans l'hémisphère droit.

Lorsqu'un individu est présenté avec un stimulus conditionné et aversif, il est traité dans l'amygdale droite, produisant une réponse désagréable ou effrayante.

Cette réponse émotionnelle conditionne l'individu à éviter les stimuli effrayants et, plus important encore, à évaluer les menaces dans l'environnement.
L'hémisphère droit est également lié à la mémoire déclarative, qui se compose de faits et d'informations provenant d'événements vécus précédemment et doit être rappelée consciemment. 

Il joue également un rôle important dans la rétention de la mémoire épisodique. 

La mémoire épisodique comprend les aspects autobiographiques de la mémoire, permettant le rappel de l'expérience émotionnelle et sensorielle d'un événement. 

Ce type de mémoire ne nécessite pas de rappel conscient. 

L'amygdale droite joue un rôle dans l'association du temps et des lieux aux propriétés émotionnelles.


== Développement et distinction sexuelle ==


L'amygdale est l'une des régions cérébrales les mieux comprises en ce qui concerne les différences entre les sexes. 

L'amygdale est plus grande chez les mâles que chez les femelles chez les enfants âgés de 7 à 11 ans, les humains adultes et les rats adultes. Il y a une croissance considérable au cours des premières années de développement structurel chez les amygdales mâles et femelles. 

Au cours de cette première période, les structures limbiques féminines se développent à un rythme plus rapide que les structures masculines. 

Chez les sujets féminins, l'amygdale atteint son plein potentiel de croissance environ 1,5 ans avant le pic de développement masculin. 

Le développement structurel de l'amygdale masculine se produit sur une période plus longue que chez les femmes. 

Malgré le développement précoce des amygdales femelles, elles atteignent leur potentiel de croissance plus tôt que les mâles, dont les amygdales continuent à se développer. 

La plus grande taille relative de l'amygdale mâle peut être attribuée à cette période de développement prolongée.
Les facteurs hormonaux peuvent également contribuer aux différences de développement spécifiques au sexe. 

L'amygdale est riche en récepteurs aux androgènes - des récepteurs nucléaires qui se lient à la testostérone. 

Les récepteurs aux androgènes jouent un rôle dans la liaison à l'ADN qui régule l'expression des gènes. 

Bien que la testostérone soit présente dans les systèmes hormonaux féminins, les femmes ont des niveaux de testostérone inférieurs à ceux des hommes. 

L'abondance de testostérone dans le système hormonal masculin peut contribuer au développement. 

De plus, le volume de matière grise sur l'amygdale est prédit par les niveaux de testostérone, qui peuvent également contribuer à l'augmentation de la masse de l'amygdale masculine.
Il existe des différences de développement observables entre l'amygdale droite et gauche. 

L'amygdale gauche atteint son pic de développement environ 1,5 à 2 ans avant l'amygdale droite. 

Malgré la croissance précoce de l'amygdale gauche, la droite augmente de volume pendant une plus longue période. 

L'amygdale droite est associée à la réponse aux stimuli effrayants ainsi qu'à la reconnaissance faciale. 

On en déduit que le développement précoce de l'amygdale gauche fonctionne pour fournir aux nourrissons la capacité de détecter le danger. 

Dans l'enfance, l'amygdale réagit différemment aux personnes de même sexe par rapport aux personnes de sexe opposé. 

Cette réactivité diminue jusqu'à ce qu'une personne entre dans l'adolescence, où elle augmente considérablement à la puberté. D'autres différences fonctionnelles et structurelles entre les amygdales masculines et féminines ont été observées. 

L'activation de l'amygdale des sujets a été observée lors du visionnage d'un film d'horreur et de stimuli subliminaux. 

Les résultats de l'étude ont montré une latéralisation différente de l'amygdale chez les hommes et les femmes. 

La mémoire améliorée pour le film était liée à une activité accrue de l'amygdale gauche, mais pas de droite, chez les femmes, alors qu'elle était liée à une activité accrue de l'amygdale droite, mais pas de gauche, chez les hommes. 

De même, une étude sur la capacité de prise de décision chez les patients présentant des lésions unilatérales de l'amygdale a suggéré que les hommes présentant des lésions de l'amygdale droite (mais pas gauche) étaient plus susceptibles d'être altérés dans leur capacité de prise de décision, tandis que les femmes présentant des lésions de l'amygdale gauche (mais pas droite) étaient plus susceptibles d'être altérés dans la capacité de prise de décision. 

Une étude a trouvé des preuves qu'en moyenne, les femmes ont tendance à conserver des souvenirs plus forts pour les événements émotionnels que les hommes.


== Fonction ==



=== Connexions ===

Une vision simple du traitement de l'information par l'amygdale est la suivante : l'amygdale envoie des projections vers l'hypothalamus, le thalamus dorsomédian, le noyau réticulaire thalamique, les noyaux du nerf trijumeau et du nerf facial, l'aire tegmentale ventrale, le locus coeruleus, et le noyau tegmental latéro-dorsal. 

L'amygdale basolatérale se projette sur le noyau accumbens, y compris la coque médiale.

Le noyau médian est impliqué dans l'odorat et le traitement des phéromones. 

Il reçoit les informations du bulbe olfactif et du cortex olfactif. 

Les amygdales latérales, qui envoient des impulsions au reste des complexes basolatéraux et aux noyaux centromédiaux, reçoivent des informations des systèmes sensoriels. 

Les noyaux centromédians sont les principales sorties des complexes basolatéraux et sont impliqués dans l'excitation émotionnelle chez les rats et les chats.


=== Apprentissage émotionnel ===


Chez les vertébrés complexes, y compris les humains, les amygdales jouent un rôle primordial dans la formation et le stockage des souvenirs associés aux événements émotionnels.

La recherche indique que, lors du conditionnement de la peur, les stimuli sensoriels atteignent les complexes basolatéraux des amygdales, en particulier les noyaux latéraux, où ils forment des associations avec les souvenirs des stimuli.

L'association entre les stimuli et les événements aversifs qu'ils prédisent peut être médiée par une potentialisation à long terme, une amélioration soutenue de la signalisation entre les neurones affectés.

Il y a eu des études qui montrent que les dommages à l'amygdale peuvent interférer avec la mémoire qui est renforcée par l'émotion.

Une étude a examiné un patient présentant une dégénérescence bilatérale de l'amygdale.

On lui a raconté une histoire violente accompagnée d'images assorties et on l'a observé en fonction de ce dont il se souvenait de l'histoire. 

Le patient avait moins de souvenirs de l'histoire que les patients atteints d'amygdale fonctionnelle, ce qui montre que l'amygdale a un lien étroit avec l'apprentissage émotionnel. On pense que les souvenirs émotionnels sont stockés dans les synapses du cerveau. 

Les souvenirs de peur, par exemple, sont considérés comme stockés dans les connexions neuronales des noyaux latéraux au noyau central de l'amygdale et aux noyaux du lit de la strie terminale (partie de l'amygdale étendue). 

Ces connexions ne sont pas le seul site des souvenirs de peur étant donné que les noyaux de l'amygdale reçoivent et envoient des informations à d'autres régions du cerveau importantes pour la mémoire telles que l'hippocampe. 

Certains neurones sensoriels projettent leurs terminaisons axonales vers le noyau central.

Les noyaux centraux sont impliqués dans la genèse de nombreuses réponses de peur telles que les comportements défensifs (réponses de blocage ou d'échappement), les réponses du système nerveux autonome (changements de pression artérielle et de fréquence cardiaque/tachycardie), les réponses neuroendocrines (libération d'hormones de stress), etc.

Les dommages aux amygdales altèrent à la fois l'acquisition et l'expression du conditionnement pavlovien de la peur, une forme de conditionnement classique des réponses émotionnelles.

De nombreuses preuves suggèrent que plusieurs neuromodulateurs agissant dans l'amygdale régulent la formation de souvenirs émotionnels. Les amygdales sont également impliquées dans le conditionnement appétitif (positif).

Il semble que des neurones distincts répondent à des stimuli positifs et négatifs, mais il n'y a pas de regroupement de ces neurones distincts en noyaux anatomiques clairs.

Cependant, il a été démontré que les lésions du noyau central de l'amygdale réduisent l'apprentissage appétitif chez le rat.

Les lésions des régions basolatérales ne présentent pas le même effet.

Des recherches comme celle-ci indiquent que différents noyaux au sein de l'amygdale ont des fonctions différentes dans le conditionnement appétitif.
Néanmoins, les chercheurs ont trouvé un exemple d'apprentissage émotionnel appétitif montrant un rôle important pour l'amygdale basolatérale : les souris femelles naïves sont naturellement attirées par les phéromones non volatiles contenues dans la litière souillée par les mâles, mais pas par les volatils dérivés des mâles, devenus attirants si associées à des phéromones attractives non volatiles, qui agissent comme un stimulus inconditionné dans un cas d'apprentissage associatif pavlovien. 

Dans les systèmes voméronasal, olfactif et émotionnel, les protéines Fos (famille de gènes) montrent que les phéromones non volatiles stimulent le système voméronasal, alors que les volatils aéroportés n'activent que le système olfactif. 

Ainsi, la préférence acquise pour les volatils d'origine masculine révèle un apprentissage associatif olfactif-voméronasal. 

De plus, le système de récompense est activé de manière différentielle par les phéromones primaires et les odorants attractifs secondaires.

L'exploration de la phéromone attractive primaire active l'amygdale basolatérale et la coquille du noyau accumbens mais ni l'aire tegmentale ventrale ni le cortex orbitofrontal.

En revanche, l'exploration des odorants d'origine masculine secondairement attractifs implique l'activation d'un circuit qui comprend l'amygdale basolatérale, le cortex préfrontal et la zone tegmentale ventrale.

Par conséquent, l'amygdale basolatérale s'impose comme le centre clé de l'apprentissage associatif voméronasal-olfactif.


=== Récompense ===

Les neurones glutamatergiques de l'amygdale basolatérale envoient des projections à la coquille et au noyau du noyau accumbens.

L'activation de ces projections stimule la saillance motivationnelle.

La capacité de ces projections à générer une saillance incitative dépend du récepteur de la dopamine D1.


=== Modulation mémoire ===

L'amygdale est également impliquée dans la modulation de la consolidation de la mémoire.

Après tout événement d'apprentissage, la mémoire à long terme de l'événement ne se forme pas instantanément.

Au contraire, les informations concernant l'événement sont lentement assimilées à un stockage à long terme (potentiellement à vie) au fil du temps, éventuellement via une potentialisation à long terme.

Des études récentes suggèrent que l'amygdale régule la consolidation de la mémoire dans d'autres régions du cerveau.

De plus, le conditionnement de la peur, un type de mémoire qui est altéré suite à une lésion de l'amygdale, est en partie médié par une potentialisation à long terme. Pendant la période de consolidation, la mémoire peut être modulée.

En particulier, il semble que l'excitation émotionnelle suivant l'événement d'apprentissage influence la force de la mémoire ultérieure pour cet événement. 

Une plus grande excitation émotionnelle à la suite d'un événement d'apprentissage améliore la rétention d'une personne de cet événement. 

Des expériences ont montré que l'administration d'hormones de stress à des souris immédiatement après qu'elles ont appris quelque chose améliore leur rétention lorsqu'elles sont testées deux jours plus tard. L'amygdale, en particulier les noyaux basolatéraux, est impliquée dans la médiation des effets de l'excitation émotionnelle sur la force de la mémoire pour l'événement, comme le montrent de nombreux laboratoires dont celui de James McGaugh. 

Ces laboratoires ont entraîné des animaux sur une variété de tâches d'apprentissage et ont découvert que les médicaments injectés dans l'amygdale après l'entraînement affectent la rétention ultérieure de la tâche par les animaux. 

Ces tâches comprennent des tâches de conditionnement classiques de base telles que l'évitement inhibiteur, où un rat apprend à associer un léger choc au pied avec un compartiment particulier d'un appareil, et des tâches plus complexes telles qu'un labyrinthe d'eau spatial ou indicé, où un rat apprend à nager jusqu'à une plate-forme. pour échapper à l'eau. 

Si un médicament qui active les amygdales est injecté dans les amygdales, les animaux avaient une meilleure mémoire pour l'entraînement à la tâche. 

Si un médicament qui inactive l'amygdale est injecté, les animaux avaient une mémoire altérée pour la tâche.
Chez les rats, on a constaté que les dommages à l'ADN augmentaient dans l'amygdale immédiatement après l'exposition au stress. 

Le stress était induit par 30 minutes de contention ou par la nage forcée. 

Sept jours après l'exposition à ces stress, l'augmentation des dommages à l'ADN n'était plus détectable dans l'amygdale, probablement à cause de la réparation de l'ADN. Il a été démontré que les moines bouddhistes qui pratiquent la méditation de compassion modulent leur amygdale, ainsi que leur jonction temporo-pariétale et leur insula, au cours de leur entraine toi. 

Dans une étude IRMf, une activité d'insula plus intensive a été trouvée chez les méditants experts que chez les novices. 

Une activité accrue dans l'amygdale après une méditation axée sur la compassion peut contribuer à la connectivité sociale. L'activité de l'amygdale au moment de l'encodage des informations est en corrélation avec la rétention de ces informations. 

Cependant, cette corrélation dépend du "caractère émotionnel" relatif de l'information. 

Des informations plus émotionnellement excitantes augmentent l'activité amygdalienne, et cette activité est en corrélation avec la rétention. 

Les neurones de l'amygdale présentent divers types d'oscillations lors de l'excitation émotionnelle, telles que l'activité thêta. 

Ces événements neuronaux synchronisés pourraient favoriser la plasticité synaptique (qui est impliquée dans la rétention de la mémoire) en augmentant les interactions entre les sites de stockage néocorticaux et les structures du lobe temporal impliquées dans la mémoire déclarative.

La recherche utilisant le test de Rorschach blot 03 révèle que le nombre de réponses uniques à ce chiffre aléatoire est lié à des amygdales de plus grande taille. 

Les chercheurs notent: "Depuis que des rapports précédents ont indiqué que des réponses uniques ont été observées à une fréquence plus élevée dans la population artistique que dans la population normale non artistique, cette corrélation positive suggère que l'élargissement de l'amygdale dans la population normale pourrait être lié à l'activité mentale créative."


== Corrélats neuropsychologiques de l'activité de l'amygdale ==

Les premières recherches sur les primates ont fourni des explications sur les fonctions de l'amygdale, ainsi qu'une base pour des recherches ultérieures.

Dès 1888, on a observé que des singes rhésus avec un cortex temporal lésé (y compris l'amygdale) présentaient des déficits sociaux et émotionnels importants.

Heinrich Klüver et Paul Bucy ont ensuite développé cette même observation en montrant que de grandes lésions du lobe temporal antérieur produisaient des changements notables, notamment une réaction excessive à tous les objets, une hypoémotivité, une perte de peur, une hypersexualité et une hyperoralité, une condition dans laquelle des objets inappropriés sont placés. dans la bouche.

Certains singes ont également montré une incapacité à reconnaître des objets familiers et s'approchaient d'objets animés et inanimés sans distinction, montrant une perte de peur envers les expérimentateurs.

Ce trouble du comportement a ensuite été nommé syndrome de Klüver-Bucy en conséquence, et des recherches ultérieures ont prouvé qu'il était spécifiquement dû à des lésions de l'amygdale.

Les mères singes qui avaient des dommages à l'amygdale ont montré une réduction des comportements maternels envers leurs bébés, les maltraitant ou les négligeant souvent physiquement.

En 1981, des chercheurs ont découvert que des lésions sélectives par radiofréquence de l'ensemble de l'amygdale provoquaient le syndrome de Klüver-Bucy. Grâce aux progrès de la technologie de neuroimagerie comme l'IRM, les neuroscientifiques ont fait des découvertes importantes concernant l'amygdale dans le cerveau humain.

Une variété de données montre que l'amygdale joue un rôle important dans les états mentaux et est liée à de nombreux troubles psychologiques.

Certaines études ont montré que les enfants souffrant de troubles anxieux ont tendance à avoir une amygdale gauche plus petite.

Dans la majorité des cas, il y avait une association entre une augmentation de la taille de l'amygdale gauche avec l'utilisation d'ISRS (médicaments antidépresseurs) ou une psychothérapie. 

L'amygdale gauche a été liée à l'anxiété sociale, aux troubles obsessionnels et compulsifs et au stress post-traumatique, ainsi que plus largement à la séparation et à l'anxiété générale. 

Dans une étude de 2003, les sujets atteints d'un trouble de la personnalité borderline ont montré une activité de l'amygdale gauche significativement plus élevée que les sujets témoins normaux. 

Certains patients borderline avaient même des difficultés à classer les visages neutres ou les voyaient comme menaçants. 

Les personnes atteintes de psychopathie montrent des réponses autonomes réduites aux signaux de peur instruits que les personnes par ailleurs en bonne santé. 

En 2006, des chercheurs ont observé une hyperactivité de l'amygdale lorsque des patients se voyaient montrer des visages menaçants ou confrontés à des situations effrayantes.

Les patients atteints de phobie sociale sévère ont montré une corrélation avec une réponse accrue de l'amygdale.

De même, les patients déprimés ont montré une activité exagérée de l'amygdale gauche lors de l'interprétation des émotions pour tous les visages, et en particulier pour les visages craintifs.

Cette hyperactivité a été normalisée lorsque les patients ont reçu des médicaments antidépresseurs.

En revanche, on a observé que l'amygdale répondait différemment chez les personnes atteintes de trouble bipolaire.

Une étude de 2003 a révélé que les patients bipolaires adultes et adolescents avaient tendance à avoir des volumes d'amygdale considérablement plus petits et des volumes d'hippocampe un peu plus petits.

De nombreuses études se sont concentrées sur les liens entre l'amygdale et l'autisme. Des études de 2004 et 2006 ont montré que des sujets normaux exposés à des images de visages effrayés ou de visages de personnes d'une autre race montreront une activité accrue de l'amygdale, même si cette exposition est subliminale. 

Cependant, l'amygdale n'est pas nécessaire au traitement des stimuli liés à la peur, car les personnes chez qui elle est endommagée bilatéralement réagissent rapidement aux visages craintifs, même en l'absence d'amygdale fonctionnelle.


=== Orientation sexuelle ===

Des études récentes ont suggéré des corrélations possibles entre la structure du cerveau, y compris les différences dans les rapports hémisphériques et les modèles de connexion dans l'amygdale, et l'orientation sexuelle. 

Les hommes homosexuels ont tendance à montrer plus de motifs féminins dans l'amygdale que les hommes hétérosexuels, tout comme les femmes homosexuelles ont tendance à montrer plus de motifs masculins dans l'amygdale que les femmes hétérosexuelles.

Il a été observé que les connexions amygdales étaient plus répandues à partir de l'amygdale gauche chez les hommes homosexuels, comme on le trouve également chez les femmes hétérosexuelles.

Les connexions amygdales étaient plus répandues à partir de l'amygdale droite chez les femmes homosexuelles, comme chez les hommes hétérosexuels.


=== Interaction sociale ===

Le volume d'amygdale est en corrélation positive avec la taille (le nombre de contacts qu'une personne a) et la complexité (le nombre de groupes différents auxquels une personne appartient) des réseaux sociaux.

Les individus avec de plus grandes amygdales avaient des réseaux sociaux plus grands et plus complexes.

L'amygdale est responsable de la reconnaissance faciale et permet aux autres de répondre de manière appropriée aux différentes expressions émotionnelles.

Ils étaient également mieux à même de porter des jugements sociaux précis sur les visages d'autres personnes.

Le rôle de l'amygdale dans l'analyse des situations sociales découle précisément de sa capacité à identifier et à traiter les modifications des traits du visage.

Cependant, il ne traite pas la direction du regard de la personne perçue. L'amygdale est également considérée comme un déterminant du niveau d'intelligence émotionnelle d'une personne.

On suppose en particulier que des amygdales plus grandes permettent une plus grande intelligence émotionnelle, permettant une plus grande intégration sociétale et une coopération avec les autres. L'amygdale traite les réactions aux violations concernant l'espace personnel.

Ces réactions sont absentes chez les personnes dont l'amygdale est endommagée bilatéralement.

De plus, l'amygdale s'avère être activée en IRMf lorsque les gens observent que d'autres sont physiquement proches d'eux, par exemple lorsqu'une personne scannée sait qu'un expérimentateur se tient juste à côté du scanner, plutôt qu'à distance.


=== Agression ===

Des études animales ont montré que la stimulation de l'amygdale semble augmenter à la fois le comportement sexuel et agressif.

De même, des études utilisant des lésions cérébrales ont montré que des dommages à l'amygdale peuvent produire l'effet inverse.

Ainsi, il semble que cette partie du cerveau puisse jouer un rôle dans la manifestation et la modulation de l'agressivité.


=== Peur ===

Il existe des cas de patients humains présentant des lésions bilatérales focales de l'amygdale dues à la maladie génétique rare de la maladie d'Urbach-Wiethe.

Ces patients ne présentent pas de comportements liés à la peur, ce qui conduit l'un d'entre eux, SM, à être surnommé la "femme sans peur". 

Cette découverte renforce la conclusion selon laquelle l'amygdale "joue un rôle central dans le déclenchement d'un état de peur".


=== Alcoolisme et consommation excessive d'alcool ===

L'amygdale semble jouer un rôle dans la consommation excessive d'alcool, étant endommagée par des épisodes répétés d'intoxication et de sevrage. 

La protéine kinase C-epsilon dans l'amygdale est importante pour réguler les réponses comportementales à la morphine, à l'éthanol et contrôler les comportements anxieux. 

La protéine est impliquée dans le contrôle de la fonction d'autres protéines et joue un rôle dans le développement de la capacité à consommer une grande quantité d'éthanol. 

La durée de la consommation chronique d'alcool et de l'abstinence peut affecter les adaptations dynamiques du réseau cérébral. 

En cas de consommation excessive d'alcool, l'amygdale est affectée par des changements de comportement et réduit la plasticité du cerveau. 

La plasticité cérébrale est la façon dont notre cerveau grandit et se développe ; c'est aussi la façon dont nos neurones peuvent établir des connexions avec d'autres neurones.

Cela augmente finalement nos voies neuronales nous permettant d'augmenter notre connaissance du monde qui nous entoure. 

Lorsque notre plasticité cérébrale diminue, il est difficile pour les neurones d'établir des connexions avec d'autres neurones. 

Souvent, en cas de consommation excessive d'alcool ou d'alcoolisme, notre amygdale est affectée et entraîne des troubles du comportement. 

Ces dommages comportementaux peuvent être un manque de contrôle, une incapacité à se conduire de manière mature, un comportement agressif, une perte de conduite, de l'anxiété, une dépression, des troubles de la personnalité, une consommation excessive de drogues, un trouble bipolaire, de la confusion, des niveaux de tolérance plus élevés, de l'irritabilité et comportements sexuels inappropriés avec les autres et avec soi-même. 


=== Anxiété ===

Il peut également y avoir un lien entre l'amygdale et l'anxiété. 

En particulier, il y a une prévalence plus élevée de femmes qui sont affectées par des troubles anxieux. 

Dans une expérience, des chiots degu ont été retirés de leur mère mais autorisés à entendre son appel. 

En réponse, les mâles ont produit une augmentation des récepteurs de la sérotonine dans l'amygdale, mais les femelles les ont perdus. 

Cela a conduit les hommes à être moins affectés par la situation stressante.
Les grappes de l'amygdale sont activées lorsqu'un individu exprime des sentiments de peur ou d'agression.

Cela se produit parce que l'amygdale est la structure principale du cerveau responsable de la réponse de combat ou de fuite.

Des crises d'anxiété et de panique peuvent survenir lorsque l'amygdale détecte des facteurs de stress environnementaux qui stimulent la réaction de combat ou de fuite.

L'amygdale est directement associée à la peur conditionnée.

La peur conditionnée est le cadre utilisé pour expliquer le comportement produit lorsqu'un stimulus à l'origine neutre est systématiquement associé à un stimulus qui évoque la peur.

L'amygdale représente un système de peur central dans le corps humain, qui est impliqué dans l'expression de la peur conditionnée.

La peur est mesurée par des changements dans l'activité autonome, y compris une augmentation de la fréquence cardiaque, une augmentation de la pression artérielle, ainsi que des réflexes simples tels que tressaillir ou cligner des yeux.
Le noyau central de l'amygdale a des corrélations directes avec l'hypothalamus et le tronc cérébral - des zones directement liées à la peur et à l'anxiété.

Ce lien est évident à partir d'études sur des animaux qui ont subi une ablation des amygdales.

De telles études suggèrent que les animaux dépourvus d'amygdale ont moins d'expression de la peur et se livrent à un comportement non semblable à celui de l'espèce.

De nombreuses zones de projection de l'amygdale sont impliquées de manière critique dans des signes spécifiques utilisés pour mesurer la peur et l'anxiété.
Les mammifères ont des façons très similaires de traiter et de réagir au danger.

Les scientifiques ont observé des zones similaires dans le cerveau - en particulier dans l'amygdale - s'éclairant ou devenant plus actives lorsqu'un mammifère est menacé ou commence à ressentir de l'anxiété.

Des parties similaires du cerveau sont activées lorsque les rongeurs et lorsque les humains observent une situation dangereuse, l'amygdale jouant un rôle crucial dans cette évaluation.

En observant les fonctions de l'amygdale, il peut déterminer pourquoi un rongeur peut être beaucoup plus anxieux qu'un autre.

Il existe une relation directe entre l'activation de l'amygdale et le niveau d'anxiété ressenti par le sujet.
Les sentiments d'anxiété commencent par un catalyseur - un stimulus environnemental qui provoque le stress.

Cela peut inclure diverses odeurs, images et sensations internes qui entraînent de l'anxiété.

L'amygdale réagit à ces stimuli en se préparant soit à se lever et à se battre, soit à se retourner et à courir.

Cette réponse est déclenchée par la libération d'adrénaline dans le sang.

Par conséquent, la glycémie augmente, devenant immédiatement disponible pour les muscles pour une énergie rapide.

Des secousses peuvent se produire pour tenter de renvoyer le sang dans le reste du corps.

Outre l'initiation du stress, des modifications à long terme des neurones de l'amygdale peuvent également augmenter l'anxiété après un stress à long terme ou traumatique, sous l'action des hormones liées au stress dans l'amygdale.

D'un autre côté, le blocage de l'action des hormones du stress dans l'amygdale réduit l'anxiété.

Une meilleure compréhension de l'amygdale et de ses différentes fonctions pourrait conduire à une nouvelle façon de traiter l'anxiété clinique.


=== Trouble de stress post-traumatique ===

Il semble y avoir un lien avec les amygdales et la façon dont le cerveau traite le trouble de stress post-traumatique.

Plusieurs études ont montré que l'amygdale peut être responsable des réactions émotionnelles des patients atteints de SSPT.

Une étude en particulier a révélé que lorsque les patients atteints de SSPT voient des images de visages avec des expressions effrayantes, leurs amygdales ont tendance à avoir une activation plus élevée que quelqu'un sans SSPT.


=== Trouble bipolaire ===

Le dysfonctionnement de l'amygdale lors du traitement des émotions faciales est bien documenté dans le trouble bipolaire.

Les personnes atteintes de trouble bipolaire ont montré une plus grande activité de l'amygdale (en particulier le circuit amygdale/médial-préfrontal-cortex).


=== Orientation politique ===

La taille de l'amygdale a été corrélée avec les styles cognitifs en matière de pensée politique.

Une étude a révélé qu '"un plus grand libéralisme était associé à une augmentation du volume de matière grise dans le cortex cingulaire antérieur, tandis qu'un plus grand conservatisme était associé à une augmentation du volume de l'amygdale droite". Ces résultats suggèrent que le volume de l'amygdale et du gyrus cingulaire antérieur peut être associé à la capacité d'un individu à tolérer l'incertitude et les conflits.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Amygdale

;;;PT;;;



CORPO AMIGDALOIDE (AMÍGDALA)


A amígdala (; plural: amígdalas ou amígdalas; também corpus amygdaloideum; latim do grego, ἀμυγδαλή, amygdalē, 'amêndoa', 'amígdala') é um dos dois aglomerados de núcleos em forma de amêndoa localizados profundamente e medialmente dentro dos lobos temporais do cérebro do cérebro em vertebrados complexos, incluindo humanos. 

Mostradas para desempenhar um papel primário no processamento da memória, tomada de decisão e respostas emocionais (incluindo medo, ansiedade e agressão), as amígdalas são consideradas parte do sistema límbico. 

O termo amígdala foi introduzido pela primeira vez por Karl Friedrich Burdach em 1822.


== Estrutura ==


As regiões descritas como núcleos da amígdala abrangem diversas estruturas do cérebro com características conexionais e funcionais distintas em humanos e outros animais. 

Entre esses núcleos estão o complexo basolateral, o núcleo cortical, o núcleo medial, o núcleo central e os aglomerados de células intercaladas. 

O complexo basolateral pode ser subdividido em núcleos laterais, basais e basais acessórios. Anatomicamente, a amígdala, e mais particularmente seus núcleos central e medial, às vezes são classificados como parte dos gânglios basais.


=== Especializações hemisféricas ===

Em um estudo, os estímulos elétricos da amígdala direita induziram emoções negativas, especialmente medo e tristeza. 

Em contraste, a estimulação da amígdala esquerda foi capaz de induzir emoções agradáveis ​​(felicidade) ou desagradáveis ​​(medo, ansiedade, tristeza). 

Outras evidências sugerem que a amígdala esquerda desempenha um papel no sistema de recompensa do cérebro. Cada lado tem uma função específica na forma como percebemos e processamos emoções. 

As porções direita e esquerda da amígdala têm sistemas de memória independentes, mas trabalham juntas para armazenar, codificar e interpretar emoções.
O hemisfério direito da amígdala está associado à emoção negativa. 

Desempenha um papel na expressão do medo e no processamento de estímulos indutores de medo. 

O condicionamento do medo, que ocorre quando um estímulo neutro adquire propriedades aversivas, ocorre no hemisfério direito. 

Quando um indivíduo recebe um estímulo condicionado e aversivo, ele é processado dentro da amígdala direita, produzindo uma resposta desagradável ou de medo. 

Essa resposta emocional condiciona o indivíduo a evitar estímulos indutores de medo e, mais importante, a avaliar ameaças no ambiente.
O hemisfério direito também está ligado à memória declarativa, que consiste em fatos e informações de eventos previamente vivenciados e devem ser lembrados conscientemente.

Também desempenha um papel significativo na retenção da memória episódica.

A memória episódica consiste nos aspectos autobiográficos da memória, permitindo recordar a experiência emocional e sensorial de um evento.

Este tipo de memória não requer evocação consciente.

A amígdala direita desempenha um papel na associação de tempo e lugares com propriedades emocionais.


== Desenvolvimento e distinção de sexo ==


A amígdala é uma das regiões do cérebro mais bem compreendidas no que diz respeito às diferenças entre os sexos.

A amígdala é maior nos machos do que nas fêmeas em crianças de 7 a 11 anos, humanos adultos e ratos adultos. Há um crescimento considerável nos primeiros anos de desenvolvimento estrutural nas amígdalas masculinas e femininas. 

Nesse período inicial, as estruturas límbicas femininas crescem em um ritmo mais rápido do que as masculinas. 

Entre as mulheres, a amígdala atinge seu pleno potencial de crescimento aproximadamente 1,5 anos antes do pico do desenvolvimento masculino. 

O desenvolvimento estrutural da amígdala masculina ocorre por um período mais longo do que nas mulheres. 

Apesar do desenvolvimento precoce das amígdalas femininas, elas atingem seu potencial de crescimento mais cedo do que os machos, cujas amígdalas continuam a se desenvolver. 

O maior tamanho relativo da amígdala masculina pode ser atribuído a esse período de desenvolvimento prolongado.
Fatores hormonais também podem contribuir para diferenças de desenvolvimento específicas do sexo.

A amígdala é rica em receptores androgênicos – receptores nucleares que se ligam à testosterona.

Os receptores androgênicos desempenham um papel na ligação ao DNA que regula a expressão gênica.

Embora a testosterona esteja presente nos sistemas hormonais femininos, as mulheres têm níveis mais baixos de testosterona do que os homens.

A abundância de testosterona no sistema hormonal masculino pode contribuir para o desenvolvimento.

Além disso, o volume de massa cinzenta na amígdala é previsto pelos níveis de testosterona, o que também pode contribuir para o aumento da massa da amígdala masculina.
Existem diferenças de desenvolvimento observáveis ​​entre a amígdala direita e esquerda.

A amígdala esquerda atinge seu pico de desenvolvimento aproximadamente 1,5 a 2 anos antes da amígdala direita.

Apesar do crescimento precoce da amígdala esquerda, a direita aumenta de volume por mais tempo.

A amígdala direita está associada à resposta a estímulos de medo, bem como ao reconhecimento facial.

Infere-se que o desenvolvimento inicial da amígdala esquerda funciona para fornecer aos bebês a capacidade de detectar o perigo.

Na infância, a amígdala reage de forma diferente a indivíduos do mesmo sexo versus indivíduos do sexo oposto.

Essa reatividade diminui até a pessoa entrar na adolescência, onde aumenta dramaticamente na puberdade. Outras diferenças funcionais e estruturais entre as amígdalas masculinas e femininas foram observadas.

A ativação da amígdala dos sujeitos foi observada ao assistir a um filme de terror e estímulos subliminares.

Os resultados do estudo mostraram uma lateralização diferente da amígdala em homens e mulheres.

A memória aprimorada para o filme estava relacionada à atividade aprimorada da amígdala esquerda, mas não à direita, nas mulheres, enquanto estava relacionada à atividade aprimorada da amígdala direita, mas não da esquerda, nos homens.

Da mesma forma, um estudo sobre a capacidade de tomada de decisão em pacientes com lesão unilateral da amígdala sugeriu que homens com lesão na amígdala direita (mas não esquerda) eram mais propensos a serem prejudicados na capacidade de tomada de decisão, enquanto mulheres com lesão na amígdala esquerda (mas não direita) eram mais propensos a serem prejudicados na capacidade de tomada de decisão.

Um estudo encontrou evidências de que, em média, as mulheres tendem a reter memórias mais fortes para eventos emocionais do que os homens.


== Função ==



=== Conexões ===

Uma visão simples do processamento da informação através da amígdala segue como: a amígdala envia projeções para o hipotálamo, o tálamo dorsomedial, o núcleo reticular talâmico, os núcleos do nervo trigêmeo e do nervo facial, a área tegmental ventral, o locus coeruleus, e o núcleo tegmental látero-dorsal.

A amígdala basolateral projeta-se para o núcleo accumbens, incluindo a concha medial.

O núcleo medial está envolvido no sentido do olfato e no processamento de feromônios.

Ele recebe informações do bulbo olfativo e do córtex olfativo.

As amígdalas laterais, que enviam impulsos para o resto dos complexos basolaterais e para os núcleos centromediais, recebem informações dos sistemas sensoriais.

Os núcleos centromediais são as principais saídas para os complexos basolaterais e estão envolvidos na excitação emocional em ratos e gatos.


=== Aprendizagem emocional ===


Em vertebrados complexos, incluindo humanos, as amígdalas desempenham papéis primários na formação e armazenamento de memórias associadas a eventos emocionais.

Pesquisas indicam que, durante o condicionamento do medo, os estímulos sensoriais atingem os complexos basolaterais das amígdalas, particularmente os núcleos laterais, onde formam associações com as memórias dos estímulos.

A associação entre os estímulos e os eventos aversivos que eles predizem pode ser mediada pela potencialização de longo prazo, um aumento sustentado da sinalização entre os neurônios afetados.

Existem estudos que mostram que danos na amígdala podem interferir na memória que é fortalecida pela emoção.

Um estudo examinou um paciente com degeneração bilateral da amígdala.

Ele ouviu uma história violenta acompanhada de fotos correspondentes e foi observado com base no quanto ele conseguia se lembrar da história. 

O paciente tinha menos lembranças da história do que os pacientes com amígdala funcional, mostrando que a amígdala tem uma forte conexão com o aprendizado emocional. Acredita-se que as memórias emocionais sejam armazenadas em sinapses em todo o cérebro. 

As memórias de medo, por exemplo, são consideradas armazenadas nas conexões neuronais dos núcleos laterais para o núcleo central da amígdala e os núcleos do leito da estria terminal (parte da amígdala estendida). 

Essas conexões não são o único local de memórias de medo, uma vez que os núcleos da amígdala recebem e enviam informações para outras regiões cerebrais importantes para a memória, como o hipocampo. 

Alguns neurônios sensoriais projetam seus terminais axônicos para o núcleo central.

Os núcleos centrais estão envolvidos na gênese de muitas respostas de medo, como comportamento defensivo (respostas de congelamento ou fuga), respostas do sistema nervoso autônomo (alterações na pressão arterial e frequência cardíaca/taquicardia), respostas neuroendócrinas (liberação do hormônio do estresse), etc.

Danos às amígdalas prejudicam tanto a aquisição quanto a expressão do condicionamento pavloviano do medo, uma forma de condicionamento clássico de respostas emocionais.

Evidências acumuladas sugerem que múltiplos neuromoduladores atuando na amígdala regulam a formação de memórias emocionais. As amígdalas também estão envolvidas no condicionamento apetitivo (positivo).

Parece que neurônios distintos respondem a estímulos positivos e negativos, mas não há agrupamento desses neurônios distintos em núcleos anatômicos claros. 

No entanto, lesões do núcleo central na amígdala demonstraram reduzir o aprendizado apetitivo em ratos. 

As lesões das regiões basolaterais não apresentam o mesmo efeito. 

Pesquisas como essa indicam que diferentes núcleos dentro da amígdala têm diferentes funções no condicionamento apetitivo.
No entanto, os pesquisadores encontraram um exemplo de aprendizado emocional apetitivo mostrando um papel importante para a amígdala basolateral: os camundongos fêmeas ingênuos são naturalmente atraídos por feromônios não voláteis contidos em roupas de cama sujas de machos, mas não pelos voláteis derivados de machos, tornam-se atraentes se associados a feromônios atrativos não voláteis, que atuam como estímulo incondicionado em um caso de aprendizagem associativa pavloviana. 

Nos sistemas vomeronasal, olfativo e emocional, as proteínas Fos (família de genes) mostram que os feromônios não voláteis estimulam o sistema vomeronasal, enquanto os voláteis transportados pelo ar ativam apenas o sistema olfativo. 

Assim, a preferência adquirida por voláteis de origem masculina revela um aprendizado associativo olfativo-vomeronasal. 

Além disso, o sistema de recompensa é ativado diferencialmente pelos feromônios primários e odorantes secundariamente atrativos.

Explorar o feromônio atrativo primário ativa a amígdala basolateral e a concha do núcleo accumbens, mas nem a área tegmental ventral nem o córtex orbitofrontal.

Em contraste, explorar os odores masculinos secundariamente atraentes envolve a ativação de um circuito que inclui a amígdala basolateral, o córtex pré-frontal e a área tegmental ventral.

Portanto, a amígdala basolateral se destaca como o centro chave para a aprendizagem associativa vomeronasal-olfativa.


=== Recompensa ===

Neurônios glutamatérgicos na amígdala basolateral enviam projeções para a concha e o núcleo do núcleo accumbens.

A ativação dessas projeções impulsiona a saliência motivacional.

A capacidade dessas projeções para impulsionar a saliência de incentivo depende do receptor de dopamina D1.


=== Modulação de memória ===

A amígdala também está envolvida na modulação da consolidação da memória.

Após qualquer evento de aprendizagem, a memória de longo prazo para o evento não é formada instantaneamente.

Em vez disso, as informações sobre o evento são assimiladas lentamente no armazenamento de longo prazo (potencialmente ao longo da vida), possivelmente por meio de potencialização de longo prazo.

Estudos recentes sugerem que a amígdala regula a consolidação da memória em outras regiões do cérebro.

Além disso, o condicionamento do medo, um tipo de memória que é prejudicado após a lesão da amígdala, é mediado em parte pela potencialização de longo prazo. Durante o período de consolidação, a memória pode ser modulada.

Em particular, parece que a excitação emocional após o evento de aprendizagem influencia a força da memória subsequente para esse evento. 

Uma maior excitação emocional após um evento de aprendizagem aumenta a retenção de uma pessoa desse evento. 

Experimentos mostraram que a administração de hormônios do estresse a camundongos imediatamente após eles aprenderem algo aumenta sua retenção quando são testados dois dias depois. o evento, como demonstrado por muitos laboratórios, incluindo o de James McGaugh. 

Esses laboratórios treinaram animais em uma variedade de tarefas de aprendizado e descobriram que as drogas injetadas na amígdala após o treinamento afetam a retenção subsequente da tarefa pelos animais. 

Essas tarefas incluem tarefas básicas de condicionamento clássico, como esquiva inibitória, onde um rato aprende a associar um leve choque nas patas com um compartimento específico de um aparelho, e tarefas mais complexas, como labirinto aquático espacial ou com pistas, onde um rato aprende a nadar até uma plataforma. para escapar da água.

Se uma droga que ativa a amígdala for injetada na amígdala, os animais terão melhor memória para o treinamento na tarefa.

Se uma droga que inativa a amígdala for injetada, os animais terão a memória prejudicada para a tarefa.
Em ratos, os danos ao DNA aumentaram na amígdala imediatamente após a exposição ao estresse.

O estresse foi induzido por 30 minutos de contenção ou natação forçada.

Por sete dias após a exposição a esses estresses, o aumento do dano ao DNA não era mais detectável na amígdala, provavelmente por causa do reparo do DNA. prática. 

Em um estudo de fMRI, a atividade da ínsula mais intensa foi encontrada em meditadores experientes do que em novatos. 

O aumento da atividade na amígdala após a meditação orientada para a compaixão pode contribuir para a conexão social. A atividade da amígdala no momento da codificação da informação está correlacionada com a retenção dessa informação. 

No entanto, essa correlação depende da relativa "emotividade" da informação. 

Informações mais excitantes emocionalmente aumentam a atividade da amígdala, e essa atividade se correlaciona com a retenção. 

Os neurônios da amígdala mostram vários tipos de oscilação durante a excitação emocional, como a atividade teta. 

Esses eventos neuronais sincronizados podem promover plasticidade sináptica (que está envolvida na retenção de memória) aumentando as interações entre os locais de armazenamento neocorticais e as estruturas do lobo temporal envolvidas na memória declarativa.

Pesquisas usando o teste Rorschach 03 descobrem que o número de respostas únicas a esse número aleatório se liga a amígdalas de tamanho maior. 

Os pesquisadores observam: "Como relatórios anteriores indicaram que respostas únicas foram observadas com maior frequência na população artística do que na população normal não artística, essa correlação positiva sugere que o aumento da amígdala na população normal pode estar relacionado à atividade mental criativa".


== Correlatos neuropsicológicos da atividade da amígdala ==

As primeiras pesquisas sobre primatas forneceram explicações sobre as funções da amígdala, bem como uma base para pesquisas futuras.

Já em 1888, macacos rhesus com córtex temporal lesionado (incluindo a amígdala) apresentavam déficits sociais e emocionais significativos.

Heinrich Klüver e Paul Bucy posteriormente expandiram essa mesma observação, mostrando que grandes lesões no lobo temporal anterior produziam mudanças perceptíveis, incluindo reação exagerada a todos os objetos, hipoemocionalidade, perda de medo, hipersexualidade e hiperoralidade, uma condição na qual objetos inadequados são colocados na boca.

Alguns macacos também apresentavam uma incapacidade de reconhecer objetos familiares e se aproximavam de objetos animados e inanimados indiscriminadamente, exibindo uma perda de medo em relação aos experimentadores.

Esse distúrbio comportamental foi posteriormente chamado de síndrome de Klüver-Bucy, e pesquisas posteriores provaram que era especificamente devido a lesões na amígdala. 

Mães de macacos que tiveram danos na amígdala mostraram uma redução nos comportamentos maternos em relação a seus bebês, muitas vezes abusando fisicamente ou negligenciando-os. 

Em 1981, pesquisadores descobriram que lesões seletivas de radiofrequência de toda a amígdala causavam a síndrome de Klüver-Bucy. 

Uma variedade de dados mostra que a amígdala tem um papel substancial nos estados mentais e está relacionada a muitos distúrbios psicológicos. 

Alguns estudos mostraram que crianças com transtornos de ansiedade tendem a ter uma amígdala esquerda menor. 

Na maioria dos casos, houve associação entre o aumento do tamanho da amígdala esquerda com o uso de ISRS (medicação antidepressiva) ou psicoterapia.

A amígdala esquerda tem sido associada à ansiedade social, transtornos obsessivos e compulsivos e estresse pós-traumático, bem como, mais amplamente, à separação e à ansiedade geral.

Em um estudo de 2003, os indivíduos com transtorno de personalidade limítrofe mostraram atividade da amígdala esquerda significativamente maior do que os controles normais.

Alguns pacientes limítrofes tiveram até dificuldade em classificar rostos neutros ou os viram como ameaçadores.

Indivíduos com psicopatia mostram respostas autonômicas reduzidas a pistas de medo instruídas do que indivíduos saudáveis.

Em 2006, pesquisadores observaram hiperatividade na amígdala quando os pacientes foram apresentados a rostos ameaçadores ou confrontados com situações assustadoras.

Pacientes com fobia social grave apresentaram correlação com aumento da resposta na amígdala.

Da mesma forma, pacientes deprimidos mostraram atividade exagerada da amígdala esquerda ao interpretar emoções para todos os rostos, e especialmente para rostos com medo.

Essa hiperatividade foi normalizada quando os pacientes receberam medicação antidepressiva.

Por outro lado, observou-se que a amígdala responde de maneira diferente em pessoas com transtorno bipolar.

Um estudo de 2003 descobriu que pacientes bipolares adultos e adolescentes tendiam a ter volumes de amígdala consideravelmente menores e volumes de hipocampo um pouco menores.

Muitos estudos se concentraram nas conexões entre a amígdala e o autismo. Estudos em 2004 e 2006 mostraram que indivíduos normais expostos a imagens de rostos assustados ou rostos de pessoas de outra raça mostrarão atividade aumentada da amígdala, mesmo que essa exposição seja subliminar. 

No entanto, a amígdala não é necessária para o processamento de estímulos relacionados ao medo, uma vez que as pessoas nas quais ela é danificada bilateralmente apresentam reações rápidas a rostos amedrontados, mesmo na ausência de uma amígdala funcional.


=== Orientação sexual ===

Estudos recentes sugeriram possíveis correlações entre a estrutura cerebral, incluindo diferenças nas proporções hemisféricas e padrões de conexão na amígdala, e orientação sexual. 

Os homens homossexuais tendem a exibir mais padrões femininos na amígdala do que os homens heterossexuais, assim como as mulheres homossexuais tendem a mostrar mais padrões masculinos na amígdala do que as mulheres heterossexuais. 

Observou-se que as conexões da amígdala foram mais difundidas a partir da amígdala esquerda em homens homossexuais, como também é encontrado em mulheres heterossexuais. 

As conexões da amígdala foram mais difundidas a partir da amígdala direita em mulheres homossexuais, como em homens heterossexuais.


=== Interação social ===

O volume da amígdala se correlaciona positivamente com o tamanho (o número de contatos que uma pessoa tem) e a complexidade (o número de grupos diferentes aos quais uma pessoa pertence) das redes sociais. 

Indivíduos com amígdalas maiores tinham redes sociais maiores e mais complexas. 

A amígdala é responsável pelo reconhecimento facial e permite que outras pessoas respondam adequadamente a diferentes expressões emocionais.

Eles também eram mais capazes de fazer julgamentos sociais precisos sobre os rostos de outras pessoas.

O papel da amígdala na análise de situações sociais decorre especificamente de sua capacidade de identificar e processar mudanças nas características faciais.

No entanto, não processa a direção do olhar da pessoa que está sendo percebida. Acredita-se também que a amígdala seja um determinante do nível de inteligência emocional de uma pessoa.

Supõe-se particularmente que amígdalas maiores permitem maior inteligência emocional, permitindo maior integração social e cooperação com os outros. A amígdala processa reações a violações do espaço pessoal.

Essas reações estão ausentes em pessoas nas quais a amígdala está danificada bilateralmente. 

Além disso, a amígdala é ativada em fMRI quando as pessoas observam que outras estão fisicamente próximas a elas, como quando uma pessoa que está sendo examinada sabe que um experimentador está imediatamente ao lado do scanner, em vez de ficar à distância.


=== Agressão ===

Estudos em animais mostraram que estimular a amígdala parece aumentar o comportamento sexual e agressivo. 

Da mesma forma, estudos com lesões cerebrais mostraram que danos à amígdala podem produzir o efeito oposto. 

Assim, parece que esta parte do cérebro pode desempenhar um papel na exibição e modulação da agressão.


=== Medo ===

Há casos de pacientes humanos com lesões focais bilaterais da amígdala devido à rara condição genética doença de Urbach-Wiethe. 

Tais pacientes não apresentam comportamentos relacionados ao medo, levando uma, SM, a ser apelidada de "mulher sem medo". 

Esse achado reforça a conclusão de que a amígdala "desempenha um papel fundamental no desencadeamento de um estado de medo".


=== Alcoolismo e bebedeira ===

A amígdala parece desempenhar um papel na bebedeira, sendo prejudicada por episódios repetidos de intoxicação e abstinência. 

A proteína quinase C-épsilon na amígdala é importante para regular as respostas comportamentais à morfina, etanol e controlar o comportamento semelhante à ansiedade. 

A proteína está envolvida no controle da função de outras proteínas e desempenha um papel no desenvolvimento da capacidade de consumir uma grande quantidade de etanol. 

A duração do consumo crônico de álcool e a abstinência podem afetar as adaptações dinâmicas da rede cerebral. 

Quando ocorre o consumo excessivo de álcool, a amígdala é afetada por meio de mudanças comportamentais e reduz a plasticidade do cérebro. 

A plasticidade cerebral é como nosso cérebro cresce e se desenvolve; é também como nossos neurônios podem fazer conexões com outros neurônios.

Isso acaba aumentando nossos caminhos neurais, permitindo-nos aumentar nosso conhecimento do mundo ao nosso redor. 

Quando a plasticidade do nosso cérebro diminui, torna-se difícil para os neurônios fazerem conexões com outros neurônios. 

Muitas vezes, quando ocorre o consumo excessivo de álcool ou alcoolismo, nossa amígdala é afetada e leva a danos comportamentais. 

Esses danos comportamentais podem ser falta de controle, incapacidade de se comportar de maneira madura, comportamento agressivo, perda de conduta, ansiedade, depressão, transtornos de personalidade, ingestão excessiva de drogas, transtorno bipolar, confusão, níveis mais altos de tolerância, irritabilidade e comportamentos sexuais inadequados com os outros e consigo mesmo.


=== Ansiedade ===

Também pode haver uma ligação entre a amígdala e a ansiedade.

Em particular, há uma maior prevalência de mulheres que são afetadas por transtornos de ansiedade.

Em um experimento, os filhotes degu foram removidos de sua mãe, mas autorizados a ouvir seu chamado.

Em resposta, os machos produziram um aumento dos receptores de serotonina na amígdala, mas as fêmeas os perderam.

Isso fez com que os homens fossem menos afetados pela situação estressante.
Os aglomerados da amígdala são ativados quando um indivíduo expressa sentimentos de medo ou agressão.

Isso ocorre porque a amígdala é a estrutura primária do cérebro responsável pela resposta de luta ou fuga.

Ansiedade e ataques de pânico podem ocorrer quando a amígdala detecta estressores ambientais que estimulam a resposta de luta ou fuga.

A amígdala está diretamente associada ao medo condicionado.

O medo condicionado é a estrutura usada para explicar o comportamento produzido quando um estímulo originalmente neutro é consistentemente emparelhado com um estímulo que evoca o medo.

A amígdala representa um sistema central de medo no corpo humano, que está envolvido na expressão do medo condicionado.

O medo é medido por mudanças na atividade autonômica, incluindo aumento da frequência cardíaca, aumento da pressão arterial, bem como em reflexos simples, como vacilar ou piscar.
O núcleo central da amígdala tem correlações diretas com o hipotálamo e o tronco cerebral – áreas diretamente relacionadas ao medo e à ansiedade. 

Essa conexão é evidente a partir de estudos de animais que foram submetidos à remoção da amígdala. 

Esses estudos sugerem que os animais que não possuem amígdala têm menos expressão de medo e se entregam a comportamentos não semelhantes a espécies. 

Muitas áreas de projeção da amígdala estão criticamente envolvidas em sinais específicos que são usados ​​para medir o medo e a ansiedade.
Os mamíferos têm formas muito semelhantes de processar e responder ao perigo. 

Os cientistas observaram áreas semelhantes no cérebro – especificamente na amígdala – acendendo ou se tornando mais ativas quando um mamífero é ameaçado ou começa a sentir ansiedade. 

Partes semelhantes do cérebro são ativadas quando roedores e humanos observam uma situação perigosa, a amígdala desempenha um papel crucial nessa avaliação.

Ao observar as funções da amígdala, pode-se determinar por que um roedor pode estar muito mais ansioso do que outro.

Existe uma relação direta entre a ativação da amígdala e o nível de ansiedade que o sujeito sente.
Sentimentos de ansiedade começam com um catalisador – um estímulo ambiental que provoca estresse.

Isso pode incluir vários cheiros, visões e sensações internas que resultam em ansiedade.

A amígdala reage a esse estímulo preparando-se para ficar de pé e lutar ou virar e correr.

Essa resposta é desencadeada pela liberação de adrenalina na corrente sanguínea.

Consequentemente, o açúcar no sangue aumenta, tornando-se imediatamente disponível para os músculos para energia rápida.

A agitação pode ocorrer na tentativa de devolver o sangue ao resto do corpo. 

Além do início do estresse, mudanças de longo prazo nos neurônios da amígdala também podem aumentar a ansiedade após estresse de longo prazo ou traumático, liderado pela ação de hormônios relacionados ao estresse dentro da amígdala. 

Por outro lado, bloquear a ação dos hormônios do estresse na amígdala reduz a ansiedade. 

Uma melhor compreensão da amígdala e de suas diversas funções pode levar a uma nova forma de tratar a ansiedade clínica.


=== Transtorno de estresse pós-traumático ===

Parece haver uma conexão com a amígdala e como o cérebro processa o transtorno de estresse pós-traumático. 

Vários estudos descobriram que a amígdala pode ser responsável pelas reações emocionais de pacientes com TEPT. 

Um estudo em particular descobriu que, quando pacientes com TEPT são mostrados com fotos de rostos com expressões de medo, suas amígdalas tendem a ter uma ativação maior do que alguém sem TEPT.


=== Transtorno bipolar ===

A disfunção da amígdala durante o processamento de emoções faciais está bem documentada no transtorno bipolar. 

Indivíduos com transtorno bipolar apresentaram maior atividade da amígdala (especialmente o circuito amígdala/córtex pré-frontal medial).


=== Orientação política ===

O tamanho da amígdala foi correlacionado com os estilos cognitivos no que diz respeito ao pensamento político. 

Um estudo descobriu que "maior liberalismo estava associado ao aumento do volume de matéria cinzenta no córtex cingulado anterior, enquanto o maior conservadorismo estava associado ao aumento do volume da amígdala direita". Esses achados sugerem que o volume da amígdala e do giro cingulado anterior podem estar associados à capacidade do indivíduo de tolerar incertezas e conflitos.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Amygdala
