

DIGESTIVE CANAL/
GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT


The gastrointestinal tract (GI tract, GIT, digestive tract, digestion tract, alimentary canal) is the tract from the mouth to the anus which includes all the organs of the digestive system in humans and other animals. 

Food taken in through the mouth is digested to extract nutrients and absorb energy, and the waste expelled as feces. 

The mouth, esophagus, stomach and intestines are all part of the gastrointestinal tract. 

Gastrointestinal is an adjective meaning of or pertaining to the stomach and intestines. 

A tract is a collection of related anatomic structures or a series of connected body organs.

Most bilaterians (including most invertebrates and all vertebrates) have a "through-gut" or complete digestive tract. 

The sponges and cnidarians are early invertebrates with an incomplete digestive tract having just one opening instead of two, where food is taken in and waste expelled, while comb jellies have both a ventral mouth and dorsal anal pores (unlike the anterior-posterior positions in bilaterians).

The human gastrointestinal tract consists of the esophagus, stomach, and intestines, and is divided into the upper and lower gastrointestinal tracts. 

The GI tract includes all structures between the mouth and the anus, forming a continuous passageway that includes the main organs of digestion, namely, the stomach, small intestine, and large intestine. 

However, the complete human digestive system is made up of the gastrointestinal tract plus the accessory organs of digestion (the tongue, salivary glands, pancreas, liver and gallbladder). 

The tract may also be divided into foregut, midgut, and hindgut, reflecting the embryological origin of each segment. 

The whole human GI tract is about nine metres (30 feet) long at autopsy. 

It is considerably shorter in the living body because the intestines, which are tubes of smooth muscle tissue, maintain constant muscle tone in a halfway-tense state but can relax in spots to allow for local distention and peristalsis.

The gastrointestinal tract contains trillions of microbes, with some 4,000 different strains of bacteria having diverse roles in maintenance of immune health and metabolism. 

Some estimates claim that the number of microbes outnumber our own cells 10:1. 

Cells of the GI tract release hormones to help regulate the digestive process. 

These digestive hormones, including gastrin, secretin, cholecystokinin, and ghrelin, are mediated through either intracrine or autocrine mechanisms, indicating that the cells releasing these hormones are conserved structures throughout evolution.


== Human gastrointestinal tract ==



=== Structure ===


The structure and function can be described both as gross anatomy and as microscopic anatomy or histology. 

The tract itself is divided into upper and lower tracts, and the intestines small and large parts.


==== Upper gastrointestinal tract ====

The upper gastrointestinal tract consists of the mouth, pharynx, esophagus, stomach, and duodenum.

The exact demarcation between the upper and lower tracts is the suspensory muscle of the duodenum. 

This differentiates the embryonic borders between the foregut and midgut, and is also the division commonly used by clinicians to describe gastrointestinal bleeding as being of either "upper" or "lower" origin. 

Upon dissection, the duodenum may appear to be a unified organ, but it is divided into four segments based upon function, location, and internal anatomy. 

The four segments of the duodenum are as follows (starting at the stomach, and moving toward the jejunum): bulb, descending, horizontal, and ascending. 

The suspensory muscle attaches the superior border of the ascending duodenum to the diaphragm.

The suspensory muscle is an important anatomical landmark which shows the formal division between the duodenum and the jejunum, the first and second parts of the small intestine, respectively. 

This is a thin muscle which is derived from the embryonic mesoderm.


==== Lower gastrointestinal tract ====

The lower gastrointestinal tract includes most of the small intestine and all of the large intestine. 

In human anatomy, the intestine (bowel, or gut. 

Greek: éntera) is the segment of the gastrointestinal tract extending from the pyloric sphincter of the stomach to the anus and as in other mammals, consists of two segments, the small intestine and the large intestine. 

In humans, the small intestine is further subdivided into the duodenum, jejunum and ileum while the large intestine is subdivided into the cecum, ascending, transverse, descending and sigmoid colon, rectum, and anal canal.


===== Small intestine =====

The small intestine begins at the duodenum and is a tubular structure, usually between 6 and 7 m long. 

Its mucosal area in an adult human is about 30 m2 (320 sq ft). 

The combination of the circular folds, the villi, and the microvilli increases the absorptive area of the mucosa about 600-fold, making a total area of about 250 m2 (2,700 sq ft) for the entire small intestine. 

Its main function is to absorb the products of digestion (including carbohydrates, proteins, lipids, and vitamins) into the bloodstream. 

There are three major divisions:

Duodenum: A short structure (about 20–25 cm long) which receives chyme from the stomach, together with pancreatic juice containing digestive enzymes and bile from the gall bladder. 

The digestive enzymes break down proteins, and bile emulsifies fats into micelles. 

The duodenum contains Brunner's glands which produce a mucus-rich alkaline secretion containing bicarbonate. 

These secretions, in combination with bicarbonate from the pancreas, neutralize the stomach acids contained in the chyme.

Jejunum: This is the midsection of the small intestine, connecting the duodenum to the ileum. 

It is about 2.5 m (8.2 ft) long and contains the circular folds also known as plicae circulares and villi that increase its surface area. 

Products of digestion (sugars, amino acids, and fatty acids) are absorbed into the bloodstream here.

Ileum: The final section of the small intestine. 

It is about 3 m long, and contains villi similar to the jejunum. 

It absorbs mainly vitamin B12 and bile acids, as well as any other remaining nutrients.


===== Large intestine =====

The large intestine also called the colon, consists of the cecum, rectum, and anal canal. 

It also includes the appendix, which is attached to the cecum. 

The colon is further divided into:

-Cecum (first portion of the colon) and appendix
-Ascending colon (ascending in the back wall of the abdomen)
-Right colic flexure (flexed portion of the ascending and transverse colon apparent to the liver)
-Transverse colon (passing below the diaphragm)
-Left colic flexure (flexed portion of the transverse and descending colon apparent to the spleen)
-Descending colon (descending down the left side of the abdomen)
-Sigmoid colon (a loop of the colon closest to the rectum)
-Rectum
-Anus

The main function of the large intestine is to absorb water.

The area of the large intestinal mucosa of an adult human is about 2 m2 (22 sq ft).


==== Development ====

The gut is an endoderm-derived structure. 

At approximately the sixteenth day of human development, the embryo begins to fold ventrally (with the embryo's ventral surface becoming concave) in two directions: 
    the sides of the embryo fold in on each other and the head and tail fold toward one another. 

The result is that a piece of the yolk sac, an endoderm-lined structure in contact with the ventral aspect of the embryo, begins to be pinched off to become the primitive gut. 

The yolk sac remains connected to the gut tube via the vitelline duct. 

Usually, this structure regresses during development; in cases where it does not, it is known as Meckel's diverticulum.

During fetal life, the primitive gut is gradually patterned into three segments: foregut, midgut, and hindgut. 

Although these terms are often used in reference to segments of the primitive gut, they are also used regularly to describe regions of the definitive gut as well.

Each segment of the gut is further specified and gives rise to specific gut and gut-related structures in later development. 

Components derived from the gut proper, including the stomach and colon, develop as swellings or dilatations in the cells of the primitive gut. 

In contrast, gut-related derivatives — that is, those structures that derive from the primitive gut but are not part of the gut proper, in general, develop as out-pouchings of the primitive gut. 

The blood vessels supplying these structures remain constant throughout development.


==== Histology ====

The gastrointestinal tract has a form of general histology with some differences that reflect the specialization in functional anatomy. 

The GI tract can be divided into four concentric layers in the following order:

-Mucosa
-Submucosa
-Muscular layer
-Adventitia or serosa


===== Mucosa =====

The mucosa is the innermost layer of the gastrointestinal tract. 

The mucosa surrounds the lumen, or open space within the tube. 

This layer comes in direct contact with digested food (chyme). 

The mucosa is made up of:

Epithelium – innermost layer. 

Responsible for most digestive, absorptive and secretory processes.

Lamina propria – a layer of connective tissue. 
Unusually cellular compared to most connective tissue

Muscularis mucosae – a thin layer of smooth muscle that aids the passing of material and enhances the interaction between the epithelial layer and the contents of the lumen by agitation and peristalsis.

The mucosae are highly specialized in each organ of the gastrointestinal tract to deal with the different conditions. 

The most variation is seen in the epithelium.


===== Submucosa =====

The submucosa consists of a dense irregular layer of connective tissue with large blood vessels, lymphatics, and nerves branching into the mucosa and muscularis externa. 

It contains the submucosal plexus, an enteric nervous plexus, situated on the inner surface of the muscularis externa.


===== Muscular layer =====

The muscular layer consists of an inner circular layer and a longitudinal outer layer. 

The circular layer prevents food from traveling backward and the longitudinal layer shortens the tract. 

The layers are not truly longitudinal or circular, rather the layers of muscle are helical with different pitches. 

The inner circular is helical with a steep pitch and the outer longitudinal is helical with a much shallower pitch. 

Whilst the muscularis externa is similar throughout the entire gastrointestinal tract, an exception is the stomach which has an additional inner oblique muscular layer to aid with grinding and mixing of food. 

The muscularis externa of the stomach is composed of the inner oblique layer, middle circular layer, and outer longitudinal layer.
Between the circular and longitudinal muscle layers is the myenteric plexus. 

This controls peristalsis. 

Activity is initiated by the pacemaker cells, (myenteric interstitial cells of Cajal). 

The gut has intrinsic peristaltic activity (basal electrical rhythm) due to its self-contained enteric nervous system. 

The rate can be modulated by the rest of the autonomic nervous system.

The coordinated contractions of these layers is called peristalsis and propels the food through the tract. 

Food in the GI tract is called a bolus (ball of food) from the mouth down to the stomach. 

After the stomach, the food is partially digested and semi-liquid, and is referred to as chyme. 

In the large intestine the remaining semi-solid substance is referred to as faeces.


===== Adventitia and serosa =====

The outermost layer of the gastrointestinal tract consists of several layers of connective tissue.

Intraperitoneal parts of the GI tract are covered with serosa. 

These include most of the stomach, first part of the duodenum, all of the small intestine, caecum and appendix, transverse colon, sigmoid colon and rectum. 

In these sections of the gut, there is a clear boundary between the gut and the surrounding tissue. 

These parts of the tract have a mesentery.

Retroperitoneal parts are covered with adventitia. 

They blend into the surrounding tissue and are fixed in position. 

For example, the retroperitoneal section of the duodenum usually passes through the transpyloric plane. 

These include the esophagus, pylorus of the stomach, distal duodenum, ascending colon, descending colon and anal canal. 

In addition, the oral cavity has adventitia.


==== Gene and protein expression ====

Approximately 20,000 protein coding genes are expressed in human cells and 75% of these genes are expressed in at least one of the different parts of the digestive organ system. 

Over 600 of these genes are more specifically expressed in one or more parts of the GI tract and the corresponding proteins have functions related to digestion of food and uptake of nutrients. 

Examples of specific proteins with such functions are pepsinogen PGC and the lipase LIPF, expressed in chief cells, and gastric ATPase ATP4A and gastric intrinsic factor GIF, expressed in parietal cells of the stomach mucosa. 

Specific proteins expressed in the stomach and duodenum involved in defence include mucin proteins, such as mucin 6 and intelectin-1.


==== Time taken ====

The time taken for food to transit through the gastrointestinal tract varies on multiple factors, including age, ethnicity, and gender. 

Several techniques have been used to measure transit time, including radiography following a barium-labeled meal, breath hydrogen analysis, and scintigraphic analysis following a radiolabeled meal. 

It takes 2.5 to 3 hours for 50% of the contents to leave the stomach. 

The rate of digestion is also dependent of the material being digested, as food composition from the same meal may leave the stomach at different rates. 

Total emptying of the stomach takes around 4–5 hours, and transit through the colon takes 30 to 50 hours.


==== Immune function ====

The gastrointestinal tract forms an important part of the immune system.


===== Immune barrier =====

The surface area of the digestive tract is estimated to be about 32 square meters, or about half a badminton court. 

With such a large exposure (more than three times larger than the exposed surface of the skin), these immune components function to prevent pathogens from entering the blood and lymph circulatory systems. 

Fundamental components of this protection are provided by the intestinal mucosal barrier, which is composed of physical, biochemical, and immune elements elaborated by the intestinal mucosa. 

Microorganisms also are kept at bay by an extensive immune system comprising the gut-associated lymphoid tissue (GALT)

There are additional factors contributing to protection from pathogen invasion. 

For example, low pH (ranging from 1 to 4) of the stomach is fatal for many microorganisms that enter it. 

Similarly, mucus (containing IgA antibodies) neutralizes many pathogenic microorganisms. 

Other factors in the GI tract contribution to immune function include enzymes secreted in the saliva and bile.


===== Immune system homeostasis =====

Beneficial bacteria also can contribute to the homeostasis of the gastrointestinal immune system. 

For example, Clostridia, one of the most predominant bacterial groups in the GI tract, play an important role in influencing the dynamics of the gut's immune system. 

It has been demonstrated that the intake of a high fiber diet could be responsible for the induction of T-regulatory cells (Tregs). 

This is due to the production of short-chain fatty acids during the fermentation of plant-derived nutrients such as butyrate and propionate. 

Basically, the butyrate induces the differentiation of Treg cells by enhancing histone H3 acetylation in the promoter and conserved non-coding sequence regions of the FOXP3 locus, thus regulating the T cells, resulting in the reduction of the inflammatory response and allergies.


==== Intestinal microbiota ====

The large intestine hosts several kinds of bacteria that can deal with molecules that the human body cannot otherwise break down. 

This is an example of symbiosis. 

These bacteria also account for the production of gases at host-pathogen interface, inside our intestine (this gas is released as flatulence when eliminated through the anus). 

However the large intestine is mainly concerned with the absorption of water from digested material (which is regulated by the hypothalamus) and the re absorption of sodium, as well as any nutrients that may have escaped primary digestion in the ileum.

Health-enhancing intestinal bacteria of the gut flora serve to prevent the overgrowth of potentially harmful bacteria in the gut. 

These two types of bacteria compete for space and "food", as there are limited resources within the intestinal tract. 

A ratio of 80-85% beneficial to 15–20% potentially harmful bacteria generally is considered normal within the intestines, and maintains homeostasis. 

A bad ratio of potentially harmful bacteria may disrupt this balance and cause dysbiosis.


==== Detoxification and drug metabolism ====

Enzymes such as CYP3A4, along with the antiporter activities, are also instrumental in the intestine's role of drug metabolism in the detoxification of antigens and xenobiotics.


== Clinical significance ==



=== Diseases ===

There are many diseases and conditions that can affect the gastrointestinal system, including infections, inflammation and cancer.

Various pathogens, such as bacteria that cause foodborne illnesses, can induce gastroenteritis which results from inflammation of the stomach and small intestine. 

Antibiotics to treat such bacterial infections can decrease the microbiome diversity of the gastrointestinal tract, and further enable inflammatory mediators. 

Gastroenteritis is the most common disease of the GI tract.

Gastrointestinal cancer may occur at any point in the gastrointestinal tract, and includes mouth cancer, tongue cancer, oesophageal cancer, stomach cancer, and colorectal cancer.
Inflammatory conditions. 

Ileitis is an inflammation of the ileum, colitis is an inflammation of the large intestine.

Appendicitis is inflammation of the appendix located at the caecum. 

This is a potentially fatal condition if left untreated; most cases of appendicitis require surgical intervention.Diverticular disease is a condition that is very common in older people in industrialized countries. 

It usually affects the large intestine but has been known to affect the small intestine as well. 

Diverticulosis occurs when pouches form on the intestinal wall. 

Once the pouches become inflamed it is known as diverticulitis.

Inflammatory bowel disease is an inflammatory condition affecting the bowel walls, and includes the subtypes Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis. 

While Crohn's can affect the entire gastrointestinal tract, ulcerative colitis is limited to the large intestine. 

Crohn's disease is widely regarded as an autoimmune disease. 

Although ulcerative colitis is often treated as though it were an autoimmune disease, there is no consensus that it actually is such.

Functional gastrointestinal disorders the most common of which is irritable bowel syndrome. 

Functional constipation and chronic functional abdominal pain are other functional disorders of the intestine that have physiological causes but do not have identifiable structural, chemical, or infectious pathologies.


=== Symptoms ===

Several symptoms are used to indicate problems with the gastrointestinal tract:

-Vomiting, which may include regurgitation of food or the vomiting of blood

-Diarrhea, or the passage of liquid or more frequent stools

-Constipation, which refers to the passage of fewer and hardened stools

-Blood in stool, which includes fresh red blood, maroon-coloured blood, and tarry-coloured blood


=== Treatment ===

Gastrointestinal surgery can often be performed in the outpatient setting. 

In the United States in 2012, operations on the digestive system accounted for 3 of the 25 most common ambulatory surgery procedures and constituted 9.1 percent of all outpatient ambulatory surgeries.


=== Imaging ===

Various methods of imaging the gastrointestinal tract include the upper and lower gastrointestinal series:

Radioopaque dyes may be swallowed to produce a barium swallow
Parts of the tract may be visualised by camera. 

This is known as endoscopy if examining the upper gastrointestinal tract and colonoscopy or sigmoidoscopy if examining the lower gastrointestinal tract. 

Capsule endoscopy is where a capsule containing a camera is swallowed in order to examine the tract. 

Biopsies may also be taken when examined.
An abdominal x-ray may be used to examine the lower gastrointestinal tract.


=== Other related diseases ===

-Cholera
-Enteric duplication cyst
-Giardiasis
-Pancreatitis
-Peptic ulcer disease
-Yellow fever
-Helicobacter pylori is a gram-negative spiral bacterium. 

Over half the world's population is infected with it, mainly during childhood; it is not certain how the disease is transmitted. 

It colonizes the gastrointestinal system, predominantly the stomach. 

The bacterium has specific survival conditions that our gastric microenvironment: it is both capnophilic and microaerophilic. 

Helicobacter also exhibits a tropism for gastric epithelial lining and the gastric mucosal layer about it. 

Gastric colonization of this bacterium triggers a robust immune response leading to moderate to severe inflammation, known as gastritis. 

Signs and symptoms of infection are gastritis, burning abdominal pain, weight loss, loss of appetite, bloating, burping, nausea, bloody vomit, and black tarry stools. 

Infection can be detected in a number of ways: GI X-rays, endoscopy, blood tests for anti-Helicobacter antibodies, a stool test, and a urease breath test (which is a by-product of the bacteria). 

If caught soon enough, it can be treated with three doses of different proton pump inhibitors as well as two antibiotics, taking about a week to cure. 

If not caught soon enough, surgery may be required.

Intestinal pseudo-obstruction is a syndrome caused by a malformation of the digestive system, characterized by a severe impairment in the ability of the intestines to push and assimilate. 

Symptoms include daily abdominal and stomach pain, nausea, severe distension, vomiting, heartburn, dysphagia, diarrhea, constipation, dehydration and malnutrition. 

There is no cure for intestinal pseudo-obstruction. 

Different types of surgery and treatment managing life-threatening complications such as ileus and volvulus, intestinal stasis which lead to bacterial overgrowth, and resection of affected or dead parts of the gut may be needed. 

Many patients require parenteral nutrition.

Ileus is a blockage of the intestines.

Coeliac disease is a common form of malabsorption, affecting up to 1% of people of northern European descent. 

An autoimmune response is triggered in intestinal cells by digestion of gluten proteins. 

Ingestion of proteins found in wheat, barley and rye, causes villous atrophy in the small intestine. 

Lifelong dietary avoidance of these foodstuffs in a gluten-free diet is the only treatment.

Enteroviruses are named by their transmission-route through the intestine (enteric meaning intestinal), but their symptoms aren't mainly associated with the intestine.

Endometriosis can affect the intestines, with similar symptoms to IBS.
Bowel twist (or similarly, bowel strangulation) is a comparatively rare event (usually developing sometime after major bowel surgery). 

It is, however, hard to diagnose correctly, and if left uncorrected can lead to bowel infarction and death. 

-Angiodysplasia of the colon
-Constipation
-Diarrhea
-Hirschsprung's disease (aganglionosis)
-Intussusception
-Polyp (medicine) (see also colorectal polyp)
-Pseudomembranous colitis
-Toxic megacolon usually a complication of ulcerative colitis


== Uses of animal guts ==

Intestines from animals other than humans are used in a number of ways. 

From each species of livestock that is a source of milk, a corresponding rennet is obtained from the intestines of milk-fed calves. 

Pig and calf intestines are eaten, and pig intestines are used as sausage casings. 

Calf intestines supply calf-intestinal alkaline phosphatase (CIP), and are used to make goldbeater's skin.
Other uses are:

The use of animal gut strings by musicians can be traced back to the third dynasty of Egypt. 

In the recent past, strings were made out of lamb gut. 

With the advent of the modern era, musicians have tended to use strings made of silk, or synthetic materials such as nylon or steel. 

Some instrumentalists, however, still use gut strings in order to evoke the older tone quality. 

Although such strings were commonly referred to as "catgut" strings, cats were never used as a source for gut strings.

Sheep gut was the original source for natural gut string used in racquets, such as for tennis. 

Today, synthetic strings are much more common, but the best gut strings are now made out of cow gut.

Gut cord has also been used to produce strings for the snares that provide a snare drum's characteristic buzzing timbre. 

While the modern snare drum almost always uses metal wire rather than gut cord, the North African bendir frame drum still uses gut for this purpose.

"Natural" sausage hulls, or casings, are made of animal gut, especially hog, beef, and lamb.

The wrapping of kokoretsi, gardoubakia, and torcinello is made of lamb (or goat) gut.

Haggis is traditionally boiled in, and served in, a sheep stomach.
Chitterlings, a kind of food, consist of thoroughly washed pig's gut.

Animal gut was used to make the cord lines in longcase clocks and for fusee movements in bracket clocks, but may be replaced by metal wire.

The oldest known condoms, from 1640 AD, were made from animal intestine.


== Other animals ==


Many birds and other animals have a specialised stomach in the digestive tract called a gizzard used for grinding up food.

Another feature not found in the human but found in a range of other animals is the crop. 

In birds this is found as a pouch alongside the esophagus.

Most vertebrates including fishes, amphibians, birds, reptiles, and egg-laying mammals have a major difference in their GI tract in that it ends in a cloaca and not an anus, having merged the urinary system with the genito-anal pore. 

Therians (most/other mammals, including humans) separated their anus from their uro-genital opening for both sexes, with subgroup placentalians later separating their urinary and genital openings by a little distance, this time only in females.

In 2020, the oldest known fossil digestive tract, of an extinct wormlike organism in the Cloudinidae was discovered; it lived during the late Ediacaran period about 550 million years ago. 

A through-gut (one with both mouth and anus) is thought to have evolved within the nephrozoan clade of Bilateria, after their ancestral ventral orifice (single, as in cnidarians and acoels; re-evolved in nephrozoans like flatworms) stretched antero-posteriorly, before the middle part of the stretch would get narrower and closed fully, leaving an anterior orifice (mouth) and a posterior orifice (anus plus genital opening).



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gastrointestinal_tract
;;;ES;;;



CANAL DIGESTIVO/
TRACTO GASTROINTESTINAL


El tracto gastrointestinal (tracto GI, GIT, tracto digestivo, tracto digestivo, canal alimentario) es el tracto desde la boca hasta el ano que incluye todos los órganos del sistema digestivo en humanos y otros animales.

Los alimentos que se ingieren por la boca se digieren para extraer nutrientes y absorber energía, y los desechos se expulsan en forma de heces.

La boca, el esófago, el estómago y los intestinos forman parte del tracto gastrointestinal.

Gastrointestinal es un adjetivo que significa o pertenece al estómago y los intestinos.

Un tracto es una colección de estructuras anatómicas relacionadas o una serie de órganos corporales conectados.

La mayoría de los bilaterales (incluida la mayoría de los invertebrados y todos los vertebrados) tienen un "intestino pasante" o tracto digestivo completo.

Las esponjas y los cnidarios son invertebrados primitivos con un tracto digestivo incompleto que tiene solo una abertura en lugar de dos, donde se ingiere la comida y se expulsan los desechos, mientras que las medusas peine tienen una boca ventral y poros anales dorsales (a diferencia de las posiciones anteroposteriores en los bilaterales). ).

El tracto gastrointestinal humano consiste en el esófago, el estómago y los intestinos, y se divide en los tractos gastrointestinales superior e inferior.

El tracto GI incluye todas las estructuras entre la boca y el ano, formando un pasaje continuo que incluye los principales órganos de la digestión, a saber, el estómago, el intestino delgado y el intestino grueso.

Sin embargo, el sistema digestivo humano completo se compone del tracto gastrointestinal más los órganos accesorios de la digestión (la lengua, las glándulas salivales, el páncreas, el hígado y la vesícula biliar).

El tracto también se puede dividir en intestino anterior, intestino medio e intestino posterior, lo que refleja el origen embriológico de cada segmento.

Todo el tracto GI humano mide unos nueve metros (30 pies) de largo en la autopsia.

Es considerablemente más corto en el cuerpo vivo porque los intestinos, que son tubos de tejido muscular liso, mantienen un tono muscular constante en un estado de tensión media, pero pueden relajarse en algunos lugares para permitir la distensión local y el peristaltismo.

El tracto gastrointestinal contiene trillones de microbios, con unas 4000 cepas diferentes de bacterias que tienen diversas funciones en el mantenimiento de la salud inmunológica y el metabolismo.

Algunas estimaciones afirman que el número de microbios supera en número a nuestras propias células 10:1.

Las células del tracto GI liberan hormonas para ayudar a regular el proceso digestivo.

Estas hormonas digestivas, incluidas la gastrina, la secretina, la colecistoquinina y la grelina, están mediadas por mecanismos intracrinos o autocrinos, lo que indica que las células que liberan estas hormonas son estructuras conservadas a lo largo de la evolución.


== Tracto gastrointestinal humano ==



=== Estructura ===


La estructura y la función pueden describirse como anatomía macroscópica y como anatomía o histología microscópica.

El tracto en sí se divide en tracto superior e inferior, y los intestinos delgado y grueso.


==== Tracto gastrointestinal superior ====

El tracto gastrointestinal superior consta de la boca, la faringe, el esófago, el estómago y el duodeno.

La demarcación exacta entre los tractos superior e inferior es el músculo suspensorio del duodeno. 

Esto diferencia los bordes embrionarios entre el intestino anterior y el intestino medio, y también es la división comúnmente utilizada por los médicos para describir el sangrado gastrointestinal como de origen "superior" o "inferior". 

Tras la disección, el duodeno puede parecer un órgano unificado, pero está dividido en cuatro segmentos según la función, la ubicación y la anatomía interna. 

Los cuatro segmentos del duodeno son los siguientes (comenzando en el estómago y avanzando hacia el yeyuno): bulbo, descendente, horizontal y ascendente. 

El músculo suspensorio une el borde superior del duodeno ascendente al diafragma.

El músculo suspensorio es un hito anatómico importante que muestra la división formal entre el duodeno y el yeyuno, la primera y la segunda parte del intestino delgado, respectivamente.

Este es un músculo delgado que se deriva del mesodermo embrionario.


==== Tracto gastrointestinal inferior ====

El tracto gastrointestinal inferior incluye la mayor parte del intestino delgado y todo el intestino grueso.

En anatomía humana, el intestino (intestino o tripa.

Griego: éntera) es el segmento del tracto gastrointestinal que se extiende desde el esfínter pilórico del estómago hasta el ano y como en otros mamíferos, consta de dos segmentos, el intestino delgado y el intestino grueso.

En los seres humanos, el intestino delgado se subdivide en duodeno, yeyuno e íleon, mientras que el intestino grueso se subdivide en ciego, colon ascendente, transverso, descendente y sigmoide, recto y canal anal.


===== Intestino delgado =====

El intestino delgado comienza en el duodeno y es una estructura tubular, por lo general entre 6 y 7 m de largo.

Su área mucosa en un ser humano adulto es de unos 30 m2 (320 pies cuadrados).

La combinación de los pliegues circulares, las vellosidades y las microvellosidades aumenta el área de absorción de la mucosa alrededor de 600 veces, lo que hace un área total de alrededor de 250 m2 (2700 pies cuadrados) para todo el intestino delgado.

Su función principal es absorber los productos de la digestión (incluidos carbohidratos, proteínas, lípidos y vitaminas) en el torrente sanguíneo.

Hay tres grandes divisiones:

Duodeno: una estructura corta (alrededor de 20 a 25 cm de largo) que recibe quimo del estómago, junto con jugo pancreático que contiene enzimas digestivas y bilis de la vesícula biliar.

Las enzimas digestivas descomponen las proteínas y la bilis emulsiona las grasas en micelas.

El duodeno contiene glándulas de Brunner que producen una secreción alcalina rica en moco que contiene bicarbonato.

Estas secreciones, en combinación con el bicarbonato del páncreas, neutralizan los ácidos del estómago contenidos en el quimo.

Yeyuno: Esta es la sección media del intestino delgado, que conecta el duodeno con el íleon.

Mide aproximadamente 2,5 m (8,2 pies) de largo y contiene los pliegues circulares también conocidos como plicae circulares y vellosidades que aumentan su área de superficie.

Los productos de la digestión (azúcares, aminoácidos y ácidos grasos) se absorben en el torrente sanguíneo aquí.

Íleon: La sección final del intestino delgado.

Mide unos 3 m de largo y contiene vellosidades similares al yeyuno.

Absorbe principalmente vitamina B12 y ácidos biliares, así como cualquier otro nutriente restante.


===== Intestino grueso =====

El intestino grueso, también llamado colon, consta del ciego, el recto y el canal anal.

También incluye el apéndice, que se adjunta al ciego.

El colon se divide a su vez en:

-Cecum (primera porción del colon) y apéndice
-Colon ascendente (ascendente en la pared posterior del abdomen)
- Angulo cólico derecho (porción flexionada del colon ascendente y transverso aparente al hígado)
-Colon transverso (que pasa por debajo del diafragma)
- Angulo cólico izquierdo (porción flexionada del colon transverso y descendente aparente al bazo)
-Colon descendente (desciende por el lado izquierdo del abdomen)
-Colon sigmoide (un asa del colon más cercana al recto)
-Recto
-Ano

La función principal del intestino grueso es absorber agua.

El área de la mucosa del intestino grueso de un ser humano adulto es de unos 2 m2 (22 pies cuadrados).


==== Desarrollo ====

El intestino es una estructura derivada del endodermo.

Aproximadamente en el decimosexto día del desarrollo humano, el embrión comienza a plegarse ventralmente (y la superficie ventral del embrión se vuelve cóncava) en dos direcciones:
los lados del embrión se pliegan entre sí y la cabeza y la cola se pliegan una hacia la otra.

El resultado es que una parte del saco vitelino, una estructura revestida de endodermo en contacto con la cara ventral del embrión, comienza a ser arrancada para convertirse en el intestino primitivo.

El saco vitelino permanece conectado al tubo intestinal a través del conducto vitelino.

Por lo general, esta estructura retrocede durante el desarrollo; en los casos en que no lo hace, se conoce como divertículo de Meckel.

Durante la vida fetal, el intestino primitivo se modela gradualmente en tres segmentos: intestino anterior, intestino medio e intestino posterior.

Aunque estos términos se usan a menudo en referencia a segmentos del intestino primitivo, también se usan regularmente para describir regiones del intestino definitivo.

Cada segmento del intestino se especifica aún más y da lugar a estructuras intestinales y relacionadas con el intestino específicas en el desarrollo posterior.

Los componentes derivados del intestino propiamente dicho, incluidos el estómago y el colon, se desarrollan como hinchazones o dilataciones en las células del intestino primitivo.

Por el contrario, los derivados relacionados con el intestino, es decir, aquellas estructuras que se derivan del intestino primitivo pero que no son parte del intestino propiamente dicho, en general, se desarrollan como evaginaciones del intestino primitivo.

Los vasos sanguíneos que irrigan estas estructuras permanecen constantes a lo largo del desarrollo.


==== Histología ====

El tracto gastrointestinal tiene una forma de histología general con algunas diferencias que reflejan la especialización en anatomía funcional.

El tracto GI se puede dividir en cuatro capas concéntricas en el siguiente orden:

-Mucosa
-Submucosa
-Capa muscular
-Adventicia o serosa


===== Mucosa =====

La mucosa es la capa más interna del tracto gastrointestinal.

La mucosa rodea la luz, o espacio abierto dentro del tubo.

Esta capa entra en contacto directo con los alimentos digeridos (quimo).

La mucosa está formada por:

Epitelio: capa más interna.

Responsable de la mayoría de los procesos digestivos, de absorción y secretores.

Lámina propia: una capa de tejido conectivo.
Inusualmente celular en comparación con la mayoría del tejido conectivo

Muscularis mucosae: una capa delgada de músculo liso que ayuda al paso del material y mejora la interacción entre la capa epitelial y el contenido de la luz mediante agitación y peristalsis.

Las mucosas están altamente especializadas en cada órgano del tracto gastrointestinal para hacer frente a las diferentes condiciones.

La mayor variación se observa en el epitelio.


===== Submucosa =====

La submucosa consta de una densa capa irregular de tejido conjuntivo con grandes vasos sanguíneos, linfáticos y nervios que se ramifican en la mucosa y la muscular externa.

Contiene el plexo submucoso, un plexo nervioso entérico, situado en la superficie interna de la muscularis externa.


===== Capa muscular =====

La capa muscular consta de una capa circular interna y una capa externa longitudinal.

La capa circular evita que los alimentos viajen hacia atrás y la capa longitudinal acorta el trayecto. 

Las capas no son verdaderamente longitudinales o circulares, sino que las capas de músculo son helicoidales con diferentes pasos. 

El circular interior es helicoidal con un paso pronunciado y el longitudinal exterior es helicoidal con un paso mucho más superficial. 

Si bien la capa muscular externa es similar en todo el tracto gastrointestinal, una excepción es el estómago, que tiene una capa muscular oblicua interna adicional para ayudar a triturar y mezclar los alimentos. 

La capa muscular externa del estómago está compuesta por una capa oblicua interna, una capa circular media y una capa longitudinal externa.
Entre las capas musculares circular y longitudinal se encuentra el plexo mientérico. 

Esto controla el peristaltismo. 

La actividad es iniciada por las células marcapasos (células intersticiales mientéricas de Cajal).

El intestino tiene actividad peristáltica intrínseca (ritmo eléctrico basal) debido a su sistema nervioso entérico autónomo.

La frecuencia puede ser modulada por el resto del sistema nervioso autónomo.

Las contracciones coordinadas de estas capas se denominan peristaltismo e impulsan el alimento a través del tracto.

La comida en el tracto GI se llama bolo (bola de comida) desde la boca hasta el estómago.

Después del estómago, la comida se digiere parcialmente y es semilíquida, y se denomina quimo.

En el intestino grueso, la sustancia semisólida restante se denomina heces.


===== Adventicia y serosa =====

La capa más externa del tracto gastrointestinal consta de varias capas de tejido conectivo.

Las partes intraperitoneales del tracto GI están cubiertas de serosa.

Estos incluyen la mayor parte del estómago, la primera parte del duodeno, todo el intestino delgado, el ciego y el apéndice, el colon transverso, el colon sigmoide y el recto. 

En estas secciones del intestino, existe un límite claro entre el intestino y el tejido circundante. 

Estas partes del tracto tienen un mesenterio.

Las partes retroperitoneales están cubiertas con adventicia. 

Se mezclan con el tejido circundante y se fijan en su posición. 

Por ejemplo, la sección retroperitoneal del duodeno suele pasar por el plano transpilórico. 

Estos incluyen el esófago, el píloro del estómago, el duodeno distal, el colon ascendente, el colon descendente y el canal anal. 

Además, la cavidad oral tiene adventicia.


==== Expresión de genes y proteínas ====

Aproximadamente 20.000 genes que codifican proteínas se expresan en células humanas y el 75% de estos genes se expresan en al menos una de las diferentes partes del sistema de órganos digestivos.

Más de 600 de estos genes se expresan más específicamente en una o más partes del tracto gastrointestinal y las proteínas correspondientes tienen funciones relacionadas con la digestión de los alimentos y la absorción de nutrientes.

Ejemplos de proteínas específicas con tales funciones son el pepsinógeno PGC y la lipasa LIPF, expresados ​​en las células principales, y la ATPasa ATP4A gástrica y el factor intrínseco gástrico GIF, expresados ​​en las células parietales de la mucosa del estómago.

Las proteínas específicas expresadas en el estómago y el duodeno involucradas en la defensa incluyen proteínas de mucina, como la mucina 6 y la intelectina-1.


==== Tiempo empleado ====

El tiempo que tardan los alimentos en transitar por el tracto gastrointestinal varía según múltiples factores, como la edad, el origen étnico y el género. 

Se han utilizado varias técnicas para medir el tiempo de tránsito, incluida la radiografía después de una comida marcada con bario, el análisis de hidrógeno en el aliento y el análisis gammagráfico después de una comida marcada radiactivamente. 

El 50% del contenido tarda de 2,5 a 3 horas en salir del estómago. 

La velocidad de digestión también depende del material que se digiere, ya que la composición de alimentos de la misma comida puede salir del estómago a diferentes velocidades. 

El vaciamiento total del estómago toma alrededor de 4 a 5 horas y el tránsito a través del colon toma de 30 a 50 horas.


==== Función inmunológica ====

El tracto gastrointestinal forma una parte importante del sistema inmunológico.


===== Barrera inmune =====

Se estima que la superficie del tracto digestivo es de unos 32 metros cuadrados, o aproximadamente la mitad de una cancha de bádminton. 

Con una exposición tan grande (más de tres veces mayor que la superficie expuesta de la piel), estos componentes inmunitarios funcionan para evitar que los patógenos entren en los sistemas circulatorios de la sangre y la linfa. 

Componentes fundamentales de esta protección son proporcionados por la barrera de la mucosa intestinal, la cual está compuesta por elementos físicos, bioquímicos e inmunológicos elaborados por la mucosa intestinal. 

Los microorganismos también se mantienen a raya gracias a un extenso sistema inmunitario que comprende el tejido linfoide asociado al intestino (GALT)

Hay factores adicionales que contribuyen a la protección contra la invasión de patógenos. 

Por ejemplo, el pH bajo (que oscila entre 1 y 4) del estómago es fatal para muchos microorganismos que entran en él. 

De manera similar, la mucosidad (que contiene anticuerpos IgA) neutraliza muchos microorganismos patógenos. 

Otros factores en la contribución del tracto GI a la función inmunológica incluyen enzimas secretadas en la saliva y la bilis.


===== Homeostasis del sistema inmunológico =====

Las bacterias beneficiosas también pueden contribuir a la homeostasis del sistema inmunitario gastrointestinal. 

Por ejemplo, Clostridia, uno de los grupos bacterianos más predominantes en el tracto GI, desempeña un papel importante al influir en la dinámica del sistema inmunitario del intestino. 

Se ha demostrado que la ingesta de una dieta alta en fibra podría ser responsable de la inducción de células T reguladoras (Tregs). 

Esto se debe a la producción de ácidos grasos de cadena corta durante la fermentación de nutrientes de origen vegetal como el butirato y el propionato. 

Básicamente, el butirato induce la diferenciación de las células Treg al mejorar la acetilación de la histona H3 en el promotor y las regiones de secuencia no codificante conservadas del locus FOXP3, regulando así las células T, lo que resulta en la reducción de la respuesta inflamatoria y las alergias.


==== Microbiota intestinal ====

El intestino grueso alberga varios tipos de bacterias que pueden lidiar con moléculas que el cuerpo humano no puede descomponer de otra manera.

Este es un ejemplo de simbiosis.

Estas bacterias también son responsables de la producción de gases en la interfaz huésped-patógeno, dentro de nuestro intestino (este gas se libera en forma de flatulencia cuando se elimina por el ano).

Sin embargo, el intestino grueso se ocupa principalmente de la absorción de agua del material digerido (que está regulado por el hipotálamo) y la reabsorción de sodio, así como de cualquier nutriente que pueda haber escapado a la digestión primaria en el íleon.

Las bacterias intestinales de la flora intestinal que mejoran la salud sirven para prevenir el crecimiento excesivo de bacterias potencialmente dañinas en el intestino. 

Estos dos tipos de bacterias compiten por el espacio y el "alimento", ya que existen recursos limitados dentro del tracto intestinal. 

Una proporción de 80-85% beneficiosa a 15-20% de bacterias potencialmente dañinas generalmente se considera normal dentro de los intestinos y mantiene la homeostasis. 

Una mala proporción de bacterias potencialmente dañinas puede alterar este equilibrio y causar disbiosis.


==== Desintoxicación y metabolismo de fármacos ====

Las enzimas como CYP3A4, junto con las actividades antiportadoras, también son fundamentales en el papel del intestino en el metabolismo de fármacos en la desintoxicación de antígenos y xenobióticos.


== Importancia clínica ==



=== Enfermedades ===

Hay muchas enfermedades y condiciones que pueden afectar el sistema gastrointestinal, incluyendo infecciones, inflamación y cáncer.

Varios patógenos, como las bacterias que causan enfermedades transmitidas por los alimentos, pueden inducir gastroenteritis, que resulta de la inflamación del estómago y el intestino delgado.

Los antibióticos para tratar tales infecciones bacterianas pueden disminuir la diversidad de microbiomas del tracto gastrointestinal y habilitar aún más los mediadores inflamatorios.

La gastroenteritis es la enfermedad más común del tracto gastrointestinal.

El cáncer gastrointestinal puede ocurrir en cualquier punto del tracto gastrointestinal e incluye cáncer de boca, cáncer de lengua, cáncer de esófago, cáncer de estómago y cáncer colorrectal.
Condiciones inflamatorias.

La ileítis es una inflamación del íleon, la colitis es una inflamación del intestino grueso.

La apendicitis es la inflamación del apéndice ubicado en el ciego.

Esta es una condición potencialmente fatal si no se trata; la mayoría de los casos de apendicitis requieren intervención quirúrgica. La enfermedad diverticular es una condición que es muy común en las personas mayores en los países industrializados.

Por lo general, afecta el intestino grueso, pero se sabe que también afecta el intestino delgado.

La diverticulosis ocurre cuando se forman bolsas en la pared intestinal.

Una vez que las bolsas se inflaman, se conoce como diverticulitis.

La enfermedad inflamatoria intestinal es una afección inflamatoria que afecta las paredes del intestino e incluye los subtipos de la enfermedad de Crohn y la colitis ulcerosa.

Mientras que la enfermedad de Crohn puede afectar todo el tracto gastrointestinal, la colitis ulcerosa se limita al intestino grueso.

La enfermedad de Crohn es ampliamente considerada como una enfermedad autoinmune.

Aunque la colitis ulcerosa a menudo se trata como si fuera una enfermedad autoinmune, no hay consenso de que realmente lo sea.

Trastornos gastrointestinales funcionales, el más común de los cuales es el síndrome del intestino irritable.

El estreñimiento funcional y el dolor abdominal funcional crónico son otros trastornos funcionales del intestino que tienen causas fisiológicas pero no tienen patologías estructurales, químicas o infecciosas identificables.


=== Síntomas ===

Varios síntomas se utilizan para indicar problemas con el tracto gastrointestinal:

-Vómitos, que pueden incluir regurgitación de alimentos o vómitos de sangre

-Diarrea, o el paso de líquidos o heces más frecuentes

-Estreñimiento, que se refiere al paso de menos heces y endurecidas.

-Sangre en las heces, que incluye sangre roja fresca, sangre de color granate y sangre de color alquitranado


=== Tratamiento ===

La cirugía gastrointestinal a menudo se puede realizar de forma ambulatoria.

En los Estados Unidos en 2012, las operaciones en el sistema digestivo representaron 3 de los 25 procedimientos quirúrgicos ambulatorios más comunes y constituyeron el 9,1 por ciento de todas las cirugías ambulatorias ambulatorias.


=== Imágenes ===

Varios métodos de obtención de imágenes del tracto gastrointestinal incluyen la serie gastrointestinal superior e inferior:

Se pueden tragar tintes radioopacos para producir un trago de bario.
Partes del tracto pueden ser visualizadas por cámara.

Esto se conoce como endoscopia si se examina el tracto gastrointestinal superior y colonoscopia o sigmoidoscopia si se examina el tracto gastrointestinal inferior.

La endoscopia con cápsula es donde se traga una cápsula que contiene una cámara para examinar el tracto.

También se pueden tomar biopsias cuando se examinan.
Se puede usar una radiografía abdominal para examinar el tracto gastrointestinal inferior.


=== Otras enfermedades relacionadas ===

-Cólera
-Quiste de duplicación entérico
-Giardiasis
-Pancreatitis
-La enfermedad de úlcera péptica
-Fiebre amarilla
-Helicobacter pylori es una bacteria espiral gramnegativa.

Más de la mitad de la población mundial está infectada, principalmente durante la infancia; no está claro cómo se transmite la enfermedad.

Coloniza el sistema gastrointestinal, predominantemente el estómago.

La bacteria tiene condiciones específicas de supervivencia que nuestro microambiente gástrico: es tanto capnofílico como microaerofílico. 

Helicobacter también exhibe un tropismo por el revestimiento epitelial gástrico y la capa mucosa gástrica que lo rodea. 

La colonización gástrica de esta bacteria desencadena una respuesta inmunitaria robusta que conduce a una inflamación de moderada a grave, conocida como gastritis. 

Los signos y síntomas de infección son gastritis, dolor abdominal ardiente, pérdida de peso, pérdida de apetito, hinchazón, eructos, náuseas, vómitos con sangre y heces negras alquitranadas. 

La infección se puede detectar de varias maneras: radiografías gastrointestinales, endoscopia, análisis de sangre para detectar anticuerpos anti-Helicobacter, una prueba de heces y una prueba de aliento con ureasa (que es un subproducto de la bacteria). 

Si se detecta lo suficientemente pronto, se puede tratar con tres dosis de diferentes inhibidores de la bomba de protones, así como con dos antibióticos, lo que demora aproximadamente una semana en curarse.

Si no se detecta lo suficientemente pronto, es posible que se requiera cirugía.

La seudoobstrucción intestinal es un síndrome causado por una malformación del sistema digestivo, caracterizado por un deterioro severo en la capacidad de los intestinos para empujar y asimilar.

Los síntomas incluyen dolor abdominal y estomacal diario, náuseas, distensión severa, vómitos, acidez estomacal, disfagia, diarrea, estreñimiento, deshidratación y desnutrición.

No existe cura para la pseudoobstrucción intestinal.

Es posible que se necesiten diferentes tipos de cirugía y tratamiento para controlar las complicaciones potencialmente mortales, como el íleo y el vólvulo, la estasis intestinal que conduce al crecimiento excesivo de bacterias y la resección de las partes afectadas o muertas del intestino.

Muchos pacientes requieren nutrición parenteral.

El íleo es un bloqueo de los intestinos.

La enfermedad celíaca es una forma común de malabsorción que afecta hasta al 1% de las personas de ascendencia del norte de Europa.

Una respuesta autoinmune se desencadena en las células intestinales por la digestión de las proteínas del gluten.

La ingestión de proteínas que se encuentran en el trigo, la cebada y el centeno provoca la atrofia de las vellosidades en el intestino delgado.

La evitación dietética de por vida de estos alimentos en una dieta libre de gluten es el único tratamiento.

Los enterovirus reciben su nombre por su ruta de transmisión a través del intestino (entérica, que significa intestinal), pero sus síntomas no están asociados principalmente con el intestino.

La endometriosis puede afectar los intestinos, con síntomas similares al SII.
La torcedura intestinal (o, de manera similar, la estrangulación intestinal) es un evento comparativamente raro (generalmente se desarrolla en algún momento después de una cirugía intestinal mayor).

Sin embargo, es difícil de diagnosticar correctamente y, si no se corrige, puede provocar un infarto intestinal y la muerte.

-Angiodisplasia del colon
-Estreñimiento
-Diarrea
-Enfermedad de Hirschsprung (aganglionosis)
-Intususcepción
-Pólipo (medicina) (ver también pólipo colorrectal)
-Colitis pseudomembranosa
-El megacolon tóxico suele ser una complicación de la colitis ulcerosa.


== Usos de las tripas de animales ==

Los intestinos de animales distintos de los humanos se utilizan de varias formas.

De cada especie de ganado que es fuente de leche, se obtiene un cuajo correspondiente de los intestinos de los terneros alimentados con leche.

Se comen intestinos de cerdo y ternera, y los intestinos de cerdo se utilizan como tripas para salchichas.

Los intestinos de ternera suministran fosfatasa alcalina intestinal de ternera (CIP) y se utilizan para hacer la piel de goldbeater.
Otros usos son:

El uso de cuerdas de tripa animal por parte de los músicos se remonta a la tercera dinastía de Egipto. 

En el pasado reciente, las cuerdas se fabricaban con tripa de cordero. 

Con el advenimiento de la era moderna, los músicos han tendido a utilizar cuerdas de seda o materiales sintéticos como el nailon o el acero. 

Sin embargo, algunos instrumentistas todavía usan cuerdas de tripa para evocar la calidad del tono más antiguo. 

Aunque tales cuerdas se denominaban comúnmente cuerdas de "catgut", los gatos nunca se utilizaron como fuente de cuerdas de tripa.

La tripa de oveja fue la fuente original de las cuerdas de tripa natural utilizadas en raquetas, como las de tenis. 

Hoy en día, las cuerdas sintéticas son mucho más comunes, pero las mejores cuerdas de tripa ahora están hechas de tripa de vaca.

La cuerda de tripa también se ha utilizado para producir cuerdas para las trampas que proporcionan el timbre de zumbido característico de una trampa. 

Mientras que el tambor moderno casi siempre usa alambre de metal en lugar de cuerda de tripa, el tambor de marco bendir del norte de África todavía usa tripa para este propósito.

Las cáscaras o tripas de salchichas "naturales" están hechas de tripa animal, especialmente cerdo, res y cordero.

El envoltorio de kokoretsi, gardoubakia y torcinello está hecho de tripa de cordero (o cabra).

Haggis se hierve tradicionalmente y se sirve en el estómago de una oveja.
Las menudencias, un tipo de comida, consisten en tripas de cerdo bien lavadas.

La tripa de animal se utilizó para hacer las líneas de cordón en los relojes de caja larga y para los movimientos de fusibles en los relojes de soporte, pero puede reemplazarse por alambre de metal.

Los condones más antiguos que se conocen, de 1640 d. C., se fabricaron con intestinos de animales.


== Otros animales ==


Muchas aves y otros animales tienen un estómago especializado en el tracto digestivo llamado molleja que se utiliza para triturar los alimentos.

Otra característica que no se encuentra en el ser humano pero sí en una variedad de otros animales es el buche. 

En las aves, esto se encuentra como una bolsa junto al esófago.

La mayoría de los vertebrados, incluidos los peces, los anfibios, las aves, los reptiles y los mamíferos que ponen huevos, tienen una gran diferencia en su tracto gastrointestinal, ya que termina en una cloaca y no en un ano, ya que fusiona el sistema urinario con el poro genitoanal. 

Therians (la mayoría / otros mamíferos, incluidos los humanos) separaron su ano de su abertura urogenital para ambos sexos, y el subgrupo de placentarios luego separó sus aberturas urinaria y genital por una pequeña distancia, esta vez solo en las hembras.

En 2020, se descubrió el tracto digestivo fósil más antiguo conocido, de un organismo parecido a un gusano extinto en Cloudinidae; vivió durante el período Ediacarano tardío hace unos 550 millones de años.

Se cree que un intestino pasante (uno con boca y ano) evolucionó dentro del clado de nefrozoos de Bilateria, después de que su orificio ventral ancestral (único, como en cnidarios y acelos; reevolucionado en nefrozoos como platelmintos) se estirara anteroposteriormente. , antes de que la parte media del tramo se estrechara y cerrara por completo, quedando un orificio anterior (boca) y un orificio posterior (ano más abertura genital).



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/tracto_gastrointestinal

;;;FR;;;



CANAL DIGESTIF/
TUBE DIGESTIF


Le tractus gastro-intestinal (tractus gastro-intestinal, GIT, tube digestif, tube digestif, tube digestif) est le tractus allant de la bouche à l'anus qui comprend tous les organes du système digestif chez l'homme et les autres animaux. 

Les aliments pris par la bouche sont digérés pour extraire les nutriments et absorber l'énergie, et les déchets sont expulsés sous forme d'excréments. 

La bouche, l'œsophage, l'estomac et les intestins font tous partie du tractus gastro-intestinal. 

Gastro-intestinal est un adjectif signifiant ou se rapportant à l'estomac et aux intestins. 

Un tractus est un ensemble de structures anatomiques apparentées ou une série d'organes corporels connectés.

La plupart des bilatériens (y compris la plupart des invertébrés et tous les vertébrés) ont un « intestin traversant » ou un tube digestif complet. 

Les éponges et les cnidaires sont des invertébrés précoces avec un tube digestif incomplet ayant une seule ouverture au lieu de deux, où la nourriture est absorbée et les déchets expulsés, tandis que les gelées en peigne ont à la fois une bouche ventrale et des pores anaux dorsaux (contrairement aux positions antéro-postérieures chez les bilatériens). ).

Le tractus gastro-intestinal humain se compose de l'œsophage, de l'estomac et des intestins, et est divisé en tractus gastro-intestinal supérieur et inférieur. 

Le tractus gastro-intestinal comprend toutes les structures entre la bouche et l'anus, formant un passage continu qui comprend les principaux organes de la digestion, à savoir l'estomac, l'intestin grêle et le gros intestin. 

Cependant, le système digestif humain complet est composé du tractus gastro-intestinal et des organes accessoires de la digestion (la langue, les glandes salivaires, le pancréas, le foie et la vésicule biliaire). 

Le tractus peut également être divisé en intestin antérieur, intestin moyen et intestin postérieur, reflétant l'origine embryologique de chaque segment. 

L'ensemble du tractus gastro-intestinal humain mesure environ neuf mètres (30 pieds) de long à l'autopsie. 

Il est considérablement plus court dans le corps vivant car les intestins, qui sont des tubes de tissu musculaire lisse, maintiennent un tonus musculaire constant dans un état à mi-tension, mais peuvent se détendre par endroits pour permettre une distension et un péristaltisme locaux.

Le tractus gastro-intestinal contient des billions de microbes, avec quelque 4 000 souches différentes de bactéries jouant divers rôles dans le maintien de la santé immunitaire et du métabolisme. 

Certaines estimations affirment que le nombre de microbes dépasse nos propres cellules 10:1. 

Les cellules du tractus gastro-intestinal libèrent des hormones pour aider à réguler le processus digestif. 

Ces hormones digestives, y compris la gastrine, la sécrétine, la cholécystokinine et la ghréline, sont médiées par des mécanismes intracrines ou autocrines, indiquant que les cellules libérant ces hormones sont des structures conservées tout au long de l'évolution.


== Tractus gastro-intestinal humain ==



=== Structure ===


La structure et la fonction peuvent être décrites à la fois comme une anatomie grossière et comme une anatomie ou une histologie microscopique. 

Le tractus lui-même est divisé en tractus supérieur et inférieur, et les intestins en petites et grandes parties.


==== Tractus gastro-intestinal supérieur ====

Le tractus gastro-intestinal supérieur comprend la bouche, le pharynx, l'œsophage, l'estomac et le duodénum.

La démarcation exacte entre les voies supérieures et inférieures est le muscle suspenseur du duodénum. 

Cela différencie les frontières embryonnaires entre l'intestin antérieur et l'intestin moyen, et est également la division couramment utilisée par les cliniciens pour décrire les saignements gastro-intestinaux comme étant d'origine «supérieure» ou «inférieure». 

Lors de la dissection, le duodénum peut sembler être un organe unifié, mais il est divisé en quatre segments en fonction de la fonction, de l'emplacement et de l'anatomie interne. 

Les quatre segments du duodénum sont les suivants (commençant à l'estomac et se déplaçant vers le jéjunum) : bulbe, descendant, horizontal et ascendant. 

Le muscle suspenseur relie le bord supérieur du duodénum ascendant au diaphragme.

Le muscle suspenseur est un repère anatomique important qui montre la division formelle entre le duodénum et le jéjunum, les première et deuxième parties de l'intestin grêle, respectivement. 

Il s'agit d'un muscle fin dérivé du mésoderme embryonnaire.


==== Tractus gastro-intestinal inférieur ====

Le tractus gastro-intestinal inférieur comprend la majeure partie de l'intestin grêle et tout le gros intestin. 

Dans l'anatomie humaine, l'intestin (intestin ou intestin. 

Grec : éntera) est le segment du tractus gastro-intestinal s'étendant du sphincter pylorique de l'estomac à l'anus et comme chez d'autres mammifères, se compose de deux segments, l'intestin grêle et le gros intestin. 

Chez l'homme, l'intestin grêle est subdivisé en duodénum, ​​jéjunum et iléon, tandis que le gros intestin est subdivisé en caecum, côlon ascendant, transverse, descendant et sigmoïde, rectum et canal anal.


===== Intestin grêle =====

L'intestin grêle commence au niveau du duodénum et est une structure tubulaire, généralement entre 6 et 7 m de long.

Sa zone muqueuse chez un humain adulte est d'environ 30 m2 (320 pieds carrés).

La combinaison des plis circulaires, des villosités et des microvillosités augmente la zone d'absorption de la muqueuse d'environ 600 fois, soit une surface totale d'environ 250 m2 (2 700 pieds carrés) pour l'ensemble de l'intestin grêle.

Sa fonction principale est d'absorber les produits de la digestion (y compris les glucides, les protéines, les lipides et les vitamines) dans la circulation sanguine.

Il existe trois grandes divisions :

Duodénum : Structure courte (environ 20 à 25 cm de long) qui reçoit du chyme de l'estomac, ainsi que du suc pancréatique contenant des enzymes digestives et de la bile de la vésicule biliaire. 

Les enzymes digestives décomposent les protéines et la bile émulsionne les graisses en micelles. 

Le duodénum contient les glandes de Brunner qui produisent une sécrétion alcaline riche en mucus contenant du bicarbonate. 

Ces sécrétions, associées au bicarbonate du pancréas, neutralisent les acides gastriques contenus dans le chyme.

Jéjunum : C'est la section médiane de l'intestin grêle, reliant le duodénum à l'iléon. 

Il mesure environ 2,5 m (8,2 pieds) de long et contient des plis circulaires également appelés plicae circulares et villosités qui augmentent sa surface. 

Les produits de la digestion (sucres, acides aminés et acides gras) sont absorbés dans la circulation sanguine ici.

Iléon : dernière partie de l'intestin grêle. 

Il mesure environ 3 m de long et contient des villosités semblables au jéjunum. 

Il absorbe principalement la vitamine B12 et les acides biliaires, ainsi que tout autre nutriment restant.


===== Gros intestin =====

Le gros intestin, également appelé côlon, comprend le caecum, le rectum et le canal anal. 

Il comprend également l'appendice, qui est attaché au caecum. 

Le côlon est en outre divisé en :

-Cecum (première partie du côlon) et appendice
-Côlon ascendant (ascendant dans la paroi arrière de l'abdomen)
- Flexure colique droite (partie fléchie du côlon ascendant et transverse apparente au foie)
-Colon transverse (passant sous le diaphragme)
- Flexion colique gauche (partie fléchie du côlon transverse et descendant apparent à la rate)
- Côlon descendant (descendant du côté gauche de l'abdomen)
- Côlon sigmoïde (une boucle du côlon la plus proche du rectum)
-Rectum
-Anus

La fonction principale du gros intestin est d'absorber l'eau.

La surface de la grande muqueuse intestinale d'un être humain adulte est d'environ 2 m2 (22 pieds carrés).


==== Développement ====

L'intestin est une structure dérivée de l'endoderme.

Vers le seizième jour du développement humain, l'embryon commence à se plier ventralement (la surface ventrale de l'embryon devenant concave) dans deux directions :
les côtés de l'embryon se replient l'un sur l'autre et la tête et la queue se replient l'une vers l'autre.

Le résultat est qu'un morceau du sac vitellin, une structure doublée d'endoderme en contact avec la face ventrale de l'embryon, commence à être pincé pour devenir l'intestin primitif.

Le sac vitellin reste connecté au tube intestinal via le canal vitellin.

Habituellement, cette structure régresse au cours du développement ; dans les cas où ce n'est pas le cas, on parle de diverticule de Meckel.

Au cours de la vie fœtale, l'intestin primitif est progressivement divisé en trois segments : l'intestin antérieur, l'intestin moyen et l'intestin postérieur. 

Bien que ces termes soient souvent utilisés en référence à des segments de l'intestin primitif, ils sont également utilisés régulièrement pour décrire également des régions de l'intestin définitif.

Chaque segment de l'intestin est spécifié plus en détail et donne naissance à des structures spécifiques de l'intestin et de l'intestin au cours du développement ultérieur. 

Les composants dérivés de l'intestin proprement dit, y compris l'estomac et le côlon, se développent sous forme de gonflements ou de dilatations dans les cellules de l'intestin primitif. 

En revanche, les dérivés liés à l'intestin - c'est-à-dire les structures qui dérivent de l'intestin primitif mais ne font pas partie de l'intestin proprement dit, se développent en général sous forme de poches de l'intestin primitif. 

Les vaisseaux sanguins alimentant ces structures restent constants tout au long du développement.


==== Histologie ====

Le tractus gastro-intestinal a une forme d'histologie générale avec quelques différences qui reflètent la spécialisation en anatomie fonctionnelle. 

Le tractus gastro-intestinal peut être divisé en quatre couches concentriques dans l'ordre suivant :

-Muqueuse
-Sous-muqueuse
-Couche musculaire
- Adventice ou séreuse


===== Muqueuse =====

La muqueuse est la couche la plus interne du tractus gastro-intestinal. 

La muqueuse entoure la lumière ou l'espace ouvert à l'intérieur du tube. 

Cette couche entre en contact direct avec les aliments digérés (chyme). 

La muqueuse est constituée de :

Épithélium - couche la plus interne. 

Responsable de la plupart des processus digestifs, absorbants et sécrétoires.

Lamina propria - une couche de tissu conjonctif. 
Exceptionnellement cellulaire par rapport à la plupart des tissus conjonctifs

Muscularis mucosae - une fine couche de muscle lisse qui facilite le passage du matériau et améliore l'interaction entre la couche épithéliale et le contenu de la lumière par agitation et péristaltisme.

Les muqueuses sont hautement spécialisées dans chaque organe du tractus gastro-intestinal pour faire face aux différentes conditions.

La plus grande variation est observée dans l'épithélium.


===== Sous-muqueuse =====

La sous-muqueuse est constituée d'une couche dense et irrégulière de tissu conjonctif avec de gros vaisseaux sanguins, des vaisseaux lymphatiques et des nerfs se ramifiant dans la muqueuse et la musculeuse externe.

Il contient le plexus sous-muqueux, un plexus nerveux entérique, situé sur la face interne de la musculeuse externe.


===== Couche musculaire =====

La couche musculaire se compose d'une couche circulaire interne et d'une couche externe longitudinale.

La couche circulaire empêche les aliments de se déplacer vers l'arrière et la couche longitudinale raccourcit le tractus.

Les couches ne sont pas vraiment longitudinales ou circulaires, mais plutôt les couches de muscle sont hélicoïdales avec des pas différents.

La circulaire intérieure est hélicoïdale avec un pas raide et la longitudinale extérieure est hélicoïdale avec un pas beaucoup plus faible.

Alors que la musculeuse externe est similaire dans tout le tractus gastro-intestinal, une exception est l'estomac qui a une couche musculaire oblique interne supplémentaire pour faciliter le broyage et le mélange des aliments.

La musculeuse externe de l'estomac est composée de la couche oblique interne, de la couche circulaire moyenne et de la couche longitudinale externe.
Entre les couches musculaires circulaire et longitudinale se trouve le plexus myentérique.

Cela contrôle le péristaltisme.

L'activité est initiée par les cellules du stimulateur cardiaque (cellules interstitielles myentériques de Cajal).

L'intestin a une activité péristaltique intrinsèque (rythme électrique basal) en raison de son système nerveux entérique autonome.

Le taux peut être modulé par le reste du système nerveux autonome.

Les contractions coordonnées de ces couches s'appellent le péristaltisme et propulsent la nourriture à travers le tractus.

La nourriture dans le tractus gastro-intestinal est appelée bolus (boule de nourriture) de la bouche jusqu'à l'estomac.

Après l'estomac, la nourriture est partiellement digérée et semi-liquide, et est appelée chyme.

Dans le gros intestin, la substance semi-solide restante est appelée fèces.


===== Adventice et séreuse =====

La couche la plus externe du tractus gastro-intestinal est constituée de plusieurs couches de tissu conjonctif.

Les parties intrapéritonéales du tractus gastro-intestinal sont recouvertes de séreuse.

Ceux-ci comprennent la majeure partie de l'estomac, la première partie du duodénum, ​​tout l'intestin grêle, le caecum et l'appendice, le côlon transverse, le côlon sigmoïde et le rectum. 

Dans ces sections de l'intestin, il existe une frontière claire entre l'intestin et les tissus environnants. 

Ces parties du tractus ont un mésentère.

Les parties rétropéritonéales sont recouvertes d'adventices. 

Ils se fondent dans les tissus environnants et sont fixés en position. 

Par exemple, la section rétropéritonéale du duodénum passe généralement par le plan transpylorique. 

Ceux-ci comprennent l'œsophage, le pylore de l'estomac, le duodénum distal, le côlon ascendant, le côlon descendant et le canal anal. 

De plus, la cavité buccale a une adventice.


==== Expression des gènes et des protéines ====

Environ 20 000 gènes codant pour des protéines sont exprimés dans les cellules humaines et 75 % de ces gènes sont exprimés dans au moins une des différentes parties du système digestif.

Plus de 600 de ces gènes sont plus spécifiquement exprimés dans une ou plusieurs parties du tractus gastro-intestinal et les protéines correspondantes ont des fonctions liées à la digestion des aliments et à l'absorption des nutriments.

Des exemples de protéines spécifiques ayant de telles fonctions sont le pepsinogène PGC et la lipase LIPF, exprimées dans les cellules principales, et l'ATPase gastrique ATP4A et le facteur intrinsèque gastrique GIF, exprimés dans les cellules pariétales de la muqueuse gastrique.

Les protéines spécifiques exprimées dans l'estomac et le duodénum impliquées dans la défense comprennent les protéines de mucine, telles que la mucine 6 et l'intelectine-1.


==== Temps pris ====

Le temps mis par les aliments pour transiter par le tractus gastro-intestinal varie en fonction de plusieurs facteurs, notamment l'âge, l'origine ethnique et le sexe. 

Plusieurs techniques ont été utilisées pour mesurer le temps de transit, y compris la radiographie après un repas marqué au baryum, l'analyse de l'hydrogène respiratoire et l'analyse scintigraphique après un repas radiomarqué. 

Il faut 2,5 à 3 heures pour que 50 % du contenu quitte l'estomac. 

La vitesse de digestion dépend également de la matière digérée, car la composition des aliments d'un même repas peut quitter l'estomac à des vitesses différentes. 

La vidange totale de l'estomac prend environ 4 à 5 heures et le transit par le côlon prend 30 à 50 heures.


==== Fonction immunitaire ====

Le tractus gastro-intestinal constitue une partie importante du système immunitaire.


===== Barrière immunitaire =====

La surface du tube digestif est estimée à environ 32 mètres carrés, soit environ la moitié d'un terrain de badminton. 

Avec une exposition aussi importante (plus de trois fois plus grande que la surface exposée de la peau), ces composants immunitaires fonctionnent pour empêcher les agents pathogènes de pénétrer dans les systèmes circulatoires sanguin et lymphatique. 

Les composants fondamentaux de cette protection sont assurés par la barrière muqueuse intestinale, qui est composée d'éléments physiques, biochimiques et immunitaires élaborés par la muqueuse intestinale. 

Les micro-organismes sont également tenus à distance par un système immunitaire étendu comprenant le tissu lymphoïde associé à l'intestin (GALT)

Il existe d'autres facteurs contribuant à la protection contre l'invasion d'agents pathogènes. 

Par exemple, un pH bas (allant de 1 à 4) de l'estomac est fatal pour de nombreux micro-organismes qui y pénètrent. 

De même, le mucus (contenant des anticorps IgA) neutralise de nombreux micro-organismes pathogènes. 

D'autres facteurs de la contribution du tractus gastro-intestinal à la fonction immunitaire comprennent les enzymes sécrétées dans la salive et la bile.


===== Homéostase du système immunitaire =====

Les bactéries bénéfiques peuvent également contribuer à l'homéostasie du système immunitaire gastro-intestinal. 

Par exemple, Clostridia, l'un des groupes bactériens les plus prédominants dans le tractus gastro-intestinal, joue un rôle important en influençant la dynamique du système immunitaire de l'intestin. 

Il a été démontré que l'apport d'un régime riche en fibres pourrait être responsable de l'induction de cellules T régulatrices (Tregs). 

Cela est dû à la production d'acides gras à chaîne courte lors de la fermentation de nutriments d'origine végétale tels que le butyrate et le propionate. 

Fondamentalement, le butyrate induit la différenciation des cellules Treg en améliorant l'acétylation de l'histone H3 dans le promoteur et les régions de séquence non codantes conservées du locus FOXP3, régulant ainsi les cellules T, entraînant la réduction de la réponse inflammatoire et des allergies.


==== Microbiote intestinal ====

Le gros intestin héberge plusieurs types de bactéries qui peuvent traiter des molécules que le corps humain ne peut autrement décomposer. 

C'est un exemple de symbiose. 

Ces bactéries sont également responsables de la production de gaz à l'interface hôte-pathogène, à l'intérieur de notre intestin (ce gaz est libéré sous forme de flatulence lorsqu'il est éliminé par l'anus). 

Cependant, le gros intestin est principalement concerné par l'absorption d'eau à partir de matières digérées (qui est régulée par l'hypothalamus) et la réabsorption de sodium, ainsi que de tous les nutriments qui peuvent avoir échappé à la digestion primaire dans l'iléon.

Les bactéries intestinales bénéfiques pour la santé de la flore intestinale servent à prévenir la prolifération de bactéries potentiellement nocives dans l'intestin.

Ces deux types de bactéries se disputent l'espace et la "nourriture", car les ressources du tractus intestinal sont limitées.

Un rapport de 80 à 85% de bactéries bénéfiques pour 15 à 20% de bactéries potentiellement nocives est généralement considéré comme normal dans les intestins et maintient l'homéostasie.

Un mauvais ratio de bactéries potentiellement nocives peut perturber cet équilibre et provoquer une dysbiose.


==== Détoxification et métabolisme des médicaments ====

Des enzymes telles que CYP3A4, ainsi que les activités antiporteuses, jouent également un rôle déterminant dans le rôle de l'intestin dans le métabolisme des médicaments dans la détoxification des antigènes et des xénobiotiques.


== Signification clinique ==



=== Maladies ===

De nombreuses maladies et affections peuvent affecter le système gastro-intestinal, notamment les infections, l'inflammation et le cancer.

Divers agents pathogènes, tels que les bactéries qui causent des maladies d'origine alimentaire, peuvent induire une gastro-entérite qui résulte d'une inflammation de l'estomac et de l'intestin grêle. 

Les antibiotiques pour traiter ces infections bactériennes peuvent diminuer la diversité du microbiome du tractus gastro-intestinal et activer en outre les médiateurs inflammatoires. 

La gastro-entérite est la maladie la plus fréquente du tractus gastro-intestinal.

Le cancer gastro-intestinal peut survenir à n'importe quel point du tractus gastro-intestinal et comprend le cancer de la bouche, le cancer de la langue, le cancer de l'œsophage, le cancer de l'estomac et le cancer colorectal.
Conditions inflammatoires.

L'iléite est une inflammation de l'iléon, la colite est une inflammation du gros intestin.

L'appendicite est une inflammation de l'appendice situé au niveau du caecum.

Il s'agit d'une affection potentiellement mortelle si elle n'est pas traitée ; la plupart des cas d'appendicite nécessitent une intervention chirurgicale. La maladie diverticulaire est une affection très fréquente chez les personnes âgées dans les pays industrialisés.

Il affecte généralement le gros intestin, mais on sait qu'il affecte également l'intestin grêle.

La diverticulose survient lorsque des poches se forment sur la paroi intestinale.

Une fois que les poches deviennent enflammées, on parle de diverticulite.

La maladie intestinale inflammatoire est une affection inflammatoire affectant les parois intestinales et comprend les sous-types de la maladie de Crohn et de la colite ulcéreuse.

Alors que la maladie de Crohn peut affecter l'ensemble du tractus gastro-intestinal, la colite ulcéreuse est limitée au gros intestin.

La maladie de Crohn est largement considérée comme une maladie auto-immune.

Bien que la colite ulcéreuse soit souvent traitée comme s'il s'agissait d'une maladie auto-immune, il n'y a pas de consensus sur le fait qu'elle en est réellement une.

Troubles gastro-intestinaux fonctionnels dont le plus fréquent est le syndrome du côlon irritable.

La constipation fonctionnelle et les douleurs abdominales fonctionnelles chroniques sont d'autres troubles fonctionnels de l'intestin qui ont des causes physiologiques mais qui n'ont pas de pathologies structurelles, chimiques ou infectieuses identifiables.


=== Symptômes ===

Plusieurs symptômes sont utilisés pour indiquer des problèmes avec le tractus gastro-intestinal :

- Vomissements, qui peuvent inclure des régurgitations de nourriture ou des vomissements de sang

-Diarrhée, ou passage de selles liquides ou plus fréquentes

-Constipation, qui fait référence au passage de selles moins nombreuses et durcies

- Sang dans les selles, qui comprend du sang rouge frais, du sang de couleur marron et du sang de couleur goudronneuse


=== Traitement ===

La chirurgie gastro-intestinale peut souvent être pratiquée en ambulatoire.

Aux États-Unis en 2012, les opérations sur le système digestif représentaient 3 des 25 procédures de chirurgie ambulatoire les plus courantes et constituaient 9,1 % de toutes les chirurgies ambulatoires ambulatoires.


=== Imagerie ===

Diverses méthodes d'imagerie du tractus gastro-intestinal comprennent les séries gastro-intestinales supérieures et inférieures :

Les colorants radio-opaques peuvent être avalés pour produire une déglutition barytée
Certaines parties du tractus peuvent être visualisées par caméra.

C'est ce qu'on appelle l'endoscopie si l'on examine le tractus gastro-intestinal supérieur et la coloscopie ou la sigmoïdoscopie si l'on examine le tractus gastro-intestinal inférieur.

L'endoscopie par capsule est l'endroit où une capsule contenant une caméra est avalée afin d'examiner le tractus.

Des biopsies peuvent également être prises lors de l'examen.
Une radiographie abdominale peut être utilisée pour examiner le tractus gastro-intestinal inférieur.


=== Autres maladies apparentées ===

-Choléra
- Kyste de duplication entérique
-Giardiase
-Pancréatite
- Ulcère peptique
-Fièvre jaune
-Helicobacter pylori est une bactérie spirale gram-négative.

Plus de la moitié de la population mondiale en est infectée, principalement pendant l'enfance ; il n'est pas certain que la maladie se transmette.

Il colonise le système gastro-intestinal, principalement l'estomac.

La bactérie a des conditions de survie spécifiques à notre microenvironnement gastrique : elle est à la fois capnophile et microaérophile. 

Helicobacter présente également un tropisme pour la muqueuse épithéliale gastrique et la couche muqueuse gastrique qui l'entoure. 

La colonisation gastrique de cette bactérie déclenche une réponse immunitaire robuste conduisant à une inflammation modérée à sévère, connue sous le nom de gastrite. 

Les signes et symptômes d'infection sont la gastrite, des douleurs abdominales brûlantes, une perte de poids, une perte d'appétit, des ballonnements, des rots, des nausées, des vomissures sanglantes et des selles noires et goudronneuses. 

L'infection peut être détectée de plusieurs façons : radiographies gastro-intestinales, endoscopie, tests sanguins pour les anticorps anti-Helicobacter, test de selles et test respiratoire à l'uréase (qui est un sous-produit de la bactérie). 

S'il est attrapé assez tôt, il peut être traité avec trois doses d'inhibiteurs de la pompe à protons différents ainsi que deux antibiotiques, ce qui prend environ une semaine pour guérir.

S'il n'est pas pris assez tôt, une intervention chirurgicale peut être nécessaire.

La pseudo-obstruction intestinale est un syndrome causé par une malformation du système digestif, caractérisé par une altération sévère de la capacité des intestins à pousser et à assimiler.

Les symptômes comprennent des douleurs abdominales et gastriques quotidiennes, des nausées, une distension grave, des vomissements, des brûlures d'estomac, de la dysphagie, de la diarrhée, de la constipation, de la déshydratation et de la malnutrition.

Il n'y a pas de remède pour la pseudo-obstruction intestinale.

Différents types de chirurgie et de traitement gérant les complications potentiellement mortelles telles que l'iléus et le volvulus, la stase intestinale qui entraîne une prolifération bactérienne et la résection des parties affectées ou mortes de l'intestin peuvent être nécessaires.

De nombreux patients ont besoin d'une nutrition parentérale.

Iléus est un blocage des intestins.

La maladie cœliaque est une forme courante de malabsorption, affectant jusqu'à 1 % des personnes d'origine nord-européenne.

Une réponse auto-immune est déclenchée dans les cellules intestinales par la digestion des protéines de gluten.

L'ingestion de protéines présentes dans le blé, l'orge et le seigle provoque une atrophie villositaire de l'intestin grêle.

L'évitement alimentaire à vie de ces aliments dans un régime sans gluten est le seul traitement.

Les entérovirus sont nommés par leur voie de transmission à travers l'intestin (entérique signifiant intestinal), mais leurs symptômes ne sont pas principalement associés à l'intestin.

L'endométriose peut affecter les intestins, avec des symptômes similaires à ceux du SII.
La torsion intestinale (ou, de manière similaire, l'étranglement intestinal) est un événement relativement rare (se développant généralement après une chirurgie intestinale majeure).

Il est cependant difficile de diagnostiquer correctement et, s'il n'est pas corrigé, il peut entraîner un infarctus intestinal et la mort.

- Angiodysplasie du côlon
-Constipation
-La diarrhée
-Maladie de Hirschsprung (aganglionose)
-Intussusception
-Polype (médicament) (voir aussi polype colorectal)
-Colite pseudomembraneuse
- Le mégacôlon toxique est généralement une complication de la colite ulcéreuse


== Utilisations des boyaux d'animaux ==

Les intestins d'animaux autres que les humains sont utilisés de plusieurs façons.

De chaque espèce de bétail source de lait, une présure correspondante est obtenue à partir des intestins des veaux de lait.

Les intestins de porc et de veau sont consommés et les intestins de porc sont utilisés comme boyaux de saucisse.

Les intestins de veau fournissent de la phosphatase alcaline intestinale de veau (CIP) et sont utilisés pour fabriquer la peau du batteur d'or.
Les autres utilisations sont :

L'utilisation de cordes en boyau d'animaux par les musiciens remonte à la troisième dynastie égyptienne.

Dans un passé récent, les cordes étaient faites de boyau d'agneau.

Avec l'avènement de l'ère moderne, les musiciens ont eu tendance à utiliser des cordes en soie ou en matériaux synthétiques comme le nylon ou l'acier.

Certains instrumentistes, cependant, utilisent encore des cordes en boyau afin d'évoquer la qualité sonore plus ancienne.

Bien que ces cordes soient communément appelées cordes "catgut", les chats n'ont jamais été utilisés comme source pour les cordes en boyau.

Le boyau de mouton était la source originale de la corde en boyau naturel utilisée dans les raquettes, comme pour le tennis.

Aujourd'hui, les cordes synthétiques sont beaucoup plus courantes, mais les meilleures cordes en boyau sont désormais fabriquées en boyau de vache.

La corde en boyau a également été utilisée pour produire des cordes pour les caisses claires qui fournissent le timbre bourdonnant caractéristique d'une caisse claire.

Alors que la caisse claire moderne utilise presque toujours du fil métallique plutôt que du cordon en boyau, le tambour sur cadre bendir nord-africain utilise toujours du boyau à cette fin.

Les coques ou boyaux de saucisses "naturelles" sont faites d'intestins d'animaux, en particulier de porc, de bœuf et d'agneau.

L'emballage du kokoretsi, du gardoubakia et du torcinello est fait de boyau d'agneau (ou de chèvre).

Le haggis est traditionnellement bouilli et servi dans un estomac de mouton.
Les andouilles, une sorte de nourriture, sont constituées d'intestins de porc soigneusement lavés.

Le boyau d'animal a été utilisé pour fabriquer les lignes de cordon dans les horloges à boîtier long et pour les mouvements de fusée dans les horloges à support, mais peut être remplacé par du fil métallique.

Les plus anciens préservatifs connus, datant de 1640 après JC, étaient fabriqués à partir d'intestins d'animaux.


== Autres animaux ==


De nombreux oiseaux et autres animaux ont un estomac spécialisé dans le tube digestif appelé gésier utilisé pour broyer les aliments.

Une autre caractéristique non trouvée chez l'homme mais trouvée dans une gamme d'autres animaux est la récolte. 

Chez les oiseaux, cela se trouve sous la forme d'une poche le long de l'œsophage.

La plupart des vertébrés, y compris les poissons, les amphibiens, les oiseaux, les reptiles et les mammifères pondeurs, ont une différence majeure dans leur tube digestif en ce sens qu'il se termine par un cloaque et non par un anus, ayant fusionné le système urinaire avec le pore génito-anal. 

Les Therians (la plupart / les autres mammifères, y compris les humains) ont séparé leur anus de leur ouverture uro-génitale pour les deux sexes, les placentaires du sous-groupe séparant plus tard leurs ouvertures urinaire et génitale d'une petite distance, cette fois uniquement chez les femelles.

En 2020, le plus ancien tube digestif fossile connu, d'un organisme vermiforme éteint chez les Cloudinidae a été découvert; il a vécu à la fin de la période édiacarienne il y a environ 550 millions d'années.

On pense qu'un intestin traversant (un avec la bouche et l'anus) a évolué au sein du clade néphrozoaire de Bilateria, après que leur orifice ventral ancestral (simple, comme chez les cnidaires et les acoels; réévolué chez les néphrozoaires comme les vers plats) s'est étiré antéro-postérieurement , avant que la partie médiane de l'étirement ne se rétrécisse et ne se ferme complètement, laissant un orifice antérieur (bouche) et un orifice postérieur (anus plus ouverture génitale).



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gastrointestinal_tract

;;;PT;;;



CANAL DIGESTÓRIO/
TRATO GASTROINTESTINAL


O trato gastrointestinal (trato GI, TGI, trato digestivo, trato digestivo, canal alimentar) é o trato da boca ao ânus que inclui todos os órgãos do sistema digestivo em humanos e outros animais. 

Os alimentos ingeridos pela boca são digeridos para extrair nutrientes e absorver energia, e os resíduos são expelidos como fezes. 

A boca, o esôfago, o estômago e os intestinos fazem parte do trato gastrointestinal. 

Gastrointestinal é um adjetivo que significa ou pertencente ao estômago e intestinos. 

Um trato é uma coleção de estruturas anatômicas relacionadas ou uma série de órgãos do corpo conectados.

A maioria dos bilaterianos (incluindo a maioria dos invertebrados e todos os vertebrados) tem um trato digestivo "através do intestino" ou completo. 

As esponjas e os cnidários são invertebrados primitivos com um trato digestivo incompleto tendo apenas uma abertura em vez de duas, onde o alimento é ingerido e os resíduos expelidos, enquanto as geleias de pente têm uma boca ventral e poros anais dorsais (ao contrário das posições ântero-posteriores em bilaterianos ).

O trato gastrointestinal humano consiste no esôfago, estômago e intestinos, e é dividido em trato gastrointestinal superior e inferior. 

O trato GI inclui todas as estruturas entre a boca e o ânus, formando uma passagem contínua que inclui os principais órgãos da digestão, ou seja, o estômago, intestino delgado e intestino grosso. 

No entanto, o sistema digestivo humano completo é composto pelo trato gastrointestinal mais os órgãos acessórios da digestão (língua, glândulas salivares, pâncreas, fígado e vesícula biliar).

O trato também pode ser dividido em intestino anterior, intestino médio e intestino posterior, refletindo a origem embriológica de cada segmento.

Todo o trato GI humano tem cerca de nove metros (30 pés) de comprimento na autópsia.

É consideravelmente mais curto no corpo vivo porque os intestinos, que são tubos de tecido muscular liso, mantêm o tônus ​​muscular constante em um estado de meia tensão, mas podem relaxar em alguns pontos para permitir a distensão local e o peristaltismo.

O trato gastrointestinal contém trilhões de micróbios, com cerca de 4.000 cepas diferentes de bactérias com papéis diversos na manutenção da saúde imunológica e do metabolismo.

Algumas estimativas afirmam que o número de micróbios supera as nossas próprias células 10:1. 

As células do trato GI liberam hormônios para ajudar a regular o processo digestivo. 

Esses hormônios digestivos, incluindo gastrina, secretina, colecistocinina e grelina, são mediados por mecanismos intracrinos ou autócrinos, indicando que as células que liberam esses hormônios são estruturas conservadas ao longo da evolução.


== Trato gastrointestinal humano ==



=== Estrutura ===


A estrutura e a função podem ser descritas tanto como anatomia macroscópica quanto como anatomia microscópica ou histologia. 

O trato em si é dividido em tratos superior e inferior, e os intestinos partes pequenas e grandes.


==== Trato gastrointestinal superior ====

O trato gastrointestinal superior é composto pela boca, faringe, esôfago, estômago e duodeno.

A demarcação exata entre os tratos superior e inferior é o músculo suspensor do duodeno. 

Isso diferencia as bordas embrionárias entre o intestino anterior e o intestino médio, e também é a divisão comumente usada pelos médicos para descrever o sangramento gastrointestinal como sendo de origem "superior" ou "inferior". 

Após a dissecção, o duodeno pode parecer um órgão unificado, mas é dividido em quatro segmentos com base na função, localização e anatomia interna. 

Os quatro segmentos do duodeno são os seguintes (começando no estômago e movendo-se em direção ao jejuno): bulbo, descendente, horizontal e ascendente. 

O músculo suspensor prende a borda superior do duodeno ascendente ao diafragma.

O músculo suspensor é um importante marco anatômico que mostra a divisão formal entre o duodeno e o jejuno, primeira e segunda partes do intestino delgado, respectivamente.

Este é um músculo fino que é derivado do mesoderma embrionário.


==== Trato gastrointestinal inferior ====

O trato gastrointestinal inferior inclui a maior parte do intestino delgado e todo o intestino grosso.

Na anatomia humana, o intestino (intestino ou intestino.

Grego: éntera) é o segmento do trato gastrointestinal que se estende do esfíncter pilórico do estômago ao ânus e, como em outros mamíferos, consiste em dois segmentos, o intestino delgado e o intestino grosso.

Em humanos, o intestino delgado é subdividido em duodeno, jejuno e íleo, enquanto o intestino grosso é subdividido em ceco, cólon ascendente, transverso, descendente e sigmóide, reto e canal anal.


===== Intestino delgado =====

O intestino delgado começa no duodeno e é uma estrutura tubular, geralmente entre 6 e 7 m de comprimento. 

Sua área de mucosa em um humano adulto é de cerca de 30 m2 (320 pés quadrados). 

A combinação das pregas circulares, das vilosidades e das microvilosidades aumenta a área de absorção da mucosa em cerca de 600 vezes, perfazendo uma área total de cerca de 250 m2 (2.700 pés quadrados) para todo o intestino delgado. 

Sua principal função é absorver os produtos da digestão (incluindo carboidratos, proteínas, lipídios e vitaminas) na corrente sanguínea. 

Existem três divisões principais:

Duodeno: Uma estrutura curta (cerca de 20 a 25 cm de comprimento) que recebe quimo do estômago, juntamente com suco pancreático contendo enzimas digestivas e bile da vesícula biliar.

As enzimas digestivas quebram as proteínas e a bile emulsifica as gorduras em micelas.

O duodeno contém glândulas de Brunner que produzem uma secreção alcalina rica em muco contendo bicarbonato.

Essas secreções, em combinação com o bicarbonato do pâncreas, neutralizam os ácidos estomacais contidos no quimo.

Jejuno: Este é o meio do intestino delgado, conectando o duodeno ao íleo.

Tem cerca de 2,5 m (8,2 pés) de comprimento e contém as dobras circulares também conhecidas como plicae circulares e vilosidades que aumentam sua área de superfície.

Os produtos da digestão (açúcares, aminoácidos e ácidos graxos) são absorvidos pela corrente sanguínea aqui.

Íleo: A seção final do intestino delgado. 

Tem cerca de 3 m de comprimento e contém vilosidades semelhantes ao jejuno. 

Absorve principalmente vitamina B12 e ácidos biliares, bem como quaisquer outros nutrientes restantes.


===== Intestino grosso =====

O intestino grosso também chamado de cólon, consiste no ceco, reto e canal anal. 

Também inclui o apêndice, que está ligado ao ceco. 

O cólon é dividido em:

-Cecum (primeira porção do cólon) e apêndice
-Cólon ascendente (ascendendo na parede posterior do abdome)
- Flexura cólica direita (porção flexionada do cólon ascendente e transverso aparente para o fígado)
-Cólon transverso (passando abaixo do diafragma)
- Flexura cólica esquerda (porção flexionada do cólon transverso e descendente aparente ao baço)
-Cólon descendente (descendo pelo lado esquerdo do abdome)
-Cólon sigmóide (uma alça do cólon mais próxima do reto)
-Reto
-Ânus

A principal função do intestino grosso é absorver água.

A área da mucosa do intestino grosso de um humano adulto é de cerca de 2 m2 (22 pés quadrados).


==== Desenvolvimento ====

O intestino é uma estrutura derivada da endoderme. 

Aproximadamente no décimo sexto dia de desenvolvimento humano, o embrião começa a dobrar ventralmente (com a superfície ventral do embrião tornando-se côncava) em duas direções: 
 os lados do embrião dobram-se uns sobre os outros e a cabeça e a cauda dobram-se uma em direção à outra. 

O resultado é que um pedaço do saco vitelino, uma estrutura revestida de endoderma em contato com a face ventral do embrião, começa a ser arrancado para se tornar o intestino primitivo. 

O saco vitelino permanece conectado ao tubo intestinal através do ducto vitelino. 

Normalmente, essa estrutura regride durante o desenvolvimento; nos casos em que não, é conhecido como divertículo de Meckel.

Durante a vida fetal, o intestino primitivo é gradualmente padronizado em três segmentos: intestino anterior, intestino médio e intestino posterior.

Embora esses termos sejam frequentemente usados ​​em referência a segmentos do intestino primitivo, eles também são usados ​​regularmente para descrever regiões do intestino definitivo.

Cada segmento do intestino é mais especificado e dá origem a estruturas específicas do intestino e relacionadas ao intestino no desenvolvimento posterior.

Componentes derivados do intestino propriamente dito, incluindo o estômago e o cólon, desenvolvem-se como inchaços ou dilatações nas células do intestino primitivo.

Em contraste, os derivados relacionados ao intestino - isto é, aquelas estruturas que derivam do intestino primitivo, mas não fazem parte do intestino propriamente dito, em geral, desenvolvem-se como bolsas do intestino primitivo.

Os vasos sanguíneos que suprem essas estruturas permanecem constantes ao longo do desenvolvimento.


==== Histologia ====

O trato gastrointestinal tem uma forma de histologia geral com algumas diferenças que refletem a especialização em anatomia funcional.

O trato GI pode ser dividido em quatro camadas concêntricas na seguinte ordem:

-Mucosa
-Submucosa
-Camada muscular
-Adventícia ou serosa


===== Mucosa =====

A mucosa é a camada mais interna do trato gastrointestinal.

A mucosa envolve o lúmen, ou espaço aberto dentro do tubo.

Esta camada entra em contato direto com o alimento digerido (quimo).

A mucosa é composta por:

Epitélio – camada mais interna.

Responsável pela maioria dos processos digestivos, absortivos e secretores.

Lâmina própria – uma camada de tecido conjuntivo.
Excepcionalmente celular em comparação com a maioria dos tecidos conjuntivos

Muscularis mucosae – uma fina camada de músculo liso que auxilia a passagem de material e aumenta a interação entre a camada epitelial e o conteúdo do lúmen por agitação e peristaltismo.

As mucosas são altamente especializadas em cada órgão do trato gastrointestinal para lidar com as diferentes condições.

A maior variação é vista no epitélio.


===== Submucosa =====

A submucosa consiste em uma densa camada irregular de tecido conjuntivo com grandes vasos sanguíneos, linfáticos e nervos que se ramificam na mucosa e na muscular externa.

Ele contém o plexo submucoso, um plexo nervoso entérico, situado na superfície interna da muscular externa.


===== Camada muscular =====

A camada muscular consiste em uma camada circular interna e uma camada externa longitudinal.

A camada circular evita que o alimento viaje para trás e a camada longitudinal encurta o trato.

As camadas não são verdadeiramente longitudinais ou circulares, mas sim as camadas de músculo são helicoidais com diferentes alturas.

A circular interna é helicoidal com um passo acentuado e a longitudinal externa é helicoidal com um passo muito mais raso.

Embora a muscular externa seja semelhante em todo o trato gastrointestinal, uma exceção é o estômago, que possui uma camada muscular oblíqua interna adicional para ajudar na trituração e mistura dos alimentos.

A muscular externa do estômago é composta pela camada oblíqua interna, camada circular média e camada longitudinal externa.
Entre as camadas musculares circulares e longitudinais está o plexo mioentérico.

Isso controla o peristaltismo.

A atividade é iniciada pelas células marcapasso (células intersticiais mioentéricas de Cajal). 

O intestino tem atividade peristáltica intrínseca (ritmo elétrico basal) devido ao seu sistema nervoso entérico autônomo. 

A taxa pode ser modulada pelo resto do sistema nervoso autônomo.

As contrações coordenadas dessas camadas são chamadas de peristaltismo e impulsionam o alimento através do trato. 

A comida no trato GI é chamada de bolus (bola de comida) da boca até o estômago. 

Após o estômago, o alimento é parcialmente digerido e semi-líquido, e é referido como quimo. 

No intestino grosso, a substância semi-sólida restante é chamada de fezes.


===== Adventícia e serosa =====

A camada mais externa do trato gastrointestinal consiste em várias camadas de tecido conjuntivo.

As partes intraperitoneais do trato GI são cobertas por serosa. 

Estes incluem a maior parte do estômago, primeira parte do duodeno, todo o intestino delgado, ceco e apêndice, cólon transverso, cólon sigmóide e reto.

Nessas seções do intestino, há um limite claro entre o intestino e o tecido circundante.

Essas partes do trato têm um mesentério.

As partes retroperitoneais são cobertas com adventícia.

Eles se misturam ao tecido circundante e são fixados na posição.

Por exemplo, a seção retroperitoneal do duodeno geralmente passa pelo plano transpilórico.

Estes incluem o esôfago, piloro do estômago, duodeno distal, cólon ascendente, cólon descendente e canal anal.

Além disso, a cavidade oral tem adventícia.


==== Expressão de genes e proteínas ====

Aproximadamente 20.000 genes codificadores de proteínas são expressos em células humanas e 75% desses genes são expressos em pelo menos uma das diferentes partes do sistema digestivo.

Mais de 600 desses genes são expressos mais especificamente em uma ou mais partes do trato GI e as proteínas correspondentes têm funções relacionadas à digestão de alimentos e absorção de nutrientes.

Exemplos de proteínas específicas com tais funções são o pepsinogênio PGC e a lipase LIPF, expressa nas células principais, e a ATPase gástrica ATP4A e o fator intrínseco gástrico GIF, expressos nas células parietais da mucosa do estômago.

Proteínas específicas expressas no estômago e duodeno envolvidas na defesa incluem proteínas mucinas, como mucina 6 e intelectina-1.


==== Tempo gasto ====

O tempo necessário para o alimento transitar pelo trato gastrointestinal varia de acordo com vários fatores, incluindo idade, etnia e sexo. 

Várias técnicas têm sido usadas para medir o tempo de trânsito, incluindo radiografia após uma refeição marcada com bário, análise de hidrogênio no ar expirado e análise cintilográfica após uma refeição radiomarcada. 

Demora 2,5 a 3 horas para 50% do conteúdo deixar o estômago. 

A taxa de digestão também depende do material que está sendo digerido, pois a composição do alimento da mesma refeição pode deixar o estômago em taxas diferentes. 

O esvaziamento total do estômago leva cerca de 4 a 5 horas e o trânsito pelo cólon leva de 30 a 50 horas.


==== Função imunológica ====

O trato gastrointestinal forma uma parte importante do sistema imunológico.


===== Barreira imunológica =====

A área de superfície do trato digestivo é estimada em cerca de 32 metros quadrados, ou cerca de meia quadra de badminton. 

Com uma exposição tão grande (mais de três vezes maior do que a superfície exposta da pele), esses componentes imunológicos funcionam para impedir que patógenos entrem nos sistemas circulatórios do sangue e da linfa. 

Os componentes fundamentais dessa proteção são fornecidos pela barreira da mucosa intestinal, que é composta por elementos físicos, bioquímicos e imunológicos elaborados pela mucosa intestinal. 

Os microrganismos também são mantidos sob controle por um extenso sistema imunológico que compreende o tecido linfoide associado ao intestino (GALT).

Existem fatores adicionais que contribuem para a proteção contra a invasão de patógenos. 

Por exemplo, o pH baixo (variando de 1 a 4) do estômago é fatal para muitos microorganismos que entram nele. 

Da mesma forma, o muco (contendo anticorpos IgA) neutraliza muitos microrganismos patogênicos.

Outros fatores na contribuição do trato GI para a função imune incluem enzimas secretadas na saliva e na bile.


===== Homeostase do sistema imunológico =====

Bactérias benéficas também podem contribuir para a homeostase do sistema imunológico gastrointestinal.

Por exemplo, Clostridia, um dos grupos bacterianos mais predominantes no trato GI, desempenha um papel importante em influenciar a dinâmica do sistema imunológico do intestino.

Tem sido demonstrado que a ingestão de uma dieta rica em fibras pode ser responsável pela indução de células T-reguladoras (Tregs).

Isso se deve à produção de ácidos graxos de cadeia curta durante a fermentação de nutrientes derivados de plantas, como butirato e propionato.

Basicamente, o butirato induz a diferenciação das células Treg, aumentando a acetilação da histona H3 no promotor e conservando regiões da sequência não codificante do locus FOXP3, regulando assim as células T, resultando na redução da resposta inflamatória e alergias.


==== Microbiota intestinal ====

O intestino grosso hospeda vários tipos de bactérias que podem lidar com moléculas que o corpo humano não pode quebrar de outra forma.

Este é um exemplo de simbiose.

Essas bactérias também são responsáveis ​​pela produção de gases na interface hospedeiro-patógeno, dentro do nosso intestino (esse gás é liberado como flatulência quando eliminado pelo ânus).

No entanto, o intestino grosso está preocupado principalmente com a absorção de água do material digerido (que é regulado pelo hipotálamo) e a reabsorção de sódio, bem como de quaisquer nutrientes que possam ter escapado da digestão primária no íleo.

As bactérias intestinais que melhoram a saúde da flora intestinal servem para prevenir o crescimento excessivo de bactérias potencialmente nocivas no intestino.

Esses dois tipos de bactérias competem por espaço e "alimento", pois há recursos limitados no trato intestinal.

Uma proporção de 80-85% benéfica para 15-20% de bactérias potencialmente nocivas geralmente é considerada normal dentro dos intestinos e mantém a homeostase.

Uma proporção ruim de bactérias potencialmente nocivas pode atrapalhar esse equilíbrio e causar disbiose.


==== Desintoxicação e metabolismo de drogas ====

Enzimas como CYP3A4, juntamente com as atividades antiportadoras, também são instrumentais no papel do metabolismo de drogas no intestino na desintoxicação de antígenos e xenobióticos.


== Significado clínico ==



=== Doenças ===

Existem muitas doenças e condições que podem afetar o sistema gastrointestinal, incluindo infecções, inflamação e câncer.

Vários patógenos, como bactérias que causam doenças transmitidas por alimentos, podem induzir gastroenterite que resulta da inflamação do estômago e do intestino delgado. 

Os antibióticos para tratar essas infecções bacterianas podem diminuir a diversidade do microbioma do trato gastrointestinal e permitir ainda mais mediadores inflamatórios. 

A gastroenterite é a doença mais comum do trato GI.

O câncer gastrointestinal pode ocorrer em qualquer ponto do trato gastrointestinal e inclui câncer de boca, câncer de língua, câncer de esôfago, câncer de estômago e câncer colorretal.
Condições inflamatórias.

A ileíte é uma inflamação do íleo, a colite é uma inflamação do intestino grosso.

A apendicite é a inflamação do apêndice localizado no ceco.

Esta é uma condição potencialmente fatal se não for tratada; a maioria dos casos de apendicite requer intervenção cirúrgica. A doença diverticular é uma condição muito comum em idosos de países industrializados.

Geralmente afeta o intestino grosso, mas também afeta o intestino delgado.

A diverticulose ocorre quando bolsas se formam na parede intestinal.

Uma vez que as bolsas ficam inflamadas, é conhecido como diverticulite.

A doença inflamatória intestinal é uma condição inflamatória que afeta as paredes do intestino e inclui os subtipos doença de Crohn e colite ulcerativa.

Enquanto a doença de Crohn pode afetar todo o trato gastrointestinal, a colite ulcerativa é limitada ao intestino grosso.

A doença de Crohn é amplamente considerada como uma doença autoimune.

Embora a colite ulcerativa seja frequentemente tratada como se fosse uma doença autoimune, não há consenso de que realmente seja.

Distúrbios gastrointestinais funcionais, sendo o mais comum a síndrome do intestino irritável.

A constipação funcional e a dor abdominal crônica funcional são outros distúrbios funcionais do intestino que têm causas fisiológicas, mas não têm patologias estruturais, químicas ou infecciosas identificáveis.


=== Sintomas ===

Vários sintomas são usados ​​para indicar problemas com o trato gastrointestinal:

-Vômitos, que podem incluir regurgitação de alimentos ou vômito de sangue

- Diarréia, ou a passagem de fezes líquidas ou mais freqüentes

- Constipação, que se refere à passagem de fezes em menor quantidade e endurecidas

-Sangue nas fezes, que inclui sangue vermelho fresco, sangue marrom e sangue cor de alcatrão


=== Tratamento ===

A cirurgia gastrointestinal muitas vezes pode ser realizada em ambulatório.

Nos Estados Unidos, em 2012, as operações no sistema digestivo representaram 3 dos 25 procedimentos de cirurgia ambulatorial mais comuns e constituíram 9,1% de todas as cirurgias ambulatoriais ambulatoriais.


=== Imagens ===

Vários métodos de imagem do trato gastrointestinal incluem a série gastrointestinal superior e inferior:

Corantes radiopacos podem ser engolidos para produzir uma deglutição de bário
Partes do trato podem ser visualizadas por câmera. 

Isso é conhecido como endoscopia se examinar o trato gastrointestinal superior e colonoscopia ou sigmoidoscopia se examinar o trato gastrointestinal inferior. 

Cápsula endoscópica é onde uma cápsula contendo uma câmera é engolida para examinar o trato. 

Biópsias também podem ser feitas quando examinadas.
Uma radiografia abdominal pode ser usada para examinar o trato gastrointestinal inferior.


=== Outras doenças relacionadas ===

-Cólera
-Cisto de duplicação entérico
-Giardíase
-Pancreatite
- Doença ulcerosa péptica
-Febre amarela
-Helicobacter pylori é uma bactéria gram-negativa espiral. 

Mais da metade da população mundial está infectada com ela, principalmente durante a infância; não é certo como a doença é transmitida.

Coloniza o sistema gastrointestinal, predominantemente o estômago. 

A bactéria possui condições de sobrevivência específicas que nosso microambiente gástrico: é tanto capnofílica quanto microaerofílica.

Helicobacter também exibe tropismo pelo revestimento epitelial gástrico e pela camada mucosa gástrica ao seu redor.

A colonização gástrica desta bactéria desencadeia uma resposta imune robusta que leva a uma inflamação moderada a grave, conhecida como gastrite.

Os sinais e sintomas de infecção são gastrite, dor abdominal em queimação, perda de peso, perda de apetite, inchaço, arrotos, náusea, vômito com sangue e fezes pretas.

A infecção pode ser detectada de várias maneiras: raios-X GI, endoscopia, exames de sangue para anticorpos anti-Helicobacter, exame de fezes e teste respiratório da urease (que é um subproduto da bactéria).

Se detectado em breve, pode ser tratado com três doses de diferentes inibidores da bomba de prótons, bem como dois antibióticos, levando cerca de uma semana para curar. 

Se não for detectado em breve, a cirurgia pode ser necessária.

A pseudo-obstrução intestinal é uma síndrome causada por uma malformação do sistema digestivo, caracterizada por uma grave deficiência na capacidade dos intestinos de empurrar e assimilar. 

Os sintomas incluem dores abdominais e estomacais diárias, náuseas, distensão severa, vômitos, azia, disfagia, diarreia, constipação, desidratação e desnutrição. 

Não há cura para a pseudo-obstrução intestinal. 

Podem ser necessários diferentes tipos de cirurgia e tratamento para gerenciar complicações com risco de vida, como íleo e volvo, estase intestinal que leva ao supercrescimento bacteriano e ressecção de partes afetadas ou mortas do intestino. 

Muitos pacientes necessitam de nutrição parenteral.

Íleo é um bloqueio dos intestinos.

A doença celíaca é uma forma comum de má absorção, afetando até 1% das pessoas de descendência do norte da Europa.

Uma resposta autoimune é desencadeada nas células intestinais pela digestão das proteínas do glúten.

A ingestão de proteínas encontradas no trigo, cevada e centeio, causa atrofia das vilosidades no intestino delgado.

A evasão alimentar ao longo da vida desses alimentos em uma dieta sem glúten é o único tratamento.

Os enterovírus são nomeados por sua via de transmissão através do intestino (entérico que significa intestinal), mas seus sintomas não estão associados principalmente ao intestino.

A endometriose pode afetar os intestinos, com sintomas semelhantes aos da SII.
A torção intestinal (ou de forma semelhante, estrangulamento intestinal) é um evento comparativamente raro (geralmente se desenvolvendo em algum momento após uma cirurgia intestinal importante).

No entanto, é difícil diagnosticar corretamente e, se não for corrigido, pode levar ao infarto do intestino e à morte. 

-Angiodisplasia do cólon
-Prisão de ventre
-Diarréia
- Doença de Hirschsprung (aganglionose)
-Intussuscepção
-Pólipo (medicamento) (ver também pólipo colorretal)
-Colite pseudomembranosa
- Megacólon tóxico geralmente uma complicação da colite ulcerativa


== Usos de tripas de animais ==

Os intestinos de outros animais que não humanos são usados ​​de várias maneiras. 

De cada espécie de gado que é fonte de leite, um coalho correspondente é obtido dos intestinos de bezerros alimentados com leite. 

Os intestinos de porco e bezerro são comidos, e os intestinos de porco são usados ​​como tripas de salsicha. 

Os intestinos de bezerro fornecem fosfatase alcalina intestinal de bezerro (CIP) e são usados ​​para fazer a pele do batedor de ouro.
Outros usos são:

O uso de cordas de tripa animal por músicos pode ser rastreado até a terceira dinastia do Egito.

No passado recente, as cordas eram feitas de tripa de cordeiro.

Com o advento da era moderna, os músicos tendem a usar cordas feitas de seda ou materiais sintéticos, como nylon ou aço.

Alguns instrumentistas, no entanto, ainda usam cordas de tripa para evocar a qualidade do tom mais antigo.

Embora essas cordas fossem comumente chamadas de cordas "catgut", os gatos nunca foram usados ​​​​como fonte para cordas de tripa.

Tripa de ovelha foi a fonte original para cordas de tripa natural usadas em raquetes, como para tênis.

Hoje, cordas sintéticas são muito mais comuns, mas as melhores cordas de tripa agora são feitas de tripa de vaca.

O cabo de tripa também foi usado para produzir cordas para as caixas que fornecem o timbre zumbido característico de uma caixa.

Enquanto a caixa moderna quase sempre usa fio de metal em vez de cabo de tripa, o tambor de armação bendir do norte da África ainda usa tripa para esse fim.

Cascas de salsicha "naturais", ou tripas, são feitas de tripa animal, especialmente porco, carne bovina e cordeiro.

O embrulho de kokoretsi, gardoubakia e torcinello é feito de tripa de cordeiro (ou cabra).

Haggis é tradicionalmente cozido e servido em um estômago de ovelha.
Chitterlings, um tipo de alimento, consiste em tripa de porco bem lavada.

A tripa animal foi usada para fazer as linhas de corda em relógios de caixa longa e para movimentos de fusível em relógios de suporte, mas pode ser substituído por fio de metal.

Os preservativos mais antigos conhecidos, de 1640 d.C., eram feitos de intestino animal.


== Outros animais ==


Muitos pássaros e outros animais têm um estômago especializado no trato digestivo chamado moela, usado para triturar alimentos.

Outra característica não encontrada no ser humano, mas encontrada em uma variedade de outros animais, é a colheita. 

Nas aves, isso é encontrado como uma bolsa ao lado do esôfago.

A maioria dos vertebrados, incluindo peixes, anfíbios, aves, répteis e mamíferos que põem ovos, tem uma grande diferença em seu trato GI, pois termina em uma cloaca e não em um ânus, fundindo o sistema urinário com o poro genito-anal. 

Therians (a maioria/outros mamíferos, incluindo humanos) separaram seu ânus de sua abertura urogenital para ambos os sexos, com o subgrupo placentário separando posteriormente suas aberturas urinárias e genitais por uma pequena distância, desta vez apenas nas fêmeas.

Em 2020, foi descoberto o trato digestivo fóssil mais antigo conhecido, de um organismo semelhante a um verme extinto no Cloudinidae; viveu durante o período Ediacarano tardio, cerca de 550 milhões de anos atrás.

Acredita-se que um intestino através (um com boca e ânus) tenha evoluído dentro do clado de nefrozoários de Bilateria, após seu orifício ventral ancestral (único, como em cnidários e acoels; re-evoluído em nefrozoários como vermes chatos) esticado antero-posteriormente , antes que a parte média do trecho ficasse mais estreita e totalmente fechada, deixando um orifício anterior (boca) e um orifício posterior (ânus mais abertura genital).



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gastrointestinal_tract
