

PHALANX


The phalanx (Ancient Greek: φάλαγξ; plural phalanxes or phalanges, φάλαγγες, phalanges) was a rectangular mass military formation, usually composed entirely of heavy infantry armed with spears, pikes, sarissas, or similar pole weapons. 

The term is particularly used to describe the use of this formation in Ancient Greek warfare, although the ancient Greek writers used it to also describe any massed infantry formation, regardless of its equipment. 

Arrian uses the term in his Array against the Alans when he refers to his legions. 

In Greek texts, the phalanx may be deployed for battle, on the march, or even camped, thus describing the mass of infantry or cavalry that would deploy in line during battle. 

They marched forward as one entity. 
The term itself, as used today, does not refer to a distinctive military unit or division (e.g., the Roman legion or the contemporary Western-type battalion), but to the type of formation of an army's troops. 

Therefore, this term does not indicate a standard combat strength or composition but includes the total number of infantry, which is deployed in a single formation known as a "phalanx".
Many spear-armed troops historically fought in what might be termed phalanx-like formations. 

This article focuses on the use of the military phalanx formation in Ancient Greece, the Hellenistic world, and other ancient states heavily influenced by Greek civilization.


== History ==

The earliest known depiction of a phalanx-like formation occurs in a Sumerian stele from the 25th century BC. 

Here the troops seem to have been equipped with spears, helmets, and large shields covering the whole body. 

Ancient Egyptian infantry were known to have employed similar formations. 

The first usage of the term phalanx comes from Homer's "φαλαγξ", used to describe hoplites fighting in an organized battle line. 

Homer used the term to differentiate the formation-based combat from the individual duels so often found in his poems.Historians have not arrived at a consensus about the relationship between the Greek formation and these predecessors of the hoplites. 

The principles of shield wall and spear hedge were almost universally known among the armies of major civilizations throughout history, and so the similarities may be related to convergent evolution instead of diffusion.
Traditionally, historians date the origin of the hoplite phalanx of ancient Greece to the 8th century BC in Sparta, but this is under revision. 

It is perhaps more likely that the formation was devised in the 7th century BC after the introduction of the aspis by the city of Argos, which would have made the formation possible. 

This is further evidenced by the Chigi vase, dated to 650 BC, identifying hoplites armed with aspis, spear and panoply.Another possible theory as to the birth of Greek phalanx warfare stems from the idea that some of the basic aspects of the phalanx were present in earlier times yet were not fully developed due to the lack of appropriate technology. 

Two of the basic tactics seen in earlier warfare include the principle of cohesion and the use of large groups of soldiers. 

This would suggest that the Greek phalanx was rather the culmination and perfection of a slowly developed idea that originated many years earlier. 

As weaponry and armour advanced through the years in different city-states, the phalanx became complex and effective.


== Overview ==

The hoplite phalanx of the Archaic and Classical periods in Greece (c. 800–350 BC) was the formation in which the hoplites would line up in ranks in close order. 

The hoplites would lock their shields together, and the first few ranks of soldiers would project their spears out over the first rank of shields. 

The phalanx therefore presented a shield wall and a mass of spear points to the enemy, making frontal assaults against it very difficult. 

It also allowed a higher proportion of the soldiers to be actively engaged in combat at a given time (rather than just those in the front rank).
Battles between two phalanxes usually took place in open, flat plains where it was easier to advance and stay in formation. 

Rough terrain or hilly regions would have made it difficult to maintain a steady line and would have defeated the purpose of a phalanx. 

As a result, battles between Greek city-states would not take place in just any location, nor would they be limited to sometimes obvious strategic points. 

Rather, many times, the two opposing sides would find the most suitable piece of land where the conflict could be settled. 

Typically, the battle ended with one of the two fighting forces fleeing to safety.The phalanx usually advanced at a walking pace, although it is possible that they picked up speed during the last several yards. 

One of the main reasons for this slow approach was to maintain formation. 

The formation would be rendered useless if the phalanx was lost as the unit approached the enemy and could even become detrimental to the advancing unit, resulting in a weaker formation that was easier for an enemy force to break through. 

If the hoplites of the phalanx were to pick up speed toward the latter part of the advance, it would have been for the purpose of gaining momentum against the enemy in the initial collision. 

Herodotus states of the Greeks at the Battle of Marathon, that "They were the first Greeks we know of to charge their enemy at a run". 

Many historians believe that this innovation was precipitated by their desire to minimize their losses from Persian archery. 

The opposing sides would collide, possibly severing many of the spears of the row in front and killing the front part of the enemy army due to the bone-breaking collision.
The spears of a phalanx had spiked butts. 

In battle, the back ranks used the spikes to finish fallen enemy soldiers.


=== Pushing ===

The "physical pushing match" theory is one where the battle would rely on the valour of the men in the front line, whilst those in the rear maintained forward pressure on the front ranks with their shields, and the whole formation would consistently press forward trying to break the enemy formation. 

This is the most widely accepted interpretation of the ancient sources thus when two phalanx formations engaged, the struggle essentially became a pushing match. 

Historians such as Victor Davis Hanson point out that it is difficult to account for exceptionally deep phalanx formations unless they were necessary to facilitate the physical pushing depicted by this theory, as those behind the first two ranks could not take part in the actual spear thrusting.No Greek art ever depicts anything like a phalanx pushing match, so this hypothesis is a product of educated speculation rather than explicit testimony from contemporary sources and is far from being academically resolved. 

The Greek term for "push" was used in the same metaphorical manner as the English word is (for example it was also used to describe the process of rhetorical arguments) and so does not necessarily describe a literal physical push, although it is possible that it did.
For instance, if Othismos were to accurately describe a physical pushing match, it would be logical to state that the deeper phalanx would always win an engagement since the physical strength of individuals would not compensate for even one additional rank on the enemy side. 

However, there are numerous examples of shallow phalanxes holding off an opponent. 

For instance, at Delium in 424 BC, the Athenian left flank, a formation eight men deep, held off a formation of Thebans 25 deep without immediate collapse. 

It is difficult with the physical pushing model to imagine eight men withstanding the pushing force of 25 opponents for a matter of seconds, let alone half the battle.
Such arguments have led to a wave of counter-criticism to physical shoving theorists. 

Adrian Goldsworthy, in his article "The Othismos, Myths and Heresies: The nature of Hoplite Battle", argues that the physical pushing match model does not fit with the average casualty figures of hoplite warfare nor the practical realities of moving large formations of men in battle. 

This debate has yet to be resolved amongst scholars.
Practical difficulties with this theory also include the fact that, in a shoving match, an eight-foot spear is too long to fight effectively or even parry attacks. 

Spears enable a formation of men to keep their enemies at a distance, parry attacks aimed at them and their comrades, and give the necessary reach to strike multiple men in the opposite formation. 

A pushing match would put enemies so close together that a quick stabbing with a knife would kill the front row almost instantly. 

The crush of men would also prevent the formation from withdrawing or retreating, which would result in much higher casualties than is recorded. 

The speed at which this would occur would also end the battle very quickly, instead of prolonging it for hours.


=== Shields ===

Each individual hoplite carried his shield on his left arm, protecting not only himself but also the soldier to the left. 

This meant that the men at the extreme right of the phalanx were only half-protected. 

In battle, opposing phalanxes would try to exploit this weakness by attempting to overlap the enemy's right flank. 

It also meant that, in battle, a phalanx would tend to drift to the right (as hoplites sought to remain behind the shield of their neighbor). 

Some groups, such as the Spartans at Nemea, tried to use this phenomenon to their advantage. 

In this case, the phalanx would sacrifice its left side, which typically consisted of allied troops, in an effort to overtake the enemy from the flank. 

It is unlikely that this strategy worked very often, as it is not mentioned frequently in ancient Greek literature.There was a leader in each row of a phalanx, and a rear rank officer, the ouragos (meaning tail-leader), who kept order in the rear. 

The hoplites had to trust their neighbors to protect them and in turn be willing to protect their neighbors; a phalanx was thus only as strong as its weakest elements. 

The effectiveness of the phalanx therefore depended on how well the hoplites could maintain this formation in combat and how well they could stand their ground, especially when engaged against another phalanx. 

For this reason, the formation was deliberately organized to group friends and family close together, thus providing a psychological incentive to support one's fellows, and a disincentive, through shame, to panic or attempt to flee. 

The more disciplined and courageous the army, the more likely it was to win – often engagements between the various city-states of Greece would be resolved by one side fleeing before the battle. 

The Greek word dynamis, the 'will to fight', expresses the drive that kept hoplites in formation.

Now of those, who dare, abiding one beside another, to advance to the close fray, and the foremost champions, fewer die, and they save the people in the rear; but in men that fear, all excellence is lost. 

No one could ever in words go through those several ills, which befall a man, if he has been actuated by cowardice. 

For 'tis grievous to wound in the rear the back of a flying man in hostile war. 

Shameful too is a corpse lying low in the dust, wounded behind in the back by the point of a spear.


=== Hoplite armament ===

Each hoplite provided his own equipment. 

The primary hoplite weapon was a spear around 2.4 metres (7.9 ft) in length called a dory. 

Although accounts of its length vary, it is usually now believed to have been seven to nine feet long (~2.1–2.7 m). 

It was held one-handed, with the other hand holding the hoplite's shield (aspis). 

The spearhead was usually a curved leaf shape, while the rear of the spear had a spike called a sauroter ('lizard-killer') which was used to stand the spear in the ground (hence the name). 

It was also used as a secondary weapon if the main shaft snapped or to kill enemies lying on the ground. 

This was a common problem, especially for soldiers who were involved in the initial clash with the enemy. 

Despite the snapping of the spear, hoplites could easily switch to the sauroter without great consequence. 

The rear ranks used the secondary end to finish off fallen opponents as the phalanx advanced over them.
Throughout the hoplite era, the standard hoplite armour went through many cyclical changes. 

An Archaic hoplite typically wore a bronze breastplate, a bronze helmet with cheekplates, as well as greaves and other armour. 

Later, in the classical period, the breastplate became less common, replaced instead with a corselet that some claim was made of linothorax (layers of linen glued together), or perhaps of leather, sometimes covered in whole or in part with overlapping metal scales. 

Eventually, even greaves became less commonly used, although degrees of heavier armour remained, as attested by Xenophon as late as 401 BC.These changes reflected the balancing of mobility with protection, especially as cavalry became more prominent in the Peloponnesian War and the need to combat light troops, which were increasingly used to negate the hoplite's role as the primary force in battle. 

Yet bronze armour remained in some form until the end of the hoplite era. 

Some archaeologists have pointed out that bronze armour does not actually provide as much protection from direct blows as more extensive corselet padding, and have suggested its continued use was a matter of status for those who could afford it. 

In the classical Greek dialect, there is no word for swordsmen; yet hoplites also carried a short sword called the xiphos, used as a secondary weapon if the dory was broken or lost. 

Samples of the xiphos recovered at excavation sites were typically around 60 cm (24 in) in length. 

These swords were double-edged and could therefore be used as a cutting and thrusting weapon. 

These short swords were often used to stab or cut at the enemy's neck during close combat.Hoplites carried a circular shield called a hoplon (often referred to as an aspis) made from wood and covered in bronze, measuring roughly 1 metre (3.3 ft) in diameter. 

It spanned from chin to knee and was very heavy (8–15 kg (18–33 lb)). 

This medium-sized shield (fairly large for the period considering the average male height) was made possible partly by its dish-like shape, which allowed it to be supported with the rim on the shoulder. 

This was quite an important feature of the shield, especially for the hoplites that remained in the latter ranks. 

While these soldiers continued to help press forward, they did not have the added burden of holding up their shield. 

But the circular shield was not without its disadvantages. 

Despite its mobility, protective curve, and double straps the circular shape created gaps in the shield wall at both its top and bottom. (Top gaps were somewhat reduced by the one or two spears jutting out of the gap. 

In order to minimize the bottom gaps, thick leather 'curtains' were used but only by an [unknown] percentage of the hoplites, possibly mostly in the first row only since there were disadvantages as well: considerable added weight on an already heavy shield and a certain additional cost.) These gaps left parts of the hoplite exposed to potentially lethal spear thrusts and were a persistent vulnerability for hoplites controlling the front lines.


=== Phalangite armament ===

The phalanx of the Ancient Macedonian kingdom and the later Hellenistic successor states was a development of the hoplite phalanx. 

The 'phalangites' were armed with a much longer spear, the sarissa, and less heavily armoured. 

The sarissa was the pike used by the ancient Macedonian army. 

Its actual length is unknown, but apparently it was twice as long as the dory. 

This makes it at least 14 feet (4.3 m), but 18 feet (5.5 m) appears more likely. (The cavalry xyston was 12.5 feet (3.8 m) by comparison.) The great length of the pike was balanced by a counterweight at the rear end, which also functioned as a butt-spike, allowing the sarissa to be planted into the ground. 

Because of its great length, weight and different balance, a sarissa was wielded two-handed. 

This meant that the aspis was no longer a practical defence. 

Instead, the phalangites strapped a smaller pelte shield (usually reserved for peltasts, light skirmishers) to their left forearm. 

Recent theories, including examination of ancient frescoes depicting full sets of weapons and armor, claim that the shields used were actually larger than the pelte but smaller than the aspis, hanging by leather strap(s) from the left shoulder or from both shoulders. 

The shield would retain handling straps in the inner curve, to be handled like a (smaller) aspis if the fight progressed to sword-wielding. 

Although in both shield size assumptions this reduced the shield wall, the extreme length of the spear kept the enemy at a greater distance, as the pikes of the first three to five ranks could all be brought to bear in front of the front row. 

This pike had to be held underhand, as the shield would have obscured the soldier's vision had it been held overhead. 

It would also be very hard to remove a sarissa from anything it stuck in (the earth, shields, and soldiers of the opposition) if it were thrust downwards, due to its length. 

The Macedonian phalanx was much less able to form a shield wall, but the lengthened spears would have compensated for this. 

Such a phalanx formation also reduced the likelihood that battles would degenerate into a pushing match.


== Deployment and combat ==

=== Phalanx composition and strength ===

The basic combat element of the Greek armies was either the stichos (meaning 'file'; usually 8–16 men strong) or the enomotia (meaning 'sworn' and made up by 2–4 stichœ, totaling up to 32 men), both led by a dimœrites who was assisted by a decadarchos and two decasterœ (sing. decasteros). 

Four to a maximum of 32 enomotiæ (depending on the era in question or the city) were forming a lochos led by a lochagos, who in this way was in command of initially 100 hoplites to a maximum of c. 500 in the late Hellenistic armies. 

Here, it has to be noted that the military manuals of Asclepiodotus and Aelian use the term lochos to denote a file in the phalanx. 

A taxis (mora for the Spartans) was the greatest standard hoplitic formation of 500 to 1500 men, led by a strategos (general). 

The entire army, a total of several taxeis or moræ was led by a generals' council. 

The commander-in-chief was usually called a polemarchos or a strategos autocrator.


=== Phalanx front and depth ===

Hoplite phalanxes usually deployed in ranks of eight men or more deep; the Macedonian phalanxes were usually 16 men deep, sometimes reported to have been arrayed 32 men deep. 

There are some notable extremes; at the battles of Leuctra and Mantinea, the Theban general Epaminondas arranged the left wing of the phalanx into a "hammerhead" of 50 ranks of elite hoplites deep (see below) and when depth was less important, phalanxes just four deep are recorded, as at the battle of Marathon.The phalanx depth could vary depending on the needs of the moment and plans of the general. 

While the phalanx was in march, an eis bathos formation (loose, meaning literally 'in depth') was adopted in order to move more freely and maintain order. 

This was also the initial battle formation as, in addition, it permitted friendly units to pass through whether assaulting or retreating. 

In this status, the phalanx had twice the normal depth and each hoplite had to occupy about 1.8–2 metres (5 ft 11 in–6 ft 7 in) in width. 

When enemy infantry was approaching, a rapid switch to the pycne (spelled also pucne) formation (dense or tight formation) was necessary. 

In that case, each man's space was halved (0.9–1 metre or 2 feet 11 inches–3 feet 3 inches in width) and the formation depth returned to normal. 

An even denser formation, the synaspismos or sunaspismos (ultra-tight or locked shields formation), was used when the phalanx was expected to experience extra pressure, intense missile volleys or frontal cavalry charges. 

In synaspismos, the rank depth was half that of a normal phalanx and the width each man occupied was as small as 0.45 metres (1.5 ft).


=== Stages of combat ===

Several stages in hoplite combat can be defined:
Ephodos: The hoplites stop singing their pæanes (battle hymns) and move towards the enemy, gradually picking up pace and momentum. 

In the instants before impact, war cries (alalagmœ, sing. alalagmos) would be made. 

Notable war cries were the Athenian (eleleleleu! eleleleleu!) and the Macedonian (alalalalai! alalalalai!) alalagmœ.
Krousis: The opposing phalanxes meet each other almost simultaneously along their front. 
Doratismos: Repeated, rapid spear thrusts in order to disrupt the enemy formation. 

The use of long spears would keep enemies apart as well as allow men in a row to assist their comrades next to them. 

The prodding could also open up a man to allow a comrade to spear him. 

Too hard prodding could get a spear stuck in a shield, which would necessitate someone in the back to lend his to the now-disarmed man.
Othismos: Literally 'pushing' after most spears have been broken, the hoplites begin to push with their spears and spear shafts against their opponents' shields. 

This could be the longest phase.Pararrhexis: 'Breaching' the opposing phalanx, the enemy formation shatters and the battle ends. 

Cavalry would be used at this point to mop up the scattered enemy.


== Tactics ==

The early history of the phalanx is largely one of combat between hoplite armies from competing Greek city-states. 

The usual result was rather identical, inflexible formations pushing against each other until one broke. 

The potential of the phalanx to achieve something more was demonstrated at Battle of Marathon (490 BC). 

Facing the much larger army of Darius I, the Athenians thinned out their phalanx and consequently lengthened their front, to avoid being outflanked. 

However, even a reduced-depth phalanx proved unstoppable to the lightly armed Persian infantry. 

After routing the Persian wings, the hoplites on the Athenian wings wheeled inwards, destroying the elite troop at the Persian centre, resulting in a crushing victory for Athens. 

Throughout the Greco-Persian Wars the hoplite phalanx was to prove superior to the Persian infantry (e.g. the battles of Thermopylae and Plataea).
Perhaps the most prominent example of the phalanx's evolution was the oblique order, made famous in the Battle of Leuctra. 

There, the Theban general Epaminondas thinned out the right flank and centre of his phalanx, and deepened his left flank to an unheard-of 50 men deep. 

In doing so, Epaminondas reversed the convention by which the right flank of the phalanx was strongest. 

This allowed the Thebans to assault in strength the elite Spartan troops on the right flank of the opposing phalanx. 

Meanwhile, the centre and right flank of the Theban line were echeloned back, from the opposing phalanx, keeping the weakened parts of the formation from being engaged. 

Once the Spartan right had been routed by the Theban left, the remainder of the Spartan line also broke. 

Thus, by localising the attacking power of the hoplites, Epaminondas was able to defeat an enemy previously thought invincible.
Philip II of Macedon spent several years in Thebes as a hostage, and paid attention to Epaminondas' innovations. 

On return to his homeland, he raised a revolutionary new infantry force, which was to change the face of the Greek world. 

Philip's phalangites were the first force of professional soldiers seen in Ancient Greece apart from Sparta. 

They were armed with longer spears (the sarissa) and were drilled more thoroughly in more evolved, complicated tactics and manoeuvres. 

More importantly, though, Philip's phalanx was part of a multi-faceted, combined force that included a variety of skirmishers and cavalry, most notably the famous Companion cavalry. 

The Macedonian phalanx now was used to pin the centre of the enemy line, while cavalry and more mobile infantry struck at the foe's flanks. 

Its supremacy over the more static armies fielded by the Greek city-states was shown at the Battle of Chaeronea, where Philip II's army crushed the allied Theban and Athenian phalanxes.


== Weaknesses ==

The hoplite phalanx was weakest when facing an enemy fielding lighter and more flexible troops without its own such supporting troops. 

An example of this would be the Battle of Lechaeum, where an Athenian contingent led by Iphicrates routed an entire Spartan mora (a unit of anywhere from 500 to 900 hoplites). 

The Athenian force had a considerable proportion of light missile troops armed with javelins and bows that wore down the Spartans with repeated attacks, causing disarray in the Spartan ranks and an eventual rout when they spotted Athenian heavy infantry reinforcements trying to flank them by boat.
The Macedonian phalanx had weaknesses similar to its hoplitic predecessor. 

Theoretically indestructible from the front, its flanks and rear were very vulnerable, and once engaged it may not easily disengage or redeploy to face a threat from those directions. 

Thus, a phalanx facing non-phalangite formations required some sort of protection on its flanks—lighter or at least more mobile infantry, cavalry, etc. 

This was shown at the Battle of Magnesia, where, once the Seleucid supporting cavalry elements were driven off, the phalanx was static and unable to go on the offensive against its Roman opponents (although they continued to resist stoutly and attempted a fighting withdrawal under a hail of Roman missiles, until the elephants posted on their flanks panicked and disrupted their formation).
The Macedonian phalanx could also lose its cohesion without proper coordination or while moving through broken terrain; doing so could create gaps between individual blocks/syntagmata, or could prevent a solid front within those sub-units as well, causing other sections of the line to bunch up. 

In this event, as in the battles of Cynoscephalae and Pydna, the phalanx became vulnerable to attacks by more flexible units—such as Roman legionary centuries, which were able to avoid the sarissae and engage in hand-to-hand combat with the phalangites.
Another important area that must be considered concerns the psychological tendencies of the hoplites. 

Because the strength of a phalanx depended on the ability of the hoplites to maintain their frontline, it was crucial that a phalanx be able to quickly and efficiently replace fallen soldiers in the front ranks. 

If a phalanx failed to do this in a structured manner, the opposing phalanx would have an opportunity to breach the line which, many times, would lead to a quick defeat. 

This then implies that the hoplites ranks closer to the front must be mentally prepared to replace their fallen comrade and adapt to his new position without disrupting the structure of the frontline.Finally, most of the phalanx-centric armies tended to lack supporting echelons behind the main line of battle. 

This meant that breaking through the line of battle or compromising one of its flanks often ensured victory.


== Classical decline and post-classical use ==

After reaching its zenith in the conquests of Alexander the Great, the phalanx began a slow decline, as Macedonian successor states declined. 

The combined arms tactics used by Alexander and his father were gradually replaced by a return to the simpler frontal charge tactics of the hoplite phalanx. 

The expense of the supporting arms and cavalry, and the widespread use of mercenaries, caused the Diadochi to rely on phalanx vs. phalanx tactics during the Wars of the Diadochi.
The decline of the Diadochi and the phalanx was linked with the rise of Rome and the Roman legions from the 3rd century BC. 

The Battle of the Caudine Forks showed the clumsiness of the Roman phalanx against the Samnites. 

The Romans had originally employed the phalanx themselves but gradually evolved more flexible tactics. 

The result was the three-line Roman legion of the middle period of the Roman Republic, the Manipular System. 

Romans used a phalanx for their third military line, the triarii. 

These were veteran reserve troops armed with the hastae or spear. 

Rome conquered most of the Macedonian successor states. 

Also the various Greek city-states and leagues. 

As these states ceased to exist, so did the armies which used the traditional phalanx. 

Subsequently, troops from these regions were equipped, trained and fought using the Roman model.
A phalanx formation called the phoulkon appeared in the late Roman army and Byzantine army. 

It had characteristics of the classical Greek and Hellenistic phalanxes, but was more flexible. 

It was used against cavalry more than infantry.
However, the phalanx did not totally disappear. 

In some battles between the Roman army and Hellenistic phalanxes, such as Pydna (168 BC), Cynoscephalae (197 BC) and Magnesia (190 BC), the phalanx performed well. 

It even drove back the Roman infantry. 

However, at Cynoscephalae and Magnesia, failure to defend the flanks of the phalanx led to defeat. 

At Pydna, the phalanx lost cohesion when pursuing retreating Roman soldiers. 

This allowed the Romans to penetrate the formation. 

Then, Roman close combat skills proved decisive. 

The historian Polybius details the effectiveness of the Roman legion against the phalanx. 

He deduces that the Romans refused to fight the phalanx where the phalanx was effective, Romans offered battle only when a legion could exploit the clumsiness and immobility of a phalanx.

Spear-armed troops continued to be important elements in many armies until reliable firearms became available. 

These did not necessarily fight as a phalanx. 

For example, compare the classical phalanx and late medieval pike formations.Military historians have suggested that the Scots under William Wallace and Robert the Bruce consciously imitated the Hellenistic phalanx to produce the Scots 'hedgehog' or schiltron. 

However, long spears might have been used by Picts and others in Scotlands' Early Middle Ages. 

Prior to 1066, long spear tactics (also found in North Wales) might have been part of irregular warfare in Britain. 

The Scots used imported French pikes and dynamic tactics at the Battle of Flodden. 

However, Flodden found the Scots pitted against effective light artillery, while advancing over bad ground. 

The combination disorganised the Scotts phalanxes and permitted effective attacks by English longbowmen, and soldiers wielding shorter, handier polearms called bills. 

Some contemporary sources might say that the bills cut off the heads of Scots pikes.
The pike was briefly reconsidered as a weapon by European armies in the late 18th and early 19th centuries. 

It could protect riflemen, whose slower rate of fire made them vulnerable. 

A collapsible pike was invented but never issued. 

The Confederate Army considered these for the American Civil War. 

Some were even manufactured but probably were never issued. 

Pikes were manufactured during World War II as "Croft's Pikes".
While obsolete in military practice, the phalanx remained in use as a metaphor of warriors moving forward as a single united block. 

This metaphor inspired several 20th-century political movements, notably the Spanish Falange and its ideology of Falangism.
The Byzantines continued and improved the use of the classical Greek phalanx alongside the Macedonian-style phalanx. 

The latter was based on a model that Alexander himself had created and had tried to give more importance to the skirmishers and cavalry, yet it never saw action until the Byzantines adopted the model that rely in a mixture of many units sometimes. 

Many writers of the age describe the spear as being a sarissa yet it was a meter short than the original sarissa and had being modified by the time, yet the term for the long spear remained alongside with its other names.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Phalanx
;;;ES;;;



FALANGE


La falange (griego antiguo: φάλαγξ; plural falanges o falanges, φάλαγγες, falanges) era una formación militar masiva rectangular, generalmente compuesta en su totalidad por infantería pesada armada con lanzas, picas, sarissas o armas de asta similares.

El término se usa particularmente para describir el uso de esta formación en la guerra de la Grecia antigua, aunque los escritores griegos antiguos también lo usaron para describir cualquier formación de infantería en masa, independientemente de su equipo.

Arrian usa el término en su Matriz contra los alanos cuando se refiere a sus legiones. 

En los textos griegos, la falange puede desplegarse para la batalla, en marcha o incluso acampada, describiendo así la masa de infantería o caballería que se desplegaría en línea durante la batalla. 

Marcharon hacia adelante como una sola entidad. 
El término en sí, como se usa hoy, no se refiere a una unidad o división militar distintiva (p. ej., la legión romana o el batallón tipo occidental contemporáneo), sino al tipo de formación de las tropas de un ejército. 

Por lo tanto, este término no indica una fuerza o composición de combate estándar, sino que incluye el número total de infantería, que se despliega en una sola formación conocida como "falange".
Históricamente, muchas tropas armadas con lanzas lucharon en lo que podría denominarse formaciones de falange. 

Este artículo se centra en el uso de la formación de falanges militares en la antigua Grecia, el mundo helenístico y otros estados antiguos fuertemente influenciados por la civilización griega.


== Historia ==

La representación más antigua conocida de una formación similar a una falange se encuentra en una estela sumeria del siglo 25 a.

Aquí las tropas parecen haber estado equipadas con lanzas, yelmos y grandes escudos que cubrían todo el cuerpo.

Se sabía que la infantería del Antiguo Egipto empleaba formaciones similares.

El primer uso del término falange proviene de "φαλαγξ" de Homero, que se usa para describir a los hoplitas que luchan en una línea de batalla organizada.

Homero usó el término para diferenciar el combate basado en formaciones de los duelos individuales que tan a menudo se encuentran en sus poemas. Los historiadores no han llegado a un consenso sobre la relación entre la formación griega y estos predecesores de los hoplitas.

Los principios del muro de escudos y el seto de lanzas eran casi universalmente conocidos entre los ejércitos de las principales civilizaciones a lo largo de la historia, por lo que las similitudes pueden estar relacionadas con la evolución convergente en lugar de la difusión.
Tradicionalmente, los historiadores datan el origen de la falange hoplita de la antigua Grecia en el siglo VIII a. C. en Esparta, pero esto está bajo revisión.

Quizás sea más probable que la formación se ideó en el siglo VII a. C. después de la introducción de los aspis por parte de la ciudad de Argos, lo que habría hecho posible la formación.

Esto se evidencia aún más en el jarrón Chigi, fechado en el 650 a. C., que identifica hoplitas armados con aspis, lanza y panoplia. Otra posible teoría sobre el nacimiento de la guerra de falange griega surge de la idea de que algunos de los aspectos básicos de la falange estaban presentes. en épocas anteriores aún no estaban completamente desarrollados debido a la falta de tecnología apropiada. 

Dos de las tácticas básicas vistas en la guerra anterior incluyen el principio de cohesión y el uso de grandes grupos de soldados. 

Esto sugeriría que la falange griega fue más bien la culminación y perfección de una idea desarrollada lentamente que se originó muchos años antes. 

A medida que el armamento y la armadura avanzaban a lo largo de los años en diferentes ciudades-estado, la falange se volvió compleja y eficaz.


== Resumen ==

La falange de hoplitas de los períodos Arcaico y Clásico en Grecia (c. 800-350 a. C.) era la formación en la que los hoplitas se alineaban en filas en orden cerrado. 

Los hoplitas unirían sus escudos y las primeras filas de soldados proyectarían sus lanzas sobre la primera fila de escudos. 

Por lo tanto, la falange presentaba un muro de escudos y una masa de puntas de lanza al enemigo, lo que dificultaba mucho los ataques frontales contra él. 

También permitió que una mayor proporción de soldados participara activamente en el combate en un momento dado (en lugar de solo aquellos en la primera fila).
Las batallas entre dos falanges generalmente tenían lugar en llanuras abiertas y planas donde era más fácil avanzar y mantenerse en formación. 

El terreno accidentado o las regiones montañosas habrían dificultado el mantenimiento de una línea estable y habrían frustrado el propósito de una falange. 

Como resultado, las batallas entre ciudades-estado griegas no tendrían lugar en cualquier lugar, ni se limitarían a puntos estratégicos a veces obvios. 

Más bien, muchas veces, los dos bandos opuestos encontrarían el terreno más adecuado para dirimir el conflicto. 

Por lo general, la batalla terminaba con una de las dos fuerzas de combate huyendo a un lugar seguro. La falange generalmente avanzaba a paso de caminata, aunque es posible que aumentara la velocidad durante los últimos metros. 

Una de las principales razones de este lento acercamiento fue mantener la formación. 

La formación se volvería inútil si la falange se perdiera cuando la unidad se acercaba al enemigo e incluso podría volverse perjudicial para la unidad que avanza, lo que resultaría en una formación más débil que sería más fácil de romper para una fuerza enemiga. 

Si los hoplitas de la falange iban a ganar velocidad hacia la última parte del avance, habría sido con el propósito de ganar impulso contra el enemigo en la colisión inicial.

Herodoto afirma de los griegos en la batalla de Maratón que "fueron los primeros griegos que conocemos que cargaron contra su enemigo a la carrera".

Muchos historiadores creen que esta innovación fue precipitada por su deseo de minimizar sus pérdidas por el tiro con arco persa.

Los bandos opuestos chocarían, posiblemente cortando muchas de las lanzas de la fila de enfrente y matando a la parte delantera del ejército enemigo debido a la colisión desgarradora.
Las lanzas de una falange tenían extremos puntiagudos.

En la batalla, las filas traseras usaban los picos para acabar con los soldados enemigos caídos.


=== Empujando ===

La teoría del "combate de empuje físico" es aquella en la que la batalla dependería del valor de los hombres en la línea del frente, mientras que los de la retaguardia mantendrían la presión hacia adelante sobre las filas delanteras con sus escudos, y toda la formación presionaría constantemente hacia adelante tratando para romper la formación enemiga. 

Esta es la interpretación más ampliamente aceptada de las fuentes antiguas, por lo tanto, cuando dos formaciones de falange se enfrentaron, la lucha se convirtió esencialmente en una pelea de empuje. 

Historiadores como Victor Davis Hanson señalan que es difícil dar cuenta de formaciones de falanges excepcionalmente profundas a menos que fueran necesarias para facilitar el empuje físico representado por esta teoría, ya que los que estaban detrás de las dos primeras filas no podían participar en el empuje real de la lanza. Ningún arte griego representa nunca nada parecido a una falange empujando un fósforo, por lo que esta hipótesis es producto de una especulación educada en lugar de un testimonio explícito de fuentes contemporáneas y está lejos de ser resuelta académicamente.

El término griego para "empujar" se usó de la misma manera metafórica que la palabra en inglés (por ejemplo, también se usó para describir el proceso de los argumentos retóricos) y, por lo tanto, no describe necesariamente un empujón físico literal, aunque es posible que lo hizo.
Por ejemplo, si Othismos tuviera que describir con precisión un combate de empujón físico, sería lógico afirmar que la falange más profunda siempre ganaría un enfrentamiento, ya que la fuerza física de los individuos no compensaría ni siquiera un rango adicional en el lado enemigo. 

Sin embargo, hay numerosos ejemplos de falanges poco profundas que mantienen a raya a un oponente. 

Por ejemplo, en Delio en 424 a. C., el flanco izquierdo ateniense, una formación de ocho hombres de profundidad, retuvo una formación de tebanos de 25 de profundidad sin un colapso inmediato. 

Con el modelo de empuje físico, es difícil imaginar a ocho hombres resistiendo la fuerza de empuje de 25 oponentes durante unos segundos, y mucho menos la mitad de la batalla.
Tales argumentos han llevado a una ola de contracríticas a los teóricos del empuje físico. 

Adrian Goldsworthy, en su artículo "The Othismos, Myths and Heresies: The nature of Hoplite Battle", argumenta que el modelo de combate de empuje físico no encaja con las cifras promedio de bajas de la guerra de hoplitas ni con las realidades prácticas de mover grandes formaciones de hombres en batalla. 

Este debate aún no se ha resuelto entre los estudiosos.
Las dificultades prácticas con esta teoría también incluyen el hecho de que, en una pelea de empujones, una lanza de dos metros y medio es demasiado larga para luchar con eficacia o incluso parar los ataques. 

Las lanzas permiten a una formación de hombres mantener a sus enemigos a distancia, parar los ataques dirigidos a ellos y a sus camaradas, y otorgar el alcance necesario para golpear a varios hombres en la formación opuesta. 

Un fósforo de empuje pondría a los enemigos tan juntos que un rápido apuñalamiento con un cuchillo mataría a la primera fila casi instantáneamente. 

La aglomeración de hombres también evitaría que la formación se retirara o retrocediera, lo que daría lugar a muchas más bajas de las registradas. 

La velocidad a la que esto ocurriría también terminaría la batalla muy rápidamente, en lugar de prolongarla durante horas.


=== Escudos ===

Cada hoplita individual llevaba su escudo en el brazo izquierdo, protegiéndose no solo a sí mismo sino también al soldado de la izquierda. 

Esto significaba que los hombres en el extremo derecho de la falange estaban solo medio protegidos. 

En la batalla, las falanges opuestas intentarían explotar esta debilidad intentando superponerse al flanco derecho del enemigo. 

También significaba que, en la batalla, una falange tendería a desviarse hacia la derecha (como los hoplitas buscaban permanecer detrás del escudo de su vecino). 

Algunos grupos, como los espartanos en Nemea, intentaron utilizar este fenómeno en su beneficio. 

En este caso, la falange sacrificaría su lado izquierdo, que normalmente consistía en tropas aliadas, en un esfuerzo por alcanzar al enemigo desde el flanco. 

Es poco probable que esta estrategia funcionara muy a menudo, ya que no se menciona con frecuencia en la literatura griega antigua. Había un líder en cada fila de una falange, y un oficial de la retaguardia, el ouragos (que significa líder de cola), que mantenía el orden. en la parte trasera. 

Los hoplitas tenían que confiar en sus vecinos para que los protegieran y, a su vez, estar dispuestos a proteger a sus vecinos; por lo tanto, una falange era tan fuerte como sus elementos más débiles.

Por lo tanto, la efectividad de la falange dependía de qué tan bien los hoplitas pudieran mantener esta formación en combate y qué tan bien pudieran mantenerse firmes, especialmente cuando se enfrentaban a otra falange. 

Por esta razón, la formación se organizó deliberadamente para agrupar a amigos y familiares, proporcionando así un incentivo psicológico para apoyar a los compañeros y un desincentivo, por vergüenza, para entrar en pánico o intentar huir.

Cuanto más disciplinado y valiente era el ejército, más probable era que ganara; a menudo, los enfrentamientos entre las distintas ciudades-estado de Grecia se resolvían con la huida de un bando antes de la batalla.

La palabra griega dynamis, la 'voluntad de luchar', expresa el impulso que mantenía a los hoplitas en formación.

Ahora bien, de aquellos que se atreven, permaneciendo uno al lado del otro, a avanzar a la refriega cerrada, y los primeros campeones, mueren menos, y salvan a la gente en la retaguardia; pero en los hombres que temen, se pierde toda excelencia.

Nadie podría jamás pasar con palabras por los diversos males que acontecen a un hombre, si ha sido movido por la cobardía.

Porque es penoso herir en la espalda la espalda de un hombre volador en una guerra hostil.

Vergonzoso también es un cadáver que yace bajo en el polvo, herido en la espalda por la punta de una lanza.


=== Armamento Hoplita ===

Cada hoplita proporcionó su propio equipo.

El arma principal de los hoplitas era una lanza de unos 2,4 metros (7,9 pies) de largo llamada dory.

Aunque los relatos de su longitud varían, ahora se cree que tenía entre siete y nueve pies de largo (~ 2,1 a 2,7 m).

Se sostenía con una mano, con la otra mano sosteniendo el escudo del hoplita (aspis).

La punta de la lanza generalmente tenía forma de hoja curva, mientras que la parte trasera de la lanza tenía una punta llamada sauroter ('mata-lagartos') que se usaba para colocar la lanza en el suelo (de ahí el nombre).

También se usaba como arma secundaria si el eje principal se rompía o para matar enemigos que yacían en el suelo.

Este fue un problema común, especialmente para los soldados que estuvieron involucrados en el choque inicial con el enemigo.

A pesar del chasquido de la lanza, los hoplitas podían cambiar fácilmente al sauroter sin grandes consecuencias.

Las filas traseras usaron el extremo secundario para acabar con los oponentes caídos mientras la falange avanzaba sobre ellos.
A lo largo de la era hoplita, la armadura hoplita estándar pasó por muchos cambios cíclicos.

Un hoplita arcaico normalmente usaba una coraza de bronce, un casco de bronce con placas para las mejillas, así como grebas y otras armaduras.

Más tarde, en el período clásico, la coraza se volvió menos común, reemplazada en cambio por un corselete que, según algunos, estaba hecho de linotórax (capas de lino pegadas), o quizás de cuero, a veces cubierto en su totalidad o en parte con escamas de metal superpuestas.

Eventualmente, incluso las grebas se volvieron menos utilizadas, aunque se mantuvieron grados de armadura más pesada, como lo atestigua Jenofonte en el año 401 a. C. tropas ligeras de combate, que se usaban cada vez más para negar el papel del hoplita como fuerza principal en la batalla. 

Sin embargo, la armadura de bronce se mantuvo de alguna forma hasta el final de la era hoplita. 

Algunos arqueólogos han señalado que la armadura de bronce en realidad no brinda tanta protección contra los golpes directos como un corselet acolchado más extenso, y han sugerido que su uso continuado era una cuestión de estatus para aquellos que podían permitírselo. 

En el dialecto griego clásico, no existe una palabra para espadachines; sin embargo, los hoplitas también portaban una espada corta llamada xiphos, que se usaba como arma secundaria si el bote se rompía o se perdía.

Las muestras de xiphos recuperadas en los sitios de excavación tenían típicamente alrededor de 60 cm (24 pulgadas) de largo.

Estas espadas tenían doble filo y, por lo tanto, podían usarse como arma cortante y de estocada.

Estas espadas cortas a menudo se usaban para apuñalar o cortar el cuello del enemigo durante el combate cuerpo a cuerpo. Los hoplitas llevaban un escudo circular llamado hoplon (a menudo denominado aspis) hecho de madera y cubierto de bronce, que medía aproximadamente 1 metro (3,3 pies) en diámetro.

Se extendía desde la barbilla hasta la rodilla y era muy pesado (8 a 15 kg (18 a 33 libras)).

Este escudo de tamaño medio (bastante grande para la época teniendo en cuenta la estatura masculina media) fue posible en parte por su forma de plato, que permitía sostenerlo con el borde sobre el hombro. 

Esta fue una característica bastante importante del escudo, especialmente para los hoplitas que permanecieron en las últimas filas. 

Si bien estos soldados continuaron ayudando a avanzar, no tenían la carga adicional de sostener su escudo. 

Pero el escudo circular no estaba exento de desventajas. 

A pesar de su movilidad, curva protectora y correas dobles, la forma circular creaba espacios en la pared del escudo tanto en la parte superior como en la inferior. (Los espacios superiores se redujeron un poco por una o dos lanzas que sobresalían del espacio.

Para minimizar los espacios inferiores, se usaron gruesas 'cortinas' de cuero, pero solo un porcentaje [desconocido] de los hoplitas, posiblemente principalmente en la primera fila solo porque también había desventajas: un peso adicional considerable en un escudo ya pesado y un cierto costo adicional.) Estas brechas dejaron partes del hoplita expuestas a estocadas de lanza potencialmente letales y fueron una vulnerabilidad persistente para los hoplitas que controlaban las líneas del frente.


=== Armamento falangita ===

La falange del antiguo reino macedonio y los estados sucesores helenísticos posteriores fue un desarrollo de la falange hoplita.

Los 'falangitas' iban armados con una lanza mucho más larga, la sarissa, y menos blindados.

La sarissa era la pica utilizada por el antiguo ejército macedonio.

Se desconoce su longitud real, pero aparentemente era el doble que el bote.

Esto lo convierte en al menos 4,3 m (14 pies), pero parece más probable que sea 5,5 m (18 pies). (En comparación, el xyston de caballería medía 12,5 pies (3,8 m).) La gran longitud de la pica se equilibraba con un contrapeso en la parte trasera, que también funcionaba como una punta trasera, lo que permitía plantar la sarissa en el suelo.

Debido a su gran longitud, peso y diferente equilibrio, una sarisa se empuñaba con las dos manos.

Esto significaba que el aspis ya no era una defensa práctica.

En cambio, los falangitas ataron un escudo pelte más pequeño (generalmente reservado para peltasts, escaramuzadores ligeros) en su antebrazo izquierdo.

Teorías recientes, incluido el examen de frescos antiguos que representan conjuntos completos de armas y armaduras, afirman que los escudos utilizados eran en realidad más grandes que la pelte pero más pequeños que los aspis, y colgaban de correas de cuero del hombro izquierdo o de ambos hombros.

El escudo retendría las correas de manejo en la curva interior, para ser manejado como un aspis (más pequeño) si la pelea progresara hasta el manejo de la espada.

Aunque en ambos supuestos del tamaño del escudo esto redujo la pared del escudo, la longitud extrema de la lanza mantuvo al enemigo a una distancia mayor, ya que las picas de las primeras tres a cinco filas podían usarse frente a la primera fila.

Esta pica tuvo que sostenerse con la mano oculta, ya que el escudo habría oscurecido la visión del soldado si se hubiera sostenido por encima de la cabeza.

También sería muy difícil quitar una sarissa de cualquier cosa en la que se clavara (la tierra, los escudos y los soldados de la oposición) si se empujara hacia abajo, debido a su longitud.

La falange macedonia era mucho menos capaz de formar un muro de escudos, pero las lanzas alargadas habrían compensado esto.

Tal formación de falange también redujo la probabilidad de que las batallas degeneraran en un enfrentamiento de empuje.


== Despliegue y combate ==

=== Composición y fuerza de la falange ===

El elemento básico de combate de los ejércitos griegos era el stichos (que significa 'fila'; normalmente de 8 a 16 hombres fuertes) o el enomotia (que significa 'jurado' y compuesto por 2 a 4 stichœ, con un total de 32 hombres), ambos dirigido por un dimœrites que fue asistido por un decadarchos y dos decasteroe (sing. decasteros).

De cuatro a un máximo de 32 enomotiae (dependiendo de la época de que se trate o de la ciudad) formaban un lochos dirigido por un lochagos, quien de esta forma estaba al mando de inicialmente 100 hoplitas hasta un máximo de c. 500 en los últimos ejércitos helenísticos.

Aquí, debe notarse que los manuales militares de Asclepiodotus y Aelian usan el término lochos para denotar una fila en la falange.

Un taxi (mora para los espartanos) era la formación hoplítica estándar más grande de 500 a 1500 hombres, dirigida por un strategos (general).

Todo el ejército, un total de varios taxeis o moræ, estaba dirigido por un consejo de generales.

El comandante en jefe generalmente se llamaba polemarchos o strategos autocrator.


=== Falange frontal y profundidad ===

Las falanges de hoplitas generalmente se despliegan en filas de ocho hombres o más de profundidad; las falanges macedonias tenían generalmente 16 hombres de profundidad, a veces se informa que estaban dispuestas con 32 hombres de profundidad.

Hay algunos extremos notables; en las batallas de Leuctra y Mantinea, el general tebano Epaminondas dispuso el ala izquierda de la falange en un "cabeza de martillo" de 50 filas de hoplitas de élite de profundidad (ver más abajo) y cuando la profundidad era menos importante, se registran falanges de solo cuatro de profundidad, como en la batalla de Maratón. La profundidad de la falange podía variar según las necesidades del momento y los planes del general.

Mientras la falange estaba en marcha, se adoptó una formación eis bathos (suelta, que significa literalmente 'en profundidad') para moverse más libremente y mantener el orden. 

Esta fue también la formación de batalla inicial ya que, además, permitió el paso de unidades amigas ya sea que asaltaran o se retiraran. 

En este estado, la falange tenía el doble de la profundidad normal y cada hoplita tenía que ocupar alrededor de 1,8 a 2 metros (5 pies 11 pulgadas a 6 pies 7 pulgadas) de ancho. 

Cuando la infantería enemiga se acercaba, era necesario un cambio rápido a la formación pycne (deletreado también pucne) (formación densa o apretada). 

En ese caso, el espacio de cada hombre se redujo a la mitad (0,9 a 1 metro o 2 pies 11 pulgadas a 3 pies 3 pulgadas de ancho) y la profundidad de la formación volvió a la normalidad. 

Se utilizó una formación aún más densa, los synaspismos o sunaspismos (formación de escudos bloqueados o ultra apretados), cuando se esperaba que la falange experimentara una presión adicional, descargas intensas de misiles o cargas frontales de caballería. 

En synaspismos, la profundidad del rango era la mitad de la de una falange normal y el ancho que ocupaba cada hombre era tan pequeño como 0,45 metros (1,5 pies).


=== Etapas del combate ===

Se pueden definir varias etapas en el combate hoplita:
Ephodos: Los hoplitas dejan de cantar sus pæanes (himnos de batalla) y avanzan hacia el enemigo, tomando poco a poco el ritmo y el impulso. 

En los instantes previos al impacto, se emitirían gritos de guerra (alalagmœ, sing. alalagmos). 

Los gritos de guerra notables fueron el ateniense (eleleleleu! eleleleleu!) y el macedonio (alalalalai! alalalalai!) alalagmœ.
Krousis: Las falanges opuestas se encuentran casi simultáneamente a lo largo de su frente. 
Doratismos: Estocadas de lanza rápidas y repetidas para desbaratar la formación enemiga. 

El uso de lanzas largas mantendría separados a los enemigos y permitiría a los hombres en fila ayudar a sus camaradas a su lado. 

La punzada también podría abrir a un hombre para permitir que un camarada lo lance.

Un empujón demasiado fuerte podría hacer que una lanza se atascara en un escudo, lo que requeriría que alguien en la parte de atrás le prestara la suya al hombre ahora desarmado.
Othismos: Literalmente 'empujar' después de que la mayoría de las lanzas se han roto, los hoplitas comienzan a empujar con sus lanzas y astas de lanza contra los escudos de sus oponentes.

Esta podría ser la fase más larga. Pararrexis: 'Rompiendo' la falange opuesta, la formación enemiga se rompe y la batalla termina.

La caballería se usaría en este punto para acabar con el enemigo disperso.


== Tácticas ==

La historia temprana de la falange es en gran parte una de combate entre ejércitos hoplitas de ciudades-estado griegas competidoras.

El resultado habitual eran formaciones bastante idénticas e inflexibles que se empujaban unas contra otras hasta que una se rompía.

El potencial de la falange para lograr algo más se demostró en la Batalla de Maratón (490 a. C.).

Frente al ejército mucho más grande de Darío I, los atenienses redujeron su falange y, en consecuencia, alargaron su frente para evitar ser flanqueados.

Sin embargo, incluso una falange de profundidad reducida resultó imparable para la infantería persa ligeramente armada.

Después de derrotar a las alas persas, los hoplitas de las alas atenienses giraron hacia adentro, destruyendo la tropa de élite en el centro persa, lo que resultó en una aplastante victoria para Atenas.

A lo largo de las guerras greco-persas, la falange hoplita demostraría ser superior a la infantería persa (p. ej., las batallas de las Termópilas y Platea).
Quizás el ejemplo más destacado de la evolución de la falange fue el orden oblicuo, que se hizo famoso en la Batalla de Leuctra.

Allí, el general tebano Epaminondas adelgazó el flanco derecho y el centro de su falange, y profundizó su flanco izquierdo a una profundidad sin precedentes de 50 hombres. 

Al hacerlo, Epaminondas invirtió la convención por la cual el flanco derecho de la falange era más fuerte. 

Esto permitió a los tebanos atacar con fuerza a las tropas espartanas de élite en el flanco derecho de la falange opuesta. 

Mientras tanto, el centro y el flanco derecho de la línea tebana fueron escalonados hacia atrás, desde la falange opuesta, evitando que las partes debilitadas de la formación se enfrentaran. 

Una vez que la derecha espartana fue derrotada por la izquierda tebana, el resto de la línea espartana también se rompió. 

Así, al localizar el poder de ataque de los hoplitas, Epaminondas pudo derrotar a un enemigo que antes se creía invencible.
Felipe II de Macedonia pasó varios años en Tebas como rehén y prestó atención a las innovaciones de Epaminondas. 

Al regresar a su tierra natal, formó una nueva fuerza de infantería revolucionaria, que iba a cambiar la faz del mundo griego. 

Las falangitas de Filipo fueron la primera fuerza de soldados profesionales vista en la Antigua Grecia además de Esparta. 

Estaban armados con lanzas más largas (la sarissa) y fueron entrenados más a fondo en tácticas y maniobras más evolucionadas y complicadas. 

Sin embargo, lo que es más importante, la falange de Philip era parte de una fuerza combinada multifacética que incluía una variedad de escaramuzadores y caballería, sobre todo la famosa caballería de los Compañeros. 

La falange macedonia ahora se utilizó para fijar el centro de la línea enemiga, mientras que la caballería y la infantería más móvil atacaban los flancos del enemigo. 

Su supremacía sobre los ejércitos más estáticos desplegados por las ciudades-estado griegas se demostró en la batalla de Queronea, donde el ejército de Felipe II aplastó a las falanges aliadas de Tebas y Atenas.


== Debilidades ==

La falange hoplita era más débil cuando se enfrentaba a un enemigo que desplegaba tropas más ligeras y flexibles sin sus propias tropas de apoyo. 

Un ejemplo de esto sería la Batalla de Lechaeum, donde un contingente ateniense dirigido por Ifícrates derrotó a toda una mora espartana (una unidad de entre 500 y 900 hoplitas). 

La fuerza ateniense tenía una proporción considerable de tropas de misiles ligeros armadas con jabalinas y arcos que desgastaron a los espartanos con repetidos ataques, causando desorden en las filas espartanas y una eventual derrota cuando vieron refuerzos de infantería pesada ateniense tratando de flanquearlos por barco.
La falange macedonia tenía debilidades similares a las de su predecesor hoplítico. 

Teóricamente indestructible desde el frente, sus flancos y su retaguardia eran muy vulnerables, y una vez que se enfrentaba, no podía retirarse o desplegarse fácilmente para enfrentar una amenaza desde esas direcciones. 

Por lo tanto, una falange que se enfrentaba a formaciones no falangitas requería algún tipo de protección en sus flancos: infantería, caballería, etc., más ligera o al menos más móvil. 

Esto se demostró en la Batalla de Magnesia, donde, una vez que los elementos de la caballería de apoyo seléucida fueron expulsados, la falange quedó estática e incapaz de pasar a la ofensiva contra sus oponentes romanos (aunque continuaron resistiendo enérgicamente e intentaron retirarse combatiendo bajo un lluvia de proyectiles romanos, hasta que los elefantes apostados en sus flancos entraron en pánico e interrumpieron su formación).
La falange macedonia también podría perder su cohesión sin la coordinación adecuada o mientras se mueve por terreno accidentado; hacerlo podría crear brechas entre bloques/sintagmas individuales, o también podría evitar un frente sólido dentro de esas subunidades, causando que otras secciones de la línea se amontonen.

En este evento, como en las batallas de Cynoscephalae y Pydna, la falange se volvió vulnerable a los ataques de unidades más flexibles, como los siglos legionarios romanos, que pudieron evitar las sarissae y entablar combate cuerpo a cuerpo con los falangitas.
Otra área importante que debe ser considerada se refiere a las tendencias psicológicas de los hoplitas.

Debido a que la fuerza de una falange dependía de la capacidad de los hoplitas para mantener su línea de frente, era crucial que una falange pudiera reemplazar rápida y eficientemente a los soldados caídos en las primeras filas.

Si una falange no lograba hacer esto de manera estructurada, la falange opuesta tendría la oportunidad de romper la línea que, muchas veces, conduciría a una rápida derrota.

Esto implica entonces que las filas de hoplitas más cercanas al frente deben estar mentalmente preparadas para reemplazar a su camarada caído y adaptarse a su nueva posición sin alterar la estructura de la línea del frente. Finalmente, la mayoría de los ejércitos centrados en la falange tendían a carecer de escalones de apoyo detrás del línea principal de batalla.

Esto significaba que romper la línea de batalla o comprometer uno de sus flancos a menudo aseguraba la victoria.


== Declive clásico y uso posclásico ==

Después de alcanzar su cenit en las conquistas de Alejandro Magno, la falange comenzó un lento declive, a medida que decaían los estados sucesores de Macedonia. 

Las tácticas de armas combinadas utilizadas por Alejandro y su padre fueron reemplazadas gradualmente por un retorno a las tácticas de carga frontal más simples de la falange hoplita. 

El gasto de las armas de apoyo y la caballería, y el uso generalizado de mercenarios, hizo que los Diadochi confiaran en las tácticas de falange contra falange durante las Guerras de los Diadochi.
El declive de los Diadochi y la falange estuvo relacionado con el ascenso de Roma y las legiones romanas a partir del siglo III a. 

La Batalla de las Horcas Caudinas mostró la torpeza de la falange romana contra los samnitas. 

Los romanos originalmente habían empleado la falange ellos mismos, pero gradualmente desarrollaron tácticas más flexibles. 

El resultado fue la legión romana de tres líneas del período medio de la República romana, el Sistema Manipular. 

Los romanos usaron una falange para su tercera línea militar, los triarii. 

Estas eran tropas de reserva veteranas armadas con hastae o lanza. 

Roma conquistó la mayoría de los estados sucesores de Macedonia. 

También las diversas ciudades-estado y ligas griegas. 

A medida que estos estados dejaron de existir, también lo hicieron los ejércitos que usaban la falange tradicional. 

Posteriormente, las tropas de estas regiones fueron equipadas, entrenadas y combatidas siguiendo el modelo romano.
Una formación de falange llamada phoulkon apareció en el ejército romano tardío y el ejército bizantino. 

Tenía características de las falanges griegas y helenísticas clásicas, pero era más flexible. 

Se utilizó más contra la caballería que contra la infantería.
Sin embargo, la falange no desapareció por completo. 

En algunas batallas entre el ejército romano y las falanges helenísticas, como Pydna (168 a. C.), Cynoscephalae (197 a. C.) y Magnesia (190 a. C.), la falange se desempeñó bien. 

Incluso hizo retroceder a la infantería romana. 

Sin embargo, en Cynoscephalae y Magnesia, la falta de defensa de los flancos de la falange condujo a la derrota. 

En Pydna, la falange perdió cohesión cuando perseguía a los soldados romanos en retirada. 

Esto permitió a los romanos penetrar en la formación. 

Entonces, las habilidades de combate cuerpo a cuerpo de los romanos resultaron decisivas. 

El historiador Polibio detalla la eficacia de la legión romana contra la falange. 

Deduce que los romanos se negaron a luchar contra la falange donde la falange era efectiva, los romanos ofrecieron batalla solo cuando una legión podía explotar la torpeza y la inmovilidad de una falange.

Las tropas armadas con lanzas continuaron siendo elementos importantes en muchos ejércitos hasta que se dispuso de armas de fuego confiables.

Estos no lucharon necesariamente como una falange.

Por ejemplo, compare la falange clásica y las formaciones de picas medievales tardías. Los historiadores militares han sugerido que los escoceses bajo William Wallace y Robert the Bruce imitaron conscientemente a la falange helenística para producir el "erizo" o schiltron escocés.

Sin embargo, los pictos y otros podrían haber utilizado lanzas largas en la Alta Edad Media de Escocia.

Antes de 1066, las tácticas de lanza larga (que también se encuentran en el norte de Gales) podrían haber sido parte de la guerra irregular en Gran Bretaña.

Los escoceses utilizaron picas francesas importadas y tácticas dinámicas en la Batalla de Flodden.

Sin embargo, Flodden encontró a los escoceses enfrentados a artillería ligera efectiva, mientras avanzaban sobre terreno en mal estado.

La combinación desorganizó las falanges de Scott y permitió ataques efectivos de arqueros ingleses y soldados que empuñaban armas de asta más cortas y prácticas llamadas billetes.

Algunas fuentes contemporáneas podrían decir que los billetes cortaron las cabezas de los lucios escoceses.
La pica fue reconsiderada brevemente como arma por los ejércitos europeos a finales del siglo XVIII y principios del XIX.

Podía proteger a los fusileros, cuya velocidad de disparo más lenta los hacía vulnerables.

Se inventó una pica plegable, pero nunca se emitió.

El Ejército Confederado consideró estos para la Guerra Civil Estadounidense.

Algunos incluso se fabricaron, pero probablemente nunca se emitieron.

Las picas se fabricaron durante la Segunda Guerra Mundial como "Picas de Croft".
Aunque obsoleta en la práctica militar, la falange permaneció en uso como metáfora de los guerreros que avanzan como un solo bloque unido.

Esta metáfora inspiró varios movimientos políticos del siglo XX, en particular la Falange Española y su ideología del falangismo.
Los bizantinos continuaron y mejoraron el uso de la falange griega clásica junto con la falange de estilo macedonio. 

Este último se basó en un modelo que el propio Alejandro había creado y había tratado de dar más importancia a los escaramuzadores y la caballería, pero nunca entró en acción hasta que los bizantinos adoptaron el modelo que a veces se basa en una mezcla de muchas unidades. 

Muchos escritores de la época describen la lanza como una sarissa, pero era un metro más corta que la sarissa original y había sido modificada por el tiempo, sin embargo, el término para la lanza larga permaneció junto con sus otros nombres.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Falange

;;;FR;;;



PHALANGE


La phalange ( grec ancien : φάλαγξ ; pluriel phalanges ou phalanges , φάλαγγες , phalanges ) était une formation militaire de masse rectangulaire, généralement composée entièrement d'infanterie lourde armée de lances, de piques, de sarisses ou d'armes polaires similaires. 

Le terme est particulièrement utilisé pour décrire l'utilisation de cette formation dans la guerre de la Grèce antique, bien que les anciens écrivains grecs l'aient utilisé pour décrire également toute formation d'infanterie massive, quel que soit son équipement. 

Arrian utilise le terme dans son Array contre les Alains lorsqu'il se réfère à ses légions. 

Dans les textes grecs, la phalange peut être déployée au combat, en marche ou même campée, décrivant ainsi la masse d'infanterie ou de cavalerie qui se déploierait en ligne pendant la bataille.

Ils ont marché en avant comme une seule entité.
Le terme lui-même, tel qu'il est utilisé aujourd'hui, ne fait pas référence à une unité ou division militaire distincte (par exemple, la légion romaine ou le bataillon contemporain de type occidental), mais au type de formation des troupes d'une armée.

Par conséquent, ce terme n'indique pas une force ou une composition de combat standard, mais inclut le nombre total d'infanterie, qui est déployée dans une seule formation connue sous le nom de « phalange ».
De nombreuses troupes armées de lances ont combattu historiquement dans ce que l'on pourrait appeler des formations de type phalange.

Cet article se concentre sur l'utilisation de la formation de la phalange militaire dans la Grèce antique, le monde hellénistique et d'autres États anciens fortement influencés par la civilisation grecque.


== Historique ==

La première représentation connue d'une formation en forme de phalange se trouve dans une stèle sumérienne du 25ème siècle avant JC.

Ici, les troupes semblent avoir été équipées de lances, de casques et de grands boucliers couvrant tout le corps.

L'infanterie égyptienne antique était connue pour avoir employé des formations similaires.

Le premier usage du terme phalange vient du "φαλαγξ" d'Homère, utilisé pour décrire les hoplites combattant dans une ligne de bataille organisée.

Homère a utilisé le terme pour différencier le combat basé sur la formation des duels individuels si souvent trouvés dans ses poèmes. Les historiens ne sont pas parvenus à un consensus sur la relation entre la formation grecque et ces prédécesseurs des hoplites.

Les principes du mur de protection et de la haie de lance étaient presque universellement connus parmi les armées des principales civilisations à travers l'histoire, et donc les similitudes peuvent être liées à une évolution convergente au lieu de la diffusion.
Traditionnellement, les historiens datent l'origine de la phalange hoplite de la Grèce antique au 8ème siècle avant JC à Sparte, mais cela est en cours de révision.

Il est peut-être plus probable que la formation ait été conçue au 7ème siècle avant JC après l'introduction des aspis par la ville d'Argos, ce qui aurait rendu la formation possible.

Ceci est encore attesté par le vase Chigi, daté de 650 av. J.-C., identifiant des hoplites armés d'aspis, de lance et de panoplie. dans les temps anciens n'étaient pas encore pleinement développés en raison du manque de technologie appropriée. 

Deux des tactiques de base observées dans les guerres antérieures incluent le principe de cohésion et l'utilisation de grands groupes de soldats. 

Cela suggérerait que la phalange grecque était plutôt l'aboutissement et la perfection d'une idée lentement développée qui est née de nombreuses années plus tôt. 

Au fur et à mesure que les armes et les armures progressaient au fil des ans dans différentes cités-états, la phalange est devenue complexe et efficace.


== Aperçu ==

La phalange hoplite des périodes archaïque et classique en Grèce (vers 800–350 avant JC) était la formation dans laquelle les hoplites s'alignaient en rangs serrés.

Les hoplites verrouillent leurs boucliers ensemble et les premiers rangs de soldats projettent leurs lances sur le premier rang de boucliers.

La phalange présentait donc un mur de boucliers et une masse de pointes de lance à l'ennemi, rendant les assauts frontaux contre elle très difficiles.

Cela a également permis à une plus grande proportion de soldats d'être activement engagés dans le combat à un moment donné (plutôt que seulement ceux du premier rang).
Les batailles entre deux phalanges se déroulaient généralement dans des plaines ouvertes et plates où il était plus facile d'avancer et de rester en formation.

Un terrain accidenté ou des régions vallonnées auraient rendu difficile le maintien d'une ligne stable et auraient contrecarré l'objectif d'une phalange.

En conséquence, les batailles entre cités-États grecques ne se dérouleraient pas n'importe où, ni ne se limiteraient à des points stratégiques parfois évidents.

Au contraire, bien souvent, les deux parties opposées trouveraient le terrain le plus approprié où le conflit pourrait être réglé.

En règle générale, la bataille se terminait par la fuite de l'une des deux forces combattantes vers la sécurité. La phalange avançait généralement au pas, bien qu'il soit possible qu'elle ait pris de la vitesse au cours des derniers mètres.

L'une des principales raisons de cette approche lente était de maintenir la formation.

La formation serait rendue inutile si la phalange était perdue à mesure que l'unité s'approchait de l'ennemi et pourrait même devenir préjudiciable à l'unité qui avançait, entraînant une formation plus faible qu'il était plus facile pour une force ennemie de percer.

Si les hoplites de la phalange devaient prendre de la vitesse vers la dernière partie de l'avance, cela aurait été dans le but de prendre de l'élan contre l'ennemi lors de la collision initiale.

Hérodote déclare à propos des Grecs à la bataille de Marathon qu '"ils ont été les premiers Grecs que nous connaissons à charger leur ennemi en courant".

De nombreux historiens pensent que cette innovation a été précipitée par leur désir de minimiser leurs pertes du tir à l'arc persan.

Les côtés opposés entreraient en collision, coupant peut-être de nombreuses lances de la rangée devant et tuant la partie avant de l'armée ennemie en raison de la collision brise-os.
Les lances d'une phalange avaient des crosses pointues.

Au combat, les rangs arrière utilisaient les pointes pour achever les soldats ennemis tombés.


=== Pousser ===

La théorie du "match de poussée physique" est celle où la bataille reposerait sur la bravoure des hommes en première ligne, tandis que ceux à l'arrière maintiendraient une pression vers l'avant sur les premiers rangs avec leurs boucliers, et toute la formation avancerait constamment en essayant briser la formation ennemie. 

C'est l'interprétation la plus largement acceptée des sources anciennes. Ainsi, lorsque deux formations de phalanges se sont engagées, la lutte est devenue essentiellement une allumette. 

Des historiens tels que Victor Davis Hanson soulignent qu'il est difficile de tenir compte des formations de phalanges exceptionnellement profondes à moins qu'elles ne soient nécessaires pour faciliter la poussée physique décrite par cette théorie, car ceux qui se trouvent derrière les deux premiers rangs ne pouvaient pas participer à la poussée de lance réelle. Aucun art grec ne représente jamais quoi que ce soit comme une allumette de poussée de phalange, donc cette hypothèse est le produit d'une spéculation éclairée plutôt que d'un témoignage explicite de sources contemporaines et est loin d'être résolue sur le plan académique.

Le terme grec pour "pousser" a été utilisé de la même manière métaphorique que le mot anglais (par exemple, il a également été utilisé pour décrire le processus d'arguments rhétoriques) et ne décrit donc pas nécessairement une poussée physique littérale, bien qu'il soit possible que ça faisait.
Par exemple, si Othismos devait décrire avec précision un match de poussée physique, il serait logique d'affirmer que la phalange la plus profonde gagnerait toujours un engagement puisque la force physique des individus ne compenserait même pas un rang supplémentaire du côté ennemi. 

Cependant, il existe de nombreux exemples de phalanges peu profondes retenant un adversaire. 

Par exemple, à Délium en 424 avant JC, le flanc gauche athénien, une formation de huit hommes de profondeur, a résisté à une formation de Thébains de 25 profondeurs sans effondrement immédiat. 

Il est difficile avec le modèle de poussée physique d'imaginer huit hommes résister à la force de poussée de 25 adversaires pendant quelques secondes, sans parler de la moitié de la bataille.
De tels arguments ont conduit à une vague de contre-critiques envers les théoriciens de la poussée physique. 

Adrian Goldsworthy, dans son article "The Othismos, Myths and Heresies: The nature of Hoplite Battle", soutient que le modèle de match de poussée physique ne correspond pas aux chiffres moyens des pertes de la guerre des hoplites ni aux réalités pratiques du déplacement de grandes formations d'hommes dans bataille. 

Ce débat n'a pas encore été résolu parmi les universitaires.
Les difficultés pratiques avec cette théorie incluent également le fait que, dans un match de bousculade, une lance de huit pieds est trop longue pour combattre efficacement ou même parer les attaques. 

Les lances permettent à une formation d'hommes de garder leurs ennemis à distance, de parer les attaques visant eux et leurs camarades, et donnent la portée nécessaire pour frapper plusieurs hommes dans la formation opposée. 

Un match de poussée rapprocherait les ennemis si près qu'un coup de couteau rapide tuerait la première rangée presque instantanément. 

L'écrasement des hommes empêcherait également la formation de se retirer ou de battre en retraite, ce qui entraînerait des pertes beaucoup plus élevées que celles enregistrées.

La vitesse à laquelle cela se produirait mettrait également fin à la bataille très rapidement, au lieu de la prolonger pendant des heures.


=== Boucliers ===

Chaque hoplite individuel portait son bouclier sur son bras gauche, protégeant non seulement lui-même mais aussi le soldat à gauche.

Cela signifiait que les hommes à l'extrême droite de la phalange n'étaient qu'à moitié protégés.

Au combat, les phalanges adverses essaieraient d'exploiter cette faiblesse en tentant de chevaucher le flanc droit de l'ennemi.

Cela signifiait également qu'au combat, une phalange aurait tendance à dériver vers la droite (car les hoplites cherchaient à rester derrière le bouclier de leur voisin).

Certains groupes, comme les Spartiates de Némée, ont tenté d'utiliser ce phénomène à leur avantage.

Dans ce cas, la phalange sacrifierait son côté gauche, qui se composait généralement de troupes alliées, dans un effort pour dépasser l'ennemi par le flanc. 

Il est peu probable que cette stratégie ait fonctionné très souvent, car elle n'est pas mentionnée fréquemment dans la littérature grecque antique. à l'arrière. 

Les hoplites devaient faire confiance à leurs voisins pour les protéger et à leur tour être disposés à protéger leurs voisins ; une phalange n'était donc aussi forte que ses éléments les plus faibles.

L'efficacité de la phalange dépendait donc de la capacité des hoplites à maintenir cette formation au combat et à leur capacité à tenir bon, en particulier lorsqu'ils étaient engagés contre une autre phalange. 

Pour cette raison, la formation a été délibérément organisée pour regrouper les amis et la famille, fournissant ainsi une incitation psychologique à soutenir ses semblables et une dissuasion, par la honte, à paniquer ou à tenter de fuir.

Plus l'armée était disciplinée et courageuse, plus elle avait de chances de gagner - souvent les combats entre les différentes cités-États de Grèce étaient résolus par un camp fuyant avant la bataille.

Le mot grec dynamis, la « volonté de combattre », exprime la volonté qui maintenait les hoplites en formation.

Maintenant, parmi ceux qui osent, demeurant les uns à côté des autres, avancer jusqu'à la mêlée, et les premiers champions, moins meurent, et ils sauvent le peuple à l'arrière ; mais chez les hommes qui craignent, toute excellence est perdue.

Personne ne pourrait jamais parler avec des mots de ces divers maux qui arrivent à un homme, s'il a été poussé par la lâcheté.

Car c'est grave de blesser à l'arrière le dos d'un homme volant dans une guerre hostile.

Honteux aussi est un cadavre étendu dans la poussière, blessé derrière le dos par la pointe d'une lance.


=== Armement Hoplite ===

Chaque hoplite fournissait son propre équipement.

L'arme principale de l'hoplite était une lance d'environ 2,4 mètres (7,9 pieds) de longueur appelée doris.

Bien que les récits de sa longueur varient, on pense généralement qu'il mesurait sept à neuf pieds de long (~ 2,1 à 2,7 m).

Il était tenu d'une seule main, l'autre main tenant le bouclier de l'hoplite (aspis).

Le fer de lance était généralement en forme de feuille incurvée, tandis que l'arrière de la lance avait une pointe appelée sauroter ("tueur de lézards") qui était utilisée pour maintenir la lance dans le sol (d'où le nom).

Il était également utilisé comme arme secondaire si le puits principal se cassait ou pour tuer des ennemis allongés au sol.

C'était un problème courant, en particulier pour les soldats qui étaient impliqués dans l'affrontement initial avec l'ennemi.

Malgré le claquement de la lance, les hoplites pouvaient facilement passer au sauroter sans grande conséquence.

Les rangs arrière utilisaient l'extrémité secondaire pour achever les adversaires tombés au fur et à mesure que la phalange avançait sur eux.
Tout au long de l'ère des hoplites, l'armure standard des hoplites a subi de nombreux changements cycliques.

Un hoplite archaïque portait généralement une cuirasse en bronze, un casque en bronze avec des joues, ainsi que des cretons et d'autres armures.

Plus tard, à l'époque classique, la cuirasse est devenue moins courante, remplacée à la place par un corselet qui, selon certains, était fait de linothorax (couches de lin collées ensemble), ou peut-être de cuir, parfois recouvert en tout ou en partie d'écailles métalliques qui se chevauchent.

Finalement, même les cretons sont devenus moins couramment utilisés, bien que des degrés d'armure plus lourdes soient restés, comme l'atteste Xénophon jusqu'en 401 av. combattre les troupes légères, qui étaient de plus en plus utilisées pour nier le rôle de l'hoplite en tant que force principale au combat. 

Pourtant, l'armure de bronze est restée sous une forme ou une autre jusqu'à la fin de l'ère des hoplites. 

Certains archéologues ont souligné que l'armure de bronze n'offre pas autant de protection contre les coups directs qu'un rembourrage de corselet plus étendu, et ont suggéré que son utilisation continue était une question de statut pour ceux qui pouvaient se le permettre. 

Dans le dialecte grec classique, il n'y a pas de mot pour les épéistes ; pourtant, les hoplites portaient également une épée courte appelée xiphos, utilisée comme arme secondaire si le doris était brisé ou perdu.

Les échantillons de xiphos récupérés sur les sites d'excavation mesuraient généralement environ 60 cm (24 po) de longueur. 

Ces épées étaient à double tranchant et pouvaient donc être utilisées comme arme coupante et d'estoc. 

Ces épées courtes étaient souvent utilisées pour poignarder ou couper le cou de l'ennemi lors d'un combat rapproché. Les hoplites portaient un bouclier circulaire appelé hoplon (souvent appelé aspis) en bois et recouvert de bronze, mesurant environ 1 mètre (3,3 pieds) en diamètre. 

Il s'étendait du menton au genou et était très lourd (8 à 15 kg (18 à 33 lb)). 

Ce bouclier de taille moyenne (assez grand pour l'époque compte tenu de la taille moyenne des hommes) a été rendu possible en partie par sa forme en forme de cuvette, qui lui permettait d'être soutenu avec le rebord sur l'épaule.

C'était une caractéristique assez importante du bouclier, en particulier pour les hoplites qui restaient dans les derniers rangs.

Alors que ces soldats continuaient à aider à avancer, ils n'avaient pas le fardeau supplémentaire de tenir leur bouclier.

Mais le bouclier circulaire n'était pas sans inconvénients.

Malgré sa mobilité, sa courbe de protection et ses doubles sangles, la forme circulaire créait des espaces dans la paroi du bouclier en haut et en bas. (Les espaces supérieurs ont été quelque peu réduits par une ou deux lances dépassant de l'espace.

Afin de minimiser les espaces inférieurs, des `` rideaux '' en cuir épais ont été utilisés, mais uniquement par un pourcentage [inconnu] des hoplites, peut-être principalement dans la première rangée uniquement car il y avait également des inconvénients: un poids supplémentaire considérable sur un bouclier déjà lourd et un certain coût supplémentaire.) Ces lacunes laissaient des parties de l'hoplite exposées à des poussées de lance potentiellement mortelles et constituaient une vulnérabilité persistante pour les hoplites contrôlant les lignes de front.


=== Armement Phalangite ===

La phalange de l' ancien royaume macédonien et des États successeurs hellénistiques ultérieurs était un développement de la phalange hoplite . 

Les « phalangites » étaient armés d'une lance beaucoup plus longue, la sarisse, et moins lourdement blindés. 

La sarissa était la pique utilisée par l'ancienne armée macédonienne. 

Sa longueur réelle est inconnue, mais apparemment il était deux fois plus long que le doris. 

Cela en fait au moins 14 pieds (4,3 m), mais 18 pieds (5,5 m) semble plus probable. (Le xyston de cavalerie mesurait 12,5 pieds (3,8 m) en comparaison.) La grande longueur du brochet était équilibrée par un contrepoids à l'arrière, qui fonctionnait également comme une pointe de crosse, permettant à la sarissa d'être plantée dans le sol.

En raison de sa grande longueur, de son poids et de son équilibre différent, une sarissa était maniée à deux mains. 

Cela signifiait que l'aspis n'était plus une défense pratique. 

Au lieu de cela, les phalangites ont attaché un bouclier pelte plus petit (généralement réservé aux peltastes, tirailleurs légers) à leur avant-bras gauche. 

Des théories récentes, y compris l'examen d'anciennes fresques représentant des ensembles complets d'armes et d'armures, affirment que les boucliers utilisés étaient en fait plus grands que la pelte mais plus petits que les aspis, suspendus par des lanières de cuir à l'épaule gauche ou aux deux épaules. 

Le bouclier conserverait des sangles de manipulation dans la courbe intérieure, à manipuler comme un (plus petit) aspis si le combat progressait vers le maniement de l'épée. 

Bien que dans les deux hypothèses de taille de bouclier, cela réduisait le mur de bouclier, la longueur extrême de la lance maintenait l'ennemi à une plus grande distance, car les piques des trois à cinq premiers rangs pouvaient tous être amenés devant la première rangée. 

Cette pique devait être tenue en dessous, car le bouclier aurait obscurci la vision du soldat s'il avait été tenu au-dessus de sa tête. 

Il serait également très difficile de retirer une sarissa de tout ce dans quoi elle est coincée (la terre, les boucliers et les soldats de l'opposition) si elle était poussée vers le bas, en raison de sa longueur.

La phalange macédonienne était beaucoup moins capable de former un mur de bouclier, mais les lances allongées auraient compensé cela.

Une telle formation de phalange réduisait également la probabilité que les batailles dégénèrent en un match poussé.


== Déploiement et combat ==

=== Composition et force de la phalange ===

L'élément de combat de base des armées grecques était soit le stichos (signifiant `` file ''; généralement fort de 8 à 16 hommes) ou l'enomotia (signifiant `` assermenté '' et composé de 2 à 4 stichœ, totalisant jusqu'à 32 hommes), les deux conduit par un dimœrites assisté d'un decadarchos et de deux decasterœ (sing. decasteros).

Quatre à un maximum de 32 enomotiæ (selon l'époque en question ou la ville) formaient un lochos dirigé par un lochagos, qui commandait ainsi initialement 100 hoplites jusqu'à un maximum de c. 500 dans les armées hellénistiques tardives.

Ici, il faut noter que les manuels militaires d'Asclépiodote et d'Élien utilisent le terme lochos pour désigner une lime dans la phalange.

Un taxis (mora pour les Spartiates) était la plus grande formation hoplitique standard de 500 à 1500 hommes, dirigée par un strategos (général).

L'armée entière, un total de plusieurs taxeis ou moræ, était dirigée par un conseil de généraux.

Le commandant en chef était généralement appelé polemarchos ou strategos autocrator.


=== Avant et profondeur de la phalange ===

Phalanges d'hoplites généralement déployées en rangs de huit hommes ou plus profonds; les phalanges macédoniennes avaient généralement 16 hommes de profondeur, parfois signalées comme étant disposées à 32 hommes de profondeur.

Il existe des extrêmes notables; lors des batailles de Leuctra et de Mantinea, le général thébain Epaminondas a arrangé l'aile gauche de la phalange en une "tête de marteau" de 50 rangs d'hoplites d'élite de profondeur (voir ci-dessous) et lorsque la profondeur était moins importante, des phalanges de seulement quatre profondeurs sont enregistrées, comme à la bataille de Marathon. La profondeur des phalanges pouvait varier selon les besoins du moment et les plans du général.

Alors que la phalange était en marche, une formation eis bathos (lâche, signifiant littéralement «en profondeur») a été adoptée afin de se déplacer plus librement et de maintenir l'ordre.

C'était aussi la formation de combat initiale car, en plus, elle permettait aux unités amies de passer, qu'elles attaquent ou battent en retraite.

Dans cet état, la phalange avait deux fois la profondeur normale et chaque hoplite devait occuper environ 1,8 à 2 mètres (5 pieds 11 pouces à 6 pieds 7 pouces) de largeur.

Lorsque l'infanterie ennemie approchait, un passage rapide à la formation pycne (orthographié aussi pucne) (formation dense ou serrée) était nécessaire.

Dans ce cas, l'espace de chaque homme a été réduit de moitié (0,9 à 1 mètre ou 2 pieds 11 pouces à 3 pieds 3 pouces de largeur) et la profondeur de la formation est revenue à la normale.

Une formation encore plus dense, les synaspismos ou sunaspismos (formation de boucliers ultra-serrés ou verrouillés), a été utilisée lorsque la phalange devait subir une pression supplémentaire, des volées de missiles intenses ou des charges de cavalerie frontales.

Dans les synaspismos, la profondeur du rang était la moitié de celle d'une phalange normale et la largeur occupée par chaque homme était aussi petite que 0,45 mètre (1,5 pied).


=== Étapes de combat ===

Plusieurs étapes du combat hoplite peuvent être définies :
Ephodos : Les hoplites arrêtent de chanter leurs pæanes (hymnes de combat) et se dirigent vers l'ennemi, accélérant progressivement le rythme et l'élan.

Dans les instants précédant l'impact, des cris de guerre (alalagmœ, sing. alalagmos) seraient émis.

Les cris de guerre notables étaient l'athénien (eleleleleu ! eleleleleu !) et le macédonien (alalalalai ! alalalalai !) alalagmœ.
Krousis : Les phalanges opposées se rencontrent presque simultanément le long de leur front.
Doratismos : Coups de lance répétés et rapides afin de perturber la formation ennemie.

L'utilisation de longues lances éloignerait les ennemis et permettrait aux hommes alignés d'aider leurs camarades à côté d'eux.

L'aiguillon pouvait également ouvrir un homme pour permettre à un camarade de le transpercer.

Une poussée trop forte pourrait coincer une lance dans un bouclier, ce qui obligerait quelqu'un à l'arrière à prêter la sienne à l'homme désormais désarmé.
Othismos : Littéralement "poussant" après que la plupart des lances ont été brisées, les hoplites commencent à pousser avec leurs lances et leurs lances contre les boucliers de leurs adversaires.

Cela pourrait être la phase la plus longue.

La cavalerie serait utilisée à ce stade pour éponger l'ennemi dispersé.


== Tactique ==

L'histoire des débuts de la phalange est en grande partie celle des combats entre les armées hoplites des cités-États grecques concurrentes.

Le résultat habituel était plutôt identique, des formations inflexibles se poussant les unes contre les autres jusqu'à ce que l'une se brise.

Le potentiel de la phalange pour réaliser quelque chose de plus a été démontré à la bataille de Marathon (490 avant JC).

Face à l'armée beaucoup plus nombreuse de Darius Ier, les Athéniens ont aminci leur phalange et par conséquent allongé leur front, pour éviter d'être débordés.

Cependant, même une phalange de profondeur réduite s'est avérée imparable pour l'infanterie perse légèrement armée.

Après avoir mis en déroute les ailes perses, les hoplites des ailes athéniennes ont roulé vers l'intérieur, détruisant la troupe d'élite au centre persan, entraînant une victoire écrasante pour Athènes.

Tout au long des guerres gréco-perses, la phalange hoplite devait se révéler supérieure à l'infanterie perse (par exemple les batailles des Thermopyles et des Platées).
L'exemple le plus frappant de l'évolution de la phalange est peut-être l'ordre oblique, rendu célèbre lors de la bataille de Leuctra.

Là, le général thébain Epaminondas a aminci le flanc droit et le centre de sa phalange, et a approfondi son flanc gauche à une profondeur inouïe de 50 hommes.

Ce faisant, Epaminondas a inversé la convention selon laquelle le flanc droit de la phalange était le plus fort.

Cela a permis aux Thébains d'assaillir en force les troupes d'élite spartiates sur le flanc droit de la phalange adverse.

Pendant ce temps, le centre et le flanc droit de la ligne thébaine étaient échelonnés en arrière, à partir de la phalange adverse, empêchant les parties affaiblies de la formation d'être engagées.

Une fois que la droite spartiate a été mise en déroute par la gauche thébaine, le reste de la ligne spartiate a également éclaté.

Ainsi, en localisant la puissance d'attaque des hoplites, Epaminondas a pu vaincre un ennemi que l'on croyait invincible.
Philippe II de Macédoine a passé plusieurs années à Thèbes en otage et a prêté attention aux innovations d'Epaminondas.

De retour dans sa patrie, il lève une nouvelle force d'infanterie révolutionnaire, qui va changer la face du monde grec.

Les phalangites de Philippe étaient la première force de soldats professionnels vue dans la Grèce antique en dehors de Sparte.

Ils étaient armés de lances plus longues (la sarissa) et ont été entraînés plus en profondeur dans des tactiques et des manœuvres plus évoluées et compliquées.

Plus important encore, cependant, la phalange de Philip faisait partie d'une force combinée aux multiples facettes qui comprenait une variété de tirailleurs et de cavalerie, notamment la célèbre cavalerie Companion.

La phalange macédonienne était maintenant utilisée pour épingler le centre de la ligne ennemie, tandis que la cavalerie et l'infanterie plus mobile frappaient les flancs de l'ennemi.

Sa suprématie sur les armées plus statiques déployées par les cités-États grecques a été démontrée lors de la bataille de Chaeronea , où l'armée de Philippe II a écrasé les phalanges thébaines et athéniennes alliées.


== Faiblesses ==

La phalange hoplite était la plus faible face à un ennemi qui alignait des troupes plus légères et plus flexibles sans ses propres troupes de soutien.

Un exemple de ceci serait la bataille de Lechaeum, où un contingent athénien dirigé par Iphicrate a mis en déroute toute une mora spartiate (une unité de 500 à 900 hoplites).

La force athénienne avait une proportion considérable de troupes de missiles légers armés de javelots et d'arcs qui épuisaient les Spartiates avec des attaques répétées, provoquant le désarroi dans les rangs spartiates et une éventuelle déroute lorsqu'ils repérèrent des renforts d'infanterie lourde athénienne essayant de les flanquer par bateau.
La phalange macédonienne avait des faiblesses similaires à son prédécesseur hoplitique. 

Théoriquement indestructible de l'avant, ses flancs et son arrière étaient très vulnérables, et une fois engagé, il ne peut pas facilement se désengager ou se redéployer pour faire face à une menace venant de ces directions. 

Ainsi, une phalange faisant face à des formations non phalangites nécessitait une sorte de protection sur ses flancs - infanterie, cavalerie, etc. plus légères ou du moins plus mobiles. 

Cela a été montré lors de la bataille de Magnésie, où, une fois que les éléments de cavalerie de soutien séleucides ont été chassés, la phalange était statique et incapable de passer à l'offensive contre ses adversaires romains (bien qu'ils aient continué à résister vigoureusement et aient tenté un retrait de combat sous un grêle de missiles romains, jusqu'à ce que les éléphants postés sur leurs flancs paniquent et perturbent leur formation).
La phalange macédonienne pourrait également perdre sa cohésion sans une bonne coordination ou en se déplaçant sur un terrain accidenté; cela pourrait créer des écarts entre les blocs / syntagmes individuels, ou pourrait également empêcher un front solide au sein de ces sous-unités, provoquant le regroupement d'autres sections de la ligne.

Dans cet événement, comme dans les batailles de Cynoscephalae et de Pydna, la phalange est devenue vulnérable aux attaques d'unités plus flexibles - comme les siècles légionnaires romains, qui ont pu éviter les sarisses et s'engager dans un combat au corps à corps avec les phalangites.
Un autre domaine important à considérer concerne les tendances psychologiques des hoplites. 

Parce que la force d'une phalange dépendait de la capacité des hoplites à maintenir leur ligne de front, il était crucial qu'une phalange puisse remplacer rapidement et efficacement les soldats tombés au front. 

Si une phalange ne parvenait pas à le faire de manière structurée, la phalange adverse aurait l'occasion de franchir la ligne, ce qui, à plusieurs reprises, conduirait à une défaite rapide. 

Cela implique alors que les hoplites rangs plus proches du front doivent être mentalement préparés à remplacer leur camarade tombé et à s'adapter à sa nouvelle position sans perturber la structure de la ligne de front. Enfin, la plupart des armées centrées sur la phalange avaient tendance à manquer d'échelons de soutien derrière le ligne principale de bataille. 

Cela signifiait que percer la ligne de bataille ou compromettre l'un de ses flancs assurait souvent la victoire.


== Déclin classique et usage post-classique ==

Après avoir atteint son apogée dans les conquêtes d' Alexandre le Grand , la phalange a commencé un lent déclin, alors que les États successeurs macédoniens déclinaient. 

Les tactiques d'armes combinées utilisées par Alexandre et son père ont été progressivement remplacées par un retour à la tactique de charge frontale plus simple de la phalange hoplite. 

Le coût des armes et de la cavalerie de soutien, et l'utilisation généralisée de mercenaires, ont poussé les Diadochi à s'appuyer sur des tactiques phalange contre phalange pendant les guerres des Diadochi.
Le déclin des diadoques et des phalanges est lié à la montée de Rome et des légions romaines à partir du IIIe siècle av. 

La bataille des Fourches Caudines montra la maladresse de la phalange romaine contre les Samnites. 

Les Romains avaient à l'origine employé la phalange eux-mêmes, mais ont progressivement développé des tactiques plus flexibles. 

Le résultat fut la légion romaine à trois lignes de la période médiane de la République romaine, le système manipulaire. 

Les Romains utilisaient une phalange pour leur troisième ligne militaire, les triarii. 

C'étaient des troupes de réserve vétérans armées du hastae ou de la lance. 

Rome a conquis la plupart des États successeurs macédoniens. 

Aussi les différentes cités-états et ligues grecques. 

Au fur et à mesure que ces États ont cessé d'exister, les armées qui utilisaient la phalange traditionnelle ont cessé d'exister. 

Par la suite, les troupes de ces régions ont été équipées, entraînées et combattues selon le modèle romain.
Une formation de phalange appelée le phoulkon est apparue dans l'armée romaine tardive et l'armée byzantine. 

Il avait des caractéristiques des phalanges grecques et hellénistiques classiques, mais était plus flexible. 

Il a été utilisé contre la cavalerie plus que l'infanterie.
Cependant, la phalange n'a pas totalement disparu. 

Dans certaines batailles entre l'armée romaine et les phalanges hellénistiques, telles que Pydna (168 avant JC), Cynoscephalae (197 avant JC) et Magnésie (190 avant JC), la phalange s'est bien comportée. 

Il a même repoussé l'infanterie romaine. 

Cependant, à Cynoscephalae et Magnesia, l'incapacité à défendre les flancs de la phalange a conduit à la défaite. 

À Pydna, la phalange a perdu sa cohésion en poursuivant les soldats romains en retraite. 

Cela a permis aux Romains de pénétrer la formation. 

Ensuite, les compétences romaines en combat rapproché se sont avérées décisives. 

L'historien Polybe détaille l'efficacité de la légion romaine contre la phalange. 

Il en déduit que les Romains refusaient de combattre la phalange là où la phalange était efficace, les Romains n'offraient la bataille que lorsqu'une légion pouvait exploiter la maladresse et l'immobilité d'une phalange.

Les troupes armées de lances ont continué d'être des éléments importants dans de nombreuses armées jusqu'à ce que des armes à feu fiables soient disponibles. 

Ceux-ci ne combattaient pas nécessairement en phalange. 

Par exemple, comparez la phalange classique et les formations de brochet de la fin du Moyen Âge. Les historiens militaires ont suggéré que les Écossais sous William Wallace et Robert the Bruce imitaient consciemment la phalange hellénistique pour produire le « hérisson » ou schiltron écossais. 

Cependant, de longues lances auraient pu être utilisées par les Pictes et d'autres au début du Moyen Âge en Écosse. 

Avant 1066, les tactiques de longue lance (également trouvées dans le nord du Pays de Galles) auraient pu faire partie de la guerre irrégulière en Grande-Bretagne. 

Les Écossais ont utilisé des piques françaises importées et des tactiques dynamiques lors de la bataille de Flodden. 

Cependant, Flodden a trouvé les Écossais opposés à une artillerie légère efficace, tout en avançant sur un mauvais terrain. 

La combinaison a désorganisé les phalanges Scotts et a permis des attaques efficaces par des archers anglais et des soldats brandissant des armes d'hast plus courtes et plus maniables appelées factures.

Certaines sources contemporaines pourraient dire que les becs ont coupé la tête des brochets écossais.
Le brochet a été brièvement reconsidéré comme une arme par les armées européennes à la fin du 18e et au début du 19e siècle.

Il pouvait protéger les carabiniers, dont la cadence de tir plus lente les rendait vulnérables.

Un brochet pliable a été inventé mais jamais publié.

L'armée confédérée les a considérés pour la guerre civile américaine.

Certains ont même été fabriqués mais n'ont probablement jamais été émis.

Les piques ont été fabriquées pendant la Seconde Guerre mondiale sous le nom de "Croft's Pikes".
Bien qu'obsolète dans la pratique militaire, la phalange est restée utilisée comme métaphore des guerriers avançant comme un seul bloc uni.

Cette métaphore a inspiré plusieurs mouvements politiques du XXe siècle, notamment la Phalange espagnole et son idéologie du falangisme.
Les Byzantins ont continué et amélioré l'utilisation de la phalange grecque classique aux côtés de la phalange de style macédonien.

Ce dernier était basé sur un modèle qu'Alexandre lui-même avait créé et avait essayé de donner plus d'importance aux tirailleurs et à la cavalerie, mais il n'a jamais vu d'action jusqu'à ce que les Byzantins adoptent le modèle qui repose parfois sur un mélange de plusieurs unités.

De nombreux écrivains de l'époque décrivent la lance comme étant une sarissa, mais elle mesurait un mètre de moins que la sarissa originale et avait été modifiée par le temps, mais le terme pour la longue lance est resté à côté de ses autres noms.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Phalange

;;;PT;;;



FALANGE


A falange (grego antigo: φάλαγξ; plural falanges ou falanges, φάλαγγες, falanges) era uma formação militar de massa retangular, geralmente composta inteiramente de infantaria pesada armada com lanças, lanças, sarissas ou armas semelhantes. 

O termo é particularmente usado para descrever o uso dessa formação na guerra da Grécia Antiga, embora os antigos escritores gregos o usassem também para descrever qualquer formação de infantaria em massa, independentemente de seu equipamento. 

Arrian usa o termo em seu Array contra os alanos quando se refere a suas legiões. 

Nos textos gregos, a falange pode ser desdobrada para a batalha, em marcha, ou mesmo acampada, descrevendo assim a massa de infantaria ou cavalaria que se desdobraria em linha durante a batalha. 

Eles marcharam para a frente como uma entidade. 
O próprio termo, como usado hoje, não se refere a uma unidade ou divisão militar distinta (por exemplo, a legião romana ou o batalhão contemporâneo do tipo ocidental), mas ao tipo de formação das tropas de um exército. 

Portanto, este termo não indica uma força ou composição de combate padrão, mas inclui o número total de infantaria, que é implantada em uma única formação conhecida como "falange".
Muitas tropas armadas com lanças historicamente lutaram no que poderia ser chamado de formações semelhantes a falanges. 

Este artigo enfoca o uso da formação da falange militar na Grécia Antiga, no mundo helenístico e em outros estados antigos fortemente influenciados pela civilização grega.


== História ==

A mais antiga representação conhecida de uma formação semelhante a uma falange ocorre em uma estela suméria do século 25 aC.

Aqui as tropas parecem ter sido equipadas com lanças, capacetes e grandes escudos cobrindo todo o corpo.

A infantaria egípcia antiga era conhecida por ter empregado formações semelhantes.

O primeiro uso do termo falange vem de "φαλαγξ" de Homero, usado para descrever hoplitas lutando em uma linha de batalha organizada.

Homero usou o termo para diferenciar o combate baseado em formação dos duelos individuais tão freqüentemente encontrados em seus poemas. Os historiadores não chegaram a um consenso sobre a relação entre a formação grega e esses predecessores dos hoplitas.

Os princípios da parede de escudos e da cerca de lança eram quase universalmente conhecidos entre os exércitos das principais civilizações ao longo da história, e assim as semelhanças podem estar relacionadas à evolução convergente em vez de difusão.
Tradicionalmente, os historiadores datam a origem da falange hoplita da Grécia antiga no século VIII aC em Esparta, mas isso está em revisão.

Talvez seja mais provável que a formação tenha sido concebida no século VII aC após a introdução do aspis pela cidade de Argos, o que teria tornado a formação possível.

Isso é ainda evidenciado pelo vaso Chigi, datado de 650 aC, identificando hoplitas armados com aspis, lança e panóplia. em épocas anteriores ainda não foram totalmente desenvolvidos devido à falta de tecnologia apropriada. 

Duas das táticas básicas vistas na guerra anterior incluem o princípio da coesão e o uso de grandes grupos de soldados. 

Isso sugeriria que a falange grega foi antes a culminação e a perfeição de uma ideia desenvolvida lentamente que se originou muitos anos antes. 

À medida que o armamento e as armaduras avançavam ao longo dos anos em diferentes cidades-estados, a falange tornou-se complexa e eficaz.


== Visão geral ==

A falange hoplita dos períodos Arcaico e Clássico na Grécia (c. 800–350 aC) era a formação na qual os hoplitas se alinhavam em fileiras em ordem. 

Os hoplitas travavam seus escudos juntos, e as primeiras fileiras de soldados projetavam suas lanças sobre a primeira fileira de escudos. 

A falange, portanto, apresentava uma parede de escudos e uma massa de pontas de lança ao inimigo, dificultando muito os ataques frontais contra ela. 

Também permitiu que uma proporção maior de soldados estivesse ativamente engajada em combate em um determinado momento (em vez de apenas aqueles na linha de frente).
As batalhas entre duas falanges geralmente ocorriam em planícies abertas e planas, onde era mais fácil avançar e permanecer em formação. 

Terreno acidentado ou regiões montanhosas teriam dificultado a manutenção de uma linha estável e teriam derrotado o propósito de uma falange. 

Como resultado, as batalhas entre as cidades-estados gregas não ocorreriam em qualquer local, nem seriam limitadas a pontos estratégicos às vezes óbvios.

Em vez disso, muitas vezes, os dois lados opostos encontrariam o pedaço de terra mais adequado onde o conflito poderia ser resolvido.

Normalmente, a batalha terminava com uma das duas forças combatentes fugindo para um local seguro. A falange geralmente avançava a passo de caminhada, embora seja possível que eles tenham ganhado velocidade durante os últimos metros.

Uma das principais razões para esta abordagem lenta foi manter a formação.

A formação se tornaria inútil se a falange fosse perdida à medida que a unidade se aproximasse do inimigo e poderia até se tornar prejudicial para a unidade que avançava, resultando em uma formação mais fraca que era mais fácil para uma força inimiga romper.

Se os hoplitas da falange ganhassem velocidade na parte final do avanço, seria com o propósito de ganhar impulso contra o inimigo na colisão inicial.

Heródoto afirma dos gregos na Batalha de Maratona, que "Eles foram os primeiros gregos que conhecemos a atacar seu inimigo em uma corrida".

Muitos historiadores acreditam que essa inovação foi precipitada por seu desejo de minimizar suas perdas com o tiro com arco persa.

Os lados opostos colidiriam, possivelmente cortando muitas das lanças da linha da frente e matando a parte da frente do exército inimigo devido à colisão de quebrar os ossos.
As lanças de uma falange tinham pontas pontiagudas.

Na batalha, as fileiras de trás usavam os espinhos para acabar com os soldados inimigos caídos.


=== Empurrando ===

A teoria da "competição física de empurrar" é aquela em que a batalha dependeria do valor dos homens na linha de frente, enquanto aqueles na retaguarda mantinham a pressão para a frente nas fileiras da frente com seus escudos, e toda a formação pressionava consistentemente para frente tentando para quebrar a formação inimiga. 

Esta é a interpretação mais amplamente aceita das fontes antigas, portanto, quando duas formações de falange se envolveram, a luta tornou-se essencialmente um jogo de empurrar. 

Historiadores como Victor Davis Hanson apontam que é difícil explicar formações de falanges excepcionalmente profundas, a menos que fossem necessárias para facilitar o empurrão físico descrito por essa teoria, já que aqueles por trás das duas primeiras fileiras não podiam participar do arremesso de lança real. Nenhuma arte grega jamais retrata algo como um jogo de empurrar de falanges, então essa hipótese é um produto de especulação educada e não de testemunho explícito de fontes contemporâneas e está longe de ser resolvida academicamente. 

O termo grego para "empurrar" foi usado da mesma maneira metafórica que a palavra em inglês (por exemplo, também foi usada para descrever o processo de argumentos retóricos) e, portanto, não descreve necessariamente um empurrão físico literal, embora seja possível que ele fez.
Por exemplo, se Othismos descrevesse com precisão uma luta física de empurrar, seria lógico afirmar que a falange mais profunda sempre venceria um combate, já que a força física dos indivíduos não compensaria nem mesmo uma classificação adicional no lado inimigo. 

No entanto, existem inúmeros exemplos de falanges rasas segurando um oponente. 

Por exemplo, em Delium em 424 aC, o flanco esquerdo ateniense, uma formação de oito homens de profundidade, segurou uma formação de tebanos de 25 de profundidade sem colapso imediato. 

É difícil, com o modelo físico de empurrar, imaginar oito homens resistindo à força de empurrar de 25 oponentes por uma questão de segundos, quanto mais metade da batalha.
Tais argumentos levaram a uma onda de contra-crítica aos teóricos do empurrão físico. 

Adrian Goldsworthy, em seu artigo "The Othismos, Myths and Heresies: The nature of Hoplite Battle", argumenta que o modelo de jogo de empurrão físico não se encaixa com os números médios de baixas da guerra hoplita nem as realidades práticas de mover grandes formações de homens em batalha. 

Este debate ainda não foi resolvido entre os estudiosos.
As dificuldades práticas com essa teoria também incluem o fato de que, em uma partida de empurra-empurra, uma lança de 2,4 metros é muito longa para lutar de forma eficaz ou até mesmo aparar ataques. 

As lanças permitem que uma formação de homens mantenha seus inimigos à distância, afaste ataques direcionados a eles e seus companheiros e dê o alcance necessário para atingir vários homens na formação oposta. 

Uma partida de empurrar colocaria os inimigos tão próximos uns dos outros que um golpe rápido com uma faca mataria a primeira fila quase instantaneamente. 

O esmagamento de homens também impediria que a formação se retirasse ou recuasse, o que resultaria em baixas muito maiores do que as registradas.

A velocidade com que isso ocorreria também terminaria a batalha muito rapidamente, em vez de prolongá-la por horas.


=== Escudos ===

Cada hoplita individual carregava seu escudo no braço esquerdo, protegendo não apenas a si mesmo, mas também o soldado à esquerda.

Isso significava que os homens na extrema direita da falange estavam apenas parcialmente protegidos.

Na batalha, as falanges adversárias tentariam explorar essa fraqueza tentando sobrepor o flanco direito do inimigo.

Isso também significava que, em batalha, uma falange tenderia a se desviar para a direita (já que os hoplitas procuravam permanecer atrás do escudo de seu vizinho).

Alguns grupos, como os espartanos em Nemea, tentaram usar esse fenômeno a seu favor.

Nesse caso, a falange sacrificaria seu lado esquerdo, que normalmente consistia em tropas aliadas, em um esforço para ultrapassar o inimigo pelo flanco. 

É improvável que essa estratégia funcionasse com muita frequência, pois não é mencionada com frequência na literatura grega antiga. Havia um líder em cada fila de uma falange e um oficial de retaguarda, o ouragos (que significa cauda-líder), que mantinha a ordem na traseira. 

Os hoplitas tinham que confiar em seus vizinhos para protegê-los e, por sua vez, estar dispostos a proteger seus vizinhos; uma falange era tão forte quanto seus elementos mais fracos.

A eficácia da falange, portanto, dependia de quão bem os hoplitas poderiam manter essa formação em combate e quão bem eles poderiam defender sua posição, especialmente quando engajados contra outra falange. 

Por esta razão, a formação foi deliberadamente organizada para agrupar amigos e familiares próximos, proporcionando assim um incentivo psicológico para apoiar os companheiros e um desincentivo, por vergonha, ao pânico ou tentativa de fuga.

Quanto mais disciplinado e corajoso o exército, maior a probabilidade de vencer – muitas vezes os confrontos entre as várias cidades-estado da Grécia seriam resolvidos por um lado fugindo antes da batalha.

A palavra grega dynamis, a 'vontade de lutar', expressa o impulso que mantinha os hoplitas em formação.

Agora, daqueles que se atrevem, permanecendo um ao lado do outro, avançar para a luta próxima, e os primeiros campeões, menos morrem, e eles salvam as pessoas na retaguarda; mas nos homens que temem, toda excelência se perde.

Ninguém jamais poderia em palavras passar por esses vários males que acontecem a um homem, se ele foi acionado pela covardia.

Pois é doloroso ferir nas costas de um homem voador em uma guerra hostil. 

Vergonhoso também é um cadáver caído no pó, ferido nas costas pela ponta de uma lança.


=== Armamento Hoplita ===

Cada hoplita forneceu seu próprio equipamento. 

A arma hoplita primária era uma lança de cerca de 2,4 metros (7,9 pés) de comprimento chamada dory. 

Embora os relatos de seu comprimento variem, geralmente acredita-se que tivesse sete a nove pés de comprimento (~ 2,1 a 2,7 m). 

Era segurado com uma mão, com a outra segurando o escudo do hoplita (aspis). 

A ponta da lança era geralmente uma forma de folha curva, enquanto a parte traseira da lança tinha um pico chamado sauroter ('assassino de lagartos') que era usado para colocar a lança no chão (daí o nome). 

Também era usado como arma secundária se o eixo principal quebrasse ou para matar inimigos caídos no chão. 

Este era um problema comum, especialmente para os soldados envolvidos no confronto inicial com o inimigo.

Apesar do estalo da lança, os hoplitas poderiam facilmente mudar para o sauroter sem grandes consequências.

As fileiras traseiras usaram a extremidade secundária para acabar com os oponentes caídos enquanto a falange avançava sobre eles.
Ao longo da era hoplita, a armadura hoplita padrão passou por muitas mudanças cíclicas.

Um hoplita arcaico normalmente usava um peitoral de bronze, um capacete de bronze com bochechas, bem como torresmos e outras armaduras.

Mais tarde, no período clássico, o peitoral tornou-se menos comum, substituído por um corpete que alguns afirmam ser feito de linotórax (camadas de linho coladas), ou talvez de couro, às vezes coberto no todo ou em parte com escamas de metal sobrepostas.

Eventualmente, até grevas tornaram-se menos usadas, embora graus de armadura mais pesada permanecessem, como atestado por Xenofonte em 401 aC. Essas mudanças refletiram o equilíbrio entre mobilidade e proteção, especialmente quando a cavalaria se tornou mais proeminente na Guerra do Peloponeso e a necessidade de tropas leves de combate, que foram cada vez mais usadas para negar o papel do hoplita como a força primária na batalha. 

No entanto, a armadura de bronze permaneceu de alguma forma até o final da era hoplita. 

Alguns arqueólogos apontaram que a armadura de bronze na verdade não fornece tanta proteção contra golpes diretos quanto um acolchoamento de corpete mais extenso, e sugeriram que seu uso contínuo era uma questão de status para aqueles que podiam pagar. 

No dialeto grego clássico, não há palavra para espadachins; no entanto, os hoplitas também carregavam uma espada curta chamada xiphos, usada como arma secundária se o dory fosse quebrado ou perdido.

Amostras do xiphos recuperados em locais de escavação tinham tipicamente cerca de 60 cm (24 pol) de comprimento.

Essas espadas eram de dois gumes e, portanto, podiam ser usadas como arma de corte e estocada.

Essas espadas curtas eram frequentemente usadas para esfaquear ou cortar o pescoço do inimigo durante o combate corpo a corpo. Os hoplitas carregavam um escudo circular chamado hoplon (muitas vezes referido como aspis) feito de madeira e coberto de bronze, medindo aproximadamente 1 metro (3,3 pés) em diâmetro.

Ele se estendia do queixo ao joelho e era muito pesado (8–15 kg (18–33 lb)).

Este escudo de tamanho médio (bastante grande para a época considerando a estatura média masculina) foi possível em parte por sua forma de prato, que permitia que ele fosse apoiado com a borda no ombro. 

Esta foi uma característica bastante importante do escudo, especialmente para os hoplitas que permaneceram nas últimas fileiras. 

Embora esses soldados continuassem a ajudar a avançar, eles não tinham o fardo adicional de segurar o escudo. 

Mas o escudo circular tinha suas desvantagens. 

Apesar de sua mobilidade, curva protetora e tiras duplas, a forma circular criava lacunas na parede do escudo na parte superior e inferior. (As aberturas superiores foram um pouco reduzidas por uma ou duas lanças que se projetavam para fora da abertura.

A fim de minimizar as lacunas do fundo, foram usadas 'cortinas' grossas de couro, mas apenas por uma porcentagem [desconhecida] dos hoplitas, possivelmente principalmente na primeira linha, pois também havia desvantagens: peso adicional considerável em um escudo já pesado e um certo custo adicional.) Essas lacunas deixavam partes do hoplita expostas a golpes de lança potencialmente letais e eram uma vulnerabilidade persistente para os hoplitas que controlavam as linhas de frente.


=== Armamento de Falangita ===

A falange do antigo reino macedônio e os posteriores estados sucessores helenísticos foi um desenvolvimento da falange hoplita.

Os 'falangitas' estavam armados com uma lança muito mais longa, a sarissa, e com armaduras menos pesadas.

A sarissa era a lança usada pelo antigo exército macedônio.

Seu comprimento real é desconhecido, mas aparentemente era duas vezes maior que o dory.

Isso faz com que tenha pelo menos 4,3 m (14 pés), mas 5,5 m (18 pés) parecem mais prováveis. (O xyston de cavalaria era de 12,5 pés (3,8 m) em comparação.) O grande comprimento do pique era equilibrado por um contrapeso na extremidade traseira, que também funcionava como um espigão, permitindo que a sarissa fosse plantada no chão.

Por causa de seu grande comprimento, peso e equilíbrio diferente, uma sarissa era empunhada com as duas mãos. 

Isso significava que o aspis não era mais uma defesa prática. 

Em vez disso, as falanges amarraram um escudo pelte menor (geralmente reservado para peltastas, escaramuçadores leves) ao antebraço esquerdo. 

Teorias recentes, incluindo o exame de afrescos antigos representando conjuntos completos de armas e armaduras, afirmam que os escudos usados ​​eram realmente maiores que a pelta, mas menores que o aspis, pendurados por tiras de couro no ombro esquerdo ou em ambos os ombros. 

O escudo reteria alças de manuseio na curva interna, para ser manuseado como um aspis (menor) se a luta progredisse para empunhar a espada. 

Embora em ambas as suposições de tamanho de escudo isso reduzisse a parede de escudo, o comprimento extremo da lança mantinha o inimigo a uma distância maior, pois as lanças das primeiras três a cinco fileiras podiam ser colocadas na frente da primeira fila. 

Esta lança tinha que ser segurada por baixo, pois o escudo teria obscurecido a visão do soldado se estivesse em cima.

Também seria muito difícil remover uma sarissa de qualquer coisa em que ela estivesse presa (terra, escudos e soldados da oposição) se fosse empurrada para baixo, devido ao seu comprimento. 

A falange macedônia era muito menos capaz de formar uma parede de escudos, mas as lanças alongadas teriam compensado isso. 

Essa formação de falange também reduziu a probabilidade de que as batalhas degenerassem em uma luta de empurra-empurra.


== Implantação e combate ==

=== Composição e força da falange ===

O elemento básico de combate dos exércitos gregos era o stichos (que significa 'arquivo'; geralmente 8-16 homens fortes) ou o enomotia (que significa 'jurado' e composto por 2-4 stichœ, totalizando até 32 homens), ambos liderado por um dimœrites que foi assistido por um decadarchos e dois decasterœ (sing. decasteros). 

Quatro a um máximo de 32 enomotiæ (dependendo da época em questão ou da cidade) formavam um lochos liderado por um lochagos, que desta forma estava no comando de inicialmente 100 hoplitas até um máximo de c. 500 nos últimos exércitos helenísticos.

Aqui, deve-se notar que os manuais militares de Asclepiodotus e Aelian usam o termo lochos para denotar um arquivo na falange. 

Um táxi (mora para os espartanos) era a maior formação hoplítica padrão de 500 a 1500 homens, liderada por um estratego (general). 

Todo o exército, um total de vários taxeis ou moræ, era liderado por um conselho de generais. 

O comandante-em-chefe era geralmente chamado de polemarchos ou strategos autocrator.


=== Falange frente e profundidade ===

As falanges hoplitas geralmente se desdobram em fileiras de oito homens ou mais; as falanges macedônias eram geralmente de 16 homens de profundidade, às vezes relatadas como tendo sido dispostas com 32 homens de profundidade.

Existem alguns extremos notáveis; nas batalhas de Leuctra e Mantinea, o general tebano Epaminondas organizou a ala esquerda da falange em uma "cabeça de martelo" de 50 fileiras de hoplitas de elite de profundidade (veja abaixo) e quando a profundidade era menos importante, falanges com apenas quatro de profundidade são registradas, como na batalha de Maratona. A profundidade da falange pode variar dependendo das necessidades do momento e dos planos do general.

Enquanto a falange estava em marcha, uma formação eis batos (solta, significando literalmente 'em profundidade') foi adotada para se mover mais livremente e manter a ordem.

Essa também foi a formação inicial de batalha, pois, além disso, permitia que unidades amigas passassem, atacando ou recuando. 

Nesse estado, a falange tinha o dobro da profundidade normal e cada hoplita tinha que ocupar cerca de 1,8 a 2 metros (5 pés 11 pol a 6 pés 7 pol) de largura. 

Quando a infantaria inimiga se aproximava, era necessária uma mudança rápida para a formação pycne (escrito também pucne) (formação densa ou apertada). 

Nesse caso, o espaço de cada homem foi reduzido pela metade (0,9 a 1 metro ou 2 pés e 11 polegadas a 3 pés e 3 polegadas de largura) e a profundidade da formação voltou ao normal. 

Uma formação ainda mais densa, os synaspismos ou sunaspismos (formação de escudos ultra-apertados ou bloqueados), foi usada quando se esperava que a falange sofresse pressão extra, voleios intensos de mísseis ou cargas de cavalaria frontal. 

Em synaspismos, a profundidade da classificação era metade da de uma falange normal e a largura que cada homem ocupava era tão pequena quanto 0,45 metros (1,5 pés).


=== Fases do combate ===

Vários estágios no combate hoplita podem ser definidos:
Éfodos: Os hoplitas param de cantar seus pæanes (hinos de batalha) e se movem em direção ao inimigo, gradualmente ganhando ritmo e impulso. 

Nos instantes antes do impacto, gritos de guerra (alalagmœ, sing. alalagmos) seriam feitos. 

Gritos de guerra notáveis ​​foram os atenienses (eleleleleu! eleleleleu!) e os macedônios (alalalalai! alalalalai!) alalagmœ.
Krousis: As falanges opostas se encontram quase simultaneamente ao longo de sua frente. 
Doratismos: Golpes de lança repetidos e rápidos para atrapalhar a formação inimiga.

O uso de lanças longas manteria os inimigos separados, bem como permitiria que homens em fila auxiliassem seus companheiros próximos a eles.

O estímulo também poderia abrir um homem para permitir que um camarada o lançasse.

Instigar com muita força poderia fazer uma lança ficar presa em um escudo, o que exigiria que alguém nas costas emprestasse a sua ao homem agora desarmado.
Othismos: Literalmente 'empurrando' depois que a maioria das lanças foi quebrada, os hoplitas começam a empurrar com suas lanças e hastes de lança contra os escudos de seus oponentes.

Esta pode ser a fase mais longa. Pararrexe: 'Rompendo' a falange adversária, a formação inimiga se desfaz e a batalha termina.

A cavalaria seria usada neste ponto para limpar o inimigo disperso.


== Táticas ==

A história inicial da falange é em grande parte de combate entre exércitos hoplitas de cidades-estados gregas concorrentes.

O resultado usual foi bastante idêntico, formações inflexíveis empurrando umas contra as outras até que uma quebrou.

O potencial da falange para alcançar algo mais foi demonstrado na Batalha de Maratona (490 aC). 

Enfrentando o exército muito maior de Dario I, os atenienses diminuíram sua falange e, consequentemente, alongaram sua frente, para evitar serem flanqueados. 

No entanto, mesmo uma falange de profundidade reduzida provou ser imparável para a infantaria persa levemente armada. 

Depois de derrotar as alas persas, os hoplitas nas alas atenienses se voltaram para dentro, destruindo a tropa de elite no centro persa, resultando em uma vitória esmagadora para Atenas. 

Ao longo das guerras greco-persas, a falange hoplita provou ser superior à infantaria persa (por exemplo, as batalhas das Termópilas e Plataea).
Talvez o exemplo mais proeminente da evolução da falange tenha sido a ordem oblíqua, que ficou famosa na Batalha de Leuctra. 

Lá, o general tebano Epaminondas diminuiu o flanco direito e o centro de sua falange e aprofundou seu flanco esquerdo para uma profundidade inédita de 50 homens. 

Ao fazê-lo, Epaminondas inverteu a convenção pela qual o flanco direito da falange era mais forte. 

Isso permitiu que os tebanos atacassem em força as tropas espartanas de elite no flanco direito da falange adversária. 

Enquanto isso, o centro e o flanco direito da linha tebana foram escalonados para trás, da falange oposta, impedindo que as partes enfraquecidas da formação fossem engajadas. 

Uma vez que a direita espartana foi derrotada pela esquerda tebana, o restante da linha espartana também quebrou. 

Assim, ao localizar o poder de ataque dos hoplitas, Epaminondas conseguiu derrotar um inimigo antes considerado invencível.
Filipe II da Macedônia passou vários anos em Tebas como refém e prestou atenção às inovações de Epaminondas. 

Ao retornar à sua terra natal, ele levantou uma nova força de infantaria revolucionária, que mudaria a face do mundo grego. 

As falanges de Filipe foram a primeira força de soldados profissionais vistos na Grécia Antiga, além de Esparta. 

Eles estavam armados com lanças mais longas (as sarissa) e foram treinados mais profundamente em táticas e manobras mais evoluídas e complicadas. 

Mais importante, porém, a falange de Filipe fazia parte de uma força combinada multifacetada que incluía uma variedade de escaramuçadores e cavalaria, mais notavelmente a famosa cavalaria Companion. 

A falange macedônia agora era usada para imobilizar o centro da linha inimiga, enquanto a cavalaria e a infantaria mais móvel atacavam os flancos do inimigo. 

Sua supremacia sobre os exércitos mais estáticos das cidades-estados gregas foi demonstrada na Batalha de Queronea, onde o exército de Filipe II esmagou as falanges aliadas de Tebas e Atenienses.


== Fraquezas ==

A falange hoplita era mais fraca quando enfrentava um inimigo com tropas mais leves e flexíveis sem suas próprias tropas de apoio.

Um exemplo disso seria a Batalha de Lechaeum, onde um contingente ateniense liderado por Iphicrates derrotou uma mora espartana inteira (uma unidade de 500 a 900 hoplitas).

A força ateniense tinha uma proporção considerável de tropas de mísseis leves armados com dardos e arcos que desgastaram os espartanos com ataques repetidos, causando confusão nas fileiras espartanas e uma eventual derrota quando avistaram reforços de infantaria pesada atenienses tentando flanqueá-los por barco.
A falange macedônia tinha fraquezas semelhantes ao seu antecessor hoplítico.

Teoricamente indestrutível pela frente, seus flancos e a retaguarda eram muito vulneráveis ​​e, uma vez engajados, não podem ser facilmente desengajados ou redistribuídos para enfrentar uma ameaça dessas direções.

Assim, uma falange voltada para formações não-falangíticas exigia algum tipo de proteção em seus flancos – infantaria, cavalaria, etc., mais leve ou pelo menos mais móvel.

Isso foi mostrado na Batalha de Magnésia, onde, uma vez que os elementos da cavalaria de apoio selêucida foram expulsos, a falange ficou estática e incapaz de ir à ofensiva contra seus oponentes romanos (embora eles continuassem a resistir fortemente e tentassem uma retirada de combate sob um granizo de mísseis romanos, até que os elefantes postados em seus flancos entraram em pânico e interromperam sua formação).
A falange macedônia também pode perder sua coesão sem coordenação adequada ou enquanto se move em terreno acidentado; fazer isso pode criar lacunas entre blocos/syntagmas individuais, ou pode impedir uma frente sólida dentro dessas subunidades, fazendo com que outras seções da linha se agrupem.

Nesse evento, como nas batalhas de Cynoscephalae e Pydna, a falange tornou-se vulnerável a ataques de unidades mais flexíveis - como os séculos legionários romanos, que conseguiram evitar os sarissae e se envolver em combate corpo a corpo com as falanges.
Outra área importante que deve ser considerada diz respeito às tendências psicológicas dos hoplitas.

Como a força de uma falange dependia da capacidade dos hoplitas de manter sua linha de frente, era crucial que uma falange pudesse substituir de forma rápida e eficiente os soldados caídos nas fileiras da frente.

Se uma falange não conseguisse fazer isso de forma estruturada, a falange adversária teria a oportunidade de romper a linha que, muitas vezes, levaria a uma derrota rápida.

Isso implica então que os hoplitas mais próximos da frente devem estar mentalmente preparados para substituir seu camarada caído e se adaptar à sua nova posição sem perturbar a estrutura da linha de frente. linha principal de batalha.

Isso significava que romper a linha de batalha ou comprometer um de seus flancos muitas vezes garantia a vitória.


== Declínio clássico e uso pós-clássico ==

Depois de atingir seu apogeu nas conquistas de Alexandre, o Grande, a falange começou um lento declínio, à medida que os estados sucessores da Macedônia diminuíam.

As táticas de armas combinadas usadas por Alexandre e seu pai foram gradualmente substituídas por um retorno às táticas de carga frontal mais simples da falange hoplita.

A despesa das armas de apoio e cavalaria, e o uso generalizado de mercenários, fez com que os Diadochi confiassem nas táticas falange contra falange durante as Guerras dos Diadochi.
O declínio do Diadochi e da falange estava ligado à ascensão de Roma e das legiões romanas do século III aC.

A Batalha dos Forques Caudinos mostrou a falta de jeito da falange romana contra os samnitas.

Os romanos originalmente empregaram a falange, mas gradualmente desenvolveram táticas mais flexíveis.

O resultado foi a legião romana de três linhas do período médio da República Romana, o Sistema Manipular. 

Os romanos usavam uma falange para sua terceira linha militar, os triarii. 

Eram tropas de reserva veteranas armadas com hastae ou lança. 

Roma conquistou a maioria dos estados sucessores da Macedônia. 

Também as várias cidades-estados e ligas gregas. 

À medida que esses estados deixaram de existir, o mesmo aconteceu com os exércitos que usavam a falange tradicional. 

Posteriormente, as tropas dessas regiões foram equipadas, treinadas e combatidas segundo o modelo romano.
Uma formação de falange chamada phoulkon apareceu no final do exército romano e no exército bizantino. 

Tinha características das falanges gregas e helenísticas clássicas, mas era mais flexível. 

Foi usado contra a cavalaria mais do que a infantaria.
No entanto, a falange não desapareceu totalmente. 

Em algumas batalhas entre o exército romano e as falanges helenísticas, como Pydna (168 aC), Cynoscephalae (197 aC) e Magnésia (190 aC), a falange teve um bom desempenho.

Até fez recuar a infantaria romana.

No entanto, em Cynoscephalae e Magnesia, o fracasso em defender os flancos da falange levou à derrota.

Em Pidna, a falange perdeu coesão ao perseguir soldados romanos em retirada.

Isso permitiu que os romanos penetrassem na formação.

Então, as habilidades romanas de combate corpo a corpo se mostraram decisivas.

O historiador Políbio detalha a eficácia da legião romana contra a falange.

Ele deduz que os romanos se recusaram a lutar contra a falange onde a falange era eficaz, os romanos ofereciam batalha apenas quando uma legião podia explorar a falta de jeito e a imobilidade de uma falange.

Tropas armadas com lanças continuaram a ser elementos importantes em muitos exércitos até que armas de fogo confiáveis ​​se tornassem disponíveis. 

Estes não lutaram necessariamente como uma falange. 

Por exemplo, compare a falange clássica e as formações de lúcios medievais tardias. Historiadores militares sugeriram que os escoceses sob William Wallace e Robert the Bruce imitaram conscientemente a falange helenística para produzir o 'ouriço' escocês ou schiltron. 

No entanto, lanças longas podem ter sido usadas por pictos e outros na Idade Média da Escócia. 

Antes de 1066, as táticas de lança longa (também encontradas no norte de Gales) podem ter sido parte da guerra irregular na Grã-Bretanha. 

Os escoceses usaram lanças francesas importadas e táticas dinâmicas na Batalha de Flodden. 

No entanto, Flodden encontrou os escoceses confrontados com artilharia leve eficaz, enquanto avançavam em terreno ruim. 

A combinação desorganizou as falanges de Scotts e permitiu ataques efetivos de arqueiros ingleses e soldados empunhando armas de haste mais curtas e práticas chamadas contas.

Algumas fontes contemporâneas podem dizer que as notas cortaram as cabeças das lanças escocesas.
O pique foi brevemente reconsiderado como arma pelos exércitos europeus no final do século XVIII e início do século XIX.

Podia proteger fuzileiros, cuja cadência de tiro mais lenta os tornava vulneráveis.

Um pique dobrável foi inventado, mas nunca emitido.

O Exército Confederado considerou estes para a Guerra Civil Americana.

Alguns foram até fabricados, mas provavelmente nunca foram emitidos.

Pikes foram fabricados durante a Segunda Guerra Mundial como "Croft's Pikes".
Embora obsoleta na prática militar, a falange permaneceu em uso como uma metáfora de guerreiros avançando como um único bloco unido.

Essa metáfora inspirou vários movimentos políticos do século XX, notadamente a Falange Espanhola e sua ideologia do Falangismo.
Os bizantinos continuaram e melhoraram o uso da falange grega clássica ao lado da falange de estilo macedônio. 

Este último foi baseado em um modelo que o próprio Alexandre havia criado e tentou dar mais importância aos escaramuçadores e cavalaria, mas nunca entrou em ação até que os bizantinos adotaram o modelo que às vezes contava com uma mistura de muitas unidades. 

Muitos escritores da época descrevem a lança como sendo uma sarissa, mas era um metro mais curta que a sarissa original e havia sido modificada na época, mas o termo para a lança longa permaneceu ao lado de seus outros nomes.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Phalanx
