

HIPPOCAMPUS


The hippocampus (via Latin from Greek ἱππόκαμπος, 'seahorse') is a major component of the brain of humans and other vertebrates. 

Humans and other mammals have two hippocampi, one in each side of the brain. 

The hippocampus is part of the limbic system, and plays important roles in the consolidation of information from short-term memory to long-term memory, and in spatial memory that enables navigation. 

The hippocampus is located in the allocortex, with neural projections into the neocortex in humans, as well as primates. 

The hippocampus, as the medial pallium, is a structure found in all vertebrates. 

In humans, it contains two main interlocking parts: the hippocampus proper (also called Ammon's horn) and the dentate gyrus.
In Alzheimer's disease (and other forms of dementia), the hippocampus is one of the first regions of the brain to suffer damage; short-term memory loss and disorientation are included among the early symptoms. 

Damage to the hippocampus can also result from oxygen starvation (hypoxia), encephalitis, or medial temporal lobe epilepsy. 

People with extensive, bilateral hippocampal damage may experience anterograde amnesia: the inability to form and retain new memories.
Since different neuronal cell types are neatly organized into layers in the hippocampus, it has frequently been used as a model system for studying neurophysiology. 

The form of neural plasticity known as long-term potentiation (LTP) was initially discovered to occur in the hippocampus and has often been studied in this structure. 

LTP is widely believed to be one of the main neural mechanisms by which memories are stored in the brain.
In rodents as model organisms, the hippocampus has been studied extensively as part of a brain system responsible for spatial memory and navigation. 

Many neurons in the rat and mouse hippocampus respond as place cells: that is, they fire bursts of action potentials when the animal passes through a specific part of its environment. 

Hippocampal place cells interact extensively with head direction cells, whose activity acts as an inertial compass, and conjecturally with grid cells in the neighboring entorhinal cortex.


== Name ==


The earliest description of the ridge running along the floor of the temporal horn of the lateral ventricle comes from the Venetian anatomist Julius Caesar Aranzi (1587), who likened it first to a silkworm and then to a seahorse (Latin hippocampus, from Greek ἱππόκαμπος, from Greek ἵππος, "horse" + κάμπος, "sea monster"). 

The German anatomist Duvernoy (1729), the first to illustrate the structure, also wavered between "seahorse" and "silkworm". "Ram's horn" was proposed by the Danish anatomist Jacob Winsløw in 1732; and a decade later his fellow Parisian, the surgeon de Garengeot, used "cornu Ammonis" – horn of (the ancient Egyptian god) Amun, who was often represented as having a ram's head. 

This has survived in abbreviated form as CA in naming the subfields of the hippocampus.
Another reference appeared with the term pes hippocampi, which may date back to Diemerbroeck in 1672, introducing a comparison with the shape of the folded back forelimbs and webbed feet of the mythological hippocampus, a sea monster with a horse's forequarters and a fish's tail. 

The hippocampus was then described as pes hippocampi major, with an adjacent bulge in the occipital horn, described as the pes hippocampi minor and later renamed as the calcar avis. 

The renaming of the hippocampus as hippocampus major, and the calcar avis as hippocampus minor, has been attributed to Félix Vicq-d'Azyr systematizing nomenclature of parts of the brain in 1786. 

Mayer mistakenly used the term hippopotamus in 1779, and was followed by some other authors until Karl Friedrich Burdach resolved this error in 1829. 

In 1861 the hippocampus minor became the center of a dispute over human evolution between Thomas Henry Huxley and Richard Owen, satirized as the Great Hippocampus Question. 

The term hippocampus minor fell from use in anatomy textbooks and was officially removed in the Nomina Anatomica of 1895. 

Today, the structure is just called the hippocampus, with the term Cornu Ammonis surviving in the names of the hippocampal subfields CA1-CA4.


== Relation to limbic system ==

The term limbic system was introduced in 1952 by Paul MacLean to describe the set of structures that line the edge of the cortex (Latin limbus meaning border): These include the hippocampus, cingulate cortex, olfactory cortex, and amygdala. 

Paul MacLean later suggested that the limbic structures comprise the neural basis of emotion. 

The hippocampus is anatomically connected to parts of the brain that are involved with emotional behavior—the septum, the hypothalamic mammillary body, and the anterior nuclear complex in the thalamus, and is generally accepted to be part of the limbic system.


== Anatomy ==


The hippocampus can be seen as a ridge of gray matter tissue, elevating from the floor of each lateral ventricle in the region of the inferior or temporal horn. 

This ridge can also be seen as an inward fold of the archicortex into the medial temporal lobe. 

The hippocampus can only be seen in dissections as it is concealed by the parahippocampal gyrus. 

The cortex thins from six layers to the three or four layers that make up the hippocampus.The term hippocampal formation is used to refer to the hippocampus proper and its related parts. 

However, there is no consensus as to what parts are included. 

Sometimes the hippocampus is said to include the dentate gyrus and the subiculum. 

Some references include the dentate gyrus and the subiculum in the hippocampal formation, and others also include the presubiculum, parasubiculum, and entorhinal cortex. 

The neural layout and pathways within the hippocampal formation are very similar in all mammals.The hippocampus, including the dentate gyrus, has the shape of a curved tube, which has been compared to a seahorse, and a ram's horn (Cornu Ammonis). 

Its abbreviation CA is used in naming the hippocampal subfields CA1, CA2, CA3, and CA4. 

It can be distinguished as an area where the cortex narrows into a single layer of densely packed pyramidal neurons, which curl into a tight U shape. 

One edge of the "U," – CA4, is embedded into the backward-facing, flexed dentate gyrus. 

The hippocampus is described as having an anterior and posterior part (in primates) or a ventral and dorsal part in other animals. 

Both parts are of similar composition but belong to different neural circuits. 

In the rat, the two hippocampi resemble a pair of bananas, joined at the stems by the commissure of fornix (also called the hippocampal commissure). 

In primates, the part of the hippocampus at the bottom, near the base of the temporal lobe, is much broader than the part at the top. 

This means that in cross-section the hippocampus can show a number of different shapes, depending on the angle and location of the cut.
In a cross-section of the hippocampus, including the dentate gyrus, several layers will be shown. 

The dentate gyrus has three layers of cells (or four if the hilus is included). 

The layers are from the outer in – the molecular layer, the inner molecular layer, the granular layer, and the hilus. 

The CA3 in the hippocampus proper has the following cell layers known as strata: lacunosum-moleculare, radiatum, lucidum, pyramidal, and oriens. 

CA2 and CA1 also have these layers except the lucidum stratum.
The input to the hippocampus (from varying cortical and subcortical structures) comes from the entorhinal cortex via the perforant path. 

The entorhinal cortex (EC) is strongly and reciprocally connected with many cortical and subcortical structures as well as with the brainstem. 

Different thalamic nuclei, (from the anterior and midline groups), the medial septal nucleus, the supramammillary nucleus of the hypothalamus, and the raphe nuclei and locus coeruleus of the brainstem all send axons to the EC, so that it serves as the interface between the neocortex and the other connections, and the hippocampus.
The EC is located in the parahippocampal gyrus, a cortical region adjacent to the hippocampus. 

This gyrus conceals the hippocampus. 

The parahippocampal gyrus is adjacent to the perirhinal cortex, which plays an important role in the visual recognition of complex objects. 

There is also substantial evidence that it makes a contribution to memory, which can be distinguished from the contribution of the hippocampus. 

It is apparent that complete amnesia occurs only when both the hippocampus and the parahippocampus are damaged.


=== Circuitry ===


The major input to the hippocampus is through the entorhinal cortex (EC), whereas its major output is via CA1 to the subiculum. 

Information reaches CA1 via two main pathways, direct and indirect. 

Axons from the EC that originate in layer III are the origin of the direct perforant pathway and form synapses on the very distal apical dendrites of CA1 neurons. 

Conversely, axons originating from layer II are the origin of the indirect pathway, and information reaches CA1 via the trisynaptic circuit. 

In the initial part of this pathway, the axons project through the perforant pathway to the granule cells of the dentate gyrus (first synapse). 

From then, the information follows via the mossy fibres to CA3 (second synapse). 

From there, CA3 axons called Schaffer collaterals leave the deep part of the cell body and loop up to the apical dendrites and then extend to CA1 (third synapse). 

Axons from CA1 then project back to the entorhinal cortex, completing the circuit.Basket cells in CA3 receive excitatory input from the pyramidal cells and then give an inhibitory feedback to the pyramidal cells. 

This recurrent inhibition is a simple feedback circuit that can dampen excitatory responses in the hippocampus. 

The pyramidal cells gives a recurrent excitation which is an important mechanism found in some memory processing microcircuits.Several other connections play important roles in hippocampal function. 

Beyond the output to the EC, additional output pathways go to other cortical areas including the prefrontal cortex. 

A major output goes via the fornix to the lateral septal area and to the mammillary body of the hypothalamus (which the fornix interconnects with the hippocampus). 

The hippocampus receives modulatory input from the serotonin, norepinephrine, and dopamine systems, and from the nucleus reuniens of the thalamus to field CA1. 

A very important projection comes from the medial septal nucleus, which sends cholinergic, and gamma amino butyric acid (GABA) stimulating fibers (GABAergic fibers) to all parts of the hippocampus. 

The inputs from the medial septal nucleus play a key role in controlling the physiological state of the hippocampus; destruction of this nucleus abolishes the hippocampal theta rhythm and severely impairs certain types of memory.


=== Regions ===


Areas of the hippocampus are shown to be functionally and anatomically distinct. 

The dorsal hippocampus (DH), ventral hippocampus (VH) and intermediate hippocampus serve different functions, project with differing pathways, and have varying degrees of place cells. 

The dorsal hippocampus serves for spatial memory, verbal memory, and learning of conceptual information. 

Using the radial arm maze, lesions in the DH were shown to cause spatial memory impairment while VH lesions did not. 

Its projecting pathways include the medial septal nucleus and supramammillary nucleus. 

The dorsal hippocampus also has more place cells than both the ventral and intermediate hippocampal regions.The intermediate hippocampus has overlapping characteristics with both the ventral and dorsal hippocampus. 

Using anterograde tracing methods, Cenquizca and Swanson (2007) located the moderate projections to two primary olfactory cortical areas and prelimbic areas of the medial prefrontal cortex. 

This region has the smallest number of place cells. 

The ventral hippocampus functions in fear conditioning and affective processes. 

Anagnostaras et al. (2002) showed that alterations to the ventral hippocampus reduced the amount of information sent to the amygdala by the dorsal and ventral hippocampus, consequently altering fear conditioning in rats. 

Historically, the earliest widely held hypothesis was that the hippocampus is involved in olfaction. 

This idea was cast into doubt by a series of anatomical studies that did not find any direct projections to the hippocampus from the olfactory bulb. 

However, later work did confirm that the olfactory bulb does project into the ventral part of the lateral entorhinal cortex, and field CA1 in the ventral hippocampus sends axons to the main olfactory bulb, the anterior olfactory nucleus, and to the primary olfactory cortex. 

There continues to be some interest in hippocampal olfactory responses, in particular, the role of the hippocampus in memory for odors, but few specialists today believe that olfaction is its primary function.


== Function ==



=== Theories of hippocampal functions ===

Over the years, three main ideas of hippocampal function have dominated the literature: response inhibition, episodic memory, and spatial cognition. 

The behavioral inhibition theory (caricatured by John O'Keefe and Lynn Nadel as "slam on the brakes!") was very popular up to the 1960s. 

It derived much of its justification from two observations: first, that animals with hippocampal damage tend to be hyperactive; second, that animals with hippocampal damage often have difficulty learning to inhibit responses that they have previously been taught, especially if the response requires remaining quiet as in a passive avoidance test. 

British psychologist Jeffrey Gray developed this line of thought into a full-fledged theory of the role of the hippocampus in anxiety. 

The inhibition theory is currently the least popular of the three.The second major line of thought relates the hippocampus to memory. 

Although it had historical precursors, this idea derived its main impetus from a famous report by American neurosurgeon William Beecher Scoville and British-Canadian neuropsychologist Brenda Milner describing the results of surgical destruction of the hippocampi when trying to relieve epileptic seizures in an American man Henry Molaison, known until his death in 2008 as "Patient H.M." The unexpected outcome of the surgery was severe anterograde and partial retrograde amnesia; Molaison was unable to form new episodic memories after his surgery and could not remember any events that occurred just before his surgery, but he did retain memories of events that occurred many years earlier extending back into his childhood. 

This case attracted such widespread professional interest that Molaison became the most intensively studied subject in medical history. 

In the ensuing years, other patients with similar levels of hippocampal damage and amnesia (caused by accident or disease) have also been studied, and thousands of experiments have studied the physiology of activity-driven changes in synaptic connections in the hippocampus. 

There is now universal agreement that the hippocampi play some sort of important role in memory; however, the precise nature of this role remains widely debated. 

A recent theory proposed – without questioning its role in spatial cognition – that the hippocampus encodes new episodic memories by associating representations in the newborn granule cells of the dentate gyrus and arranging those representations sequentially in the CA3 by relying on the phase precession generated in the entorhinal cortex

The third important theory of hippocampal function relates the hippocampus to space. 

The spatial theory was originally championed by O'Keefe and Nadel, who were influenced by American psychologist E.C. 

Tolman's theories about "cognitive maps" in humans and animals. 

O'Keefe and his student Dostrovsky in 1971 discovered neurons in the rat hippocampus that appeared to them to show activity related to the rat's location within its environment. 

Despite skepticism from other investigators, O'Keefe and his co-workers, especially Lynn Nadel, continued to investigate this question, in a line of work that eventually led to their very influential 1978 book The Hippocampus as a Cognitive Map. 

There is now almost universal agreement that hippocampal function plays an important role in spatial coding, but the details are widely debated.Later research has focused on trying to bridge the disconnect between the two main views of hippocampal function as being split between memory and spatial cognition. 

In some studies, these areas have been expanded to the point of near convergence. 

In an attempt to reconcile the two disparate views, it is suggested that a broader view of the hippocampal function is taken and seen to have a role that encompasses both the organisation of experience (mental mapping, as per Tolman's original concept in 1948) and the directional behaviour seen as being involved in all areas of cognition, so that the function of the hippocampus can be viewed as a broader system that incorporates both the memory and the spatial perspectives in its role that involves the use of a wide scope of cognitive maps. 

This relates to the purposive behaviorism born of Tolman's original goal of identifying the complex cognitive mechanisms and purposes that guided behaviour.It has also been proposed that the spiking activity of hippocampal neurons is associated spatially, and it was suggested that the mechanisms of memory and planning both evolved from mechanisms of navigation and that their neuronal algorithms were basically the same.Many studies have made use of neuroimaging techniques such as functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), and a functional role in approach-avoidance conflict has been noted. 

The anterior hippocampus is seen to be involved in decision-making under approach-avoidance conflict processing. 

It is suggested that the memory, spatial cognition, and conflict processing functions may be seen as working together and not mutually exclusive.


=== Role in memory ===


Psychologists and neuroscientists generally agree that the hippocampus plays an important role in the formation of new memories about experienced events (episodic or autobiographical memory). 

Part of this function is hippocampal involvement in the detection of new events, places and stimuli. 

Some researchers regard the hippocampus as part of a larger medial temporal lobe memory system responsible for general declarative memory (memories that can be explicitly verbalized—these would include, for example, memory for facts in addition to episodic memory). 

The hippocampus also encodes emotional context from the amygdala. 

This is partly why returning to a location where an emotional event occurred may evoke that emotion. 

There is a deep emotional connection between episodic memories and places.Due to bilateral symmetry the brain has a hippocampus in each cerebral hemisphere. 

If damage to the hippocampus occurs in only one hemisphere, leaving the structure intact in the other hemisphere, the brain can retain near-normal memory functioning. 

Severe damage to the hippocampi in both hemispheres results in profound difficulties in forming new memories (anterograde amnesia) and often also affects memories formed before the damage occurred (retrograde amnesia). 

Although the retrograde effect normally extends many years back before the brain damage, in some cases older memories remain. 

This retention of older memories leads to the idea that consolidation over time involves the transfer of memories out of the hippocampus to other parts of the brain. 

Experiments using intrahippocampal transplantation of hippocampal cells in primates with neurotoxic lesions of the hippocampus have shown that the hippocampus is required for the formation and recall, but not the storage, of memories. 

It has been shown that a decrease in the volume of various parts of the hippocampus in people leads to specific memory impairments. 

In particular, efficiency of verbal memory retention is related to the anterior parts of the right and left hippocampus. 

The right head of the hippocampus is more involved in executive functions and regulation during verbal memory recall. 

The tail of the left hippocampus tends to be closely related to verbal memory capacity.Damage to the hippocampus does not affect some types of memory, such as the ability to learn new skills (playing a musical instrument or solving certain types of puzzles, for example). 

This fact suggests that such abilities depend on different types of memory (procedural memory) and different brain regions. 

Furthermore, amnesic patients frequently show "implicit" memory for experiences even in the absence of conscious knowledge. 

For example, patients asked to guess which of two faces they have seen most recently may give the correct answer most of the time in spite of stating that they have never seen either of the faces before. 

Some researchers distinguish between conscious recollection, which depends on the hippocampus, and familiarity, which depends on portions of the medial temporal lobe.When rats are exposed to an intense learning event, they may retain a life-long memory of the event even after a single training session. 

The memory of such an event appears to be first stored in the hippocampus, but this storage is transient. 

Much of the long-term storage of the memory seems to take place in the anterior cingulate cortex. 

When such an intense learning event was experimentally applied, more than 5,000 differently methylated DNA regions appeared in the hippocampus neuronal genome of the rats at one hour and at 24 hours after training. 

These alterations in methylation pattern occurred at many genes that were down-regulated, often due to the formation of new 5-methylcytosine sites in CpG rich regions of the genome. 

Furthermore, many other genes were upregulated, likely often due to the removal of methyl groups from previously existing 5-methylcytosines (5mCs) in DNA. 

Demethylation of 5mC can be carried out by several proteins acting in concert, including TET enzymes as well as enzymes of the DNA base excision repair pathway (see Epigenetics in learning and memory).


=== Role in spatial memory and navigation ===


Studies on freely moving rats and mice have shown many hippocampal neurons to act as place cells that cluster in place fields, and these fire bursts of action potentials when the animal passes through a particular location. 

This place-related neural activity in the hippocampus has also been reported in monkeys that were moved around a room whilst in a restraint chair. 

However, the place cells may have fired in relation to where the monkey was looking rather than to its actual location in the room. 

Over many years, many studies have been carried out on place-responses in rodents, which have given a large amount of information. 

Place cell responses are shown by pyramidal cells in the hippocampus and by granule cells in the dentate gyrus. 

Other cells in smaller proportion are inhibitory interneurons, and these often show place-related variations in their firing rate that are much weaker. 

There is little, if any, spatial topography in the representation; in general, cells lying next to each other in the hippocampus have uncorrelated spatial firing patterns. 

Place cells are typically almost silent when a rat is moving around outside the place field but reach sustained rates as high as 40 Hz when the rat is near the center. 

Neural activity sampled from 30–40 randomly chosen place cells carries enough information to allow a rat's location to be reconstructed with high confidence. 

The size of place fields varies in a gradient along the length of the hippocampus, with cells at the dorsal end showing the smallest fields, cells near the center showing larger fields, and cells at the ventral tip showing fields that cover the entire environment. 

In some cases, the firing rate of hippocampal cells depends not only on place but also the direction a rat is moving, the destination toward which it is traveling, or other task-related variables. 

The firing of place cells is timed in relation to local theta waves, a process termed phase precession.In humans, cells with location-specific firing patterns have been reported during a study of patients with drug-resistant epilepsy. 

They were undergoing an invasive procedure to localize the source of their seizures, with a view to surgical resection. 

The patients had diagnostic electrodes implanted in their hippocampus and then used a computer to move around in a virtual reality town. 

Similar brain imaging studies in navigation have shown the hippocampus to be active. 

A study was carried out on taxi drivers. 

London’s black cab drivers need to learn the locations of a large number of places and the fastest routes between them in order to pass a strict test known as The Knowledge in order to gain a license to operate. 

A study showed that the posterior part of the hippocampus is larger in these drivers than in the general public, and that a positive correlation exists between the length of time served as a driver and the increase in the volume of this part. 

It was also found the total volume of the hippocampus was unchanged, as the increase seen in the posterior part was made at the expense of the anterior part, which showed a relative decrease in size. 

There have been no reported adverse effects from this disparity in hippocampal proportions. 

Another study showed opposite findings in blind individuals. 

The anterior part of the right hippocampus was larger and the posterior part was smaller, compared with sighted individuals.There are several navigational cells in the brain that are either in the hippocampus itself or are strongly connected to it, such as the speed cells present in the medial entorhinal cortex. 

Together these cells form a network that serves as spatial memory. 

The first of such cells discovered in the 1970s were the place cells, which led to the idea of the hippocampus acting to give a neural representation of the environment in a cognitive map. 

When the hippocampus is dysfunctional, orientation is affected; people may have difficulty in remembering how they arrived at a location and how to proceed further. 

Getting lost is a common symptom of amnesia. 

Studies with animals have shown that an intact hippocampus is required for initial learning and long-term retention of some spatial memory tasks, in particular ones that require finding the way to a hidden goal. 

Other cells have been discovered since the finding of the place cells in the rodent brain that are either in the hippocampus or the entorhinal cortex. 

These have been assigned as head direction cells, grid cells and boundary cells. 

Speed cells are thought to provide input to the hippocampal grid cells.


=== Role in approach-avoidance conflict processing ===


Approach-avoidance conflict happens when a situation is presented that can either be rewarding or punishing, and the ensuing decision-making has been associated with anxiety. fMRI findings from studies in approach-avoidance decision-making found evidence for a functional role that is not explained by either long-term memory or spatial cognition. 

Overall findings showed that the anterior hippocampus is sensitive to conflict, and that it may be part of a larger cortical and subcortical network seen to be important in decision making in uncertain conditions.A review makes reference to a number of studies that show the involvement of the hippocampus in conflict tasks. 

The authors suggest that a challenge is to understand how conflict processing relates to the functions of spatial navigation and memory and how all of these functions need not be mutually exclusive.


== Electroencephalography ==


The hippocampus shows two major "modes" of activity, each associated with a distinct pattern of neural population activity and waves of electrical activity as measured by an electroencephalogram (EEG). 

These modes are named after the EEG patterns associated with them: theta and large irregular activity (LIA). 

The main characteristics described below are for the rat, which is the animal most extensively studied.The theta mode appears during states of active, alert behavior (especially locomotion), and also during REM (dreaming) sleep. 

In the theta mode, the EEG is dominated by large regular waves with a frequency range of 6 to 9 Hz, and the main groups of hippocampal neurons (pyramidal cells and granule cells) show sparse population activity, which means that in any short time interval, the great majority of cells are silent, while the small remaining fraction fire at relatively high rates, up to 50 spikes in one second for the most active of them. 

An active cell typically stays active for half a second to a few seconds. 

As the rat behaves, the active cells fall silent and new cells become active, but the overall percentage of active cells remains more or less constant. 

In many situations, cell activity is determined largely by the spatial location of the animal, but other behavioral variables also clearly influence it.
The LIA mode appears during slow-wave (non-dreaming) sleep, and also during states of waking immobility such as resting or eating. 

In the LIA mode, the EEG is dominated by sharp waves that are randomly timed large deflections of the EEG signal lasting for 25–50 milliseconds. 

Sharp waves are frequently generated in sets, with sets containing up to 5 or more individual sharp waves and lasting up to 500 ms. 

The spiking activity of neurons within the hippocampus is highly correlated with sharp wave activity. 

Most neurons decrease their firing rate between sharp waves; however, during a sharp wave, there is a dramatic increase in firing rate in up to 10% of the hippocampal population
These two hippocampal activity modes can be seen in primates as well as rats, with the exception that it has been difficult to see robust theta rhythmicity in the primate hippocampus. 

There are, however, qualitatively similar sharp waves and similar state-dependent changes in neural population activity.


=== Theta rhythm ===


The underlying currents producing the theta wave are generated mainly by densely packed neural layers of the entorhinal cortex, CA3, and the dendrites of pyramidal cells. 

The theta wave is one of the largest signals seen on EEG, and is known as the hippocampal theta rhythm. 

In some situations the EEG is dominated by regular waves at 3 to 10 Hz, often continuing for many seconds. 

These reflect subthreshold membrane potentials and strongly modulate the spiking of hippocampal neurons and synchronise across the hippocampus in a travelling wave pattern. 

The trisynaptic circuit is a relay of neurotransmission in the hippocampus that interacts with many brain regions. 

From rodent studies it has been proposed that the trisynaptic circuit generates the hippocampal theta rhythm.Theta rhythmicity is very obvious in rabbits and rodents and also clearly present in cats and dogs. 

Whether theta can be seen in primates is not yet clear. 

In rats (the animals that have been the most extensively studied), theta is seen mainly in two conditions: first, when an animal is walking or in some other way actively interacting with its surroundings; second, during REM sleep. 

The function of theta has not yet been convincingly explained although numerous theories have been proposed. 

The most popular hypothesis has been to relate it to learning and memory. 

An example would be the phase with which theta rhythms, at the time of stimulation of a neuron, shape the effect of that stimulation upon its synapses. 

What is meant here is that theta rhythms may affect those aspects of learning and memory that are dependent upon synaptic plasticity. 

It is well established that lesions of the medial septum—the central node of the theta system—cause severe disruptions of memory. 

However, the medial septum is more than just the controller of theta; it is also the main source of cholinergic projections to the hippocampus. 

It has not been established that septal lesions exert their effects specifically by eliminating the theta rhythm.


=== Sharp waves ===


During sleep or during resting, when an animal is not engaged with its surroundings, the hippocampal EEG shows a pattern of irregular slow waves, somewhat larger in amplitude than theta waves. 

This pattern is occasionally interrupted by large surges called sharp waves. 

These events are associated with bursts of spike activity lasting 50 to 100 milliseconds in pyramidal cells of CA3 and CA1. 

They are also associated with short-lived high-frequency EEG oscillations called "ripples", with frequencies in the range 150 to 200 Hz in rats, and together they are known as sharp waves and ripples. 

Sharp waves are most frequent during sleep when they occur at an average rate of around 1 per second (in rats) but in a very irregular temporal pattern. 

Sharp waves are less frequent during inactive waking states and are usually smaller. 

Sharp waves have also been observed in humans and monkeys. 

In macaques, sharp waves are robust but do not occur as frequently as in rats.One of the most interesting aspects of sharp waves is that they appear to be associated with memory. 

Wilson and McNaughton 1994, and numerous later studies, reported that when hippocampal place cells have overlapping spatial firing fields (and therefore often fire in near-simultaneity), they tend to show correlated activity during sleep following the behavioral session. 

This enhancement of correlation, commonly known as reactivation, has been found to occur mainly during sharp waves. 

It has been proposed that sharp waves are, in fact, reactivations of neural activity patterns that were memorized during behavior, driven by strengthening of synaptic connections within the hippocampus. 

This idea forms a key component of the "two-stage memory" theory, advocated by Buzsáki and others, which proposes that memories are stored within the hippocampus during behavior and then later transferred to the neocortex during sleep. 

Sharp waves in Hebbian theory are seen as persistently repeated stimulations by presynaptic cells, of postsynaptic cells that are suggested to drive synaptic changes in the cortical targets of hippocampal output pathways. 

Suppression of sharp waves and ripples in sleep or during immobility can interfere with memories expressed at the level of the behavior, nonetheless, the newly formed CA1 place cell code can re-emerge even after a sleep with abolished sharp waves and ripples, in spatially non-demanding tasks.


=== Long-term potentiation ===


Since at least the time of Ramon y Cajal (1852–1934), psychologists have speculated that the brain stores memory by altering the strength of connections between neurons that are simultaneously active. 

This idea was formalized by Donald Hebb in 1949, but for many years remained unexplained. 

In 1973, Tim Bliss and Terje Lømo described a phenomenon in the rabbit hippocampus that appeared to meet Hebb's specifications: a change in synaptic responsiveness induced by brief strong activation and lasting for hours or days or longer. 

This phenomenon was soon referred to as long-term potentiation (LTP). 

As a candidate mechanism for long-term memory, LTP has since been studied intensively, and a great deal has been learned about it. 

However, the complexity and variety of the intracellular signalling cascades that can trigger LTP is acknowledged as preventing a more complete understanding.The hippocampus is a particularly favorable site for studying LTP because of its densely packed and sharply defined layers of neurons, but similar types of activity-dependent synaptic change have also been observed in many other brain areas. 

The best-studied form of LTP has been seen in CA1 of the hippocampus and occurs at synapses that terminate on dendritic spines and use the neurotransmitter glutamate. 

The synaptic changes depend on a special type of glutamate receptor, the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor, a cell surface receptor which has the special property of allowing calcium to enter the postsynaptic spine only when presynaptic activation and postsynaptic depolarization occur at the same time. 

Drugs that interfere with NMDA receptors block LTP and have major effects on some types of memory, especially spatial memory. 

Genetically modified mice that are modified to disable the LTP mechanism, also generally show severe memory deficits.


== Disorders ==



=== Aging ===


Age-related conditions such as Alzheimer's disease and other forms of dementia (for which hippocampal disruption is one of the earliest signs) have a severe impact on many types of cognition including memory. 

Even normal aging is associated with a gradual decline in some types of memory, including episodic memory and working memory (or short-term memory). 

Because the hippocampus is thought to play a central role in memory, there has been considerable interest in the possibility that age-related declines could be caused by hippocampal deterioration. 

Some early studies reported substantial loss of neurons in the hippocampus of elderly people, but later studies using more precise techniques found only minimal differences. 

Similarly, some MRI studies have reported shrinkage of the hippocampus in elderly people, but other studies have failed to reproduce this finding. 

There is, however, a reliable relationship between the size of the hippocampus and memory performance; so that where there is age-related shrinkage, memory performance will be impaired. 

There are also reports that memory tasks tend to produce less hippocampal activation in the elderly than in the young. 

Furthermore, a randomized control trial published in 2011 found that aerobic exercise could increase the size of the hippocampus in adults aged 55 to 80 and also improve spatial memory.


=== Stress ===

The hippocampus contains high levels of glucocorticoid receptors, which make it more vulnerable to long-term stress than most other brain areas. 

There is evidence that humans having experienced severe, long-lasting traumatic stress show atrophy of the hippocampus more than of other parts of the brain. 

These effects show up in post-traumatic stress disorder, and they may contribute to the hippocampal atrophy reported in schizophrenia and severe depression. 

Anterior hippocampal volume in children is positively correlated with parental family income and this correlation is thought to be mediated by income related stress. 

A recent study has also revealed atrophy as a result of depression, but this can be stopped with anti-depressants even if they are not effective in relieving other symptoms.Chronic stress resulting in elevated levels of glucocorticoids, notably of cortisol, is seen to be a cause of neuronal atrophy in the hippocampus. 

This atrophy results in a smaller hippocampal volume which is also seen in Cushing’s syndrome. 

The higher levels of cortisol in Cushing’s syndrome is usually the result of medications taken for other conditions. 

Neuronal loss also occurs as a result of impaired neurogenesis. 

Another factor that contributes to a smaller hippocampal volume is that of dendritic retraction where dendrites are shortened in length and reduced in number, in response to increased glucocorticoids. 

This dendritic retraction is reversible. 

After treatment with medication to reduce cortisol in Cushing’s syndrome, the hippocampal volume is seen to be restored by as much as 10%. 

This change is seen to be due to the reforming of the dendrites. 

This dendritic restoration can also happen when stress is removed. 

There is, however, evidence derived mainly from studies using rats that stress occurring shortly after birth can affect hippocampal function in ways that persist throughout life.Sex-specific responses to stress have also been demonstrated in the rat to have an effect on the hippocampus. 

Chronic stress in the male rat showed dendritic retraction and cell loss in the CA3 region but this was not shown in the female. 

This was thought to be due to neuroprotective ovarian hormones. 

In rats, DNA damage increases in the hippocampus under conditions of stress.


=== Epilepsy ===


The hippocampus is one of the few brain regions where new neurons are generated. 

This process of neurogenesis is confined to the dentate gyrus. 

The production of new neurons can be positively affected by exercise or negatively affected by epileptic seizures.Seizures in temporal lobe epilepsy can affect the normal development of new neurons and can cause tissue damage. 

Hippocampal sclerosis is the most common type of such tissue damage. 

It is not yet clear, however, whether the epilepsy is usually caused by hippocampal abnormalities or whether the hippocampus is damaged by cumulative effects of seizures. 

However, in experimental settings where repetitive seizures are artificially induced in animals, hippocampal damage is a frequent result. 

This may be a consequence of the concentration of excitable glutamate receptors in the hippocampus. 

Hyperexcitability can lead to cytotoxicity and cell death. 

It may also have something to do with the hippocampus being a site where new neurons continue to be created throughout life, and to abnormalities in this process.


=== Schizophrenia ===

The causes of schizophrenia are not well understood, but numerous abnormalities of brain structure have been reported. 

The most thoroughly investigated alterations involve the cerebral cortex, but effects on the hippocampus have also been described. 

Many reports have found reductions in the size of the hippocampus in people with schizophrenia. 

The left hippocampus seems to be affected more than the right. 

The changes noted have largely been accepted to be the result of abnormal development. 

It is unclear whether hippocampal alterations play any role in causing the psychotic symptoms that are the most important feature of schizophrenia. 

It has been suggested that on the basis of experimental work using animals, hippocampal dysfunction might produce an alteration of dopamine release in the basal ganglia, thereby indirectly affecting the integration of information in the prefrontal cortex. 

It has also been suggested that hippocampal dysfunction might account for the disturbances in long-term memory frequently observed.MRI studies have found a smaller brain volume and larger ventricles in people with schizophrenia–however researchers do not know if the shrinkage is from the schizophrenia or from the medication. 

The hippocampus and thalamus have been shown to be reduced in volume; and the volume of the globus pallidus is increased. 

Cortical patterns are altered, and a reduction in the volume and thickness of the cortex particularly in the frontal and temporal lobes has been noted. 

It has further been proposed that many of the changes seen are present at the start of the disorder which gives weight to the theory that there is abnormal neurodevelopment.The hippocampus has been seen as central to the pathology of schizophrenia, both in the neural and physiological effects. 

It has been generally accepted that there is an abnormal synaptic connectivity underlying schizophrenia. 

Several lines of evidence implicate changes in the synaptic organization and connectivity, in and from the hippocampus Many studies have found dysfunction in the synaptic circuitry within the hippocampus and its activity on the prefrontal cortex. 

The glutamatergic pathways have been seen to be largely affected. 

The subfield CA1 is seen to be the least involved of the other subfields, and CA4 and the subiculum have been reported elsewhere as being the most implicated areas. 

The review concluded that the pathology could be due to genetics, faulty neurodevelopment or abnormal neural plasticity. 

It was further concluded that schizophrenia is not due to any known neurodegenerative disorder. 

Oxidative DNA damage is substantially increased in the hippocampus of elderly patients with chronic schizophrenia.


=== Transient global amnesia ===

Transient global amnesia is a dramatic, sudden, temporary, near-total loss of short-term memory. 

Various causes have been hypothesized including ischemia, epilepsy, migraine and disturbance of cerebral venous blood flow, leading to ischemia of structures such as the hippocampus that are involved in memory.There has been no scientific proof of any cause. 

However, diffusion weighted MRI studies taken from 12 to 24 hours following an episode has shown there to be small dot-like lesions in the hippocampus. 

These findings have suggested a possible implication of CA1 neurons made vulnerable by metabolic stress.


=== PTSD ===

Some studies shows correlation of reduced hippocampus volume and posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). 

A study of Vietnam War combat veterans with PTSD showed a 20% reduction in the volume of their hippocampus compared with veterans having suffered no such symptoms. 

This finding was not replicated in chronic PTSD patients traumatized at an air show plane crash in 1988 (Ramstein, Germany). 

It is also the case that non-combat twin brothers of Vietnam veterans with PTSD also had smaller hippocampi than other controls, raising questions about the nature of the correlation. 

A 2016 study strengthened theory that a smaller hippocampus increases the risk for post-traumatic stress disorder, and a larger hippocampus increases the likelihood of efficacious treatment.


=== Microcephaly ===

Hippocampus atrophy has been characterized in microcephaly patients and mouse models with WDR62 mutations which recapitulate human point mutations shown a deficiency in hippocampal development and neurogenesis.


== Other animals ==



=== Other mammals ===

The hippocampus has a generally similar appearance across the range of mammals, from monotremes such as the echidna to primates such as humans. 

The hippocampal-size-to-body-size ratio broadly increases, being about twice as large for primates as for the echidna. 

It does not, however, increase at anywhere close to the rate of the neocortex-to-body-size ratio. 

Therefore, the hippocampus takes up a much larger fraction of the cortical mantle in rodents than in primates. 

In adult humans the volume of the hippocampus on each side of the brain is about 3.0 to 3.5 cm3 as compared to 320 to 420 cm3 for the volume of the neocortex.There is also a general relationship between the size of the hippocampus and spatial memory. 

When comparisons are made between similar species, those that have a greater capacity for spatial memory tend to have larger hippocampal volumes. 

This relationship also extends to sex differences; in species where males and females show strong differences in spatial memory ability they also tend to show corresponding differences in hippocampal volume.


=== Other vertebrates ===

Non-mammalian species do not have a brain structure that looks like the mammalian hippocampus, but they have one that is considered homologous to it. 

The hippocampus, as pointed out above, is in essence part of the allocortex. 

Only mammals have a fully developed cortex, but the structure it evolved from, called the pallium, is present in all vertebrates, even the most primitive ones such as the lamprey or hagfish. 

The pallium is usually divided into three zones: medial, lateral and dorsal. 

The medial pallium forms the precursor of the hippocampus. 

It does not resemble the hippocampus visually because the layers are not warped into an S shape or enfolded by the dentate gyrus, but the homology is indicated by strong chemical and functional affinities. 

There is now evidence that these hippocampal-like structures are involved in spatial cognition in birds, reptiles, and fish.


==== Birds ====
In birds, the correspondence is sufficiently well established that most anatomists refer to the medial pallial zone as the "avian hippocampus". 

Numerous species of birds have strong spatial skills, in particular those that cache food. 

There is evidence that food-caching birds have a larger hippocampus than other types of birds and that damage to the hippocampus causes impairments in spatial memory.


==== Fish ====
The story for fish is more complex. 

In teleost fish (which make up the great majority of existing species), the forebrain is distorted in comparison to other types of vertebrates: most neuroanatomists believe that the teleost forebrain is in essence everted, like a sock turned inside-out, so that structures that lie in the interior, next to the ventricles, for most vertebrates, are found on the outside in teleost fish, and vice versa. 

One of the consequences of this is that the medial pallium ("hippocampal" zone) of a typical vertebrate is thought to correspond to the lateral pallium of a typical fish. 

Several types of fish (particularly goldfish) have been shown experimentally to have strong spatial memory abilities, even forming "cognitive maps" of the areas they inhabit. 

There is evidence that damage to the lateral pallium impairs spatial memory. 

It is not yet known whether the medial pallium plays a similar role in even more primitive vertebrates, such as sharks and rays, or even lampreys and hagfish.


=== Insects and molluscs ===

Some types of insects, and molluscs such as the octopus, also have strong spatial learning and navigation abilities, but these appear to work differently from the mammalian spatial system, so there is as yet no good reason to think that they have a common evolutionary origin; nor is there sufficient similarity in brain structure to enable anything resembling a "hippocampus" to be identified in these species. 

Some have proposed, however, that the insect's mushroom bodies may have a function similar to that of the hippocampus.


== Notes ==



== Further reading ==

Hippocampus (Wiley)
Docampo-Seara A, Lagadec R, Mazan S, Rodríguez MA, Quintana-Urzainqui I, Candal E (July 2018). "Study of pallial neurogenesis in shark embryos and the evolutionary origin of the subventricular zone". 

Brain Structure and Function. 223 (8): 3593–3612. doi:10.1007/s00429-018-1705-2. 

PMID 29980930.
Derdikman D, Knierim JJ, eds. (2014). 

Space, Time and Memory in the Hippocampal Formation. 

Springer. 

ISBN 978-3-7091-1292-2.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hippocampus
;;;ES;;;



HIPOCAMPO


El hipocampo (a través del latín del griego ἱππόκαμπος, 'caballito de mar') es un componente importante del cerebro de los humanos y otros vertebrados. 

Los humanos y otros mamíferos tienen dos hipocampos, uno en cada lado del cerebro. 

El hipocampo es parte del sistema límbico y juega un papel importante en la consolidación de la información de la memoria a corto plazo a la memoria a largo plazo, y en la memoria espacial que permite la navegación. 

El hipocampo está ubicado en la alocorteza, con proyecciones neurales en la neocorteza en humanos, así como en primates. 

El hipocampo, como el palio medial, es una estructura que se encuentra en todos los vertebrados. 

En los humanos, contiene dos partes principales entrelazadas: el hipocampo propiamente dicho (también llamado cuerno de Amón) y la circunvolución dentada.
En la enfermedad de Alzheimer (y otras formas de demencia), el hipocampo es una de las primeras regiones del cerebro en sufrir daño; la pérdida de memoria a corto plazo y la desorientación se incluyen entre los primeros síntomas.

El daño al hipocampo también puede deberse a falta de oxígeno (hipoxia), encefalitis o epilepsia del lóbulo temporal medio. 

Las personas con daño hipocampal bilateral extenso pueden experimentar amnesia anterógrada: la incapacidad de formar y retener nuevos recuerdos.
Dado que diferentes tipos de células neuronales están perfectamente organizados en capas en el hipocampo, se ha utilizado con frecuencia como sistema modelo para el estudio de la neurofisiología. 

La forma de plasticidad neuronal conocida como potenciación a largo plazo (LTP) se descubrió inicialmente que se producía en el hipocampo y, a menudo, se ha estudiado en esta estructura. 

Se cree ampliamente que la LTP es uno de los principales mecanismos neuronales mediante los cuales los recuerdos se almacenan en el cerebro.
En roedores como organismos modelo, el hipocampo se ha estudiado ampliamente como parte de un sistema cerebral responsable de la memoria espacial y la navegación. 

Muchas neuronas en el hipocampo de rata y ratón responden como células de lugar: es decir, disparan ráfagas de potenciales de acción cuando el animal pasa por una parte específica de su entorno. 

Las células de lugar del hipocampo interactúan ampliamente con las células de dirección de la cabeza, cuya actividad actúa como una brújula de inercia, y conjeturalmente con las células de la cuadrícula en la corteza entorrinal vecina.


== Nombre ==


La primera descripción de la cresta que recorre el suelo del asta temporal del ventrículo lateral proviene del anatomista veneciano Julius Caesar Aranzi (1587), quien la comparó primero con un gusano de seda y luego con un caballito de mar (latín hippocampus, del griego ἱππόκαμπος, del griego ἵππος, "caballo" + κάμπος, "monstruo marino").

El anatomista alemán Duvernoy (1729), el primero en ilustrar la estructura, también vaciló entre "caballito de mar" y "gusano de seda". El "cuerno de carnero" fue propuesto por el anatomista danés Jacob Winsløw en 1732; y una década más tarde, su compañero parisino, el cirujano de Garengeot, usó "cornu Ammonis" - cuerno de (el antiguo dios egipcio) Amón, que a menudo se representaba con cabeza de carnero.

Esto ha sobrevivido en forma abreviada como CA al nombrar los subcampos del hipocampo.
Otra referencia apareció con el término pes hippocampi, que puede remontarse a Diemerbroeck en 1672, introduciendo una comparación con la forma de las extremidades anteriores plegadas hacia atrás y los pies palmeados del mitológico hipocampo, un monstruo marino con cuartos delanteros de caballo y cola de pez. 

Luego, el hipocampo se describió como pes hippocampi major, con un bulto adyacente en el cuerno occipital, descrito como pes hippocampi minor y luego renombrado como calcar avis.

El cambio de nombre del hipocampo como hipocampo mayor, y el calcar avis como hipocampo menor, se ha atribuido a Félix Vicq-d'Azyr al sistematizar la nomenclatura de las partes del cerebro en 1786.

Mayer usó erróneamente el término hipopótamo en 1779, y fue seguido por otros autores hasta que Karl Friedrich Burdach resolvió este error en 1829.

En 1861, el hipocampo menor se convirtió en el centro de una disputa sobre la evolución humana entre Thomas Henry Huxley y Richard Owen, satirizado como la Gran Cuestión del Hipocampo.

El término hipocampo menor dejó de usarse en los libros de texto de anatomía y se eliminó oficialmente en la Nomina Anatomica de 1895.

Hoy en día, la estructura se llama simplemente hipocampo, y el término Cornu Ammonis sobrevive en los nombres de los subcampos del hipocampo CA1-CA4.


== Relación con el sistema límbico ==

El término sistema límbico fue introducido en 1952 por Paul MacLean para describir el conjunto de estructuras que recubren el borde de la corteza (del latín limbus que significa borde): estas incluyen el hipocampo, la corteza cingulada, la corteza olfativa y la amígdala. 

Paul MacLean sugirió más tarde que las estructuras límbicas comprenden la base neural de la emoción. 

El hipocampo está conectado anatómicamente con partes del cerebro que están involucradas con el comportamiento emocional: el tabique, el cuerpo mamilar hipotalámico y el complejo nuclear anterior en el tálamo, y generalmente se acepta que es parte del sistema límbico.


== Anatomía ==


El hipocampo se puede ver como una cresta de tejido de sustancia gris, que se eleva desde el suelo de cada ventrículo lateral en la región del asta inferior o temporal. 

Esta cresta también se puede ver como un pliegue hacia adentro del arquicórtex en el lóbulo temporal medial. 

El hipocampo solo se puede ver en las disecciones, ya que está oculto por la circunvolución parahipocampal. 

La corteza se adelgaza de seis capas a las tres o cuatro capas que forman el hipocampo. El término formación hipocampal se usa para referirse al hipocampo propiamente dicho y sus partes relacionadas. 

Sin embargo, no hay consenso sobre qué partes se incluyen. 

A veces se dice que el hipocampo incluye la circunvolución dentada y el subículo. 

Algunas referencias incluyen la circunvolución dentada y el subículo en la formación del hipocampo, y otras también incluyen el presubículo, el parasubículo y la corteza entorrinal. 

El diseño neural y las vías dentro de la formación del hipocampo son muy similares en todos los mamíferos. El hipocampo, incluida la circunvolución dentada, tiene la forma de un tubo curvo, que se ha comparado con un caballito de mar, y un cuerno de carnero (Cornu ammonis).

Su abreviatura CA se usa para nombrar los subcampos del hipocampo CA1, CA2, CA3 y CA4.

Se puede distinguir como un área donde la corteza se estrecha en una sola capa de neuronas piramidales densamente empaquetadas, que se curvan en forma de U apretada.

Un borde de la "U", CA4, está incrustado en la circunvolución dentada flexionada que mira hacia atrás.

Se describe que el hipocampo tiene una parte anterior y posterior (en primates) o una parte ventral y dorsal en otros animales.

Ambas partes tienen una composición similar pero pertenecen a diferentes circuitos neuronales.

En la rata, los dos hipocampos se asemejan a un par de plátanos, unidos en los tallos por la comisura del fórnix (también llamada comisura del hipocampo). 

En los primates, la parte inferior del hipocampo, cerca de la base del lóbulo temporal, es mucho más ancha que la parte superior. 

Esto significa que, en la sección transversal, el hipocampo puede mostrar varias formas diferentes, según el ángulo y la ubicación del corte.
En una sección transversal del hipocampo, incluida la circunvolución dentada, se mostrarán varias capas. 

La circunvolución dentada tiene tres capas de células (o cuatro si se incluye el hilio). 

Las capas son de afuera hacia adentro: la capa molecular, la capa molecular interna, la capa granular y el hilio. 

El CA3 en el hipocampo propiamente dicho tiene las siguientes capas celulares conocidas como estratos: lacunosum-moleculare, radiatum, lucidum, pyramidal y oriens. 

CA2 y CA1 también tienen estas capas excepto el estrato lucidum.
La entrada al hipocampo (de diversas estructuras corticales y subcorticales) proviene de la corteza entorrinal a través de la vía perforante.

La corteza entorrinal (EC) está fuerte y recíprocamente conectada con muchas estructuras corticales y subcorticales, así como con el tronco encefálico.

Los diferentes núcleos talámicos (de los grupos anterior y de la línea media), el núcleo septal medial, el núcleo supramamilar del hipotálamo y los núcleos del rafe y el locus coeruleus del tronco encefálico envían axones al EC, de modo que sirve como interfaz entre el neocórtex y las demás conexiones, y el hipocampo.
El EC está ubicado en la circunvolución parahipocampal, una región cortical adyacente al hipocampo.

Esta circunvolución oculta el hipocampo.

La circunvolución parahipocampal está adyacente a la corteza perirrinal, que juega un papel importante en el reconocimiento visual de objetos complejos.

También hay evidencia sustancial de que hace una contribución a la memoria, que se puede distinguir de la contribución del hipocampo.

Es evidente que la amnesia completa sólo ocurre cuando tanto el hipocampo como el parahipocampo están dañados.


=== Circuito ===


La entrada principal al hipocampo es a través de la corteza entorrinal (EC), mientras que su salida principal es a través de CA1 al subículo.

La información llega a CA1 a través de dos vías principales, directa e indirecta.

Los axones de la CE que se originan en la capa III son el origen de la vía perforante directa y forman sinapsis en las dendritas apicales muy distales de las neuronas CA1.

Por el contrario, los axones que se originan en la capa II son el origen de la vía indirecta y la información llega a CA1 a través del circuito trisináptico.

En la parte inicial de esta vía, los axones se proyectan a través de la vía perforante hacia las células granulares del giro dentado (primera sinapsis).

A partir de ahí, la información sigue a través de las fibras musgosas hasta CA3 (segunda sinapsis).

A partir de ahí, los axones CA3 llamados colaterales de Schaffer salen de la parte profunda del cuerpo celular y ascienden hasta las dendritas apicales y luego se extienden hasta CA1 (tercera sinapsis).

Los axones de CA1 luego se proyectan de regreso a la corteza entorrinal, completando el circuito. Las células en canasta en CA3 reciben información excitatoria de las células piramidales y luego dan una retroalimentación inhibitoria a las células piramidales.

Esta inhibición recurrente es un circuito de retroalimentación simple que puede amortiguar las respuestas excitatorias en el hipocampo.

Las células piramidales dan una excitación recurrente que es un mecanismo importante que se encuentra en algunos microcircuitos de procesamiento de memoria. Varias otras conexiones juegan un papel importante en la función del hipocampo.

Más allá de la salida a la EC, las vías de salida adicionales van a otras áreas corticales, incluida la corteza prefrontal.

Una salida principal va a través del fórnix al área septal lateral y al cuerpo mamilar del hipotálamo (que el fórnix interconecta con el hipocampo).

El hipocampo recibe impulsos moduladores de los sistemas de serotonina, norepinefrina y dopamina, y del núcleo reuniens del tálamo al campo CA1.

Una proyección muy importante proviene del núcleo septal medial, que envía fibras estimulantes colinérgicas y de ácido gamma aminobutírico (GABA) (fibras GABAérgicas) a todas las partes del hipocampo.

Las entradas del núcleo septal medial juegan un papel clave en el control del estado fisiológico del hipocampo; la destrucción de este núcleo suprime el ritmo theta del hipocampo y deteriora gravemente ciertos tipos de memoria.


=== Regiones ===


Se muestra que las áreas del hipocampo son funcional y anatómicamente distintas. 

El hipocampo dorsal (DH), el hipocampo ventral (VH) y el hipocampo intermedio cumplen diferentes funciones, se proyectan con diferentes vías y tienen diversos grados de células de lugar. 

El hipocampo dorsal sirve para la memoria espacial, la memoria verbal y el aprendizaje de información conceptual. 

Usando el laberinto del brazo radial, se demostró que las lesiones en el DH causan deterioro de la memoria espacial mientras que las lesiones del VH no lo hacen. 

Sus vías de proyección incluyen el núcleo septal medial y el núcleo supramamilar. 

El hipocampo dorsal también tiene más células de lugar que las regiones del hipocampo ventral e intermedia. El hipocampo intermedio tiene características superpuestas con el hipocampo ventral y dorsal.

Usando métodos de rastreo anterógrado, Cenquizca y Swanson (2007) ubicaron las proyecciones moderadas en dos áreas corticales olfatorias primarias y áreas prelímbicas de la corteza prefrontal medial.

Esta región tiene el menor número de celdas de lugar.

El hipocampo ventral funciona en el condicionamiento del miedo y los procesos afectivos.

Anagnostaras et al. (2002) demostraron que las alteraciones en el hipocampo ventral reducían la cantidad de información enviada a la amígdala por el hipocampo dorsal y ventral, alterando en consecuencia el condicionamiento del miedo en ratas.

Históricamente, la primera hipótesis ampliamente sostenida fue que el hipocampo está involucrado en el olfato.

Esta idea fue puesta en duda por una serie de estudios anatómicos que no encontraron proyecciones directas al hipocampo desde el bulbo olfatorio.

Sin embargo, trabajos posteriores confirmaron que el bulbo olfatorio se proyecta hacia la parte ventral de la corteza entorrinal lateral, y el campo CA1 en el hipocampo ventral envía axones al bulbo olfatorio principal, al núcleo olfatorio anterior y a la corteza olfatoria primaria.

Sigue habiendo cierto interés en las respuestas olfativas del hipocampo, en particular, el papel del hipocampo en la memoria de los olores, pero hoy en día pocos especialistas creen que el olfato es su función principal.


== Función ==



=== Teorías de las funciones del hipocampo ===

A lo largo de los años, tres ideas principales sobre la función del hipocampo han dominado la literatura: inhibición de la respuesta, memoria episódica y cognición espacial.

La teoría de la inhibición del comportamiento (caricaturizada por John O'Keefe y Lynn Nadel como "¡Pisen los frenos!") fue muy popular hasta la década de 1960. 

Derivó gran parte de su justificación de dos observaciones: primero, que los animales con daño en el hipocampo tienden a ser hiperactivos; segundo, que los animales con daño en el hipocampo a menudo tienen dificultad para aprender a inhibir las respuestas que les han enseñado previamente, especialmente si la respuesta requiere permanecer en silencio como en una prueba de evitación pasiva.

El psicólogo británico Jeffrey Gray desarrolló esta línea de pensamiento en una teoría completa sobre el papel del hipocampo en la ansiedad. 

La teoría de la inhibición es actualmente la menos popular de las tres. La segunda línea principal de pensamiento relaciona el hipocampo con la memoria. 

Aunque tuvo antecedentes históricos, esta idea derivó su principal impulso de un famoso informe del neurocirujano estadounidense William Beecher Scoville y la neuropsicóloga británico-canadiense Brenda Milner que describe los resultados de la destrucción quirúrgica de los hipocampos al tratar de aliviar los ataques epilépticos en un hombre estadounidense Henry Molaison. , conocido hasta su muerte en 2008 como "Paciente HM". El resultado inesperado de la cirugía fue una amnesia anterógrada y retrógrada parcial severa; Molaison no pudo formar nuevos recuerdos episódicos después de su cirugía y no pudo recordar ningún evento que ocurriera justo antes de su cirugía, pero retuvo recuerdos de eventos que ocurrieron muchos años antes que se remontan a su infancia.

Este caso atrajo un interés profesional tan generalizado que Molaison se convirtió en el tema más estudiado en la historia de la medicina. 

En los años siguientes, también se estudiaron otros pacientes con niveles similares de daño hipocampal y amnesia (causada por accidente o enfermedad), y miles de experimentos estudiaron la fisiología de los cambios impulsados ​​por la actividad en las conexiones sinápticas en el hipocampo. 

Ahora existe un acuerdo universal de que los hipocampos juegan algún tipo de papel importante en la memoria; sin embargo, la naturaleza precisa de este rol sigue siendo ampliamente debatida.

Una teoría reciente propuso, sin cuestionar su papel en la cognición espacial, que el hipocampo codifica nuevos recuerdos episódicos al asociar representaciones en las células granulares recién nacidas de la circunvolución dentada y organizar esas representaciones secuencialmente en el CA3 confiando en la precesión de fase generada en el entorrinal. corteza

La tercera teoría importante de la función del hipocampo relaciona el hipocampo con el espacio.

La teoría espacial fue originalmente defendida por O'Keefe y Nadel, quienes fueron influenciados por el psicólogo estadounidense EC.

Las teorías de Tolman sobre los "mapas cognitivos" en humanos y animales.

O'Keefe y su alumno Dostrovsky en 1971 descubrieron neuronas en el hipocampo de rata que les pareció que mostraban actividad relacionada con la ubicación de la rata dentro de su entorno.

A pesar del escepticismo de otros investigadores, O'Keefe y sus compañeros de trabajo, especialmente Lynn Nadel, continuaron investigando esta cuestión, en una línea de trabajo que eventualmente condujo a su muy influyente libro de 1978 The Hippocampus as a Cognitive Map. 

Ahora existe un acuerdo casi universal de que la función del hipocampo juega un papel importante en la codificación espacial, pero los detalles son ampliamente debatidos. Investigaciones posteriores se han centrado en tratar de salvar la desconexión entre los dos puntos de vista principales de la función del hipocampo dividida entre la memoria y la cognición espacial. . 

En algunos estudios, estas áreas se han ampliado hasta el punto de casi convergencia. 

En un intento por reconciliar los dos puntos de vista dispares, se sugiere que se tome una visión más amplia de la función del hipocampo y se considere que tiene un papel que abarca tanto la organización de la experiencia (mapeo mental, según el concepto original de Tolman en 1948) como la Se considera que el comportamiento direccional está involucrado en todas las áreas de la cognición, de modo que la función del hipocampo puede verse como un sistema más amplio que incorpora tanto la memoria como las perspectivas espaciales en su papel que implica el uso de una amplia gama de mapas cognitivos.

Esto se relaciona con el conductismo intencional nacido del objetivo original de Tolman de identificar los mecanismos cognitivos complejos y los propósitos que guían el comportamiento. ambos evolucionaron a partir de mecanismos de navegación y sus algoritmos neuronales eran básicamente los mismos. Muchos estudios han hecho uso de técnicas de neuroimagen como la resonancia magnética funcional (fMRI), y se ha observado un papel funcional en el conflicto de aproximación-evitación.

Se ve que el hipocampo anterior está involucrado en la toma de decisiones bajo el procesamiento de conflictos de enfoque-evitación.

Se sugiere que las funciones de memoria, cognición espacial y procesamiento de conflictos pueden verse como trabajando juntas y no mutuamente excluyentes.


=== Papel en la memoria ===


Los psicólogos y neurocientíficos generalmente están de acuerdo en que el hipocampo juega un papel importante en la formación de nuevos recuerdos sobre eventos experimentados (memoria episódica o autobiográfica).

Parte de esta función es la participación del hipocampo en la detección de nuevos eventos, lugares y estímulos.

Algunos investigadores consideran que el hipocampo es parte de un sistema de memoria del lóbulo temporal medial más grande responsable de la memoria declarativa general (recuerdos que se pueden verbalizar explícitamente; estos incluirían, por ejemplo, la memoria de hechos además de la memoria episódica).

El hipocampo también codifica el contexto emocional de la amígdala.

Esta es en parte la razón por la cual regresar a un lugar donde ocurrió un evento emocional puede evocar esa emoción.

Existe una conexión emocional profunda entre los recuerdos episódicos y los lugares. Debido a la simetría bilateral, el cerebro tiene un hipocampo en cada hemisferio cerebral.

Si el daño al hipocampo ocurre en un solo hemisferio, dejando la estructura intacta en el otro hemisferio, el cerebro puede conservar un funcionamiento de memoria casi normal.

El daño severo a los hipocampos en ambos hemisferios resulta en profundas dificultades para formar nuevos recuerdos (amnesia anterógrada) y, a menudo, también afecta los recuerdos formados antes de que ocurriera el daño (amnesia retrógrada).

Aunque el efecto retrógrado normalmente se extiende muchos años antes del daño cerebral, en algunos casos quedan recuerdos más antiguos.

Esta retención de recuerdos más antiguos lleva a la idea de que la consolidación con el tiempo implica la transferencia de recuerdos del hipocampo a otras partes del cerebro. 

Los experimentos que utilizan el trasplante intrahipocampal de células hipocampales en primates con lesiones neurotóxicas del hipocampo han demostrado que el hipocampo es necesario para la formación y el recuerdo, pero no para el almacenamiento de recuerdos. 

Se ha demostrado que una disminución en el volumen de varias partes del hipocampo en las personas conduce a problemas de memoria específicos. 

En particular, la eficiencia de la retención de la memoria verbal está relacionada con las partes anteriores del hipocampo derecho e izquierdo. 

La cabeza derecha del hipocampo está más involucrada en las funciones ejecutivas y la regulación durante el recuerdo de la memoria verbal. 

La cola del hipocampo izquierdo tiende a estar estrechamente relacionada con la capacidad de la memoria verbal. El daño al hipocampo no afecta algunos tipos de memoria, como la capacidad de aprender nuevas habilidades (tocar un instrumento musical o resolver ciertos tipos de rompecabezas, por ejemplo). ).

Este hecho sugiere que tales habilidades dependen de diferentes tipos de memoria (memoria procedimental) y diferentes regiones del cerebro.

Además, los pacientes amnésicos frecuentemente muestran una memoria "implícita" de experiencias incluso en ausencia de conocimiento consciente.

Por ejemplo, los pacientes a los que se les pide que adivinen cuál de las dos caras han visto más recientemente pueden dar la respuesta correcta la mayor parte del tiempo a pesar de afirmar que nunca antes han visto ninguna de las caras.

Algunos investigadores distinguen entre recuerdo consciente, que depende del hipocampo, y familiaridad, que depende de porciones del lóbulo temporal medio. única sesión de entrenamiento.

El recuerdo de tal evento parece almacenarse primero en el hipocampo, pero este almacenamiento es transitorio.

Gran parte del almacenamiento a largo plazo de la memoria parece tener lugar en la corteza cingulada anterior.

Cuando se aplicó experimentalmente un evento de aprendizaje tan intenso, aparecieron más de 5.000 regiones de ADN metiladas de manera diferente en el genoma neuronal del hipocampo de las ratas una hora y 24 horas después del entrenamiento.

Estas alteraciones en el patrón de metilación ocurrieron en muchos genes que estaban regulados a la baja, a menudo debido a la formación de nuevos sitios de 5-metilcitosina en regiones del genoma ricas en CpG.

Además, muchos otros genes se regularon positivamente, probablemente a menudo debido a la eliminación de grupos metilo de 5-metilcitosinas (5mCs) previamente existentes en el ADN.

La desmetilación de 5mC puede llevarse a cabo mediante varias proteínas que actúan en conjunto, incluidas las enzimas TET y las enzimas de la vía de reparación por escisión de la base del ADN (ver Epigenética en el aprendizaje y la memoria).


=== Papel en la memoria espacial y la navegación ===


Los estudios en ratas y ratones que se mueven libremente han demostrado que muchas neuronas del hipocampo actúan como células de lugar que se agrupan en campos de lugar, y disparan ráfagas de potenciales de acción cuando el animal pasa por un lugar en particular.

Esta actividad neuronal relacionada con el lugar en el hipocampo también se ha informado en monos que se movían por una habitación mientras estaban en una silla de sujeción. 

Sin embargo, es posible que las células de lugar se hayan disparado en relación con el lugar al que miraba el mono y no con su ubicación real en la habitación. 

Durante muchos años, se han llevado a cabo muchos estudios sobre las respuestas de lugar en roedores, que han proporcionado una gran cantidad de información. 

Las respuestas de las células de lugar se muestran en las células piramidales del hipocampo y en las células granulares de la circunvolución dentada. 

Otras células en menor proporción son interneuronas inhibitorias, y éstas a menudo muestran variaciones relacionadas con el lugar en su tasa de activación que son mucho más débiles. 

Hay poca o ninguna topografía espacial en la representación; en general, las células que se encuentran una al lado de la otra en el hipocampo tienen patrones de activación espacial no correlacionados.

Las celdas de lugar suelen ser casi silenciosas cuando una rata se mueve fuera del campo de lugar, pero alcanzan tasas sostenidas de hasta 40 Hz cuando la rata está cerca del centro.

La actividad neuronal muestreada de 30 a 40 celdas de lugar elegidas al azar contiene suficiente información para permitir que la ubicación de una rata se reconstruya con alta confianza.

El tamaño de los campos de lugar varía en un gradiente a lo largo del hipocampo, con células en el extremo dorsal que muestran los campos más pequeños, células cerca del centro que muestran campos más grandes y células en la punta ventral que muestran campos que cubren todo el entorno.

En algunos casos, la tasa de activación de las células del hipocampo depende no solo del lugar sino también de la dirección en que se mueve una rata, el destino hacia el que viaja u otras variables relacionadas con la tarea.

La activación de las células de lugar se sincroniza en relación con las ondas theta locales, un proceso denominado precesión de fase.

Estaban sometidos a un procedimiento invasivo para localizar el origen de sus convulsiones, con miras a la resección quirúrgica.

A los pacientes se les implantaron electrodos de diagnóstico en el hipocampo y luego usaron una computadora para moverse en una ciudad de realidad virtual.

Estudios similares de imágenes cerebrales en navegación han demostrado que el hipocampo está activo.

Se realizó un estudio en taxistas.

Los conductores de taxis negros de Londres necesitan aprender las ubicaciones de una gran cantidad de lugares y las rutas más rápidas entre ellos para pasar una prueba estricta conocida como The Knowledge para obtener una licencia para operar.

Un estudio demostró que la parte posterior del hipocampo es más grande en estos conductores que en el público en general, y que existe una correlación positiva entre el tiempo de servicio como conductor y el aumento del volumen de esta parte. 

También se encontró que el volumen total del hipocampo no se modificó, ya que el aumento observado en la parte posterior se hizo a expensas de la parte anterior, que mostró una disminución relativa de tamaño. 

No se han informado efectos adversos de esta disparidad en las proporciones del hipocampo. 

Otro estudio mostró hallazgos opuestos en personas ciegas. 

La parte anterior del hipocampo derecho era más grande y la parte posterior era más pequeña, en comparación con las personas videntes. Hay varias células de navegación en el cerebro que están en el hipocampo mismo o están fuertemente conectadas a él, como las células de velocidad presentes en la corteza entorrinal medial. 

Juntas, estas células forman una red que sirve como memoria espacial. 

Las primeras de estas células descubiertas en la década de 1970 fueron las células de lugar, que condujeron a la idea de que el hipocampo actúa para dar una representación neuronal del entorno en un mapa cognitivo. 

Cuando el hipocampo es disfuncional, la orientación se ve afectada; las personas pueden tener dificultades para recordar cómo llegaron a un lugar y cómo continuar.

Perderse es un síntoma común de la amnesia. 

Los estudios con animales han demostrado que se requiere un hipocampo intacto para el aprendizaje inicial y la retención a largo plazo de algunas tareas de memoria espacial, en particular aquellas que requieren encontrar el camino hacia un objetivo oculto.

Se han descubierto otras células desde el hallazgo de células de lugar en el cerebro de roedores que se encuentran en el hipocampo o en la corteza entorrinal.

Estos se han asignado como celdas de dirección de cabeza, celdas de cuadrícula y celdas de límite.

Se cree que las celdas de velocidad proporcionan información a las celdas de la cuadrícula del hipocampo.


=== Rol en el procesamiento de conflictos de aproximación-evitación ===


El conflicto de acercamiento-evitación ocurre cuando se presenta una situación que puede ser gratificante o punitiva, y la toma de decisiones resultante se ha asociado con la ansiedad. Los hallazgos de fMRI de estudios en la toma de decisiones de aproximación-evitación encontraron evidencia de un papel funcional que no se explica ni por la memoria a largo plazo ni por la cognición espacial.

Los hallazgos generales mostraron que el hipocampo anterior es sensible al conflicto y que puede ser parte de una red cortical y subcortical más grande que se considera importante en la toma de decisiones en condiciones inciertas. Una revisión hace referencia a una serie de estudios que muestran la participación de el hipocampo en tareas de conflicto.

Los autores sugieren que un desafío es comprender cómo se relaciona el procesamiento de conflictos con las funciones de navegación espacial y memoria y cómo todas estas funciones no tienen por qué ser mutuamente excluyentes.


== Electroencefalografía ==


El hipocampo muestra dos "modos" principales de actividad, cada uno asociado con un patrón distinto de actividad de la población neuronal y ondas de actividad eléctrica medidas por un electroencefalograma (EEG). 

Estos modos reciben el nombre de los patrones de EEG asociados con ellos: theta y gran actividad irregular (LIA). 

Las principales características descritas a continuación corresponden a la rata, que es el animal más estudiado. El modo theta aparece durante estados de comportamiento activo y alerta (especialmente locomoción) y también durante el sueño REM (soñar). 

En el modo theta, el EEG está dominado por grandes ondas regulares con un rango de frecuencia de 6 a 9 Hz, y los principales grupos de neuronas del hipocampo (células piramidales y células granulares) muestran escasa actividad de población, lo que significa que en cualquier intervalo de tiempo corto , la gran mayoría de las células son silenciosas, mientras que la pequeña fracción restante dispara a velocidades relativamente altas, hasta 50 picos en un segundo para las más activas.

Una celda activa normalmente permanece activa durante medio segundo a unos pocos segundos.

A medida que la rata se comporta, las células activas se silencian y se activan nuevas células, pero el porcentaje total de células activas permanece más o menos constante.

En muchas situaciones, la actividad celular está determinada en gran medida por la ubicación espacial del animal, pero otras variables de comportamiento también influyen claramente en ella.
El modo LIA aparece durante el sueño de ondas lentas (sin soñar) y también durante los estados de inmovilidad durante la vigilia, como descansar o comer. 

En el modo LIA, el EEG está dominado por ondas agudas que son grandes desviaciones cronometradas aleatoriamente de la señal del EEG que duran entre 25 y 50 milisegundos. 

Las ondas agudas se generan con frecuencia en conjuntos, con conjuntos que contienen hasta 5 o más ondas agudas individuales y que duran hasta 500 ms. 

La actividad de picos de las neuronas dentro del hipocampo está altamente correlacionada con la actividad de ondas agudas. 

La mayoría de las neuronas disminuyen su velocidad de disparo entre ondas agudas; sin embargo, durante una ola aguda, hay un aumento dramático en la tasa de activación en hasta el 10% de la población del hipocampo.
Estos dos modos de actividad del hipocampo se pueden ver tanto en primates como en ratas, con la excepción de que ha sido difícil ver una ritmicidad theta robusta en el hipocampo de los primates. 

Sin embargo, hay ondas agudas cualitativamente similares y cambios dependientes del estado similares en la actividad de la población neuronal.


=== Ritmo theta ===


Las corrientes subyacentes que producen la onda theta son generadas principalmente por capas neurales densamente empaquetadas de la corteza entorrinal, CA3 y las dendritas de las células piramidales. 

La onda theta es una de las señales más grandes que se ven en el EEG y se conoce como el ritmo theta del hipocampo. 

En algunas situaciones, el EEG está dominado por ondas regulares de 3 a 10 Hz, que a menudo continúan durante varios segundos. 

Estos reflejan potenciales de membrana por debajo del umbral y modulan fuertemente el aumento de las neuronas del hipocampo y se sincronizan a través del hipocampo en un patrón de onda viajera.

El circuito trisináptico es un relé de neurotransmisión en el hipocampo que interactúa con muchas regiones del cerebro.

A partir de estudios con roedores se ha propuesto que el circuito trisináptico genera el ritmo theta del hipocampo. El ritmo theta es muy evidente en conejos y roedores y también claramente presente en perros y gatos.

Aún no está claro si theta se puede ver en primates.

En las ratas (los animales que han sido los más estudiados), theta se ve principalmente en dos condiciones: primero, cuando un animal está caminando o de alguna otra manera interactuando activamente con su entorno; segundo, durante el sueño REM.

La función de theta aún no se ha explicado de manera convincente, aunque se han propuesto numerosas teorías. 

La hipótesis más popular ha sido relacionarlo con el aprendizaje y la memoria. 

Un ejemplo sería la fase con la que los ritmos theta, en el momento de la estimulación de una neurona, configuran el efecto de esa estimulación sobre sus sinapsis. 

Lo que se quiere decir aquí es que los ritmos theta pueden afectar aquellos aspectos del aprendizaje y la memoria que dependen de la plasticidad sináptica. 

Está bien establecido que las lesiones del tabique medial, el nodo central del sistema theta, causan graves trastornos de la memoria. 

Sin embargo, el tabique medial es algo más que el controlador de theta; también es la principal fuente de proyecciones colinérgicas al hipocampo.

No se ha establecido que las lesiones septales ejerzan sus efectos específicamente eliminando el ritmo theta.


=== Olas agudas ===


Durante el sueño o el descanso, cuando un animal no está conectado con su entorno, el EEG del hipocampo muestra un patrón de ondas lentas irregulares, algo más grandes en amplitud que las ondas theta.

Este patrón es ocasionalmente interrumpido por grandes oleadas llamadas olas agudas.

Estos eventos están asociados con ráfagas de picos de actividad que duran de 50 a 100 milisegundos en las células piramidales de CA3 y CA1.

También están asociados con oscilaciones de EEG de alta frecuencia y corta duración llamadas "ondulaciones", con frecuencias en el rango de 150 a 200 Hz en ratas, y juntas se conocen como ondas agudas y ondulaciones.

Las ondas agudas son más frecuentes durante el sueño cuando ocurren a una tasa promedio de alrededor de 1 por segundo (en ratas) pero en un patrón temporal muy irregular.

Las ondas agudas son menos frecuentes durante los estados de vigilia inactivos y suelen ser más pequeñas. 

También se han observado ondas agudas en humanos y monos. 

En los macacos, las ondas agudas son robustas pero no ocurren con tanta frecuencia como en las ratas. Uno de los aspectos más interesantes de las ondas agudas es que parecen estar asociadas con la memoria. 

Wilson y McNaughton 1994, y numerosos estudios posteriores, informaron que cuando las células de lugar del hipocampo tienen campos de disparo espaciales superpuestos (y, por lo tanto, a menudo se disparan casi en simultaneidad), tienden a mostrar actividad correlacionada durante el sueño después de la sesión de comportamiento. 

Se ha descubierto que esta mejora de la correlación, comúnmente conocida como reactivación, ocurre principalmente durante olas agudas. 

Se ha propuesto que las ondas agudas son, de hecho, reactivaciones de patrones de actividad neuronal que se memorizaron durante el comportamiento, impulsadas por el fortalecimiento de las conexiones sinápticas dentro del hipocampo.

Esta idea forma un componente clave de la teoría de la "memoria en dos etapas", defendida por Buzsáki y otros, que propone que los recuerdos se almacenan en el hipocampo durante el comportamiento y luego se transfieren a la neocorteza durante el sueño.

Las ondas agudas en la teoría de Hebbian se ven como estimulaciones persistentemente repetidas por parte de las células presinápticas, de las células postsinápticas que se sugiere que impulsan los cambios sinápticos en los objetivos corticales de las vías de salida del hipocampo.

La supresión de ondas agudas y ondulaciones en el sueño o durante la inmovilidad puede interferir con los recuerdos expresados ​​en el nivel del comportamiento, sin embargo, el código de celda de lugar CA1 recién formado puede resurgir incluso después de un sueño con ondas agudas y ondulaciones abolidas, en espacialmente no. -tareas exigentes.


=== Potenciación a largo plazo ===


Desde por lo menos la época de Ramón y Cajal (1852-1934), los psicólogos han especulado que el cerebro almacena la memoria alterando la fuerza de las conexiones entre las neuronas que están activas simultáneamente. 

Esta idea fue formalizada por Donald Hebb en 1949, pero durante muchos años permaneció sin explicación. 

En 1973, Tim Bliss y Terje Lømo describieron un fenómeno en el hipocampo del conejo que parecía cumplir con las especificaciones de Hebb: un cambio en la capacidad de respuesta sináptica inducido por una breve activación fuerte y que dura horas, días o más. 

Este fenómeno pronto se denominó potenciación a largo plazo (LTP). 

Como mecanismo candidato para la memoria a largo plazo, la LTP se ha estudiado intensamente desde entonces y se ha aprendido mucho al respecto. 

Sin embargo, se reconoce que la complejidad y variedad de las cascadas de señalización intracelular que pueden desencadenar la LTP impiden una comprensión más completa. También se han observado cambios sinápticos dependientes de la actividad en muchas otras áreas del cerebro. 

La forma mejor estudiada de LTP se ha visto en CA1 del hipocampo y ocurre en las sinapsis que terminan en las espinas dendríticas y usan el neurotransmisor glutamato. 

Los cambios sinápticos dependen de un tipo especial de receptor de glutamato, el receptor de N-metil-D-aspartato (NMDA), un receptor de la superficie celular que tiene la propiedad especial de permitir que el calcio ingrese a la columna postsináptica solo cuando ocurre la activación presináptica y la despolarización postsináptica. al mismo tiempo. 

Los fármacos que interfieren con los receptores NMDA bloquean la LTP y tienen efectos importantes en algunos tipos de memoria, especialmente en la memoria espacial. 

Los ratones genéticamente modificados que se modifican para deshabilitar el mecanismo LTP, generalmente también muestran graves déficits de memoria.


== Trastornos ==



=== Envejecimiento ===


Las condiciones relacionadas con la edad, como la enfermedad de Alzheimer y otras formas de demencia (para las cuales la alteración del hipocampo es uno de los primeros signos) tienen un impacto severo en muchos tipos de cognición, incluida la memoria. 

Incluso el envejecimiento normal se asocia con una disminución gradual de algunos tipos de memoria, incluida la memoria episódica y la memoria de trabajo (o memoria a corto plazo). 

Debido a que se cree que el hipocampo desempeña un papel central en la memoria, ha habido un interés considerable en la posibilidad de que las disminuciones relacionadas con la edad puedan ser causadas por el deterioro del hipocampo. 

Algunos estudios iniciales informaron una pérdida sustancial de neuronas en el hipocampo de personas mayores, pero estudios posteriores que utilizaron técnicas más precisas solo encontraron diferencias mínimas. 

De manera similar, algunos estudios de resonancia magnética informaron una contracción del hipocampo en personas mayores, pero otros estudios no lograron reproducir este hallazgo. 

Sin embargo, existe una relación fiable entre el tamaño del hipocampo y el rendimiento de la memoria; de modo que donde hay una reducción relacionada con la edad, el rendimiento de la memoria se verá afectado.

También hay informes de que las tareas de memoria tienden a producir menos activación del hipocampo en los ancianos que en los jóvenes. 

Además, un ensayo de control aleatorio publicado en 2011 encontró que el ejercicio aeróbico podría aumentar el tamaño del hipocampo en adultos de 55 a 80 años y también mejorar la memoria espacial.


=== Estrés ===

El hipocampo contiene altos niveles de receptores de glucocorticoides, lo que lo hace más vulnerable al estrés a largo plazo que la mayoría de las otras áreas del cerebro. 

Existe evidencia de que los humanos que han experimentado estrés traumático severo y duradero muestran atrofia del hipocampo más que de otras partes del cerebro. 

Estos efectos aparecen en el trastorno de estrés postraumático y pueden contribuir a la atrofia del hipocampo reportada en la esquizofrenia y la depresión severa. 

El volumen del hipocampo anterior en los niños se correlaciona positivamente con los ingresos familiares de los padres y se cree que esta correlación está mediada por el estrés relacionado con los ingresos.

Un estudio reciente también ha revelado atrofia como resultado de la depresión, pero esto se puede detener con antidepresivos incluso si no son efectivos para aliviar otros síntomas. una causa de atrofia neuronal en el hipocampo.

Esta atrofia da como resultado un volumen hipocampal más pequeño que también se observa en el síndrome de Cushing.

Los niveles más altos de cortisol en el síndrome de Cushing generalmente son el resultado de medicamentos que se toman para otras afecciones.

La pérdida neuronal también ocurre como resultado de una neurogénesis alterada.

Otro factor que contribuye a un menor volumen del hipocampo es la retracción dendrítica, donde las dendritas se acortan en longitud y se reducen en número, en respuesta al aumento de glucocorticoides.

Esta retracción dendrítica es reversible.

Después del tratamiento con medicamentos para reducir el cortisol en el síndrome de Cushing, se observa que el volumen del hipocampo se restablece hasta en un 10%.

Se considera que este cambio se debe a la reforma de las dendritas.

Esta restauración dendrítica también puede ocurrir cuando se elimina el estrés.

Sin embargo, hay evidencia derivada principalmente de estudios con ratas de que el estrés que ocurre poco después del nacimiento puede afectar la función del hipocampo de manera que persiste durante toda la vida. También se ha demostrado que las respuestas al estrés específicas del sexo en la rata tienen un efecto en el hipocampo.

El estrés crónico en la rata macho mostró retracción dendrítica y pérdida de células en la región CA3, pero esto no se mostró en la hembra. 

Se pensaba que esto se debía a las hormonas ováricas neuroprotectoras. 

En ratas, el daño del ADN aumenta en el hipocampo en condiciones de estrés.


=== Epilepsia ===


El hipocampo es una de las pocas regiones del cerebro donde se generan nuevas neuronas. 

Este proceso de neurogénesis se limita a la circunvolución dentada. 

La producción de nuevas neuronas puede verse afectada positivamente por el ejercicio o negativamente por las convulsiones epilépticas. Las convulsiones en la epilepsia del lóbulo temporal pueden afectar el desarrollo normal de nuevas neuronas y causar daños en los tejidos. 

La esclerosis del hipocampo es el tipo más común de dicho daño tisular. 

Sin embargo, aún no está claro si la epilepsia generalmente es causada por anomalías del hipocampo o si el hipocampo está dañado por los efectos acumulativos de las convulsiones.

Sin embargo, en entornos experimentales donde se inducen artificialmente convulsiones repetitivas en animales, el daño del hipocampo es un resultado frecuente.

Esto puede ser consecuencia de la concentración de receptores de glutamato excitables en el hipocampo.

La hiperexcitabilidad puede provocar citotoxicidad y muerte celular.

También puede tener algo que ver con que el hipocampo sea un sitio donde se siguen creando nuevas neuronas a lo largo de la vida y con anomalías en este proceso.


=== Esquizofrenia ===

Las causas de la esquizofrenia no se comprenden bien, pero se han informado numerosas anomalías de la estructura cerebral.

Las alteraciones más investigadas involucran la corteza cerebral, pero también se han descrito efectos en el hipocampo. 

Muchos informes han encontrado reducciones en el tamaño del hipocampo en personas con esquizofrenia. 

El hipocampo izquierdo parece estar más afectado que el derecho. 

Se ha aceptado en gran medida que los cambios observados son el resultado de un desarrollo anormal. 

No está claro si las alteraciones del hipocampo juegan algún papel en la causa de los síntomas psicóticos que son la característica más importante de la esquizofrenia. 

Se ha sugerido que, sobre la base del trabajo experimental con animales, la disfunción del hipocampo podría producir una alteración de la liberación de dopamina en los ganglios basales, lo que afectaría indirectamente a la integración de la información en la corteza prefrontal. 

También se ha sugerido que la disfunción del hipocampo podría explicar las alteraciones en la memoria a largo plazo que se observan con frecuencia. Los estudios de resonancia magnética han encontrado un volumen cerebral más pequeño y ventrículos más grandes en personas con esquizofrenia; sin embargo, los investigadores no saben si la reducción se debe a la esquizofrenia o de la medicación. 

Se ha demostrado que el hipocampo y el tálamo tienen un volumen reducido; y aumenta el volumen del globo pálido.

Los patrones corticales están alterados y se ha observado una reducción en el volumen y grosor de la corteza, particularmente en los lóbulos frontal y temporal. 

Además, se ha propuesto que muchos de los cambios observados están presentes al comienzo del trastorno, lo que da peso a la teoría de que existe un neurodesarrollo anormal. efectos 

Se ha aceptado generalmente que existe una conectividad sináptica anormal subyacente a la esquizofrenia. 

Varias líneas de evidencia implican cambios en la organización y conectividad sináptica, en y desde el hipocampo Muchos estudios han encontrado disfunción en el circuito sináptico dentro del hipocampo y su actividad en la corteza prefrontal. 

Se ha visto que las vías glutamatérgicas están muy afectadas. 

Se considera que el subcampo CA1 es el menos involucrado de los otros subcampos, y CA4 y el subículo se han informado en otros lugares como las áreas más implicadas. 

La revisión concluyó que la patología podría deberse a la genética, un neurodesarrollo defectuoso o una plasticidad neuronal anormal. 

Se concluyó además que la esquizofrenia no se debe a ningún trastorno neurodegenerativo conocido. 

El daño oxidativo del ADN aumenta sustancialmente en el hipocampo de pacientes ancianos con esquizofrenia crónica.


=== Amnesia global transitoria ===

La amnesia global transitoria es una pérdida dramática, repentina, temporal y casi total de la memoria a corto plazo. 

Se han formulado hipótesis sobre varias causas, como isquemia, epilepsia, migraña y alteración del flujo sanguíneo venoso cerebral, lo que lleva a la isquemia de estructuras como el hipocampo que están involucradas en la memoria. No ha habido pruebas científicas de ninguna causa. 

Sin embargo, los estudios de resonancia magnética ponderada por difusión tomados de 12 a 24 horas después de un episodio han demostrado que hay pequeñas lesiones en forma de puntos en el hipocampo. 

Estos hallazgos han sugerido una posible implicación de las neuronas CA1 que se vuelven vulnerables por el estrés metabólico.


=== TEPT ===

Algunos estudios muestran una correlación entre el volumen reducido del hipocampo y el trastorno de estrés postraumático (TEPT). 

Un estudio de veteranos de combate de la Guerra de Vietnam con PTSD mostró una reducción del 20% en el volumen de su hipocampo en comparación con los veteranos que no habían sufrido tales síntomas. 

Este hallazgo no se reprodujo en pacientes con PTSD crónico traumatizados en un accidente aéreo en un espectáculo aéreo en 1988 (Ramstein, Alemania).

También se da el caso de que los hermanos gemelos de veteranos de Vietnam con TEPT que no combatieron también tenían hipocampos más pequeños que otros controles, lo que genera dudas sobre la naturaleza de la correlación.

Un estudio de 2016 reforzó la teoría de que un hipocampo más pequeño aumenta el riesgo de trastorno de estrés postraumático, y un hipocampo más grande aumenta la probabilidad de un tratamiento eficaz.


=== Microcefalia ===

La atrofia del hipocampo se ha caracterizado en pacientes con microcefalia y modelos de ratón con mutaciones WDR62 que recapitulan las mutaciones puntuales humanas que muestran una deficiencia en el desarrollo del hipocampo y la neurogénesis.


== Otros animales ==



=== Otros mamíferos ===

El hipocampo tiene una apariencia generalmente similar en toda la gama de mamíferos, desde monotremas como el equidna hasta primates como los humanos.

La relación entre el tamaño del hipocampo y el tamaño del cuerpo aumenta ampliamente, siendo aproximadamente el doble para los primates que para el equidna.

Sin embargo, no aumenta en ningún lugar cercano a la tasa de la relación entre el neocórtex y el tamaño del cuerpo.

Por lo tanto, el hipocampo ocupa una fracción mucho mayor del manto cortical en roedores que en primates.

En humanos adultos, el volumen del hipocampo en cada lado del cerebro es de aproximadamente 3,0 a 3,5 cm3 en comparación con los 320 a 420 cm3 del volumen del neocórtex. También existe una relación general entre el tamaño del hipocampo y la memoria espacial.

Cuando se hacen comparaciones entre especies similares, aquellas que tienen una mayor capacidad de memoria espacial tienden a tener mayores volúmenes de hipocampo.

Esta relación también se extiende a las diferencias de sexo; en especies en las que machos y hembras muestran fuertes diferencias en la capacidad de memoria espacial, también tienden a mostrar diferencias correspondientes en el volumen del hipocampo.


=== Otros vertebrados ===

Las especies no mamíferas no tienen una estructura cerebral que se parezca al hipocampo de los mamíferos, pero tienen una que se considera homóloga.

El hipocampo, como se señaló anteriormente, es en esencia parte de la alocorteza.

Solo los mamíferos tienen una corteza completamente desarrollada, pero la estructura de la que evolucionó, llamada palio, está presente en todos los vertebrados, incluso en los más primitivos como la lamprea o el mixino.

El palio se suele dividir en tres zonas: medial, lateral y dorsal. 

El palio medial forma el precursor del hipocampo. 

No se parece visualmente al hipocampo porque las capas no están deformadas en forma de S ni envueltas por la circunvolución dentada, pero la homología está indicada por fuertes afinidades químicas y funcionales. 

Ahora hay evidencia de que estas estructuras similares al hipocampo están involucradas en la cognición espacial en aves, reptiles y peces.


==== Pájaros ====
En las aves, la correspondencia está tan bien establecida que la mayoría de los anatomistas se refieren a la zona paleal medial como el "hipocampo aviar". 

Numerosas especies de aves tienen fuertes habilidades espaciales, en particular aquellas que esconden comida. 

Existe evidencia de que las aves que almacenan comida tienen un hipocampo más grande que otros tipos de aves y que el daño al hipocampo provoca deficiencias en la memoria espacial.


==== Pescado ====
La historia de los peces es más compleja.

En los peces teleósteos (que constituyen la gran mayoría de las especies existentes), el cerebro anterior está distorsionado en comparación con otros tipos de vertebrados: la mayoría de los neuroanatomistas creen que el cerebro anterior de los teleósteos está esencialmente evertido, como un calcetín al revés, de modo que las estructuras que se encuentran en el interior, junto a los ventrículos, para la mayoría de los vertebrados, se encuentran en el exterior en los peces teleósteos, y viceversa.

Una de las consecuencias de esto es que se cree que el palio medial (zona del "hipocampo") de un vertebrado típico corresponde al palio lateral de un pez típico.

Se ha demostrado experimentalmente que varios tipos de peces (en particular, los peces dorados) tienen fuertes capacidades de memoria espacial, incluso formando "mapas cognitivos" de las áreas que habitan.

Hay evidencia de que el daño al palio lateral afecta la memoria espacial.

Todavía no se sabe si el palio medial desempeña un papel similar en vertebrados aún más primitivos, como tiburones y rayas, o incluso en lampreas y mixinos.


=== Insectos y moluscos ===

Algunos tipos de insectos y moluscos como el pulpo, también tienen fuertes habilidades de navegación y aprendizaje espacial, pero parecen funcionar de manera diferente al sistema espacial de los mamíferos, por lo que todavía no hay una buena razón para pensar que tienen un origen evolutivo común. ; ni hay suficiente similitud en la estructura del cerebro para permitir que se identifique algo parecido a un "hipocampo" en estas especies.

Algunos han propuesto, sin embargo, que los cuerpos de hongos del insecto pueden tener una función similar a la del hipocampo.


== Notas ==



== Lectura adicional ==

Hipocampo (Wiley)
Docampo-Seara A, Lagadec R, Mazan S, Rodríguez MA, Quintana-Urzainqui I, Candal E (julio de 2018). "Estudio de la neurogénesis paleal en embriones de tiburón y el origen evolutivo de la zona subventricular".

Estructura y función del cerebro. 223 (8): 3593–3612. doi:10.1007/s00429-018-1705-2.

PMID 29980930.
Derdikman D, Knierim JJ, eds. (2014).

Espacio, Tiempo y Memoria en la Formación Hipocampal. 

Saltador. 

ISBN 978-3-7091-1292-2.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hipocampo

;;;FR;;;



HIPPOCAMPE


L'hippocampe (via le latin du grec ἱππόκαμπος, « hippocampe ») est un composant majeur du cerveau des humains et des autres vertébrés.

Les humains et les autres mammifères ont deux hippocampes, un de chaque côté du cerveau.

L'hippocampe fait partie du système limbique et joue un rôle important dans la consolidation des informations de la mémoire à court terme à la mémoire à long terme, et dans la mémoire spatiale qui permet la navigation.

L'hippocampe est situé dans l'allocortex, avec des projections neurales dans le néocortex chez l'homme, ainsi que chez les primates. 

L'hippocampe, comme le pallium médian, est une structure que l'on retrouve chez tous les vertébrés. 

Chez l'homme, il contient deux parties principales imbriquées : l'hippocampe proprement dit (également appelé corne d'Ammon) et le gyrus denté.
Dans la maladie d'Alzheimer (et d'autres formes de démence), l'hippocampe est l'une des premières régions du cerveau à subir des dommages ; la perte de mémoire à court terme et la désorientation font partie des premiers symptômes.

Les dommages à l'hippocampe peuvent également résulter d'une privation d'oxygène (hypoxie), d'une encéphalite ou d'une épilepsie du lobe temporal médial. 

Les personnes atteintes de lésions étendues et bilatérales de l'hippocampe peuvent souffrir d'amnésie antérograde : l'incapacité de former et de conserver de nouveaux souvenirs.
Étant donné que différents types de cellules neuronales sont soigneusement organisés en couches dans l'hippocampe, il a souvent été utilisé comme système modèle pour étudier la neurophysiologie.

La forme de plasticité neurale connue sous le nom de potentialisation à long terme (LTP) a été initialement découverte dans l'hippocampe et a souvent été étudiée dans cette structure.

La LTP est largement considérée comme l'un des principaux mécanismes neuronaux par lesquels les souvenirs sont stockés dans le cerveau.
Chez les rongeurs en tant qu'organismes modèles, l'hippocampe a été largement étudié dans le cadre d'un système cérébral responsable de la mémoire spatiale et de la navigation.

De nombreux neurones de l'hippocampe du rat et de la souris répondent comme des cellules de lieu : c'est-à-dire qu'ils déclenchent des rafales de potentiels d'action lorsque l'animal traverse une partie spécifique de son environnement.

Les cellules de lieu de l'hippocampe interagissent largement avec les cellules de direction de la tête, dont l'activité agit comme une boussole inertielle, et conjecturellement avec les cellules de la grille dans le cortex entorhinal voisin.


== Nom ==


La première description de la crête longeant le plancher de la corne temporale du ventricule latéral provient de l'anatomiste vénitien Jules César Aranzi (1587), qui l'a d'abord comparée à un ver à soie puis à un hippocampe (latin hippocampe, du grec ἱππόκαμπος, du grec ἵππος, "cheval" + κάμπος, "monstre marin").

L'anatomiste allemand Duvernoy (1729), le premier à illustrer la structure, hésite également entre "hippocampe" et "ver à soie". La "corne de bélier" a été proposée par l'anatomiste danois Jacob Winsløw en 1732; et une décennie plus tard, son compatriote parisien, le chirurgien de Garengeot, utilisa le "cornu Ammonis" - la corne de (l'ancien dieu égyptien) Amon, qui était souvent représenté comme ayant une tête de bélier.

Cela a survécu sous forme abrégée en CA en nommant les sous-champs de l'hippocampe.
Une autre référence est apparue avec le terme pes hippocampi, qui pourrait remonter à Diemerbroeck en 1672, introduisant une comparaison avec la forme des membres antérieurs repliés et des pieds palmés de l'hippocampe mythologique, un monstre marin avec un avant-train de cheval et une queue de poisson.

L'hippocampe a ensuite été décrit comme pes hippocampi major, avec un renflement adjacent dans la corne occipitale, décrit comme pes hippocampi minor et renommé plus tard calcar avis. 

Le changement de nom de l'hippocampe en hippocampe majeur et du calcar avis en hippocampe mineur a été attribué à Félix Vicq-d'Azyr en systématisant la nomenclature des parties du cerveau en 1786. 

Mayer a utilisé par erreur le terme hippopotame en 1779, et a été suivi par d'autres auteurs jusqu'à ce que Karl Friedrich Burdach résolve cette erreur en 1829. 

En 1861, l'hippocampe mineur est devenu le centre d'un différend sur l'évolution humaine entre Thomas Henry Huxley et Richard Owen, satirisé sous le nom de Great Hippocampus Question. 

Le terme hippocampus minor n'est plus utilisé dans les manuels d'anatomie et a été officiellement supprimé dans la Nomina Anatomica de 1895. 

Aujourd'hui, la structure s'appelle simplement l'hippocampe, le terme Cornu Ammonis survivant dans les noms des sous-champs hippocampiques CA1-CA4.


== Relation avec le système limbique ==

Le terme système limbique a été introduit en 1952 par Paul MacLean pour décrire l'ensemble des structures qui bordent le bord du cortex (limbe latin signifiant frontière) : il s'agit notamment de l'hippocampe, du cortex cingulaire, du cortex olfactif et de l'amygdale.

Paul MacLean a suggéré plus tard que les structures limbiques constituent la base neurale de l'émotion.

L'hippocampe est anatomiquement connecté aux parties du cerveau impliquées dans le comportement émotionnel - le septum, le corps mammillaire hypothalamique et le complexe nucléaire antérieur du thalamus, et est généralement accepté comme faisant partie du système limbique.


== Anatomie ==


L'hippocampe peut être vu comme une crête de tissu de matière grise, s'élevant du plancher de chaque ventricule latéral dans la région de la corne inférieure ou temporale. 

Cette crête peut également être considérée comme un pli vers l'intérieur de l'archicortex dans le lobe temporal médial. 

L'hippocampe n'est visible que lors des dissections car il est caché par le gyrus parahippocampique. 

Le cortex s'amincit de six couches aux trois ou quatre couches qui composent l'hippocampe. Le terme formation hippocampique est utilisé pour désigner l'hippocampe proprement dit et ses parties apparentées. 

Cependant, il n'y a pas de consensus quant aux parties incluses. 

On dit parfois que l'hippocampe comprend le gyrus denté et le subiculum. 

Certaines références incluent le gyrus denté et le subiculum dans la formation hippocampique, et d'autres incluent également le présubiculum, le parasubiculum et le cortex entorhinal. 

La disposition et les voies neuronales au sein de la formation hippocampique sont très similaires chez tous les mammifères. L'hippocampe, y compris le gyrus denté, a la forme d'un tube incurvé, qui a été comparé à un hippocampe, et à une corne de bélier (Cornu Ammonis).

Son abréviation CA est utilisée pour nommer les sous-champs hippocampiques CA1, CA2, CA3 et CA4.

Il peut être distingué comme une zone où le cortex se rétrécit en une seule couche de neurones pyramidaux densément emballés, qui s'enroulent en forme de U serré.

Un bord du «U», - CA4, est intégré dans le gyrus denté fléchi orienté vers l'arrière.

L'hippocampe est décrit comme ayant une partie antérieure et postérieure (chez les primates) ou une partie ventrale et dorsale chez les autres animaux.

Les deux parties sont de composition similaire mais appartiennent à des circuits neuronaux différents.

Chez le rat, les deux hippocampes ressemblent à une paire de bananes, reliées au niveau des tiges par la commissure du fornix (également appelée commissure de l'hippocampe).

Chez les primates, la partie inférieure de l'hippocampe, près de la base du lobe temporal, est beaucoup plus large que la partie supérieure.

Cela signifie qu'en coupe transversale, l'hippocampe peut présenter un certain nombre de formes différentes, en fonction de l'angle et de l'emplacement de la coupe.
Dans une coupe transversale de l'hippocampe, y compris le gyrus denté, plusieurs couches seront affichées.

Le gyrus denté a trois couches de cellules (ou quatre si le hile est inclus).

Les couches sont de l'extérieur vers l'intérieur - la couche moléculaire, la couche moléculaire interne, la couche granuleuse et le hile.

Le CA3 dans l'hippocampe proprement dit a les couches cellulaires suivantes appelées strates : lacunosum-moleculare, radiatum, lucidum, pyramidal et oriens.

CA2 et CA1 ont également ces couches à l'exception de la strate lucidum.
L'apport à l'hippocampe (à partir de différentes structures corticales et sous-corticales) provient du cortex entorhinal via la voie perforante. 

Le cortex entorhinal (CE) est fortement et réciproquement connecté à de nombreuses structures corticales et sous-corticales ainsi qu'au tronc cérébral. 

Différents noyaux thalamiques (des groupes antérieur et médian), le noyau septal médial, le noyau supramammillaire de l'hypothalamus, les noyaux du raphé et le locus coeruleus du tronc cérébral envoient tous des axones au CE, de sorte qu'il sert d'interface entre le néocortex et les autres connexions, et l'hippocampe.
Le CE est situé dans le gyrus parahippocampique, une région corticale adjacente à l'hippocampe. 

Ce gyrus cache l'hippocampe. 

Le gyrus parahippocampique est adjacent au cortex périrhinal, qui joue un rôle important dans la reconnaissance visuelle d'objets complexes.

Il existe également des preuves substantielles qu'il apporte une contribution à la mémoire, qui peut être distinguée de la contribution de l'hippocampe.

Il est évident que l'amnésie complète ne se produit que lorsque l'hippocampe et le parahippocampe sont endommagés.


=== Circuit ===


L'entrée principale de l'hippocampe se fait par le cortex entorhinal (CE), tandis que sa sortie principale se fait via CA1 vers le subiculum.

L'information atteint CA1 via deux voies principales, directe et indirecte.

Les axones de l'EC qui proviennent de la couche III sont à l'origine de la voie perforante directe et forment des synapses sur les dendrites apicales très distales des neurones CA1.

A l'inverse, les axones issus de la couche II sont à l'origine de la voie indirecte, et l'information parvient à CA1 via le circuit trisynaptique.

Dans la partie initiale de cette voie, les axones se projettent à travers la voie perforante vers les cellules granulaires du gyrus denté (première synapse).

À partir de là, les informations suivent via les fibres moussues jusqu'à CA3 (deuxième synapse).

De là, les axones CA3 appelés collatéraux de Schaffer quittent la partie profonde du corps cellulaire et bouclent jusqu'aux dendrites apicales puis s'étendent jusqu'à CA1 (troisième synapse).

Les axones de CA1 se projettent ensuite vers le cortex entorhinal, complétant le circuit. Les cellules du panier de CA3 reçoivent une entrée excitatrice des cellules pyramidales, puis donnent une rétroaction inhibitrice aux cellules pyramidales.

Cette inhibition récurrente est un simple circuit de rétroaction qui peut atténuer les réponses excitatrices dans l'hippocampe.

Les cellules pyramidales donnent une excitation récurrente qui est un mécanisme important trouvé dans certains microcircuits de traitement de la mémoire. Plusieurs autres connexions jouent un rôle important dans la fonction hippocampique.

Au-delà de la sortie vers l'EC, des voies de sortie supplémentaires vont vers d'autres zones corticales, y compris le cortex préfrontal.

Une sortie majeure passe par le fornix vers la zone septale latérale et vers le corps mammillaire de l'hypothalamus (que le fornix relie à l'hippocampe).

L'hippocampe reçoit une entrée modulatrice des systèmes de sérotonine, de noradrénaline et de dopamine, et du noyau reuniens du thalamus vers le champ CA1.

Une projection très importante provient du noyau septal médial, qui envoie des fibres cholinergiques et stimulantes de l'acide gamma amino butyrique (GABA) (fibres GABAergiques) à toutes les parties de l'hippocampe.

Les apports du noyau septal médial jouent un rôle clé dans le contrôle de l'état physiologique de l'hippocampe ; la destruction de ce noyau abolit le rythme thêta hippocampique et altère sévèrement certains types de mémoire.


=== Régions ===


Les zones de l'hippocampe sont fonctionnellement et anatomiquement distinctes.

L'hippocampe dorsal (DH), l'hippocampe ventral (VH) et l'hippocampe intermédiaire remplissent des fonctions différentes, projettent avec des voies différentes et ont des degrés variables de cellules de lieu.

L'hippocampe dorsal sert à la mémoire spatiale, à la mémoire verbale et à l'apprentissage d'informations conceptuelles.

En utilisant le labyrinthe à bras radial, il a été démontré que les lésions dans la DH provoquaient une altération de la mémoire spatiale, contrairement aux lésions VH.

Ses voies saillantes comprennent le noyau septal médial et le noyau supramammillaire.

L'hippocampe dorsal a également plus de cellules de lieu que les régions ventrale et intermédiaire de l'hippocampe. L'hippocampe intermédiaire présente des caractéristiques qui se chevauchent avec les hippocampes ventral et dorsal. 

En utilisant des méthodes de traçage antérograde, Cenquizca et Swanson (2007) ont localisé les projections modérées sur deux zones corticales olfactives primaires et les zones prélimbiques du cortex préfrontal médian. 

Cette région a le plus petit nombre de cellules de lieu. 

L'hippocampe ventral fonctionne dans le conditionnement de la peur et les processus affectifs. 

Anagnostaras et al. (2002) ont montré que des altérations de l'hippocampe ventral réduisaient la quantité d'informations envoyées à l'amygdale par les hippocampes dorsal et ventral, altérant par conséquent le conditionnement de la peur chez les rats.

Historiquement, la première hypothèse largement répandue était que l'hippocampe est impliqué dans l'olfaction. 

Cette idée a été remise en question par une série d'études anatomiques qui n'ont trouvé aucune projection directe sur l'hippocampe à partir du bulbe olfactif. 

Cependant, des travaux ultérieurs ont confirmé que le bulbe olfactif se projette dans la partie ventrale du cortex entorhinal latéral et que le champ CA1 dans l'hippocampe ventral envoie des axones au bulbe olfactif principal, au noyau olfactif antérieur et au cortex olfactif primaire. 

Il existe toujours un certain intérêt pour les réponses olfactives de l'hippocampe, en particulier le rôle de l'hippocampe dans la mémoire des odeurs, mais peu de spécialistes pensent aujourd'hui que l'olfaction est sa fonction première.


== Fonction ==



=== Théories des fonctions hippocampiques ===

Au fil des ans, trois idées principales de la fonction hippocampique ont dominé la littérature : l'inhibition de la réponse, la mémoire épisodique et la cognition spatiale. 

La théorie de l'inhibition comportementale (caricaturée par John O'Keefe et Lynn Nadel comme "coup de frein !") était très populaire jusque dans les années 1960.

Il tire une grande partie de sa justification de deux observations : premièrement, que les animaux atteints de lésions hippocampiques ont tendance à être hyperactifs ; deuxièmement, que les animaux présentant des dommages à l'hippocampe ont souvent des difficultés à apprendre à inhiber les réponses qui leur ont été enseignées auparavant, en particulier si la réponse nécessite de rester silencieux comme dans un test d'évitement passif.

Le psychologue britannique Jeffrey Gray a développé cette ligne de pensée en une théorie à part entière du rôle de l'hippocampe dans l'anxiété.

La théorie de l'inhibition est actuellement la moins populaire des trois. La deuxième grande ligne de pensée relie l'hippocampe à la mémoire.

Bien qu'elle ait eu des précurseurs historiques, cette idée tire son impulsion principale d'un rapport célèbre du neurochirurgien américain William Beecher Scoville et de la neuropsychologue anglo-canadienne Brenda Milner décrivant les résultats de la destruction chirurgicale de l'hippocampe lors d'une tentative de soulagement des crises d'épilepsie chez un homme américain Henry Molaison , connu jusqu'à sa mort en 2008 sous le nom de "Patient HM". Le résultat inattendu de l'opération était une amnésie antérograde et rétrograde partielle sévère ; Molaison n'a pas été en mesure de former de nouveaux souvenirs épisodiques après son opération et ne pouvait se souvenir d'aucun événement survenu juste avant son opération, mais il a conservé des souvenirs d'événements survenus de nombreuses années plus tôt remontant à son enfance.

Ce cas a suscité un tel intérêt professionnel que Molaison est devenu le sujet le plus étudié de l'histoire de la médecine.

Dans les années qui ont suivi, d'autres patients présentant des niveaux similaires de lésions hippocampiques et d'amnésie (causées par un accident ou une maladie) ont également été étudiés, et des milliers d'expériences ont étudié la physiologie des changements induits par l'activité dans les connexions synaptiques de l'hippocampe.

Il existe maintenant un accord universel sur le fait que les hippocampes jouent un rôle important dans la mémoire ; cependant, la nature précise de ce rôle reste largement débattue.

Une théorie récente a proposé - sans remettre en cause son rôle dans la cognition spatiale - que l'hippocampe encode de nouveaux souvenirs épisodiques en associant des représentations dans les cellules granulaires du nouveau-né du gyrus denté et en organisant ces représentations séquentiellement dans le CA3 en s'appuyant sur la précession de phase générée dans le entorhinal cortex

La troisième théorie importante de la fonction hippocampique relie l'hippocampe à l'espace.

La théorie spatiale a été défendue à l'origine par O'Keefe et Nadel, qui ont été influencés par le psychologue américain EC

Les théories de Tolman sur les "cartes cognitives" chez les humains et les animaux.

O'Keefe et son étudiant Dostrovsky ont découvert en 1971 des neurones dans l'hippocampe du rat qui leur semblaient montrer une activité liée à l'emplacement du rat dans son environnement.

Malgré le scepticisme d'autres enquêteurs, O'Keefe et ses collègues, en particulier Lynn Nadel, ont continué à enquêter sur cette question, dans une ligne de travail qui a finalement conduit à leur livre très influent de 1978, The Hippocampus as a Cognitive Map.

Il existe maintenant un accord presque universel sur le fait que la fonction hippocampique joue un rôle important dans le codage spatial, mais les détails sont largement débattus. Des recherches ultérieures se sont concentrées sur la tentative de combler le fossé entre les deux principales visions de la fonction hippocampique comme étant divisées entre la mémoire et la cognition spatiale. .

Dans certaines études, ces domaines ont été étendus jusqu'au point de quasi convergence.

Dans une tentative de concilier les deux points de vue disparates, il est suggéré qu'une vision plus large de la fonction hippocampique soit prise et considérée comme ayant un rôle qui englobe à la fois l'organisation de l'expérience (cartographie mentale, selon le concept original de Tolman en 1948) et la comportement directionnel considéré comme étant impliqué dans tous les domaines de la cognition, de sorte que la fonction de l'hippocampe peut être considérée comme un système plus large qui intègre à la fois la mémoire et les perspectives spatiales dans son rôle qui implique l'utilisation d'un large éventail de cartes cognitives.

Cela concerne le behaviorisme téléologique né de l'objectif initial de Tolman d'identifier les mécanismes cognitifs complexes et les objectifs qui guidaient le comportement. Il a également été proposé que l'activité de pointe des neurones hippocampiques soit associée spatialement, et il a été suggéré que les mécanismes de la mémoire et de la planification tous deux ont évolué à partir de mécanismes de navigation et que leurs algorithmes neuronaux étaient fondamentalement les mêmes. De nombreuses études ont utilisé des techniques de neuroimagerie telles que l'imagerie par résonance magnétique fonctionnelle (IRMf), et un rôle fonctionnel dans le conflit approche-évitement a été noté.

L'hippocampe antérieur est considéré comme impliqué dans la prise de décision dans le cadre du traitement des conflits d'approche et d'évitement.

Il est suggéré que les fonctions de mémoire, de cognition spatiale et de traitement des conflits peuvent être considérées comme travaillant ensemble et non mutuellement exclusives.


=== Rôle dans la mémoire ===


Les psychologues et les neuroscientifiques s'accordent généralement à dire que l'hippocampe joue un rôle important dans la formation de nouveaux souvenirs d'événements vécus (mémoire épisodique ou autobiographique).

Une partie de cette fonction est l'implication de l'hippocampe dans la détection de nouveaux événements, lieux et stimuli.

Certains chercheurs considèrent l'hippocampe comme faisant partie d'un plus grand système de mémoire du lobe temporal médial responsable de la mémoire déclarative générale (souvenirs qui peuvent être explicitement verbalisés - ceux-ci incluraient, par exemple, la mémoire des faits en plus de la mémoire épisodique).

L'hippocampe encode également le contexte émotionnel de l'amygdale.

C'est en partie pourquoi retourner à un endroit où un événement émotionnel s'est produit peut évoquer cette émotion. 

Il existe un lien émotionnel profond entre les souvenirs épisodiques et les lieux. En raison de la symétrie bilatérale, le cerveau possède un hippocampe dans chaque hémisphère cérébral. 

Si des dommages à l'hippocampe se produisent dans un seul hémisphère, laissant la structure intacte dans l'autre hémisphère, le cerveau peut conserver un fonctionnement de la mémoire presque normal. 

De graves lésions de l'hippocampe dans les deux hémisphères entraînent de profondes difficultés à former de nouveaux souvenirs (amnésie antérograde) et affectent souvent également les souvenirs formés avant que le dommage ne se produise (amnésie rétrograde). 

Bien que l'effet rétrograde s'étende normalement plusieurs années avant les lésions cérébrales, dans certains cas, des souvenirs plus anciens subsistent. 

Cette rétention de souvenirs plus anciens conduit à l'idée que la consolidation au fil du temps implique le transfert de souvenirs hors de l'hippocampe vers d'autres parties du cerveau. 

Des expériences utilisant la transplantation intrahippocampique de cellules hippocampiques chez des primates présentant des lésions neurotoxiques de l'hippocampe ont montré que l'hippocampe est nécessaire à la formation et au rappel, mais pas au stockage, des souvenirs. 

Il a été démontré qu'une diminution du volume de diverses parties de l'hippocampe chez l'homme entraîne des troubles spécifiques de la mémoire. 

En particulier, l'efficacité de la rétention de la mémoire verbale est liée aux parties antérieures de l'hippocampe droit et gauche. 

La tête droite de l'hippocampe est plus impliquée dans les fonctions exécutives et la régulation lors du rappel de la mémoire verbale. 

La queue de l'hippocampe gauche a tendance à être étroitement liée à la capacité de mémoire verbale. Les dommages à l'hippocampe n'affectent pas certains types de mémoire, tels que la capacité d'acquérir de nouvelles compétences (jouer d'un instrument de musique ou résoudre certains types d'énigmes, par exemple ). 

Ce fait suggère que ces capacités dépendent de différents types de mémoire (mémoire procédurale) et de différentes régions du cerveau. 

De plus, les patients amnésiques montrent fréquemment une mémoire "implicite" pour des expériences même en l'absence de connaissance consciente. 

Par exemple, les patients à qui l'on demande de deviner lequel des deux visages ils ont vus le plus récemment peuvent donner la bonne réponse la plupart du temps bien qu'ils déclarent n'avoir jamais vu l'un ou l'autre des visages auparavant. 

Certains chercheurs font la distinction entre le souvenir conscient, qui dépend de l'hippocampe, et la familiarité, qui dépend de portions du lobe temporal médial. Lorsque les rats sont exposés à un événement d'apprentissage intense, ils peuvent conserver un souvenir à vie de l'événement même après un séance d'entraînement unique.

La mémoire d'un tel événement semble être d'abord stockée dans l'hippocampe, mais ce stockage est transitoire.

Une grande partie du stockage à long terme de la mémoire semble avoir lieu dans le cortex cingulaire antérieur.

Lorsqu'un événement d'apprentissage aussi intense a été appliqué expérimentalement, plus de 5 000 régions d'ADN méthylées différemment sont apparues dans le génome neuronal de l'hippocampe des rats à une heure et à 24 heures après l'entraînement.

Ces altérations du schéma de méthylation se sont produites au niveau de nombreux gènes qui étaient régulés à la baisse, souvent en raison de la formation de nouveaux sites 5-méthylcytosine dans les régions riches en CpG du génome. 

En outre, de nombreux autres gènes ont été régulés positivement, probablement souvent en raison de l'élimination des groupes méthyle des 5-méthylcytosines (5mC) précédemment existantes dans l'ADN. 

La déméthylation de 5mC peut être réalisée par plusieurs protéines agissant de concert, dont les enzymes TET ainsi que les enzymes de la voie de réparation par excision des bases de l'ADN (voir L'épigénétique dans l'apprentissage et la mémoire).


=== Rôle dans la mémoire spatiale et la navigation ===


Des études sur des rats et des souris en mouvement libre ont montré que de nombreux neurones de l'hippocampe agissent comme des cellules de lieu qui se regroupent dans des champs de lieu, et ces rafales de potentiels d'action lorsque l'animal passe par un endroit particulier. 

Cette activité neurale liée au lieu dans l'hippocampe a également été signalée chez des singes qui ont été déplacés dans une pièce alors qu'ils étaient dans une chaise de contention. 

Cependant, les cellules de l'endroit peuvent avoir tiré par rapport à l'endroit où le singe regardait plutôt qu'à son emplacement réel dans la pièce. 

Depuis de nombreuses années, de nombreuses études ont été menées sur les réponses de lieu chez les rongeurs, qui ont fourni une grande quantité d'informations. 

Les réponses des cellules de lieu sont représentées par des cellules pyramidales dans l'hippocampe et par des cellules granulaires dans le gyrus denté. 

D'autres cellules en plus petite proportion sont des interneurones inhibiteurs, et ceux-ci présentent souvent des variations liées au lieu dans leur taux de décharge qui sont beaucoup plus faibles. 

Il y a peu ou pas de topographie spatiale dans la représentation ; en général, les cellules situées les unes à côté des autres dans l'hippocampe ont des schémas de déclenchement spatiaux non corrélés.

Les cellules de lieu sont généralement presque silencieuses lorsqu'un rat se déplace en dehors du champ de lieu, mais atteignent des taux soutenus aussi élevés que 40 Hz lorsque le rat est près du centre.

L'activité neuronale échantillonnée à partir de 30 à 40 cellules de lieu choisies au hasard contient suffisamment d'informations pour permettre de reconstruire l'emplacement d'un rat avec une grande confiance.

La taille des champs de lieu varie selon un gradient sur la longueur de l'hippocampe, les cellules à l'extrémité dorsale montrant les champs les plus petits, les cellules près du centre montrant des champs plus grands et les cellules à l'extrémité ventrale montrant des champs qui couvrent tout l'environnement.

Dans certains cas, le taux de déclenchement des cellules de l'hippocampe dépend non seulement de l'endroit, mais aussi de la direction dans laquelle un rat se déplace, de la destination vers laquelle il se dirige ou d'autres variables liées à la tâche.

Le déclenchement des cellules de lieu est chronométré par rapport aux ondes thêta locales, un processus appelé précession de phase. Chez l'homme, des cellules avec des schémas de déclenchement spécifiques à l'emplacement ont été signalées lors d'une étude sur des patients atteints d'épilepsie résistante aux médicaments.

Ils subissaient une intervention invasive pour localiser l'origine de leurs crises, en vue d'une résection chirurgicale.

Les patients avaient des électrodes de diagnostic implantées dans leur hippocampe et utilisaient ensuite un ordinateur pour se déplacer dans une ville de réalité virtuelle.

Des études d'imagerie cérébrale similaires en navigation ont montré que l'hippocampe était actif.

Une étude a été menée auprès des chauffeurs de taxi.

Les chauffeurs de taxi noirs de Londres doivent apprendre les emplacements d'un grand nombre d'endroits et les itinéraires les plus rapides entre eux afin de passer un test strict connu sous le nom de The Knowledge afin d'obtenir une licence d'exploitation.

Une étude a montré que la partie postérieure de l'hippocampe est plus volumineuse chez ces conducteurs que dans le grand public, et qu'il existe une corrélation positive entre la durée de service en tant que conducteur et l'augmentation du volume de cette partie.

Il a également été constaté que le volume total de l'hippocampe était inchangé, car l'augmentation observée dans la partie postérieure s'est faite aux dépens de la partie antérieure, qui a montré une diminution relative de taille.

Il n'y a pas eu d'effets indésirables rapportés de cette disparité dans les proportions de l'hippocampe.

Une autre étude a montré des résultats opposés chez des personnes aveugles.

La partie antérieure de l'hippocampe droit était plus grande et la partie postérieure était plus petite, par rapport aux individus voyants. Il existe plusieurs cellules de navigation dans le cerveau qui se trouvent soit dans l'hippocampe lui-même, soit qui y sont fortement connectées, telles que les cellules de vitesse présentes dans le cortex entorhinal médial.

Ensemble, ces cellules forment un réseau qui sert de mémoire spatiale.

Les premières de ces cellules découvertes dans les années 1970 étaient les cellules de lieu, qui ont conduit à l'idée que l'hippocampe agit pour donner une représentation neuronale de l'environnement dans une carte cognitive.

Lorsque l'hippocampe est dysfonctionnel, l'orientation est affectée ; les gens peuvent avoir de la difficulté à se rappeler comment ils sont arrivés à un endroit et comment continuer.

Se perdre est un symptôme courant de l'amnésie.

Des études sur des animaux ont montré qu'un hippocampe intact est nécessaire pour l'apprentissage initial et la rétention à long terme de certaines tâches de mémoire spatiale, en particulier celles qui nécessitent de trouver le chemin vers un objectif caché. 

D'autres cellules ont été découvertes depuis la découverte des cellules de place dans le cerveau des rongeurs qui se trouvent soit dans l'hippocampe, soit dans le cortex entorhinal. 

Celles-ci ont été attribuées en tant que cellules de direction de tête, cellules de grille et cellules de délimitation. 

On pense que les cellules de vitesse fournissent une entrée aux cellules de la grille hippocampique.


=== Rôle dans le traitement des conflits approche-évitement ===


Le conflit approche-évitement se produit lorsqu'une situation se présente qui peut être gratifiante ou punitive, et la prise de décision qui s'ensuit a été associée à l'anxiété. Les résultats de l'IRMf provenant d'études sur la prise de décision d'évitement d'approche ont trouvé des preuves d'un rôle fonctionnel qui n'est expliqué ni par la mémoire à long terme ni par la cognition spatiale.

Les résultats globaux ont montré que l'hippocampe antérieur est sensible aux conflits et qu'il peut faire partie d'un réseau cortical et sous-cortical plus vaste considéré comme important dans la prise de décision dans des conditions incertaines. Une revue fait référence à un certain nombre d'études qui montrent l'implication de l'hippocampe dans les tâches conflictuelles. 

Les auteurs suggèrent qu'un défi consiste à comprendre comment le traitement des conflits est lié aux fonctions de navigation spatiale et de mémoire et comment toutes ces fonctions ne doivent pas nécessairement s'exclure mutuellement.


== Électroencéphalographie ==


L'hippocampe présente deux "modes" d'activité majeurs, chacun associé à un schéma distinct d'activité de la population neuronale et à des vagues d'activité électrique mesurées par un électroencéphalogramme (EEG).

Ces modes sont nommés d'après les schémas EEG qui leur sont associés : thêta et grande activité irrégulière (LIA).

Les principales caractéristiques décrites ci-dessous concernent le rat, qui est l'animal le plus étudié. Le mode thêta apparaît lors d'états de comportement actif et alerte (notamment la locomotion), ainsi que lors du sommeil paradoxal (rêve).

En mode thêta, l'EEG est dominé par de grandes ondes régulières avec une gamme de fréquences de 6 à 9 Hz, et les principaux groupes de neurones de l'hippocampe (cellules pyramidales et cellules granulaires) montrent une activité de population clairsemée, ce qui signifie que dans tout intervalle de temps court , la grande majorité des cellules sont silencieuses, tandis que la petite fraction restante se déclenche à des cadences relativement élevées, jusqu'à 50 pointes en une seconde pour les plus actives d'entre elles. 

Une cellule active reste généralement active pendant une demi-seconde à quelques secondes. 

Au fur et à mesure que le rat se comporte, les cellules actives se taisent et de nouvelles cellules deviennent actives, mais le pourcentage global de cellules actives reste plus ou moins constant. 

Dans de nombreuses situations, l'activité cellulaire est déterminée en grande partie par la localisation spatiale de l'animal, mais d'autres variables comportementales l'influencent également clairement.
Le mode LIA apparaît pendant le sommeil à ondes lentes (sans rêve), ainsi que pendant les états d'immobilité éveillée tels que le repos ou l'alimentation.

En mode LIA, l'EEG est dominé par des ondes aiguës qui sont de grandes déviations chronométrées de manière aléatoire du signal EEG durant 25 à 50 millisecondes.

Les ondes aiguës sont fréquemment générées dans des ensembles, avec des ensembles contenant jusqu'à 5 ondes aiguës individuelles ou plus et durant jusqu'à 500 ms.

L'activité de pointe des neurones dans l'hippocampe est fortement corrélée à l'activité des ondes aiguës.

La plupart des neurones diminuent leur taux de déclenchement entre les ondes aiguës ; cependant, lors d'une forte vague, il y a une augmentation spectaculaire du taux de déclenchement chez jusqu'à 10% de la population hippocampique
Ces deux modes d'activité hippocampique peuvent être observés chez les primates ainsi que chez les rats, à l'exception du fait qu'il a été difficile de voir une rythmicité thêta robuste dans l'hippocampe des primates.

Il existe cependant des ondes aiguës qualitativement similaires et des changements similaires dépendant de l'état dans l'activité de la population neuronale.


=== Rythme thêta ===


Les courants sous-jacents produisant l'onde thêta sont générés principalement par des couches neurales denses du cortex entorhinal, CA3, et les dendrites des cellules pyramidales.

L'onde thêta est l'un des signaux les plus importants observés sur l'EEG et est connue sous le nom de rythme thêta hippocampique.

Dans certaines situations, l'EEG est dominé par des ondes régulières de 3 à 10 Hz, se poursuivant souvent pendant plusieurs secondes.

Ceux-ci reflètent les potentiels membranaires inférieurs au seuil et modulent fortement le pic des neurones hippocampiques et se synchronisent à travers l'hippocampe selon un schéma d'ondes progressives.

Le circuit trisynaptique est un relais de neurotransmission dans l'hippocampe qui interagit avec de nombreuses régions du cerveau.

À partir d'études sur des rongeurs, il a été proposé que le circuit trisynaptique génère le rythme thêta de l'hippocampe. La rythmicité thêta est très évidente chez les lapins et les rongeurs et également clairement présente chez les chats et les chiens.

Il n'est pas encore clair si thêta peut être vu chez les primates.

Chez les rats (les animaux qui ont été les plus étudiés), le thêta est principalement observé dans deux conditions : premièrement, lorsqu'un animal marche ou interagit activement d'une autre manière avec son environnement ; deuxièmement, pendant le sommeil paradoxal.

La fonction de thêta n'a pas encore été expliquée de manière convaincante bien que de nombreuses théories aient été proposées.

L'hypothèse la plus populaire a été de la relier à l'apprentissage et à la mémoire.

Un exemple serait la phase avec laquelle les rythmes thêta, au moment de la stimulation d'un neurone, façonnent l'effet de cette stimulation sur ses synapses.

Ce que l'on entend ici, c'est que les rythmes thêta peuvent affecter les aspects de l'apprentissage et de la mémoire qui dépendent de la plasticité synaptique.

Il est bien établi que les lésions du septum médial - le nœud central du système thêta - provoquent de graves perturbations de la mémoire.

Cependant, le septum médial est plus que le simple contrôleur de thêta ; c'est aussi la principale source de projections cholinergiques vers l'hippocampe.

Il n'est pas établi que les lésions septales exercent leurs effets spécifiquement en supprimant le rythme thêta.


=== Ondes pointues ===


Pendant le sommeil ou au repos, lorsqu'un animal n'est pas en contact avec son environnement, l'EEG hippocampique montre un schéma d'ondes lentes irrégulières, d'une amplitude un peu plus grande que les ondes thêta.

Ce schéma est parfois interrompu par de grandes surtensions appelées ondes aiguës.

Ces événements sont associés à des pics d'activité d'une durée de 50 à 100 millisecondes dans les cellules pyramidales de CA3 et CA1.

Ils sont également associés à des oscillations EEG à haute fréquence de courte durée appelées «ondulations», avec des fréquences comprises entre 150 et 200 Hz chez les rats, et ensemble, ils sont connus sous le nom d'ondes et d'ondulations aiguës.

Les ondes aiguës sont plus fréquentes pendant le sommeil lorsqu'elles se produisent à un rythme moyen d'environ 1 par seconde (chez les rats) mais selon un schéma temporel très irrégulier.

Les ondes aiguës sont moins fréquentes pendant les états de veille inactifs et sont généralement plus petites.

De fortes ondes ont également été observées chez les humains et les singes.

Chez les macaques, les ondes aiguës sont robustes mais ne se produisent pas aussi fréquemment que chez les rats. L'un des aspects les plus intéressants des ondes aiguës est qu'elles semblent être associées à la mémoire.

Wilson et McNaughton 1994, et de nombreuses études ultérieures, ont rapporté que lorsque les cellules de lieu de l'hippocampe ont des champs de tir spatiaux qui se chevauchent (et donc souvent tirent en quasi-simultanéité), elles ont tendance à montrer une activité corrélée pendant le sommeil après la session comportementale.

Cette amélioration de la corrélation, communément appelée réactivation, s'est avérée se produire principalement lors de fortes vagues.

Il a été proposé que les ondes aiguës sont, en fait, des réactivations de modèles d'activité neuronale qui ont été mémorisés pendant le comportement, entraînés par le renforcement des connexions synaptiques dans l'hippocampe. 

Cette idée constitue un élément clé de la théorie de la "mémoire en deux étapes", préconisée par Buzsáki et d'autres, qui propose que les souvenirs soient stockés dans l'hippocampe pendant le comportement, puis transférés plus tard au néocortex pendant le sommeil. 

Les ondes aiguës dans la théorie hebbienne sont considérées comme des stimulations répétées de manière persistante par les cellules présynaptiques, des cellules postsynaptiques qui sont suggérées pour entraîner des changements synaptiques dans les cibles corticales des voies de sortie de l'hippocampe. 

La suppression des ondes et des ondulations aiguës pendant le sommeil ou pendant l'immobilité peut interférer avec les souvenirs exprimés au niveau du comportement, néanmoins, le code cellulaire de lieu CA1 nouvellement formé peut réapparaître même après un sommeil avec des ondes et des ondulations aiguës abolies, dans un environnement non spatial. - des tâches exigeantes.


=== Valorisation à long terme ===


Depuis au moins l'époque de Ramon y Cajal (1852-1934), les psychologues ont émis l'hypothèse que le cerveau stocke la mémoire en modifiant la force des connexions entre les neurones qui sont simultanément actifs.

Cette idée a été formalisée par Donald Hebb en 1949, mais pendant de nombreuses années est restée inexpliquée.

En 1973, Tim Bliss et Terje Lømo ont décrit un phénomène dans l'hippocampe du lapin qui semblait répondre aux spécifications de Hebb : un changement de la réactivité synaptique induit par une brève activation forte et durant des heures ou des jours ou plus.

Ce phénomène a rapidement été appelé potentialisation à long terme (LTP).

En tant que mécanisme candidat pour la mémoire à long terme, la LTP a depuis été étudiée de manière intensive et a beaucoup appris à son sujet.

Cependant, la complexité et la variété des cascades de signalisation intracellulaire qui peuvent déclencher la LTP sont reconnues comme empêchant une compréhension plus complète. L'hippocampe est un site particulièrement favorable pour l'étude de la LTP en raison de ses couches de neurones denses et bien définies, mais de des changements synaptiques dépendants de l'activité ont également été observés dans de nombreuses autres régions du cerveau.

La forme la mieux étudiée de LTP a été observée dans CA1 de l'hippocampe et se produit au niveau des synapses qui se terminent sur les épines dendritiques et utilisent le neurotransmetteur glutamate.

Les modifications synaptiques dépendent d'un type particulier de récepteur du glutamate, le récepteur N-méthyl-D-aspartate (NMDA), un récepteur de surface cellulaire qui a la propriété spéciale de permettre au calcium de pénétrer dans la colonne vertébrale postsynaptique uniquement lorsque l'activation présynaptique et la dépolarisation postsynaptique se produisent. en même temps.

Les médicaments qui interfèrent avec les récepteurs NMDA bloquent la LTP et ont des effets majeurs sur certains types de mémoire, en particulier la mémoire spatiale.

Les souris génétiquement modifiées qui sont modifiées pour désactiver le mécanisme LTP présentent également généralement de graves déficits de mémoire.


== Troubles ==



=== Vieillissement ===


Les affections liées à l'âge telles que la maladie d'Alzheimer et d'autres formes de démence (dont la perturbation de l'hippocampe est l'un des premiers signes) ont de graves répercussions sur de nombreux types de cognition, y compris la mémoire.

Même le vieillissement normal est associé à un déclin progressif de certains types de mémoire, notamment la mémoire épisodique et la mémoire de travail (ou mémoire à court terme).

Comme on pense que l'hippocampe joue un rôle central dans la mémoire, la possibilité que les déclins liés à l'âge puissent être causés par la détérioration de l'hippocampe suscite un intérêt considérable.

Certaines premières études ont rapporté une perte substantielle de neurones dans l'hippocampe des personnes âgées, mais des études ultérieures utilisant des techniques plus précises n'ont trouvé que des différences minimes.

De même, certaines études IRM ont rapporté un rétrécissement de l'hippocampe chez les personnes âgées, mais d'autres études n'ont pas réussi à reproduire ce résultat.

Il existe cependant une relation fiable entre la taille de l'hippocampe et les performances de la mémoire ; de sorte que là où il y a un rétrécissement lié à l'âge, les performances de la mémoire seront altérées.

Il existe également des rapports selon lesquels les tâches de mémoire ont tendance à produire moins d'activation de l'hippocampe chez les personnes âgées que chez les jeunes.

De plus, un essai contrôlé randomisé publié en 2011 a révélé que l'exercice aérobique pouvait augmenter la taille de l'hippocampe chez les adultes âgés de 55 à 80 ans et également améliorer la mémoire spatiale.


=== Stress ===

L'hippocampe contient des niveaux élevés de récepteurs de glucocorticoïdes, ce qui le rend plus vulnérable au stress à long terme que la plupart des autres zones du cerveau.

Il est prouvé que les humains ayant subi un stress traumatique sévère et de longue durée présentent une atrophie de l'hippocampe plus que d'autres parties du cerveau.

Ces effets se manifestent dans le trouble de stress post-traumatique et peuvent contribuer à l'atrophie de l'hippocampe signalée dans la schizophrénie et la dépression sévère.

Le volume de l'hippocampe antérieur chez les enfants est corrélé positivement avec le revenu familial des parents et cette corrélation serait médiée par le stress lié au revenu. 

Une étude récente a également révélé une atrophie à la suite d'une dépression, mais celle-ci peut être stoppée par des antidépresseurs même s'ils ne sont pas efficaces pour soulager d'autres symptômes. Le stress chronique entraînant des niveaux élevés de glucocorticoïdes, notamment de cortisol, est une cause d'atrophie neuronale dans l'hippocampe. 

Cette atrophie se traduit par un volume hippocampique plus petit qui est également observé dans le syndrome de Cushing. 

Les niveaux plus élevés de cortisol dans le syndrome de Cushing sont généralement le résultat de médicaments pris pour d'autres conditions. 

La perte neuronale se produit également à la suite d'une neurogenèse altérée. 

Un autre facteur qui contribue à un volume hippocampique plus petit est celui de la rétraction dendritique où les dendrites sont raccourcies en longueur et réduites en nombre, en réponse à l'augmentation des glucocorticoïdes.

Cette rétraction dendritique est réversible.

Après un traitement avec des médicaments pour réduire le cortisol dans le syndrome de Cushing, le volume de l'hippocampe semble être restauré jusqu'à 10 %.

Ce changement est considéré comme étant dû à la reformation des dendrites.

Cette restauration dendritique peut également se produire lorsque le stress est supprimé.

Il existe cependant des preuves provenant principalement d'études utilisant des rats selon lesquelles le stress survenant peu de temps après la naissance peut affecter la fonction hippocampique d'une manière qui persiste tout au long de la vie. Il a également été démontré que les réponses au stress spécifiques au sexe chez le rat ont un effet sur l'hippocampe.

Le stress chronique chez le rat mâle a montré une rétraction dendritique et une perte de cellules dans la région CA3, mais cela n'a pas été montré chez la femelle. 

On pensait que cela était dû aux hormones ovariennes neuroprotectrices. 

Chez les rats, les dommages à l'ADN augmentent dans l'hippocampe dans des conditions de stress.


=== Épilepsie ===


L'hippocampe est l'une des rares régions du cerveau où de nouveaux neurones sont générés. 

Ce processus de neurogenèse est confiné au gyrus denté. 

La production de nouveaux neurones peut être positivement affectée par l'exercice ou négativement affectée par les crises d'épilepsie. Les crises d'épilepsie du lobe temporal peuvent affecter le développement normal de nouveaux neurones et causer des lésions tissulaires. 

La sclérose hippocampique est le type le plus courant de telles lésions tissulaires. 

Il n'est pas encore clair, cependant, si l'épilepsie est généralement causée par des anomalies de l'hippocampe ou si l'hippocampe est endommagé par les effets cumulatifs des crises.

Cependant, dans des contextes expérimentaux où des crises répétitives sont induites artificiellement chez les animaux, des dommages à l'hippocampe sont un résultat fréquent.

Cela peut être une conséquence de la concentration de récepteurs excitables du glutamate dans l'hippocampe.

L'hyperexcitabilité peut entraîner une cytotoxicité et la mort cellulaire.

Cela peut aussi avoir quelque chose à voir avec le fait que l'hippocampe est un site où de nouveaux neurones continuent d'être créés tout au long de la vie, et avec des anomalies dans ce processus.


=== Schizophrénie ===

Les causes de la schizophrénie ne sont pas bien comprises, mais de nombreuses anomalies de la structure cérébrale ont été rapportées.

Les altérations les plus étudiées concernent le cortex cérébral, mais des effets sur l'hippocampe ont également été décrits. 

De nombreux rapports ont trouvé des réductions de la taille de l'hippocampe chez les personnes atteintes de schizophrénie. 

L'hippocampe gauche semble plus touché que le droit. 

Les changements notés ont été largement acceptés comme étant le résultat d'un développement anormal. 

Il n'est pas clair si les altérations de l'hippocampe jouent un rôle dans l'apparition des symptômes psychotiques qui sont la caractéristique la plus importante de la schizophrénie. 

Il a été suggéré que sur la base de travaux expérimentaux utilisant des animaux, le dysfonctionnement de l'hippocampe pourrait produire une altération de la libération de dopamine dans les ganglions de la base, affectant ainsi indirectement l'intégration des informations dans le cortex préfrontal. 

Il a également été suggéré que le dysfonctionnement de l'hippocampe pourrait expliquer les troubles de la mémoire à long terme fréquemment observés. du médicament. 

L'hippocampe et le thalamus se sont avérés réduits en volume; et le volume du globus pallidus est augmenté.

Les schémas corticaux sont altérés et une réduction du volume et de l'épaisseur du cortex, en particulier dans les lobes frontaux et temporaux, a été notée. 

Il a en outre été proposé que bon nombre des changements observés soient présents au début du trouble, ce qui donne du poids à la théorie selon laquelle il existe un développement neurologique anormal. effets. 

Il a été généralement admis qu'il existe une connectivité synaptique anormale sous-jacente à la schizophrénie. 

Plusieurs sources de preuves impliquent des changements dans l'organisation et la connectivité synaptiques, dans et depuis l'hippocampe. De nombreuses études ont trouvé un dysfonctionnement des circuits synaptiques dans l'hippocampe et son activité sur le cortex préfrontal. 

Les voies glutamatergiques se sont avérées largement affectées. 

Le sous-champ CA1 est considéré comme le moins impliqué des autres sous-champs, et CA4 et le subiculum ont été signalés ailleurs comme étant les domaines les plus impliqués.

L'examen a conclu que la pathologie pourrait être due à la génétique, à un développement neurologique défectueux ou à une plasticité neurale anormale.

Il a en outre été conclu que la schizophrénie n'est due à aucun trouble neurodégénératif connu.

Les dommages oxydatifs à l'ADN sont considérablement augmentés dans l'hippocampe des patients âgés atteints de schizophrénie chronique.


=== Amnésie globale transitoire ===

L'amnésie globale transitoire est une perte dramatique, soudaine, temporaire et quasi totale de la mémoire à court terme.

Diverses causes ont été supposées, notamment l'ischémie, l'épilepsie, la migraine et la perturbation du flux sanguin veineux cérébral, entraînant une ischémie de structures telles que l'hippocampe qui sont impliquées dans la mémoire. Aucune cause n'a été scientifiquement prouvée.

Cependant, des études d'IRM pondérées en diffusion prises de 12 à 24 heures après un épisode ont montré qu'il y avait de petites lésions en forme de points dans l'hippocampe.

Ces découvertes ont suggéré une possible implication des neurones CA1 rendus vulnérables par le stress métabolique.


=== SSPT ===

Certaines études montrent une corrélation entre le volume réduit de l'hippocampe et le trouble de stress post-traumatique (SSPT).

Une étude sur les anciens combattants de la guerre du Vietnam atteints de SSPT a montré une réduction de 20% du volume de leur hippocampe par rapport aux anciens combattants n'ayant subi aucun de ces symptômes.

Cette découverte n'a pas été reproduite chez les patients atteints de SSPT chronique traumatisés lors d'un accident d'avion lors d'un spectacle aérien en 1988 (Ramstein, Allemagne).

Il est également vrai que les frères jumeaux non combattants des vétérans du Vietnam atteints de SSPT avaient également des hippocampes plus petits que les autres témoins, ce qui soulève des questions sur la nature de la corrélation.

Une étude de 2016 a renforcé la théorie selon laquelle un hippocampe plus petit augmente le risque de trouble de stress post-traumatique, et un hippocampe plus grand augmente la probabilité d'un traitement efficace.


=== Microcéphalie ===

L'atrophie de l'hippocampe a été caractérisée chez des patients atteints de microcéphalie et des modèles de souris avec des mutations WDR62 qui récapitulent les mutations ponctuelles humaines montrant une déficience dans le développement et la neurogenèse de l'hippocampe.


== Autres animaux ==



=== Autres mammifères ===

L'hippocampe a une apparence généralement similaire dans toute la gamme de mammifères, des monotrèmes tels que l'échidné aux primates tels que les humains. 

Le rapport taille de l'hippocampe à la taille du corps augmente largement, étant environ deux fois plus grand pour les primates que pour l'échidné. 

Cependant, il n'augmente pas à un niveau proche du taux du rapport néocortex-taille corporelle. 

Par conséquent, l'hippocampe occupe une fraction beaucoup plus importante du manteau cortical chez les rongeurs que chez les primates. 

Chez l'homme adulte, le volume de l'hippocampe de chaque côté du cerveau est d'environ 3,0 à 3,5 cm3 contre 320 à 420 cm3 pour le volume du néocortex. Il existe également une relation générale entre la taille de l'hippocampe et la mémoire spatiale. 

Lorsque des comparaisons sont faites entre des espèces similaires, celles qui ont une plus grande capacité de mémoire spatiale ont tendance à avoir des volumes d'hippocampe plus importants.

Cette relation s'étend également aux différences sexuelles; chez les espèces où les mâles et les femelles présentent de fortes différences dans la capacité de mémoire spatiale, ils ont également tendance à montrer des différences correspondantes dans le volume de l'hippocampe.


=== Autres vertébrés ===

Les espèces non mammifères n'ont pas de structure cérébrale qui ressemble à l'hippocampe des mammifères, mais elles en ont une qui lui est considérée comme homologue.

L'hippocampe, comme indiqué ci-dessus, fait essentiellement partie de l'allocortex.

Seuls les mammifères ont un cortex pleinement développé, mais la structure à partir de laquelle il a évolué, appelée pallium, est présente chez tous les vertébrés, même les plus primitifs comme la lamproie ou la myxine.

Le pallium est généralement divisé en trois zones : médiale, latérale et dorsale.

Le pallium médial forme le précurseur de l'hippocampe.

Il ne ressemble pas visuellement à l'hippocampe car les couches ne sont pas déformées en forme de S ou enveloppées par le gyrus denté, mais l'homologie est indiquée par de fortes affinités chimiques et fonctionnelles.

Il est maintenant prouvé que ces structures de type hippocampe sont impliquées dans la cognition spatiale chez les oiseaux, les reptiles et les poissons.


==== Oiseaux ====
Chez les oiseaux, la correspondance est suffisamment bien établie pour que la plupart des anatomistes appellent la zone palléale médiale « l'hippocampe aviaire ».

De nombreuses espèces d'oiseaux ont de fortes compétences spatiales, en particulier celles qui cachent de la nourriture.

Il existe des preuves que les oiseaux qui cachent de la nourriture ont un hippocampe plus grand que les autres types d'oiseaux et que les dommages à l'hippocampe provoquent des altérations de la mémoire spatiale.


==== Poisson ====
L'histoire du poisson est plus complexe. 

Chez les poissons téléostéens (qui constituent la grande majorité des espèces existantes), le cerveau antérieur est déformé par rapport aux autres types de vertébrés : la plupart des neuroanatomistes pensent que le cerveau antérieur téléostéen est essentiellement renversé, comme une chaussette retournée, de sorte que les structures qui se trouvent à l'intérieur, à côté des ventricules, pour la plupart des vertébrés, se trouvent à l'extérieur chez les poissons téléostéens, et vice versa. 

L'une des conséquences de ceci est que l'on pense que le pallium médian (zone «hippocampique») d'un vertébré typique correspond au pallium latéral d'un poisson typique. 

Il a été démontré expérimentalement que plusieurs types de poissons (en particulier les poissons rouges) avaient de fortes capacités de mémoire spatiale, formant même des «cartes cognitives» des zones qu'ils habitent. 

Il est prouvé que des dommages au pallium latéral altèrent la mémoire spatiale. 

On ne sait pas encore si le pallium médian joue un rôle similaire chez des vertébrés encore plus primitifs, comme les requins et les raies, ou encore les lamproies et les myxines.


=== Insectes et mollusques ===

Certains types d'insectes et de mollusques comme la pieuvre ont également de fortes capacités d'apprentissage spatial et de navigation, mais ceux-ci semblent fonctionner différemment du système spatial des mammifères, il n'y a donc pas encore de bonne raison de penser qu'ils ont une origine évolutive commune. ; il n'y a pas non plus de similitude suffisante dans la structure du cerveau pour permettre d'identifier quoi que ce soit ressemblant à un "hippocampe" chez ces espèces.

Certains ont proposé, cependant, que les corps de champignon de l'insecte puissent avoir une fonction similaire à celle de l'hippocampe.


== Remarques ==



== Lectures complémentaires ==

Hippocampe (Wiley)
Docampo-Seara A, Lagadec R, Mazan S, Rodríguez MA, Quintana-Urzainqui I, Candal E (juillet 2018). "Étude de la neurogenèse palliale chez les embryons de requin et l'origine évolutive de la zone sous-ventriculaire".

Structure et fonction du cerveau. 223 (8): 3593–3612. doi : 10.1007/s00429-018-1705-2.

PMID 29980930.
Derdikman D, Knierim JJ, éds. (2014).

Espace, temps et mémoire dans la formation hippocampique.

Springer.

ISBN 978-3-7091-1292-2.



https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hippocampe

;;;PT;;;



HIPOCAMPO


O hipocampo (via latim do grego ἱππόκαμπος, 'cavalo-marinho') é um componente importante do cérebro de humanos e outros vertebrados.

Humanos e outros mamíferos têm dois hipocampos, um em cada lado do cérebro.

O hipocampo faz parte do sistema límbico e desempenha papéis importantes na consolidação de informações da memória de curto prazo para a memória de longo prazo e na memória espacial que permite a navegação.

O hipocampo está localizado no alocórtex, com projeções neurais no neocórtex em humanos, assim como em primatas. 

O hipocampo, como o pálio medial, é uma estrutura encontrada em todos os vertebrados. 

Nos humanos, contém duas partes principais interligadas: o hipocampo propriamente dito (também chamado de chifre de Amon) e o giro denteado.
Na doença de Alzheimer (e outras formas de demência), o hipocampo é uma das primeiras regiões do cérebro a sofrer danos; perda de memória de curto prazo e desorientação estão incluídos entre os primeiros sintomas.

Danos ao hipocampo também podem resultar de falta de oxigênio (hipóxia), encefalite ou epilepsia do lobo temporal medial. 

Pessoas com danos extensos e bilaterais no hipocampo podem sofrer amnésia anterógrada: a incapacidade de formar e reter novas memórias.
Como os diferentes tipos de células neuronais são organizados em camadas no hipocampo, ela tem sido frequentemente usada como um sistema modelo para estudar a neurofisiologia.

A forma de plasticidade neural conhecida como potenciação de longo prazo (LTP) foi inicialmente descoberta no hipocampo e tem sido frequentemente estudada nesta estrutura.

Acredita-se que a LTP seja um dos principais mecanismos neurais pelos quais as memórias são armazenadas no cérebro.
Em roedores como organismos modelo, o hipocampo tem sido estudado extensivamente como parte de um sistema cerebral responsável pela memória espacial e navegação.

Muitos neurônios no hipocampo de ratos e camundongos respondem como células de lugar: ou seja, disparam rajadas de potenciais de ação quando o animal passa por uma parte específica de seu ambiente.

As células do hipocampo interagem extensivamente com as células de direção da cabeça, cuja atividade atua como uma bússola inercial, e conjecturalmente com as células da grade no córtex entorrinal vizinho.


== Nome ==


A descrição mais antiga da crista que corre ao longo do assoalho do corno temporal do ventrículo lateral vem do anatomista veneziano Júlio César Aranzi (1587), que a comparou primeiro a um bicho-da-seda e depois a um cavalo-marinho (do latim hipocampo, do grego ἱππόκαμπος, do grego ἵππος, "cavalo" + κάμπος, "monstro marinho").

O anatomista alemão Duvernoy (1729), o primeiro a ilustrar a estrutura, também oscilou entre "cavalo-marinho" e "bicho-da-seda". O "chifre de carneiro" foi proposto pelo anatomista dinamarquês Jacob Winsløw em 1732; e uma década depois seu colega parisiense, o cirurgião de Garengeot, usou "cornu Ammonis" - chifre de (o antigo deus egípcio) Amon, que era frequentemente representado como tendo cabeça de carneiro.

Isso sobreviveu de forma abreviada como CA ao nomear os subcampos do hipocampo.
Outra referência apareceu com o termo pes hippocampi, que pode remontar a Diemerbroeck em 1672, introduzindo uma comparação com a forma dos membros anteriores dobrados e pés palmados do hipocampo mitológico, um monstro marinho com quartos dianteiros de cavalo e cauda de peixe.

O hipocampo foi então descrito como pes hippocampi major, com uma protuberância adjacente no corno occipital, descrito como pes hippocampi minor e posteriormente renomeado como calcar avis.

A renomeação do hipocampo como hipocampo maior, e do calcar avis como hipocampo menor, foi atribuída a Félix Vicq-d'Azyr sistematizando a nomenclatura de partes do cérebro em 1786.

Mayer erroneamente usou o termo hipopótamo em 1779 e foi seguido por alguns outros autores até que Karl Friedrich Burdach resolveu esse erro em 1829.

Em 1861, o hipocampo menor tornou-se o centro de uma disputa sobre a evolução humana entre Thomas Henry Huxley e Richard Owen, satirizada como a Grande Questão do Hipocampo.

O termo hipocampo menor caiu em desuso nos livros de anatomia e foi oficialmente removido na Nomina Anatomica de 1895.

Hoje, a estrutura é chamada apenas de hipocampo, com o termo Cornu Ammonis sobrevivendo nos nomes dos subcampos do hipocampo CA1-CA4.


== Relação com o sistema límbico ==

O termo sistema límbico foi introduzido em 1952 por Paul MacLean para descrever o conjunto de estruturas que revestem a borda do córtex (latim limbus significa fronteira): Estes incluem o hipocampo, córtex cingulado, córtex olfativo e amígdala. 

Paul MacLean sugeriu mais tarde que as estruturas límbicas constituem a base neural da emoção. 

O hipocampo está anatomicamente conectado a partes do cérebro que estão envolvidas com o comportamento emocional - o septo, o corpo mamilar hipotalâmico e o complexo nuclear anterior no tálamo, e geralmente é aceito como parte do sistema límbico.


== Anatomia ==


O hipocampo pode ser visto como uma crista de tecido de substância cinzenta, elevando-se do assoalho de cada ventrículo lateral na região do corno inferior ou temporal.

Essa crista também pode ser vista como uma dobra interna do arquicórtex no lobo temporal medial.

O hipocampo só pode ser visto em dissecções, pois está oculto pelo giro parahipocampal.

O córtex se afina de seis camadas para as três ou quatro camadas que compõem o hipocampo. O termo formação hipocampal é usado para se referir ao hipocampo propriamente dito e suas partes relacionadas.

No entanto, não há consenso sobre quais partes estão incluídas.

Às vezes, diz-se que o hipocampo inclui o giro denteado e o subículo.

Algumas referências incluem o giro denteado e o subículo na formação hipocampal, e outras também incluem o pré-subículo, o para-subículo e o córtex entorrinal.

O layout neural e os caminhos dentro da formação do hipocampo são muito semelhantes em todos os mamíferos. O hipocampo, incluindo o giro denteado, tem a forma de um tubo curvo, que foi comparado a um cavalo-marinho, e um chifre de carneiro (Cornu Ammonis). 

Sua abreviatura CA é usada para nomear os subcampos do hipocampo CA1, CA2, CA3 e CA4. 

Pode ser distinguido como uma área onde o córtex se estreita em uma única camada de neurônios piramidais densamente compactados, que se enrolam em uma forma de U apertada. 

Uma borda do "U", - CA4, está inserida no giro denteado flexionado voltado para trás. 

O hipocampo é descrito como tendo uma parte anterior e posterior (nos primatas) ou uma parte ventral e dorsal em outros animais. 

Ambas as partes são de composição semelhante, mas pertencem a circuitos neurais diferentes. 

No rato, os dois hipocampos se assemelham a um par de bananas, unidas nas hastes pela comissura do fórnix (também chamada de comissura hipocampal).

Nos primatas, a parte inferior do hipocampo, próxima à base do lobo temporal, é muito mais larga do que a parte superior.

Isso significa que, em corte transversal, o hipocampo pode apresentar várias formas diferentes, dependendo do ângulo e da localização do corte.
Em um corte transversal do hipocampo, incluindo o giro denteado, várias camadas serão mostradas.

O giro denteado tem três camadas de células (ou quatro se o hilo estiver incluído).

As camadas são de fora para dentro – a camada molecular, a camada molecular interna, a camada granular e o hilo.

O CA3 no hipocampo propriamente dito tem as seguintes camadas de células conhecidas como estratos: lacunosum-moleculare, radiatum, lucidum, piramidal e oriens.

CA2 e CA1 também possuem essas camadas, exceto o estrato lúcido.
A entrada para o hipocampo (de estruturas corticais e subcorticais variadas) vem do córtex entorrinal através da via perfurante. 

O córtex entorrinal (CE) está fortemente e reciprocamente conectado com muitas estruturas corticais e subcorticais, bem como com o tronco encefálico. 

Diferentes núcleos talâmicos (dos grupos anterior e da linha média), o núcleo septal medial, o núcleo supramamilar do hipotálamo, os núcleos da rafe e o locus coeruleus do tronco encefálico enviam axônios para a CE, de modo que ela serve de interface entre o neocórtex e as demais conexões, e o hipocampo.
O CE está localizado no giro parahipocampal, região cortical adjacente ao hipocampo. 

Este giro esconde o hipocampo. 

O giro parahipocampal é adjacente ao córtex perirrinal, que desempenha um papel importante no reconhecimento visual de objetos complexos.

Há também evidências substanciais de que ele contribui para a memória, o que pode ser distinguido da contribuição do hipocampo.

É evidente que a amnésia completa ocorre apenas quando o hipocampo e o para-hipocampo estão danificados.


=== Circuito ===


A principal entrada para o hipocampo é através do córtex entorrinal (EC), enquanto sua principal saída é via CA1 para o subículo.

A informação chega ao CA1 através de duas vias principais, direta e indireta.

Os axônios da CE que se originam na camada III são a origem da via perfurante direta e formam sinapses nos dendritos apicais muito distais dos neurônios CA1.

Por outro lado, os axônios originários da camada II são a origem da via indireta, e a informação chega ao CA1 através do circuito trissináptico.

Na parte inicial desta via, os axônios projetam-se através da via perfurante para as células granulares do giro denteado (primeira sinapse).

A partir daí, a informação segue pelas fibras musgosas para CA3 (segunda sinapse).

A partir daí, os axônios CA3 chamados colaterais de Schaffer deixam a parte profunda do corpo celular e se enrolam até os dendritos apicais e depois se estendem até CA1 (terceira sinapse).

Os axônios de CA1 então se projetam de volta para o córtex entorrinal, completando o circuito. As células em forma de cesto em CA3 recebem estímulos excitatórios das células piramidais e então dão um feedback inibitório às células piramidais.

Essa inibição recorrente é um circuito de feedback simples que pode amortecer as respostas excitatórias no hipocampo.

As células piramidais dão uma excitação recorrente que é um mecanismo importante encontrado em alguns microcircuitos de processamento de memória. Várias outras conexões desempenham papéis importantes na função hipocampal.

Além da saída para o EC, vias de saída adicionais vão para outras áreas corticais, incluindo o córtex pré-frontal.

Uma saída principal vai através do fórnice para a área septal lateral e para o corpo mamilar do hipotálamo (que o fórnice interliga com o hipocampo).

O hipocampo recebe aferências modulatórias dos sistemas de serotonina, norepinefrina e dopamina, e do núcleo reuniens do tálamo para o campo CA1.

Uma projeção muito importante vem do núcleo septal medial, que envia fibras estimulantes colinérgicas e de ácido gama aminobutírico (GABA) (fibras GABAérgicas) para todas as partes do hipocampo.

As entradas do núcleo septal medial desempenham um papel fundamental no controle do estado fisiológico do hipocampo; a destruição desse núcleo abole o ritmo teta do hipocampo e prejudica severamente certos tipos de memória.


=== Regiões ===


Áreas do hipocampo mostram-se funcional e anatomicamente distintas.

O hipocampo dorsal (DH), o hipocampo ventral (VH) e o hipocampo intermediário têm funções diferentes, projetam-se com diferentes vias e possuem graus variados de células de lugar.

O hipocampo dorsal serve para memória espacial, memória verbal e aprendizado de informações conceituais.

Usando o labirinto do braço radial, as lesões no DH mostraram causar comprometimento da memória espacial, enquanto as lesões do VH não.

Suas vias de projeção incluem o núcleo septal medial e o núcleo supramamilar.

O hipocampo dorsal também tem mais células de lugar do que as regiões ventral e intermediária do hipocampo. O hipocampo intermediário tem características sobrepostas com o hipocampo ventral e dorsal. 

Usando métodos de rastreamento anterógrado, Cenquizca e Swanson (2007) localizaram as projeções moderadas para duas áreas corticais olfativas primárias e áreas pré-límbicas do córtex pré-frontal medial. 

Esta região tem o menor número de células de lugar. 

O hipocampo ventral funciona no condicionamento do medo e nos processos afetivos. 

Anagnostaras et al. (2002) mostraram que alterações no hipocampo ventral reduziram a quantidade de informação enviada para a amígdala pelo hipocampo dorsal e ventral, consequentemente alterando o condicionamento do medo em ratos.

Historicamente, a primeira hipótese amplamente aceita era que o hipocampo está envolvido no olfato. 

Essa ideia foi posta em dúvida por uma série de estudos anatômicos que não encontraram nenhuma projeção direta do bulbo olfativo para o hipocampo.

No entanto, trabalhos posteriores confirmaram que o bulbo olfativo se projeta na parte ventral do córtex entorrinal lateral, e o campo CA1 no hipocampo ventral envia axônios para o bulbo olfativo principal, o núcleo olfativo anterior e o córtex olfativo primário.

Continua a haver algum interesse nas respostas olfativas do hipocampo, em particular, o papel do hipocampo na memória de odores, mas poucos especialistas hoje acreditam que o olfato seja sua função primária.


== Função ==



=== Teorias das funções hipocampais ===

Ao longo dos anos, três ideias principais da função hipocampal dominaram a literatura: inibição de resposta, memória episódica e cognição espacial.

A teoria da inibição comportamental (caricaturada por John O'Keefe e Lynn Nadel como "pisar no freio!") foi muito popular até a década de 1960.

Ele derivou muito de sua justificativa de duas observações: primeiro, que os animais com danos no hipocampo tendem a ser hiperativos; segundo, que os animais com lesão no hipocampo muitas vezes têm dificuldade em aprender a inibir as respostas que foram ensinadas anteriormente, especialmente se a resposta exigir permanecer quieto como em um teste de esquiva passiva.

O psicólogo britânico Jeffrey Gray desenvolveu essa linha de pensamento em uma teoria completa do papel do hipocampo na ansiedade.

A teoria da inibição é atualmente a menos popular das três. A segunda grande linha de pensamento relaciona o hipocampo à memória.

Embora tivesse precursores históricos, essa ideia derivou seu principal ímpeto de um famoso relatório do neurocirurgião americano William Beecher Scoville e da neuropsicóloga anglo-canadense Brenda Milner descrevendo os resultados da destruição cirúrgica do hipocampo ao tentar aliviar crises epilépticas em um americano Henry Molaison , conhecido até sua morte em 2008 como "Paciente HM" O resultado inesperado da cirurgia foi amnésia anterógrada e parcial retrógrada grave; Molaison foi incapaz de formar novas memórias episódicas após sua cirurgia e não conseguia se lembrar de nenhum evento que ocorreu pouco antes de sua cirurgia, mas reteve memórias de eventos que ocorreram muitos anos antes, estendendo-se até sua infância.

Este caso atraiu um interesse profissional tão amplo que Molaison se tornou o assunto mais intensamente estudado na história da medicina. 

Nos anos seguintes, outros pacientes com níveis semelhantes de dano hipocampal e amnésia (causada por acidente ou doença) também foram estudados, e milhares de experimentos estudaram a fisiologia das mudanças impulsionadas pela atividade nas conexões sinápticas no hipocampo. 

Existe agora um consenso universal de que os hipocampos desempenham algum tipo de papel importante na memória; no entanto, a natureza precisa desse papel permanece amplamente debatida.

Uma teoria recente propôs – sem questionar seu papel na cognição espacial – que o hipocampo codifica novas memórias episódicas associando representações nas células granulares recém-nascidas do giro denteado e organizando essas representações sequencialmente no CA3, contando com a precessão de fase gerada no entorrinal. córtex

A terceira importante teoria da função hipocampal relaciona o hipocampo ao espaço. 

A teoria espacial foi originalmente defendida por O'Keefe e Nadel, que foram influenciados pelo psicólogo americano EC 

As teorias de Tolman sobre "mapas cognitivos" em humanos e animais. 

O'Keefe e seu aluno Dostrovsky em 1971 descobriram neurônios no hipocampo de ratos que pareciam mostrar atividade relacionada à localização do rato em seu ambiente. 

Apesar do ceticismo de outros pesquisadores, O'Keefe e seus colegas de trabalho, especialmente Lynn Nadel, continuaram a investigar essa questão, em uma linha de trabalho que acabou levando ao seu influente livro de 1978, The Hippocampus as a Cognitive Map.

Existe agora um acordo quase universal de que a função hipocampal desempenha um papel importante na codificação espacial, mas os detalhes são amplamente debatidos. .

Em alguns estudos, essas áreas foram expandidas ao ponto de quase convergência.

Na tentativa de conciliar as duas visões díspares, sugere-se que uma visão mais ampla da função hipocampal seja tomada e vista como tendo um papel que engloba tanto a organização da experiência (mapeamento mental, conforme o conceito original de Tolman em 1948) quanto a comportamento direcional visto como estando envolvido em todas as áreas da cognição, de modo que a função do hipocampo pode ser vista como um sistema mais amplo que incorpora tanto a memória quanto as perspectivas espaciais em seu papel que envolve o uso de uma ampla gama de mapas cognitivos.

Isso se relaciona com o behaviorismo intencional nascido do objetivo original de Tolman de identificar os complexos mecanismos cognitivos e propósitos que guiavam o comportamento. ambos evoluíram de mecanismos de navegação e que seus algoritmos neuronais eram basicamente os mesmos. Muitos estudos fizeram uso de técnicas de neuroimagem, como ressonância magnética funcional (fMRI), e um papel funcional no conflito de aproximação-evitação foi observado. 

O hipocampo anterior é visto como envolvido na tomada de decisão sob o processamento de conflito de aproximação-evitação. 

Sugere-se que as funções de memória, cognição espacial e processamento de conflitos podem ser vistas como trabalhando juntas e não mutuamente exclusivas.


=== Função na memória ===


Psicólogos e neurocientistas geralmente concordam que o hipocampo desempenha um papel importante na formação de novas memórias sobre eventos vivenciados (memória episódica ou autobiográfica). 

Parte dessa função é o envolvimento do hipocampo na detecção de novos eventos, lugares e estímulos. 

Alguns pesquisadores consideram o hipocampo como parte de um sistema de memória maior do lobo temporal medial responsável pela memória declarativa geral (memórias que podem ser explicitamente verbalizadas – estas incluem, por exemplo, memória para fatos além da memória episódica). 

O hipocampo também codifica o contexto emocional da amígdala. 

É em parte por isso que retornar a um local onde ocorreu um evento emocional pode evocar essa emoção. 

Existe uma profunda conexão emocional entre memórias episódicas e lugares. Devido à simetria bilateral, o cérebro possui um hipocampo em cada hemisfério cerebral. 

Se o dano ao hipocampo ocorrer em apenas um hemisfério, deixando a estrutura intacta no outro hemisfério, o cérebro pode manter o funcionamento da memória quase normal. 

Danos graves ao hipocampo em ambos os hemisférios resultam em profundas dificuldades na formação de novas memórias (amnésia anterógrada) e muitas vezes também afetam memórias formadas antes da ocorrência do dano (amnésia retrógrada). 

Embora o efeito retrógrado normalmente se estenda por muitos anos antes do dano cerebral, em alguns casos, memórias mais antigas permanecem. 

Essa retenção de memórias mais antigas leva à ideia de que a consolidação ao longo do tempo envolve a transferência de memórias do hipocampo para outras partes do cérebro. 

Experimentos usando transplante intrahipocampal de células hipocampais em primatas com lesões neurotóxicas do hipocampo mostraram que o hipocampo é necessário para a formação e recordação, mas não para o armazenamento, de memórias. 

Foi demonstrado que uma diminuição no volume de várias partes do hipocampo em pessoas leva a deficiências de memória específicas. 

Em particular, a eficiência da retenção da memória verbal está relacionada às partes anteriores do hipocampo direito e esquerdo. 

A cabeça direita do hipocampo está mais envolvida nas funções executivas e na regulação durante a recordação da memória verbal. 

A cauda do hipocampo esquerdo tende a estar intimamente relacionada à capacidade de memória verbal. Danos ao hipocampo não afetam alguns tipos de memória, como a capacidade de aprender novas habilidades (tocar um instrumento musical ou resolver certos tipos de quebra-cabeças, por exemplo ). 

Esse fato sugere que tais habilidades dependem de diferentes tipos de memória (memória processual) e de diferentes regiões cerebrais. 

Além disso, pacientes amnésicos frequentemente apresentam memória "implícita" para experiências, mesmo na ausência de conhecimento consciente. 

Por exemplo, os pacientes solicitados a adivinhar qual dos dois rostos viram mais recentemente podem dar a resposta correta na maioria das vezes, apesar de afirmarem que nunca viram nenhum dos rostos antes. 

Alguns pesquisadores distinguem entre lembrança consciente, que depende do hipocampo, e familiaridade, que depende de porções do lobo temporal medial. única sessão de treino. 

A memória de tal evento parece ser armazenada primeiro no hipocampo, mas esse armazenamento é transitório. 

Grande parte do armazenamento a longo prazo da memória parece ocorrer no córtex cingulado anterior. 

Quando um evento de aprendizado tão intenso foi aplicado experimentalmente, mais de 5.000 regiões diferentes de DNA metilado apareceram no genoma neuronal do hipocampo dos ratos em uma hora e 24 horas após o treinamento. 

Essas alterações no padrão de metilação ocorreram em muitos genes que foram regulados negativamente, muitas vezes devido à formação de novos sítios de 5-metilcitosina em regiões ricas em CpG do genoma.

Além disso, muitos outros genes foram regulados positivamente, provavelmente devido à remoção de grupos metil de 5-metilcitosinas (5mCs) previamente existentes no DNA.

A desmetilação de 5mC pode ser realizada por várias proteínas atuando em conjunto, incluindo enzimas TET, bem como enzimas da via de reparo por excisão de bases de DNA (veja Epigenética em aprendizado e memória).


=== Papel na memória espacial e navegação ===


Estudos em ratos e camundongos que se movimentam livremente mostraram que muitos neurônios do hipocampo atuam como células de lugar que se agrupam em campos de lugar, e essas explosões de potenciais de ação quando o animal passa por um local específico.

Essa atividade neural relacionada ao local no hipocampo também foi relatada em macacos que foram movidos pela sala enquanto estavam em uma cadeira de contenção. 

No entanto, as células de lugar podem ter disparado em relação ao local para onde o macaco estava olhando, em vez de sua localização real na sala. 

Ao longo de muitos anos, muitos estudos foram realizados sobre respostas locais em roedores, que forneceram uma grande quantidade de informações. 

As respostas de células de lugar são mostradas por células piramidais no hipocampo e por células granulares no giro denteado. 

Outras células em menor proporção são interneurônios inibitórios, e estes geralmente mostram variações relacionadas ao local em sua taxa de disparo que são muito mais fracas. 

Há pouca ou nenhuma topografia espacial na representação; em geral, as células situadas próximas umas das outras no hipocampo têm padrões de disparo espacial não correlacionados.

As células de lugar são tipicamente quase silenciosas quando um rato está se movendo fora do campo de lugar, mas atingem taxas sustentadas de até 40 Hz quando o rato está perto do centro.

A atividade neural amostrada de 30 a 40 células de local escolhidas aleatoriamente carrega informações suficientes para permitir que a localização de um rato seja reconstruída com alta confiança.

O tamanho dos campos de lugar varia em um gradiente ao longo do comprimento do hipocampo, com células na extremidade dorsal mostrando os campos menores, células próximas ao centro mostrando campos maiores e células na ponta ventral mostrando campos que cobrem todo o ambiente.

Em alguns casos, a taxa de disparo das células do hipocampo depende não apenas do local, mas também da direção em que o rato está se movendo, do destino para o qual está viajando ou de outras variáveis ​​relacionadas à tarefa.

O disparo de células de lugar é cronometrado em relação às ondas teta locais, um processo denominado precessão de fase. 

Eles estavam sendo submetidos a um procedimento invasivo para localizar a origem das crises, com vistas à ressecção cirúrgica. 

Os pacientes tiveram eletrodos de diagnóstico implantados em seu hipocampo e, em seguida, usaram um computador para se movimentar em uma cidade de realidade virtual. 

Estudos semelhantes de imagens cerebrais em navegação mostraram que o hipocampo está ativo. 

Foi realizado um estudo com taxistas. 

Os motoristas de táxi preto de Londres precisam aprender a localização de um grande número de lugares e as rotas mais rápidas entre eles para passar por um teste rigoroso conhecido como The Knowledge para obter uma licença para operar. 

Um estudo mostrou que a parte posterior do hipocampo é maior nesses motoristas do que no público em geral, e que existe uma correlação positiva entre o tempo de serviço como motorista e o aumento do volume dessa parte. 

Constatou-se também que o volume total do hipocampo não se alterou, pois o aumento observado na parte posterior foi feito em detrimento da parte anterior, que apresentou relativa diminuição do tamanho. 

Não foram relatados efeitos adversos dessa disparidade nas proporções do hipocampo. 

Outro estudo mostrou achados opostos em indivíduos cegos. 

A parte anterior do hipocampo direito era maior e a parte posterior menor, em comparação com indivíduos com visão. Existem várias células de navegação no cérebro que estão no próprio hipocampo ou estão fortemente ligadas a ele, como as células de velocidade o córtex entorrinal medial. 

Juntas, essas células formam uma rede que serve como memória espacial. 

A primeira dessas células descobertas na década de 1970 foram as células de lugar, o que levou à ideia do hipocampo agir para dar uma representação neural do ambiente em um mapa cognitivo. 

Quando o hipocampo está disfuncional, a orientação é afetada; as pessoas podem ter dificuldade em lembrar como chegaram a um local e como prosseguir.

Perder-se é um sintoma comum de amnésia. 

Estudos com animais mostraram que um hipocampo intacto é necessário para o aprendizado inicial e retenção a longo prazo de algumas tarefas de memória espacial, em particular aquelas que exigem encontrar o caminho para um objetivo oculto.

Outras células foram descobertas desde a descoberta das células de lugar no cérebro de roedores que estão no hipocampo ou no córtex entorrinal.

Estes foram atribuídos como células de direção de cabeça, células de grade e células de limite.

Pensa-se que as células de velocidade fornecem entrada para as células da grade do hipocampo.


=== Papel no processamento de conflito de aproximação-evitação ===


O conflito de aproximação-evitação acontece quando uma situação é apresentada que pode ser recompensadora ou punitiva, e a tomada de decisão resultante foi associada à ansiedade. Os achados de fMRI de estudos na tomada de decisão de evitar abordagem encontraram evidências de um papel funcional que não é explicado pela memória de longo prazo ou pela cognição espacial.

Os achados gerais mostraram que o hipocampo anterior é sensível ao conflito e que pode fazer parte de uma rede cortical e subcortical maior, considerada importante na tomada de decisões em condições incertas. o hipocampo em tarefas de conflito.

Os autores sugerem que um desafio é entender como o processamento de conflitos se relaciona com as funções de navegação espacial e memória e como todas essas funções não precisam ser mutuamente exclusivas.


== Eletroencefalografia ==


O hipocampo mostra dois "modos" principais de atividade, cada um associado a um padrão distinto de atividade da população neural e ondas de atividade elétrica, conforme medido por um eletroencefalograma (EEG). 

Esses modos são nomeados após os padrões de EEG associados a eles: teta e grande atividade irregular (LIA). 

As principais características descritas a seguir são para o rato, que é o animal mais amplamente estudado. O modo teta aparece durante estados de comportamento ativo e alerta (especialmente locomoção), e também durante o sono REM (sonho). 

No modo teta, o EEG é dominado por grandes ondas regulares com faixa de frequência de 6 a 9 Hz, e os principais grupos de neurônios do hipocampo (células piramidais e células granulares) apresentam atividade populacional esparsa, o que significa que em qualquer intervalo de tempo curto , a grande maioria das células é silenciosa, enquanto a pequena fração restante dispara em taxas relativamente altas, até 50 picos em um segundo para o mais ativo deles.

Uma célula ativa normalmente permanece ativa por meio segundo a alguns segundos.

À medida que o rato se comporta, as células ativas ficam silenciosas e novas células se tornam ativas, mas a porcentagem geral de células ativas permanece mais ou menos constante.

Em muitas situações, a atividade celular é determinada em grande parte pela localização espacial do animal, mas outras variáveis ​​comportamentais também a influenciam claramente.
O modo LIA aparece durante o sono de ondas lentas (sem sonhos) e também durante os estados de imobilidade de vigília, como descansar ou comer. 

No modo LIA, o EEG é dominado por ondas agudas que são grandes deflexões cronometradas aleatoriamente do sinal de EEG com duração de 25 a 50 milissegundos. 

Ondas agudas são frequentemente geradas em conjuntos, com conjuntos contendo até 5 ou mais ondas agudas individuais e com duração de até 500 ms. 

A atividade de pico dos neurônios dentro do hipocampo está altamente correlacionada com a atividade de ondas agudas. 

A maioria dos neurônios diminui sua taxa de disparo entre ondas agudas; no entanto, durante uma onda acentuada, há um aumento dramático na taxa de disparo em até 10% da população hipocampal
Esses dois modos de atividade do hipocampo podem ser vistos em primatas e ratos, com a exceção de que tem sido difícil ver ritmicidade teta robusta no hipocampo dos primatas. 

Existem, no entanto, ondas agudas qualitativamente semelhantes e alterações dependentes do estado semelhantes na atividade da população neural.


=== Ritmo teta ===


As correntes subjacentes que produzem a onda teta são geradas principalmente por camadas neurais densamente compactadas do córtex entorrinal, CA3, e os dendritos das células piramidais. 

A onda teta é um dos maiores sinais vistos no EEG e é conhecido como ritmo teta do hipocampo. 

Em algumas situações, o EEG é dominado por ondas regulares de 3 a 10 Hz, muitas vezes continuando por muitos segundos. 

Estes refletem potenciais de membrana subliminares e modulam fortemente o pico de neurônios do hipocampo e sincronizam através do hipocampo em um padrão de onda viajante.

O circuito trissináptico é um relé de neurotransmissão no hipocampo que interage com muitas regiões do cérebro.

A partir de estudos com roedores foi proposto que o circuito trissináptico gera o ritmo teta hipocampal. A ritmicidade teta é muito óbvia em coelhos e roedores e também claramente presente em gatos e cães.

Se teta pode ser visto em primatas ainda não está claro.

Em ratos (os animais que foram mais amplamente estudados), teta é visto principalmente em duas condições: primeiro, quando um animal está andando ou de alguma outra forma interagindo ativamente com seu entorno; segundo, durante o sono REM.

A função de teta ainda não foi explicada de forma convincente, embora inúmeras teorias tenham sido propostas. 

A hipótese mais popular tem sido relacioná-la com a aprendizagem e a memória. 

Um exemplo seria a fase com que os ritmos teta, no momento da estimulação de um neurônio, moldam o efeito dessa estimulação sobre suas sinapses. 

O que se quer dizer aqui é que os ritmos teta podem afetar os aspectos do aprendizado e da memória que dependem da plasticidade sináptica. 

Está bem estabelecido que lesões do septo medial – o nó central do sistema teta – causam graves interrupções da memória. 

No entanto, o septo medial é mais do que apenas o controlador de teta; é também a principal fonte de projeções colinérgicas para o hipocampo.

Não foi estabelecido que as lesões septais exerçam seus efeitos especificamente pela eliminação do ritmo teta.


=== Ondas afiadas ===


Durante o sono ou durante o repouso, quando um animal não está envolvido com o ambiente, o EEG hipocampal mostra um padrão de ondas lentas irregulares, um pouco maiores em amplitude do que as ondas teta.

Esse padrão é ocasionalmente interrompido por grandes surtos chamados de ondas agudas.

Esses eventos estão associados a surtos de atividade de pico com duração de 50 a 100 milissegundos em células piramidais de CA3 e CA1.

Eles também estão associados a oscilações de EEG de alta frequência de curta duração chamadas "ondulações", com frequências na faixa de 150 a 200 Hz em ratos, e juntas são conhecidas como ondas agudas e ondulações.

Ondas agudas são mais frequentes durante o sono quando ocorrem a uma taxa média de cerca de 1 por segundo (em ratos), mas em um padrão temporal muito irregular.

Ondas agudas são menos frequentes durante os estados de vigília inativos e geralmente são menores. 

Ondas afiadas também foram observadas em humanos e macacos. 

Em macacos, ondas agudas são robustas, mas não ocorrem com tanta frequência quanto em ratos. Um dos aspectos mais interessantes das ondas agudas é que elas parecem estar associadas à memória. 

Wilson e McNaughton 1994, e vários estudos posteriores, relataram que quando as células do hipocampo têm campos de disparo espaciais sobrepostos (e, portanto, geralmente disparam em quase simultaneidade), elas tendem a mostrar atividade correlacionada durante o sono após a sessão comportamental. 

Esse aumento de correlação, comumente conhecido como reativação, ocorre principalmente durante ondas agudas. 

Tem sido proposto que as ondas agudas são, de fato, reativações de padrões de atividade neural que foram memorizados durante o comportamento, impulsionados pelo fortalecimento das conexões sinápticas dentro do hipocampo.

Essa ideia é um componente-chave da teoria da "memória em dois estágios", defendida por Buzsáki e outros, que propõe que as memórias são armazenadas no hipocampo durante o comportamento e depois transferidas para o neocórtex durante o sono.

Ondas afiadas na teoria hebbiana são vistas como estimulações persistentemente repetidas por células pré-sinápticas, de células pós-sinápticas que são sugeridas para conduzir mudanças sinápticas nos alvos corticais das vias de saída do hipocampo.

A supressão de ondas e ondulações agudas durante o sono ou durante a imobilidade pode interferir nas memórias expressas ao nível do comportamento, no entanto, o código da célula de lugar CA1 recém-formado pode ressurgir mesmo após um sono com ondas e ondulações agudas abolidas, em áreas espacialmente não - tarefas exigentes.


=== Potenciação de longo prazo ===


Desde pelo menos a época de Ramon y Cajal (1852-1934), os psicólogos especulam que o cérebro armazena a memória alterando a força das conexões entre os neurônios que estão simultaneamente ativos. 

Essa ideia foi formalizada por Donald Hebb em 1949, mas por muitos anos permaneceu sem explicação. 

Em 1973, Tim Bliss e Terje Lømo descreveram um fenômeno no hipocampo do coelho que parecia atender às especificações de Hebb: uma mudança na resposta sináptica induzida por uma breve ativação forte e com duração de horas, dias ou mais. 

Este fenômeno foi logo referido como potenciação de longo prazo (LTP). 

Como um mecanismo candidato para a memória de longo prazo, a LTP tem sido estudada intensivamente, e muito se aprendeu sobre ela. 

No entanto, a complexidade e variedade das cascatas de sinalização intracelular que podem desencadear a LTP são reconhecidas como impedindo uma compreensão mais completa. alterações sinápticas dependentes de atividade também foram observadas em muitas outras áreas do cérebro. 

A forma mais bem estudada de LTP foi observada no CA1 do hipocampo e ocorre em sinapses que terminam em espinhas dendríticas e usam o neurotransmissor glutamato. 

As alterações sinápticas dependem de um tipo especial de receptor de glutamato, o receptor N-metil-D-aspartato (NMDA), um receptor de superfície celular que tem a propriedade especial de permitir que o cálcio entre na espinha pós-sináptica apenas quando ocorre ativação pré-sináptica e despolarização pós-sináptica. ao mesmo tempo. 

Drogas que interferem com os receptores NMDA bloqueiam a LTP e têm efeitos importantes em alguns tipos de memória, especialmente a memória espacial. 

Camundongos geneticamente modificados que são modificados para desativar o mecanismo LTP, também geralmente apresentam déficits de memória graves.


== Distúrbios ==



=== Envelhecimento ===


Condições relacionadas à idade, como a doença de Alzheimer e outras formas de demência (para as quais a ruptura do hipocampo é um dos primeiros sinais), têm um impacto severo em muitos tipos de cognição, incluindo a memória. 

Mesmo o envelhecimento normal está associado a um declínio gradual em alguns tipos de memória, incluindo a memória episódica e a memória de trabalho (ou memória de curto prazo). 

Como se acredita que o hipocampo desempenha um papel central na memória, tem havido um interesse considerável na possibilidade de que declínios relacionados à idade possam ser causados ​​pela deterioração do hipocampo. 

Alguns estudos iniciais relataram perda substancial de neurônios no hipocampo de pessoas idosas, mas estudos posteriores usando técnicas mais precisas encontraram apenas diferenças mínimas. 

Da mesma forma, alguns estudos de ressonância magnética relataram encolhimento do hipocampo em idosos, mas outros estudos não conseguiram reproduzir esse achado. 

Existe, no entanto, uma relação confiável entre o tamanho do hipocampo e o desempenho da memória; de modo que onde houver encolhimento relacionado à idade, o desempenho da memória será prejudicado.

Há também relatos de que tarefas de memória tendem a produzir menos ativação hipocampal em idosos do que em jovens. 

Além disso, um estudo de controle randomizado publicado em 2011 descobriu que o exercício aeróbico pode aumentar o tamanho do hipocampo em adultos de 55 a 80 anos e também melhorar a memória espacial.


=== Estresse ===

O hipocampo contém altos níveis de receptores de glicocorticóides, o que o torna mais vulnerável ao estresse de longo prazo do que a maioria das outras áreas do cérebro. 

Há evidências de que os seres humanos que sofreram estresse traumático grave e duradouro apresentam atrofia do hipocampo mais do que de outras partes do cérebro. 

Esses efeitos aparecem no transtorno de estresse pós-traumático e podem contribuir para a atrofia hipocampal relatada na esquizofrenia e na depressão grave. 

O volume anterior do hipocampo em crianças está positivamente correlacionado com a renda familiar dos pais e acredita-se que essa correlação seja mediada pelo estresse relacionado à renda.

Um estudo recente também revelou atrofia como resultado da depressão, mas isso pode ser interrompido com antidepressivos, mesmo que não sejam eficazes no alívio de outros sintomas. uma causa de atrofia neuronal no hipocampo.

Esta atrofia resulta em um volume hipocampal menor que também é visto na síndrome de Cushing.

Os níveis mais altos de cortisol na síndrome de Cushing geralmente são o resultado de medicamentos tomados para outras condições.

A perda neuronal também ocorre como resultado da neurogênese prejudicada.

Outro fator que contribui para um menor volume hipocampal é a retração dendrítica, onde os dendritos são encurtados em comprimento e reduzidos em número, em resposta ao aumento de glicocorticóides. 

Essa retração dendrítica é reversível. 

Após o tratamento com medicação para reduzir o cortisol na síndrome de Cushing, o volume do hipocampo é restaurado em até 10%. 

Esta mudança é vista como sendo devido à reforma dos dendritos. 

Essa restauração dendrítica também pode acontecer quando o estresse é removido. 

Há, no entanto, evidências derivadas principalmente de estudos usando ratos que o estresse que ocorre logo após o nascimento pode afetar a função hipocampal de maneiras que persistem ao longo da vida. 

O estresse crônico no rato macho mostrou retração dendrítica e perda de células na região CA3, mas isso não foi mostrado na fêmea. 

Isso foi pensado para ser devido a hormônios ovarianos neuroprotetores. 

Em ratos, o dano ao DNA aumenta no hipocampo sob condições de estresse.


=== Epilepsia ===


O hipocampo é uma das poucas regiões do cérebro onde novos neurônios são gerados. 

Este processo de neurogênese está confinado ao giro denteado. 

A produção de novos neurônios pode ser afetada positivamente pelo exercício ou negativamente pelas crises epilépticas. As crises na epilepsia do lobo temporal podem afetar o desenvolvimento normal de novos neurônios e causar danos nos tecidos. 

A esclerose hipocampal é o tipo mais comum de tal dano tecidual. 

Ainda não está claro, no entanto, se a epilepsia é geralmente causada por anormalidades do hipocampo ou se o hipocampo é danificado por efeitos cumulativos de convulsões. 

No entanto, em ambientes experimentais onde convulsões repetitivas são induzidas artificialmente em animais, o dano hipocampal é um resultado frequente. 

Isso pode ser consequência da concentração de receptores de glutamato excitáveis ​​no hipocampo. 

A hiperexcitabilidade pode levar à citotoxicidade e morte celular. 

Também pode ter algo a ver com o hipocampo ser um local onde novos neurônios continuam a ser criados ao longo da vida e com anormalidades nesse processo.


=== Esquizofrenia ===

As causas da esquizofrenia não são bem compreendidas, mas inúmeras anormalidades da estrutura cerebral foram relatadas. 

As alterações mais investigadas envolvem o córtex cerebral, mas também foram descritos efeitos no hipocampo.

Muitos relatórios encontraram reduções no tamanho do hipocampo em pessoas com esquizofrenia.

O hipocampo esquerdo parece ser mais afetado do que o direito.

As mudanças observadas foram amplamente aceitas como resultado de desenvolvimento anormal.

Não está claro se as alterações hipocampais desempenham algum papel na causa dos sintomas psicóticos que são a característica mais importante da esquizofrenia.

Tem sido sugerido que, com base em trabalhos experimentais com animais, a disfunção hipocampal pode produzir uma alteração na liberação de dopamina nos gânglios da base, afetando indiretamente a integração da informação no córtex pré-frontal.

Também foi sugerido que a disfunção do hipocampo pode explicar os distúrbios na memória de longo prazo freqüentemente observados. Estudos de ressonância magnética encontraram um volume cerebral menor e ventrículos maiores em pessoas com esquizofrenia - no entanto, os pesquisadores não sabem se o encolhimento é da esquizofrenia ou da medicação.

Demonstrou-se que o hipocampo e o tálamo estão reduzidos em volume; e o volume do globo pálido aumenta.

Os padrões corticais estão alterados e observa-se uma redução do volume e da espessura do córtex, particularmente nos lobos frontal e temporal.

Foi proposto ainda que muitas das alterações observadas estão presentes no início do transtorno, o que dá peso à teoria de que há neurodesenvolvimento anormal. efeitos. 

Tem sido geralmente aceito que há uma conectividade sináptica anormal subjacente à esquizofrenia. 

Várias linhas de evidência implicam mudanças na organização e conectividade sináptica, dentro e a partir do hipocampo. Muitos estudos encontraram disfunção no circuito sináptico dentro do hipocampo e sua atividade no córtex pré-frontal. 

As vias glutamatérgicas têm sido amplamente afetadas. 

O subcampo CA1 é visto como o menos envolvido dos outros subcampos, e CA4 e o subículo foram relatados em outros lugares como sendo as áreas mais implicadas.

A revisão concluiu que a patologia pode ser devido à genética, neurodesenvolvimento defeituoso ou plasticidade neural anormal.

Concluiu-se ainda que a esquizofrenia não se deve a nenhum distúrbio neurodegenerativo conhecido.

O dano oxidativo do DNA é substancialmente aumentado no hipocampo de pacientes idosos com esquizofrenia crônica.


=== Amnésia global transitória ===

A amnésia global transitória é uma perda dramática, repentina, temporária e quase total da memória de curto prazo.

Várias causas foram levantadas, incluindo isquemia, epilepsia, enxaqueca e distúrbios do fluxo sanguíneo venoso cerebral, levando à isquemia de estruturas como o hipocampo que estão envolvidas na memória. Não houve comprovação científica de qualquer causa.

No entanto, estudos de ressonância magnética ponderada em difusão realizados de 12 a 24 horas após um episódio mostraram que há pequenas lesões semelhantes a pontos no hipocampo.

Esses achados sugeriram uma possível implicação dos neurônios CA1 tornados vulneráveis ​​pelo estresse metabólico.


=== PTSD ===

Alguns estudos mostram correlação do volume reduzido do hipocampo e transtorno de estresse pós-traumático (TEPT).

Um estudo de veteranos de combate da Guerra do Vietnã com TEPT mostrou uma redução de 20% no volume do hipocampo em comparação com veteranos que não sofreram tais sintomas.

Este achado não foi replicado em pacientes com TEPT crônico traumatizados em um acidente de avião em um show aéreo em 1988 (Ramstein, Alemanha).

É também o caso de irmãos gêmeos não-combatentes de veteranos do Vietnã com TEPT também terem hipocampos menores do que outros controles, levantando questões sobre a natureza da correlação.

Um estudo de 2016 reforçou a teoria de que um hipocampo menor aumenta o risco de transtorno de estresse pós-traumático, e um hipocampo maior aumenta a probabilidade de um tratamento eficaz.


=== Microcefalia ===

A atrofia do hipocampo foi caracterizada em pacientes com microcefalia e modelos de camundongos com mutações WDR62 que recapitulam mutações pontuais humanas que mostraram uma deficiência no desenvolvimento hipocampal e na neurogênese.


== Outros animais ==



=== Outros mamíferos ===

O hipocampo tem uma aparência geralmente semelhante em toda a gama de mamíferos, de monotremados, como a equidna, a primatas, como humanos.

A proporção do tamanho do hipocampo para o tamanho do corpo aumenta amplamente, sendo cerca de duas vezes maior para os primatas do que para a equidna.

No entanto, não aumenta nem perto da taxa da relação neocórtex-tamanho do corpo.

Portanto, o hipocampo ocupa uma fração muito maior do manto cortical em roedores do que em primatas.

Em humanos adultos, o volume do hipocampo em cada lado do cérebro é de cerca de 3,0 a 3,5 cm3 em comparação com 320 a 420 cm3 para o volume do neocórtex. Há também uma relação geral entre o tamanho do hipocampo e a memória espacial.

Quando são feitas comparações entre espécies semelhantes, aquelas que possuem maior capacidade de memória espacial tendem a apresentar maiores volumes hipocampais. 

Essa relação também se estende às diferenças de sexo; em espécies onde machos e fêmeas apresentam fortes diferenças na capacidade de memória espacial, eles também tendem a apresentar diferenças correspondentes no volume do hipocampo.


=== Outros vertebrados ===

Espécies não-mamíferas não possuem uma estrutura cerebral que se parece com o hipocampo dos mamíferos, mas possuem uma que é considerada homóloga a ele. 

O hipocampo, como apontado acima, é essencialmente parte do alocórtex. 

Apenas os mamíferos têm um córtex totalmente desenvolvido, mas a estrutura da qual evoluiu, chamada de pálio, está presente em todos os vertebrados, mesmo nos mais primitivos, como a lampreia ou a bruxa. 

O pálio é geralmente dividido em três zonas: medial, lateral e dorsal. 

O pálio medial forma o precursor do hipocampo. 

Não se assemelha visualmente ao hipocampo porque as camadas não são deformadas em forma de S ou envoltas pelo giro denteado, mas a homologia é indicada por fortes afinidades químicas e funcionais. 

Agora há evidências de que essas estruturas semelhantes ao hipocampo estão envolvidas na cognição espacial em pássaros, répteis e peixes.


==== Aves ====
Nas aves, a correspondência é suficientemente bem estabelecida para que a maioria dos anatomistas se refiram à zona palial medial como "hipocampo aviário". 

Numerosas espécies de aves têm fortes habilidades espaciais, em particular aquelas que armazenam alimentos. 

Há evidências de que as aves que armazenam alimentos têm um hipocampo maior do que outros tipos de aves e que danos ao hipocampo causam deficiências na memória espacial.


==== Peixe ====
A história dos peixes é mais complexa.

Nos peixes teleósteos (que constituem a grande maioria das espécies existentes), o prosencéfalo é distorcido em comparação com outros tipos de vertebrados: a maioria dos neuroanatomistas acredita que o prosencéfalo teleósteo é em essência evertido, como uma meia virada do avesso, de modo que as estruturas que ficam no interior, próximo aos ventrículos, para a maioria dos vertebrados, são encontrados no exterior em peixes teleósteos, e vice-versa.

Uma das consequências disso é que o pálio medial (zona do hipocampo) de um vertebrado típico corresponde ao pálio lateral de um peixe típico.

Vários tipos de peixes (particularmente peixinhos dourados) demonstraram experimentalmente ter fortes habilidades de memória espacial, até mesmo formando "mapas cognitivos" das áreas em que habitam. 

Há evidências de que danos ao pálio lateral prejudicam a memória espacial. 

Ainda não se sabe se o pálio medial desempenha um papel semelhante em vertebrados ainda mais primitivos, como tubarões e raias, ou mesmo lampreias e peixes-bruxa.


=== Insetos e moluscos ===

Alguns tipos de insetos e moluscos, como o polvo, também têm fortes habilidades de aprendizado espacial e navegação, mas parecem funcionar de maneira diferente do sistema espacial dos mamíferos, de modo que ainda não há boas razões para pensar que eles tenham uma origem evolutiva comum. ; nem há similaridade suficiente na estrutura cerebral para permitir que qualquer coisa parecida com um "hipocampo" seja identificada nessas espécies.

Alguns propuseram, no entanto, que os corpos de cogumelo do inseto podem ter uma função semelhante à do hipocampo.


== Notas ==



== Leitura adicional ==

Hipocampo (Wiley)
Docampo-Seara A, Lagadec R, Mazan S, Rodríguez MA, Quintana-Urzainqui I, Candal E (julho de 2018). "Estudo da neurogênese palial em embriões de tubarão e a origem evolutiva da zona subventricular".

Estrutura e Função do Cérebro. 223 (8): 3593-3612. doi:10.1007/s00429-018-1705-2.

PMID 29980930.
Derdikman D, Knierim JJ, eds. (2014).

Espaço, Tempo e Memória na Formação Hipocampal. 

Springer. 

ISBN 978-3-7091-1292-2.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hippocampus
