

LIVER


The liver is an organ of the digestive system only found in vertebrates which detoxifies various metabolites, synthesizes proteins and produces biochemicals necessary for digestion and growth. 

In humans, it is located in the right upper quadrant of the abdomen, below the diaphragm. 

Its other roles in metabolism include the regulation of glycogen storage, decomposition of red blood cells, and the production of hormones.

The liver is an accessory digestive organ that produces bile, an alkaline fluid containing cholesterol and bile acids, which helps the breakdown of fat. 

The gallbladder, a small pouch that sits just under the liver, stores bile produced by the liver which is afterwards moved to the small intestine to complete digestion. 

The liver's highly specialized tissue, consisting of mostly hepatocytes, regulates a wide variety of high-volume biochemical reactions, including the synthesis and breakdown of small and complex molecules, many of which are necessary for normal vital functions. 

Estimates regarding the organ's total number of functions vary, but textbooks generally cite it being around 500.

It is not known how to compensate for the absence of liver function in the long term, although liver dialysis techniques can be used in the short term. 

Artificial livers have not been developed to promote long-term replacement in the absence of the liver. 

As of 2018, liver transplantation is the only option for complete liver failure.


== Structure ==

The liver is a reddish-brown, wedge-shaped organ with two
lobes of unequal size and shape. 

A human liver normally weighs approximately 1.5 kg (3.3 lb) and has a width of about 15 cm (6 in). 

There is considerable size variation between individuals, with the standard reference range for men being 970–1,860 g (2.14–4.10 lb) and for women 600–1,770 g (1.32–3.90 lb). 

It is both the heaviest internal organ and the largest gland in the human body.

Located in the right upper quadrant of the abdominal cavity, it rests just below the diaphragm, to the right of the stomach and overlies the gallbladder.

The liver is connected to two large blood vessels: the hepatic artery and the portal vein. 

The hepatic artery carries oxygen-rich blood from the aorta via the celiac trunk, whereas the portal vein carries blood rich in digested nutrients from the entire gastrointestinal tract and also from the spleen and pancreas. 

These blood vessels subdivide into small capillaries known as liver sinusoids, which then lead to lobules.
Lobules are the functional units of the liver. 

Each lobule is made up of millions of hepatic cells (hepatocytes), which are the basic metabolic cells. 

The lobules are held together by a fine, dense, irregular, fibroelastic connective tissue layer extending from the fibrous capsule covering the entire liver known as Glisson's capsule. 

This extends into the structure of the liver by accompanying the blood vessels, ducts, and nerves at the hepatic hilum. 

The whole surface of the liver, except for the bare area, is covered in a serous coat derived from the peritoneum, and this firmly adheres to the inner Glisson's capsule.


=== Gross anatomy ===

Terminology related to the liver often starts in hepat- from ἡπατο-, from the Greek word for liver.


==== Lobes ====

The liver is grossly divided into two parts when viewed from above – a right and a left lobe - and four parts when viewed from below (left, right, caudate, and quadrate lobes).

The falciform ligament makes a superficial division of the liver into a left and right lobe. 

From below, the two additional lobes are located between the right and left lobes, one in front of the other. 

A line can be imagined running from the left of the vena cava and all the way forward to divide the liver and gallbladder into two halves. 

This line is called Cantlie's line.

Other anatomical landmarks include the ligamentum venosum and the round ligament of the liver, which further divide the left side of the liver in two sections. 

An important anatomical landmark, the porta hepatis, divides this left portion into four segments, which can be numbered starting at the caudate lobe as I in an anticlockwise manner. 

From this parietal view, seven segments can be seen, because the eighth segment is only visible in the visceral view.


==== Surfaces ====

On the diaphragmatic surface, apart from a triangular bare area where it connects to the diaphragm, the liver is covered by a thin, double-layered membrane, the peritoneum, that helps to reduce friction against other organs. 

This surface covers the convex shape of the two lobes where it accommodates the shape of the diaphragm. 

The peritoneum folds back on itself to form the falciform ligament and the right and left triangular ligaments.

These peritoneal ligaments are not related to the anatomic ligaments in joints, and the right and left triangular ligaments have no known functional importance, though they serve as surface landmarks. 

The falciform ligament functions to attach the liver to the posterior portion of the anterior body wall.

The visceral surface or inferior surface is uneven and concave. 

It is covered in peritoneum apart from where it attaches the gallbladder and the porta hepatis. 

The fossa of gall bladder lies to the right of the quadrate lobe, occupied by the gallbladder with its cystic duct close to the right end of porta hepatis.


==== Impressions ====

Several impressions on the surface of the liver accommodate the various adjacent structures and organs. 

Underneath the right lobe and to the right of the gallbladder fossa are two impressions, one behind the other and separated by a ridge. 

The one in front is a shallow colic impression, formed by the hepatic flexure and the one behind is a deeper renal impression accommodating part of the right kidney and part of the suprarenal gland.

The suprarenal impression is a small, triangular, depressed area on the liver. 

It is located close to the right of the fossa, between the bare area and the caudate lobe, and immediately above the renal impression. 

The greater part of the suprarenal impression is devoid of peritoneum and it lodges the right suprarenal gland.Medial to the renal impression is a third and slightly marked impression, lying between it and the neck of the gall bladder. 

This is caused by the descending portion of the duodenum, and is known as the duodenal impression.The inferior surface of the left lobe of the liver presents behind and to the left of the gastric impression. 

This is moulded over the upper front surface of the stomach, and to the right of this is a rounded eminence, the tuber omentale, which fits into the concavity of the lesser curvature of the stomach and lies in front of the anterior layer of the lesser omentum.


=== Microscopic anatomy ===


Microscopically, each liver lobe is seen to be made up of hepatic lobules. 

The lobules are roughly hexagonal, and consist of plates of hepatocytes, and sinusoids radiating from a central vein towards an imaginary perimeter of interlobular portal triads. 

The central vein joins to the hepatic vein to carry blood out from the liver. 

A distinctive component of a lobule is the portal triad, which can be found running along each of the lobule's corners. 

The portal triad, consists of the hepatic artery, the portal vein, and the common bile duct. 

The triad may be seen on a liver ultrasound, as a Mickey Mouse sign with the portal vein as the head, and the hepatic artery, and the common bile duct as the ears.

Histology, the study of microscopic anatomy, shows two major types of liver cell: parenchymal cells and nonparenchymal cells. 

About 70–85% of the liver volume is occupied by parenchymal hepatocytes. 

Nonparenchymal cells constitute 40% of the total number of liver cells but only 6.5% of its volume. 

The liver sinusoids are lined with two types of cell, sinusoidal endothelial cells, and phagocytic Kupffer cells. 

Hepatic stellate cells are nonparenchymal cells found in the perisinusoidal space, between a sinusoid and a hepatocyte.

Additionally, intrahepatic lymphocytes are often present in the sinusoidal lumen.


=== Functional anatomy ===


The central area or hepatic hilum, includes the opening known as the porta hepatis which carries the common bile duct and common hepatic artery, and the opening for the portal vein. 

The duct, vein, and artery divide into left and right branches, and the areas of the liver supplied by these branches constitute the functional left and right lobes. 

The functional lobes are separated by the imaginary plane, Cantlie's line, joining the gallbladder fossa to the inferior vena cava. 

The plane separates the liver into the true right and left lobes. 

The middle hepatic vein also demarcates the true right and left lobes. 

The right lobe is further divided into an anterior and posterior segment by the right hepatic vein. 

The left lobe is divided into the medial and lateral segments by the left hepatic vein.

The hilum of the liver is described in terms of three plates that contain the bile ducts and blood vessels. 

The contents of the whole plate system are surrounded by a sheath. 

The three plates are the hilar plate, the cystic plate and the umbilical plate and the plate system is the site of the many anatomical variations to be found in the liver.


=== Couinaud classification system ===

In the widely used Couinaud system, the functional lobes are further divided into a total of eight subsegments based on a transverse plane through the bifurcation of the main portal vein. 

The caudate lobe is a separate structure that receives blood flow from both the right- and left-sided vascular branches. 

The Couinaud classification divides the liver into eight functionally independent liver segments. 

Each segment has its own vascular inflow, outflow and biliary drainage. 

In the centre of each segment are branches of the portal vein, hepatic artery, and bile duct. 

In the periphery of each segment is vascular outflow through the hepatic veins. 

The classification system uses the vascular supply in the liver to separate the functional units (numbered I to VIII) with unit 1, the caudate lobe, receiving its supply from both the right and the left branches of the portal vein. 

It contains one or more hepatic veins which drain directly into the inferior vena cava. 

The remainder of the units (II to VIII) are numbered in a clockwise fashion:


=== Gene and protein expression ===


About 20,000 protein coding genes are expressed in human cells and 60% of these genes are expressed in a normal, adult liver. 

Over 400 genes are more specifically expressed in the liver, with some 150 genes highly specific for liver tissue. 

A large fraction of the corresponding liver specific proteins are mainly expressed in hepatocytes and secreted into the blood and constitute plasma proteins. 

Other liver specific proteins are certain liver enzymes such as HAO1 and RDH16, proteins involved in bile synthesis such as BAAT and SLC27A5, and transporter proteins involved in the metabolism of drugs, such as ABCB11 and SLC2A2. 

Examples of highly liver-specific proteins include apolipoprotein A II, coagulation factors F2 and F9, complement factor related proteins, and the fibrinogen beta chain protein.


== Development ==

Organogenesis, the development of the organs, takes place from the third to the eighth week during embryogenesis. 

The origins of the liver lie in both the ventral portion of the foregut endoderm (endoderm being one of the three embryonic germ layers) and the constituents of the adjacent septum transversum mesenchyme. 

In the human embryo, the hepatic diverticulum is the tube of endoderm that extends out from the foregut into the surrounding mesenchyme. 

The mesenchyme of septum transversum induces this endoderm to proliferate, to branch, and to form the glandular epithelium of the liver. 

A portion of the hepatic diverticulum (that region closest to the digestive tube) continues to function as the drainage duct of the liver, and a branch from this duct produces the gallbladder. 

Besides signals from the septum transversum mesenchyme, fibroblast growth factor from the developing heart also contributes to hepatic competence, along with retinoic acid emanating from the lateral plate mesoderm. 

The hepatic endodermal cells undergo a morphological transition from columnar to pseudostratified resulting in thickening into the early liver bud. 

Their expansion forms a population of the bipotential hepatoblasts. 

Hepatic stellate cells are derived from mesenchyme.After migration of hepatoblasts into the septum transversum mesenchyme, the hepatic architecture begins to be established, with liver sinusoids and bile canaliculi appearing. 

The liver bud separates into the lobes. 

The left umbilical vein becomes the ductus venosus and the right vitelline vein becomes the portal vein. 

The expanding liver bud is colonized by hematopoietic cells. 

The bipotential hepatoblasts begin differentiating into biliary epithelial cells and hepatocytes. 

The biliary epithelial cells differentiate from hepatoblasts around portal veins, first producing a monolayer, and then a bilayer of cuboidal cells. 

In ductal plate, focal dilations emerge at points in the bilayer, become surrounded by portal mesenchyme, and undergo tubulogenesis into intrahepatic bile ducts. 

Hepatoblasts not adjacent to portal veins instead differentiate into hepatocytes and arrange into cords lined by sinusoidal epithelial cells and bile canaliculi. 

Once hepatoblasts are specified into hepatocytes and undergo further expansion, they begin acquiring the functions of a mature hepatocyte, and eventually mature hepatocytes appear as highly polarized epithelial cells with abundant glycogen accumulation. 

In the adult liver, hepatocytes are not equivalent, with position along the portocentrovenular axis within a liver lobule dictating expression of metabolic genes involved in drug metabolism, carbohydrate metabolism, ammonia detoxification, and bile production and secretion. 

WNT/β-catenin has now been identified to be playing a key role in this phenomenon.At birth, the liver comprises roughly 4% of body weight and weighs on average about 120 g (4 oz). 

Over the course of further development, it will increase to 1.4–1.6 kg (3.1–3.5 lb) but will only take up 2.5–3.5% of body weight.


=== Fetal blood supply ===

In the growing fetus, a major source of blood to the liver is the umbilical vein, which supplies nutrients to the growing fetus. 

The umbilical vein enters the abdomen at the umbilicus and passes upward along the free margin of the falciform ligament of the liver to the inferior surface of the liver. 

There, it joins with the left branch of the portal vein. 

The ductus venosus carries blood from the left portal vein to the left hepatic vein and then to the inferior vena cava, allowing placental blood to bypass the liver. 

In the fetus, the liver does not perform the normal digestive processes and filtration of the infant liver because nutrients are received directly from the mother via the placenta. 

The fetal liver releases some blood stem cells that migrate to the fetal thymus, creating the T-cells or T-lymphocytes. 

After birth, the formation of blood stem cells shifts to the red bone marrow. 

After 2–5 days, the umbilical vein and ductus venosus are completely obliterated; the former becomes the round ligament of liver and the latter becomes the ligamentum venosum. 

In the disorders of cirrhosis and portal hypertension, the umbilical vein can open up again.


== Functions ==

The various functions of the liver are carried out by the liver cells or hepatocytes. 

The liver is thought to be responsible for up to 500 separate functions, usually in combination with other systems and organs. 

Currently, no artificial organ or device is capable of reproducing all the functions of the liver. 

Some functions can be carried out by liver dialysis, an experimental treatment for liver failure. 

The liver also accounts for about 20% of resting total body oxygen consumption.


=== Blood supply ===

The liver receives a dual blood supply from the hepatic portal vein and hepatic arteries. 

The hepatic portal vein delivers around 75% of the liver's blood supply and carries venous blood drained from the spleen, gastrointestinal tract, and its associated organs. 

The hepatic arteries supply arterial blood to the liver, accounting for the remaining quarter of its blood flow. 

Oxygen is provided from both sources; about half of the liver's oxygen demand is met by the hepatic portal vein, and half is met by the hepatic arteries. 

The hepatic artery also has both alpha- and beta-adrenergic receptors; therefore, flow through the artery is controlled, in part, by the splanchnic nerves of the autonomic nervous system.

Blood flows through the liver sinusoids and empties into the central vein of each lobule. 

The central veins coalesce into hepatic veins, which leave the liver and drain into the inferior vena cava.


=== Biliary flow ===

The biliary tract is derived from the branches of the bile ducts. 

The biliary tract, also known as the biliary tree, is the path by which bile is secreted by the liver then transported to the first part of the small intestine, the duodenum. 

The bile produced in the liver is collected in bile canaliculi, small grooves between the faces of adjacent hepatocytes. 

The canaliculi radiate to the edge of the liver lobule, where they merge to form bile ducts. 

Within the liver, these ducts are termed intrahepatic bile ducts, and once they exit the liver, they are considered extrahepatic. 

The intrahepatic ducts eventually drain into the right and left hepatic ducts, which exit the liver at the transverse fissure, and merge to form the common hepatic duct. 

The cystic duct from the gallbladder joins with the common hepatic duct to form the common bile duct. 

The biliary system and connective tissue is supplied by the hepatic artery alone.

Bile either drains directly into the duodenum via the common bile duct, or is temporarily stored in the gallbladder via the cystic duct. 

The common bile duct and the pancreatic duct enter the second part of the duodenum together at the hepatopancreatic ampulla, also known as the ampulla of Vater.


=== Synthesis ===

The liver plays a major role in carbohydrate, protein, amino acid, and lipid metabolism.


==== Carbohydrate metabolism ====

The liver performs several roles in carbohydrate metabolism: 

The liver synthesizes and stores around 100g of glycogen via glycogenesis, the formation of glycogen from glucose.

When needed, the liver releases glucose into the blood by performing glycogenolysis, the breakdown of glycogen into glucose.

The liver is also responsible for gluconeogenesis, which is the synthesis of glucose from certain amino acids, lactate, or glycerol. 

Adipose and liver cells produce glycerol by breakdown of fat, which the liver uses for gluconeogenesis.

Liver also does glyconeogenesis which is synthesis of glycogen from lactic acid.


==== Protein metabolism ====

The liver is responsible for the mainstay of protein metabolism, synthesis as well as degradation. 

All plasma proteins except Gamma-globulins are synthesised in the liver. 

It is also responsible for a large part of amino acid synthesis. 

The liver plays a role in the production of clotting factors, as well as red blood cell production. 

Some of the proteins synthesized by the liver include coagulation factors I (fibrinogen), II (prothrombin), V, VII, VIII, IX, X, XI, XII, XIII, as well as protein C, protein S and antithrombin. 

The liver is a major site of production for thrombopoietin, a glycoprotein hormone that regulates the production of platelets by the bone marrow.


==== Lipid metabolism ====

The liver plays several roles in lipid metabolism: it performs cholesterol synthesis, lipogenesis, and the production of triglycerides, and a bulk of the body's lipoproteins are synthesized in the liver. 

The liver plays a key role in digestion, as it produces and excretes bile (a yellowish liquid) required for emulsifying fats and help the absorption of vitamin K from the diet. 

Some of the bile drains directly into the duodenum, and some is stored in the gallbladder. 

The liver produces insulin-like growth factor 1, a polypeptide protein hormone that plays an important role in childhood growth and continues to have anabolic effects in adults.


=== Breakdown ===

The liver is responsible for the breakdown of insulin and other hormones. 

The liver breaks down bilirubin via glucuronidation, facilitating its excretion into bile.

The liver is responsible for the breakdown and excretion of many waste products. 

It plays a key role in breaking down or modifying toxic substances (e.g., methylation) and most medicinal products in a process called drug metabolism. 

This sometimes results in toxication, when the metabolite is more toxic than its precursor. 

Preferably, the toxins are conjugated to avail excretion in bile or urine. 

The liver converts ammonia into urea as part of the ornithine cycle or the urea cycle, and the urea is excreted in the urine.


=== Blood reservoir ===

Because the liver is an expandable organ, large quantities of
blood can be stored in its blood vessels. 

Its normal blood volume, including both that in the hepatic veins and that in the hepatic sinuses, is about 450 milliliters, or almost 10 percent of the body's total blood volume. 

When high pressure in the right atrium causes backpressure in the liver, the liver expands, and 0.5 to 1 liter of extra blood is occasionally stored in the hepatic veins and sinuses. 

This occurs especially in cardiac failure with peripheral congestion. 

Thus, in effect, the liver is a large, expandable, venous organ capable of acting as a valuable blood reservoir in times of excess blood volume and capable of supplying extra blood in times of diminished blood volume.


=== Lymph production ===

Because the pores in the hepatic sinusoids are very permeable and allow ready passage of both fluid and proteins into the perisinusoidal space, the lymph draining from the liver usually has a protein concentration of about 6 g/dl, which is only slightly less than the protein concentration of plasma. 

Also, the high permeability of the liver sinusoid epithelium allows large quantities of lymph to form. 

Therefore, about half of all the lymph formed in the body under resting conditions arises in the liver.


=== Other ===

The liver stores a multitude of substances, including vitamin A (1–2 years' supply), vitamin D (1–4 months' supply), vitamin B12 (3–5 years' supply), vitamin K, vitamin E, iron, copper, zinc, cobalt, molybdenum, etc.

Haemopoiesis - The formation of blood cells is called haemopoiesis. 

In embryonic stage RBC and WBC are formed by liver. 

In the first trimester fetus, the liver is the main site of red blood cell production. 

By the 32nd week of gestation, the bone marrow has almost completely taken over that task.

Liver helps in purification of blood. 

The Kupffer cells of liver are phagocytic cells, helps in phagocytosis of dead blood cells and bacteria from the blood.

The liver is responsible for immunological effects – the mononuclear phagocyte system of the liver contains many immunologically active cells, acting as a 'sieve' for antigens carried to it via the portal system.

The liver produces albumin, the most abundant protein in blood serum. 

It is essential in the maintenance of oncotic pressure, and acts as a transport for fatty acids and steroid hormones.

The liver synthesizes angiotensinogen, a hormone that is responsible for raising the blood pressure when activated by renin, an enzyme that is released when the kidney senses low blood pressure.

The liver produces the enzyme catalase to break down hydrogen peroxide, a toxic oxidising agent, into water and oxygen.


=== With aging ===

The oxidative capacity of the liver decreases with aging, and therefore any medications that require oxidation (for instance, benzodiazepines) are more likely to accumulate to toxic levels. 

However, medications with shorter half-lives, such as lorazepam and oxazepam, are preferred in most cases when benzodiazepines are required in regard to geriatric medicine.


== Clinical significance ==

=== Disease ===

The liver is a vital organ and supports almost every other organ in the body. 

Because of its strategic location and multidimensional functions, the liver is also prone to many diseases. 

The bare area of the liver is a site that is vulnerable to the passing of infection from the abdominal cavity to the thoracic cavity. 

Liver diseases may be diagnosed by liver function tests–blood tests that can identify various markers. 

For example, acute-phase reactants are produced by the liver in response to injury or inflammation.

Hepatitis is a common condition of inflammation of the liver. 

The most usual cause of this is viral, and the most common of these infections are hepatitis A, B, C, D, and E. 

Some of these infections are sexually transmitted. 

Inflammation can also be caused by other viruses in the family Herpesviridae such as the herpes simplex virus. 

Chronic (rather than acute) infection with hepatitis B virus or hepatitis C virus is the main cause of liver cancer. 

Globally, about 248 million individuals are chronically infected with hepatitis B (with 843,724 in the U.S.), and 142 million are chronically infected with hepatitis C (with 2.7 million in the U.S.). 

Globally there are about 114 million and 20 million cases of hepatitis A and hepatitis E respectively, but these generally resolve and do not become chronic. 

Hepatitis D virus is a "satellite" of hepatitis B virus (can only infect in the presence of hepatitis B), and co-infects nearly 20 million people with hepatitis B, globally.

Hepatic encephalopathy is caused by an accumulation of toxins in the bloodstream that are normally removed by the liver. 

This condition can result in coma and can prove fatal. 

Budd–Chiari syndrome is a condition caused by blockage of the hepatic veins (including thrombosis) that drain the liver. 

It presents with the classical triad of abdominal pain, ascites and liver enlargement. 

Many diseases of the liver are accompanied by jaundice caused by increased levels of bilirubin in the system. 

The bilirubin results from the breakup of the hemoglobin of dead red blood cells; normally, the liver removes bilirubin from the blood and excretes it through bile.

Other disorders caused by excessive alcohol consumption are grouped under alcoholic liver diseases and these include alcoholic hepatitis, fatty liver, and cirrhosis. 

Factors contributing to the development of alcoholic liver diseases are not only the quantity and frequency of alcohol consumption, but can also include gender, genetics, and liver insult. 

Liver damage can also be caused by drugs, particularly paracetamol and drugs used to treat cancer. 

A rupture of the liver can be caused by a liver shot used in combat sports.
Primary biliary cholangitis is an autoimmune disease of the liver. 

It is marked by slow progressive destruction of the small bile ducts of the liver, with the intralobular ducts (Canals of Hering) affected early in the disease. 

When these ducts are damaged, bile and other toxins build up in the liver (cholestasis) and over time damages the liver tissue in combination with ongoing immune related damage. 

This can lead to scarring (fibrosis) and cirrhosis. 

Cirrhosis increases the resistance to blood flow in the liver, and can result in portal hypertension. 

Congested anastomoses between the portal venous system and the systemic circulation, can be a subsequent condition.

There are also many pediatric liver diseases, including biliary atresia, alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency, alagille syndrome, progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis, Langerhans cell histiocytosis and hepatic hemangioma a benign tumour the most common type of liver tumour, thought to be congenital. 

A genetic disorder causing multiple cysts to form in the liver tissue, usually in later life, and usually asymptomatic, is polycystic liver disease. 

Diseases that interfere with liver function will lead to derangement of these processes. 

However, the liver has a great capacity to regenerate and has a large reserve capacity. 

In most cases, the liver only produces symptoms after extensive damage.

Hepatomegaly refers to an enlarged liver and can be due to many causes. 

It can be palpated in a liver span measurement.


=== Symptoms ===

The classic symptoms of liver damage include the following:

Pale stools occur when stercobilin, a brown pigment, is absent from the stool. 

Stercobilin is derived from bilirubin metabolites produced in the liver.

Dark urine occurs when bilirubin mixes with urine

Jaundice (yellow skin and/or whites of the eyes) 

This is where bilirubin deposits in skin, causing an intense itch. 

Itching is the most common complaint by people who have liver failure. 

Often this itch cannot be relieved by drugs.

Swelling of the abdomen, and swelling of the ankles and feet occurs because the liver fails to make albumin.

Excessive fatigue occurs from a generalized loss of nutrients, minerals and vitamins.

Bruising and easy bleeding are other features of liver disease. 

The liver makes clotting factors, substances which help prevent bleeding. 

When liver damage occurs, these factors are no longer present and severe bleeding can occur.

Pain in the upper right quadrant can result from the stretching of Glisson's capsule in conditions of hepatitis and pre-eclampsia.


=== Diagnosis ===

The diagnosis of liver disease is made by liver function tests, groups of blood tests, that can readily show the extent of liver damage. 

If infection is suspected, then other serological tests will be carried out. 

A physical examination of the liver can only reveal its size and any tenderness, and some form of imaging such as an ultrasound or CT scan may also be needed.

Sometimes a liver biopsy will be necessary, and a tissue sample is taken through a needle inserted into the skin just below the rib cage. 

This procedure may be helped by a sonographer providing ultrasound guidance to an interventional radiologist.

		
=== Liver regeneration ===


The liver is the only human internal organ capable of natural regeneration of lost tissue; as little as 25% of a liver can regenerate into a whole liver. 

This is, however, not true regeneration but rather compensatory growth in mammals. 

The lobes that are removed do not regrow and the growth of the liver is a restoration of function, not original form. 

This contrasts with true regeneration where both original function and form are restored. 

In some other species, such as zebrafish, the liver undergoes true regeneration by restoring both shape and size of the organ. 

In the liver, large areas of the tissues are formed but for the formation of new cells there must be sufficient amount of material so the circulation of the blood becomes more active.

This is predominantly due to the hepatocytes re-entering the cell cycle. 

That is, the hepatocytes go from the quiescent G0 phase to the G1 phase and undergo mitosis. 

This process is activated by the p75 receptors. 

There is also some evidence of bipotential stem cells, called hepatic oval cells or ovalocytes (not to be confused with oval red blood cells of ovalocytosis), which are thought to reside in the canals of Hering. 

These cells can differentiate into either hepatocytes or cholangiocytes. 

Cholangiocytes are the epithelial lining cells of the bile ducts. 

They are cuboidal epithelium in the small interlobular bile ducts, but become columnar and mucus secreting in larger bile ducts approaching the porta hepatis and the extrahepatic ducts. 

Research is being carried out on the use of stem cells for the generation of an artificial liver.

Scientific and medical works about liver regeneration often refer to the Greek Titan Prometheus who was chained to a rock in the Caucasus where, each day, his liver was devoured by an eagle, only to grow back each night. 

The myth suggests the ancient Greeks may have known about the liver's remarkable capacity for self-repair.


=== Liver transplantation ===

Human liver transplants were first performed by Thomas Starzl in the United States and Roy Calne in Cambridge, England in 1963 and 1967, respectively.

Liver transplantation is the only option for those with irreversible liver failure. 

Most transplants are done for chronic liver diseases leading to cirrhosis, such as chronic hepatitis C, alcoholism, and autoimmune hepatitis. 

Less commonly, liver transplantation is done for fulminant hepatic failure, in which liver failure occurs over days to weeks.

Liver allografts for transplant usually come from donors who have died from fatal brain injury. 

Living donor liver transplantation is a technique in which a portion of a living person's liver is removed (hepatectomy) and used to replace the entire liver of the recipient. 

This was first performed in 1989 for pediatric liver transplantation. 

Only 20 percent of an adult's liver (Couinaud segments 2 and 3) is needed to serve as a liver allograft for an infant or small child.

More recently, adult-to-adult liver transplantation has been done using the donor's right hepatic lobe, which amounts to 60 percent of the liver. 

Due to the ability of the liver to regenerate, both the donor and recipient end up with normal liver function if all goes well. 

This procedure is more controversial, as it entails performing a much larger operation on the donor, and indeed there were at least two donor deaths out of the first several hundred cases. 

A 2006 publication addressed the problem of donor mortality and found at least fourteen cases. 

The risk of postoperative complications (and death) is far greater in right-sided operations than that in left-sided operations.

With the recent advances of noninvasive imaging, living liver donors usually have to undergo imaging examinations for liver anatomy to decide if the anatomy is feasible for donation. 

The evaluation is usually performed by multidetector row computed tomography (MDCT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). 

MDCT is good in vascular anatomy and volumetry. 

MRI is used for biliary tree anatomy. 

Donors with very unusual vascular anatomy, which makes them unsuitable for donation, could be screened out to avoid unnecessary operations.


== Society and culture ==

Some cultures regard the liver as the seat of the soul. 

In Greek mythology, the gods punished Prometheus for revealing fire to humans by chaining him to a rock where a vulture (or an eagle) would peck out his liver, which would regenerate overnight. 

(The liver is the only human internal organ that actually can regenerate itself to a significant extent.) 

Many ancient peoples of the Near East and Mediterranean areas practiced a type of divination called haruspicy or hepatomancy, where they tried to obtain information by examining the livers of sheep and other animals.

In Plato, and in later physiology, the liver was thought to be the seat of the darkest emotions (specifically wrath, jealousy and greed) which drive men to action. 

The Talmud (tractate Berakhot 61b) refers to the liver as the seat of anger, with the gallbladder counteracting this. 

The Persian, Urdu, and Hindi languages (جگر or jigar) refer to the liver figurative speech to indicate courage and strong feelings, or "their best"; e.g., "This Mecca has thrown to you the pieces of its liver!". 

The term jan e jigar, literally "the strength (power) of my liver", is a term of endearment in Urdu. 

In Persian slang, jigar is used as an adjective for any object which is desirable, especially women. 

In the Zulu language, the word for liver (isibindi) is the same as the word for courage. 

In English the term 'lily-livered' is used to indicate cowardice from the medieval belief that the liver was the seat of courage.
Spanish hígados also means "courage".

However the secondary meaning of Basque gibel is "indolence".In biblical Hebrew, the word for liver, כבד (Kauved, stemmed KBD or KVD, similar to Arabic الكبد), also means heavy and is used to describe the rich ("heavy" with possessions) and honor (presumably for the same reason). 

In the Book of Lamentations (2:11) it is used to describe the physiological responses to sadness by "my liver spilled to earth" along with the flow of tears and the overturning in bitterness of the intestines. 

On several occasions in the book of Psalms (most notably 16:9), the word is used to describe happiness in the liver, along with the heart (which beats rapidly) and the flesh (which appears red under the skin). 

Further usage as the self (similar to "your honor") is widely available throughout the old testament, sometimes compared to the breathing soul (Genesis 49:6, Psalms 7:6, etc.). 

An honorable hat was also referred to with this word (Job 19:9, etc.) and under that definition appears many times along with פאר Pe'er - grandeur.

These four meanings were used in preceding ancient Semitic languages such as Accadian and Ancient Egyptian preserved in classical Ethiopic Ge'ez language.


=== Food ===


Humans commonly eat the livers of mammals, fowl, and fish as food. 

Domestic pig, ox, lamb, calf, chicken, and goose livers are widely available from butchers and supermarkets. 

In the Romance languages, the anatomical word for "liver" (French foie, Spanish hígado, etc.) derives not from the Latin anatomical term, jecur, but from the culinary term ficatum, literally "stuffed with figs," referring to the livers of geese that had been fattened on figs. 

Animal livers are rich in iron, vitamin A and vitamin B12; and cod liver oil is commonly used as a dietary supplement.

Liver can be baked, boiled, broiled, fried, stir-fried, or eaten raw (asbeh nayeh or sawda naye in Lebanese cuisine, or liver sashimi in Japanese cuisine). 

In many preparations, pieces of liver are combined with pieces of meat or kidneys, as in the various forms of Middle Eastern mixed grill (e.g. meurav Yerushalmi). 

Well-known examples include liver pâté, foie gras, chopped liver, and leverpastej. 

Liver sausages, such as Braunschweiger and liverwurst, are also a valued meal. 

Liver sausages may also be used as spreads. 

A traditional South African delicacy, skilpadjies, is made of minced lamb's liver wrapped in netvet (caul fat), and grilled over an open fire. 

Traditionally, some fish livers were valued as food, especially the stingray liver. 

It was used to prepare delicacies, such as poached skate liver on toast in England, as well as the beignets de foie de raie and foie de raie en croute in French cuisine.


=== Giraffe liver ===

The Humr, one of the tribes in the Baggara ethnic grouping, native to southwestern Kordofan in Sudan and speakers of Shuwa or Chadian Arabic, prepare a non-alcoholic drink from the liver and bone marrow of the giraffe which they call umm nyolokh, and which they claim is intoxicating ( Arabic سكران sakran ), causing dreams and even waking hallucinations. 

Anthropologist Ian Cunnison, who accompanied the Humr on one of their giraffe-hunting expeditions in the late 1950s, notes that:

It is said that a person, once he has drunk umm nyolokh, will return to giraffe again and again. 

Humr, being Mahdists, are strict abstainers [ from alcohol ] and a Humrawi is never drunk ( sakran ) on liquor or beer. 

But he uses this word to describe the effects which umm nyolokh has upon him.

Cunnison's remarkable account of an apparently psychoactive mammal found its way from a somewhat obscure scientific paper into more mainstream literature through a conversation between Dr. 

Wendy James of the Institute of Social and Cultural Anthropology at the University of Oxford and specialist on the use of hallucinogens and intoxicants in society Richard Rudgley, who considered its implications in his popular work The Encyclopedia of Psychoactive Substances. 

Rudgley hypothesises that the presence of the hallucinogenic compound DMT might account for the putative intoxicating properties of umm nyolokh.Cunnison himself, on the other hand, had found it hard fully to believe in the literal truth of the Humr's assertion that their drink was intoxicating:

I can only assume that there is no intoxicating substance in the drink and that the effect it produces is simply a matter of convention, although it may be brought about subconsciously.

The study of entheogens in general - including entheogens of animal origin ( e.g. hallucinogenic fish and toad venom ) - has, however, made considerable progress in the sixty-odd years since Cunnison's report and the idea that some intoxicating principle might reside in giraffe liver no longer seems as far-fetched as it was in Cunnison's day, although conclusive proof ( or disproof ) will have to await detailed analyses of the animal organ in question and the drink prepared therefrom.


=== Arrow/bullet poison ===

Certain Tungusic peoples formerly prepared a type of arrow poison from rotting animal livers, which was, in later times, also applied to bullets. 

Russian anthropologist Sergei Mikhailovich Shirokogorov notes that: Formerly the using of poisoned arrows was common. 

For instance, among the Kumarčen, [ a subgroup of the Oroqen ] even in recent times a poison was used which was prepared from decaying liver.  

This has been confirmed by the Kumarčen. 

I am not competent to judge as to the chemical conditions of production of poison which is not destroyed by the heat of explosion. 

However, the Tungus themselves compare this method [ of poisoning ammunition ] with the poisoning of arrows.


== Other animals ==

The liver is found in all vertebrates and is typically the largest internal organ. 

Its form varies considerably in different species, and is largely determined by the shape and arrangement of the surrounding organs. 

Nonetheless, in most species it is divided into right and left lobes; exceptions to this general rule include snakes, where the shape of the body necessitates a simple cigar-like form. 

The internal structure of the liver is broadly similar in all vertebrates.

An organ sometimes referred to as a liver is found associated with the digestive tract of the primitive chordate Amphioxus. 

Although it performs many functions of a liver, it is not considered a true liver but a homolog of the vertebrate liver. 

The amphioxus hepatic caecum produces the liver-specific proteins vitellogenin, antithrombin, plasminogen, alanine aminotransferase, and insulin/Insulin-like growth factor (IGF)



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Liver
;;;ES;;;



HÍGADO


El hígado es un órgano del sistema digestivo que solo se encuentra en los vertebrados y que desintoxica varios metabolitos, sintetiza proteínas y produce bioquímicos necesarios para la digestión y el crecimiento. 

En los humanos, se encuentra en el cuadrante superior derecho del abdomen, debajo del diafragma. 

Sus otras funciones en el metabolismo incluyen la regulación del almacenamiento de glucógeno, la descomposición de los glóbulos rojos y la producción de hormonas.

El hígado es un órgano digestivo accesorio que produce la bilis, un líquido alcalino que contiene colesterol y ácidos biliares, lo que ayuda a la descomposición de las grasas. 

La vesícula biliar, una pequeña bolsa que se encuentra justo debajo del hígado, almacena la bilis producida por el hígado que luego se traslada al intestino delgado para completar la digestión. 

El tejido altamente especializado del hígado, que consiste principalmente en hepatocitos, regula una amplia variedad de reacciones bioquímicas de gran volumen, incluida la síntesis y descomposición de moléculas pequeñas y complejas, muchas de las cuales son necesarias para las funciones vitales normales.

Las estimaciones sobre el número total de funciones del órgano varían, pero los libros de texto generalmente citan alrededor de 500.

No se sabe cómo compensar la ausencia de función hepática a largo plazo, aunque se pueden utilizar técnicas de diálisis hepática a corto plazo.

No se han desarrollado hígados artificiales para promover el reemplazo a largo plazo en ausencia del hígado.

A partir de 2018, el trasplante de hígado es la única opción para la insuficiencia hepática completa.


== Estructura ==

El hígado es un órgano en forma de cuña de color marrón rojizo con dos
lóbulos de tamaño y forma desiguales.

Un hígado humano normalmente pesa aproximadamente 1,5 kg (3,3 libras) y tiene un ancho de unos 15 cm (6 pulgadas). 

Existe una variación de tamaño considerable entre individuos, con un rango de referencia estándar para hombres de 970 a 1860 g (2,14 a 4,10 libras) y para mujeres de 600 a 1770 g (1,32 a 3,90 libras). 

Es a la vez el órgano interno más pesado y la glándula más grande del cuerpo humano.

Ubicado en el cuadrante superior derecho de la cavidad abdominal, descansa justo debajo del diafragma, a la derecha del estómago y se superpone a la vesícula biliar.

El hígado está conectado a dos grandes vasos sanguíneos: la arteria hepática y la vena porta. 

La arteria hepática transporta sangre rica en oxígeno desde la aorta a través del tronco celíaco, mientras que la vena porta transporta sangre rica en nutrientes digeridos de todo el tracto gastrointestinal y también del bazo y el páncreas. 

Estos vasos sanguíneos se subdividen en pequeños capilares conocidos como sinusoides hepáticos, que luego conducen a los lobulillos.
Los lobulillos son las unidades funcionales del hígado. 

Cada lóbulo está formado por millones de células hepáticas (hepatocitos), que son las células metabólicas básicas. 

Los lobulillos se mantienen unidos por una capa de tejido conjuntivo fibroelástico fino, denso e irregular que se extiende desde la cápsula fibrosa que cubre todo el hígado conocida como cápsula de Glisson. 

Esto se extiende a la estructura del hígado acompañando a los vasos sanguíneos, conductos y nervios en el hilio hepático. 

Toda la superficie del hígado, excepto el área desnuda, está cubierta por una capa serosa derivada del peritoneo, y esta se adhiere firmemente a la cápsula interna de Glisson.


=== Anatomía macroscópica ===

La terminología relacionada con el hígado a menudo comienza en hepat- de ἡπατο-, de la palabra griega para hígado.


==== Lóbulos ====

El hígado se divide macroscópicamente en dos partes cuando se ve desde arriba, un lóbulo derecho y otro izquierdo, y cuatro partes cuando se ve desde abajo (lóbulos izquierdo, derecho, caudado y cuadrado).

El ligamento falciforme hace una división superficial del hígado en un lóbulo izquierdo y otro derecho.

Desde abajo, los dos lóbulos adicionales se ubican entre los lóbulos derecho e izquierdo, uno frente al otro.

Se puede imaginar una línea que va desde la izquierda de la vena cava hasta el final para dividir el hígado y la vesícula biliar en dos mitades.

Esta línea se llama línea de Cantlie.

Otros puntos de referencia anatómicos incluyen el ligamento venoso y el ligamento redondo del hígado, que además dividen el lado izquierdo del hígado en dos secciones.

Un hito anatómico importante, el porta hepatis, divide esta porción izquierda en cuatro segmentos, que se pueden numerar comenzando en el lóbulo caudado como I en sentido contrario a las agujas del reloj.

Desde esta vista parietal, se pueden ver siete segmentos, porque el octavo segmento solo es visible en la vista visceral.


==== Superficies ====

En la superficie diafragmática, además de un área desnuda triangular donde se conecta con el diafragma, el hígado está cubierto por una membrana delgada de doble capa, el peritoneo, que ayuda a reducir la fricción con otros órganos.

Esta superficie cubre la forma convexa de los dos lóbulos donde se acomoda la forma del diafragma.

El peritoneo se pliega sobre sí mismo para formar el ligamento falciforme y los ligamentos triangulares derecho e izquierdo.

Estos ligamentos peritoneales no están relacionados con los ligamentos anatómicos de las articulaciones, y los ligamentos triangulares derecho e izquierdo no tienen importancia funcional conocida, aunque sirven como puntos de referencia en la superficie.

El ligamento falciforme funciona para unir el hígado a la porción posterior de la pared anterior del cuerpo.

La superficie visceral o superficie inferior es irregular y cóncava.

Está cubierto de peritoneo además de donde se une a la vesícula biliar y la porta hepatis.

La fosa de la vesícula biliar se encuentra a la derecha del lóbulo cuadrado, ocupada por la vesícula biliar con su conducto cístico cerca del extremo derecho de porta hepatis.


==== Impresiones ====

Varias impresiones en la superficie del hígado acomodan las diversas estructuras y órganos adyacentes.

Debajo del lóbulo derecho ya la derecha de la fosa de la vesícula biliar hay dos impresiones, una detrás de la otra y separadas por una cresta.

La que está delante es una impresión cólica poco profunda, formada por el ángulo hepático y la que está detrás es una impresión renal más profunda que aloja parte del riñón derecho y parte de la glándula suprarrenal.

La impresión suprarrenal es un área pequeña, triangular y deprimida en el hígado.

Se encuentra cerca de la derecha de la fosa, entre el área desnuda y el lóbulo caudado, e inmediatamente encima de la impresión renal.

La mayor parte de la impresión suprarrenal está desprovista de peritoneo y alberga la glándula suprarrenal derecha. Medial a la impresión renal hay una tercera impresión ligeramente marcada, situada entre ésta y el cuello de la vesícula biliar.

Esto es causado por la porción descendente del duodeno y se conoce como impresión duodenal. La superficie inferior del lóbulo izquierdo del hígado se presenta detrás ya la izquierda de la impresión gástrica. 

Este está moldeado sobre la superficie frontal superior del estómago, y a la derecha de este hay una eminencia redondeada, el tuber omentale, que encaja en la concavidad de la curvatura menor del estómago y se encuentra frente a la capa anterior del menor. epiplón


=== Anatomía microscópica ===


Microscópicamente, se ve que cada lóbulo hepático está formado por lobulillos hepáticos. 

Los lobulillos son aproximadamente hexagonales y consisten en placas de hepatocitos y sinusoides que se irradian desde una vena central hacia un perímetro imaginario de tríadas portales interlobulillares. 

La vena central se une a la vena hepática para sacar la sangre del hígado. 

Un componente distintivo de un lóbulo es la tríada del portal, que se puede encontrar a lo largo de cada una de las esquinas del lóbulo.

La tríada portal está formada por la arteria hepática, la vena porta y el colédoco.

La tríada se puede ver en una ecografía hepática, como un signo de Mickey Mouse con la vena porta como la cabeza y la arteria hepática y el conducto biliar común como las orejas.

La histología, el estudio de la anatomía microscópica, muestra dos tipos principales de células hepáticas: células parenquimatosas y células no parenquimatosas.

Alrededor del 70 al 85% del volumen hepático está ocupado por hepatocitos parenquimatosos.

Las células no parenquimatosas constituyen el 40% del número total de células hepáticas pero sólo el 6,5% de su volumen.

Los sinusoides hepáticos están revestidos con dos tipos de células, células endoteliales sinusoidales y células fagocíticas de Kupffer.

Las células estrelladas hepáticas son células no parenquimatosas que se encuentran en el espacio perisinusoidal, entre un sinusoide y un hepatocito.

Además, los linfocitos intrahepáticos suelen estar presentes en la luz sinusoidal.


=== Anatomía funcional ===


El área central o hilio hepático incluye la abertura conocida como porta hepatis que lleva el conducto biliar común y la arteria hepática común, y la abertura para la vena porta.

El conducto, la vena y la arteria se dividen en ramas derecha e izquierda, y las áreas del hígado irrigadas por estas ramas constituyen los lóbulos derecho e izquierdo funcionales.

Los lóbulos funcionales están separados por el plano imaginario, la línea de Cantlie, que une la fosa de la vesícula biliar con la vena cava inferior.

El plano separa el hígado en los lóbulos derecho e izquierdo verdaderos.

La vena hepática media también delimita los lóbulos derecho e izquierdo verdaderos.

El lóbulo derecho se divide además en un segmento anterior y posterior por la vena hepática derecha.

El lóbulo izquierdo se divide en los segmentos medial y lateral por la vena hepática izquierda.

El hilio del hígado se describe en términos de tres placas que contienen los conductos biliares y los vasos sanguíneos.

El contenido de todo el sistema de placas está rodeado por una funda.

Las tres placas son la placa hiliar, la placa cística y la placa umbilical y el sistema de placas es el sitio de las muchas variaciones anatómicas que se encuentran en el hígado.


=== Sistema de clasificación de Couinaud ===

En el sistema Couinaud ampliamente utilizado, los lóbulos funcionales se dividen en un total de ocho subsegmentos basados ​​en un plano transversal a través de la bifurcación de la vena porta principal.

El lóbulo caudado es una estructura separada que recibe flujo sanguíneo de las ramas vasculares del lado derecho e izquierdo.

La clasificación de Couinaud divide el hígado en ocho segmentos hepáticos funcionalmente independientes.

Cada segmento tiene su propio flujo vascular de entrada, salida y drenaje biliar.

En el centro de cada segmento hay ramas de la vena porta, la arteria hepática y el conducto biliar.

En la periferia de cada segmento hay salida vascular a través de las venas hepáticas.

El sistema de clasificación utiliza el suministro vascular en el hígado para separar las unidades funcionales (numeradas del I al VIII) con la unidad 1, el lóbulo caudado, recibiendo su suministro de las ramas derecha e izquierda de la vena porta.

Contiene una o más venas hepáticas que drenan directamente en la vena cava inferior.

El resto de las unidades (II a VIII) se numeran en el sentido de las agujas del reloj:


=== Expresión de genes y proteínas ===


Alrededor de 20.000 genes que codifican proteínas se expresan en células humanas y el 60% de estos genes se expresan en un hígado adulto normal. 

Más de 400 genes se expresan más específicamente en el hígado, con unos 150 genes altamente específicos para el tejido hepático. 

Una gran fracción de las correspondientes proteínas específicas del hígado se expresan principalmente en los hepatocitos y se secretan a la sangre y constituyen proteínas plasmáticas. 

Otras proteínas específicas del hígado son ciertas enzimas hepáticas como HAO1 y RDH16, proteínas implicadas en la síntesis de bilis como BAAT y SLC27A5 y proteínas transportadoras implicadas en el metabolismo de fármacos, como ABCB11 y SLC2A2. 

Los ejemplos de proteínas muy específicas del hígado incluyen la apolipoproteína A II, los factores de coagulación F2 y F9, las proteínas relacionadas con el factor del complemento y la proteína de la cadena beta del fibrinógeno.


== Desarrollo ==

La organogénesis, el desarrollo de los órganos, tiene lugar de la tercera a la octava semana durante la embriogénesis.

Los orígenes del hígado se encuentran tanto en la porción ventral del endodermo del intestino anterior (el endodermo es una de las tres capas germinales embrionarias) como en los constituyentes del mesénquima del septum transversum adyacente.

En el embrión humano, el divertículo hepático es el tubo de endodermo que se extiende desde el intestino anterior hacia el mesénquima circundante.

El mesénquima del septum transversum induce a este endodermo a proliferar, ramificarse y formar el epitelio glandular del hígado.

Una parte del divertículo hepático (la región más cercana al tubo digestivo) continúa funcionando como conducto de drenaje del hígado, y una rama de este conducto produce la vesícula biliar. 

Además de las señales del mesénquima del septum transversum, el factor de crecimiento de fibroblastos del corazón en desarrollo también contribuye a la competencia hepática, junto con el ácido retinoico que emana del mesodermo de la placa lateral. 

Las células endodérmicas hepáticas experimentan una transición morfológica de columnares a pseudoestratificadas, lo que da como resultado un engrosamiento en el brote hepático temprano. 

Su expansión forma una población de hepatoblastos bipotenciales. 

Las células estrelladas hepáticas se derivan del mesénquima. Después de la migración de los hepatoblastos al mesénquima del septum transversum, la arquitectura hepática comienza a establecerse y aparecen los sinusoides hepáticos y los canalículos biliares. 

La yema hepática se separa en los lóbulos.

La vena umbilical izquierda se convierte en el conducto venoso y la vena vitelina derecha se convierte en la vena porta.

El brote hepático en expansión es colonizado por células hematopoyéticas.

Los hepatoblastos bipotenciales comienzan a diferenciarse en células epiteliales biliares y hepatocitos.

Las células epiteliales biliares se diferencian de los hepatoblastos alrededor de las venas porta, produciendo primero una monocapa y luego una bicapa de células cuboidales.

En la placa ductal, las dilataciones focales surgen en puntos de la bicapa, se rodean de mesénquima portal y experimentan tubulogénesis en los conductos biliares intrahepáticos.

Los hepatoblastos que no están adyacentes a las venas porta se diferencian en hepatocitos y se organizan en cordones revestidos por células epiteliales sinusoidales y canalículos biliares.

Una vez que los hepatoblastos se especifican en hepatocitos y experimentan una mayor expansión, comienzan a adquirir las funciones de un hepatocito maduro y, finalmente, los hepatocitos maduros aparecen como células epiteliales altamente polarizadas con abundante acumulación de glucógeno. 

En el hígado adulto, los hepatocitos no son equivalentes, con una posición a lo largo del eje portocentrovenular dentro de un lóbulo hepático que dicta la expresión de genes metabólicos involucrados en el metabolismo de fármacos, metabolismo de carbohidratos, desintoxicación de amoníaco y producción y secreción de bilis. 

Ahora se ha identificado que WNT/β-catenina desempeña un papel clave en este fenómeno. Al nacer, el hígado comprende aproximadamente el 4 % del peso corporal y pesa en promedio alrededor de 120 g (4 oz). 

En el transcurso de un mayor desarrollo, aumentará a 1,4 a 1,6 kg (3,1 a 3,5 lb), pero solo ocupará del 2,5 al 3,5% del peso corporal.


=== Suministro de sangre fetal ===

En el feto en crecimiento, una fuente importante de sangre para el hígado es la vena umbilical, que suministra nutrientes al feto en crecimiento.

La vena umbilical ingresa al abdomen en el ombligo y pasa hacia arriba a lo largo del margen libre del ligamento falciforme del hígado hasta la superficie inferior del hígado.

Allí se une con la rama izquierda de la vena porta.

El conducto venoso transporta sangre desde la vena porta izquierda a la vena hepática izquierda y luego a la vena cava inferior, lo que permite que la sangre de la placenta no pase por el hígado.

En el feto, el hígado no realiza los procesos digestivos y de filtración normales del hígado infantil porque los nutrientes se reciben directamente de la madre a través de la placenta.

El hígado fetal libera algunas células madre sanguíneas que migran al timo fetal, creando las células T o linfocitos T.

Después del nacimiento, la formación de células madre sanguíneas se traslada a la médula ósea roja. 

Después de 2 a 5 días, la vena umbilical y el conducto venoso se obliteran por completo; el primero se convierte en el ligamento redondo del hígado y el segundo en el ligamento venoso.

En los trastornos de cirrosis e hipertensión portal, la vena umbilical puede volver a abrirse.


== Funciones ==

Las diversas funciones del hígado son realizadas por las células hepáticas o hepatocitos. 

Se cree que el hígado es responsable de hasta 500 funciones separadas, generalmente en combinación con otros sistemas y órganos. 

Actualmente, ningún órgano o dispositivo artificial es capaz de reproducir todas las funciones del hígado. 

Algunas funciones pueden llevarse a cabo mediante diálisis hepática, un tratamiento experimental para la insuficiencia hepática. 

El hígado también representa alrededor del 20% del consumo total de oxígeno del cuerpo en reposo.


=== Suministro de sangre ===

El hígado recibe un suministro de sangre dual de la vena porta hepática y las arterias hepáticas.

La vena porta hepática proporciona alrededor del 75% del suministro de sangre del hígado y transporta la sangre venosa drenada del bazo, el tracto gastrointestinal y sus órganos asociados.

Las arterias hepáticas suministran sangre arterial al hígado, lo que representa la cuarta parte restante de su flujo sanguíneo.

El oxígeno proviene de ambas fuentes; aproximadamente la mitad de la demanda de oxígeno del hígado es satisfecha por la vena porta hepática y la otra mitad por las arterias hepáticas.

La arteria hepática también tiene receptores adrenérgicos alfa y beta; por lo tanto, el flujo a través de la arteria está controlado, en parte, por los nervios esplácnicos del sistema nervioso autónomo.

La sangre fluye a través de los sinusoides hepáticos y desemboca en la vena central de cada lóbulo.

Las venas centrales se unen en las venas hepáticas, que salen del hígado y drenan en la vena cava inferior.


=== Flujo biliar ===

El tracto biliar se deriva de las ramas de los conductos biliares. 

El tracto biliar, también conocido como el árbol biliar, es el camino por el cual el hígado secreta la bilis y luego la transporta a la primera parte del intestino delgado, el duodeno. 

La bilis producida en el hígado se acumula en los canalículos biliares, pequeños surcos entre las caras de los hepatocitos adyacentes. 

Los canalículos se irradian hasta el borde del lóbulo hepático, donde se fusionan para formar los conductos biliares. 

Dentro del hígado, estos conductos se denominan conductos biliares intrahepáticos y, una vez que salen del hígado, se consideran extrahepáticos. 

Los conductos intrahepáticos finalmente drenan en los conductos hepáticos derecho e izquierdo, que salen del hígado por la fisura transversa y se unen para formar el conducto hepático común. 

El conducto cístico de la vesícula biliar se une con el conducto hepático común para formar el conducto biliar común. 

El sistema biliar y el tejido conjuntivo son irrigados únicamente por la arteria hepática.

La bilis drena directamente al duodeno a través del conducto biliar común o se almacena temporalmente en la vesícula biliar a través del conducto cístico. 

El conducto biliar común y el conducto pancreático entran juntos en la segunda parte del duodeno en la ampolla hepatopancreática, también conocida como ampolla de Vater.


=== Síntesis ===

El hígado juega un papel importante en el metabolismo de carbohidratos, proteínas, aminoácidos y lípidos.


==== Metabolismo de los carbohidratos ====

El hígado desempeña varias funciones en el metabolismo de los carbohidratos: 

El hígado sintetiza y almacena alrededor de 100 g de glucógeno a través de la glucogénesis, la formación de glucógeno a partir de la glucosa.

Cuando es necesario, el hígado libera glucosa a la sangre mediante la glucogenólisis, la descomposición del glucógeno en glucosa.

El hígado también es responsable de la gluconeogénesis, que es la síntesis de glucosa a partir de ciertos aminoácidos, lactato o glicerol. 

Las células adiposas y hepáticas producen glicerol mediante la descomposición de la grasa, que el hígado utiliza para la gluconeogénesis.

El hígado también realiza la gluconeogénesis, que es la síntesis de glucógeno a partir del ácido láctico.


==== Metabolismo de proteínas ====

El hígado es responsable del pilar del metabolismo de las proteínas, la síntesis y la degradación. 

Todas las proteínas plasmáticas, excepto las gammaglobulinas, se sintetizan en el hígado. 

También es responsable de gran parte de la síntesis de aminoácidos. 

El hígado juega un papel en la producción de factores de coagulación, así como en la producción de glóbulos rojos.

Algunas de las proteínas sintetizadas por el hígado incluyen los factores de coagulación I (fibrinógeno), II (protrombina), V, VII, VIII, IX, X, XI, XII, XIII, así como proteína C, proteína S y antitrombina.

El hígado es un sitio importante de producción de trombopoyetina, una hormona glicoproteica que regula la producción de plaquetas por parte de la médula ósea.


==== Metabolismo de los lípidos ====

El hígado desempeña varias funciones en el metabolismo de los lípidos: realiza la síntesis de colesterol, la lipogénesis y la producción de triglicéridos, y la mayor parte de las lipoproteínas del cuerpo se sintetizan en el hígado.

El hígado juega un papel clave en la digestión, ya que produce y excreta la bilis (un líquido amarillento) necesaria para emulsionar las grasas y ayudar a la absorción de la vitamina K de la dieta.

Parte de la bilis drena directamente al duodeno y parte se almacena en la vesícula biliar. 

El hígado produce el factor de crecimiento similar a la insulina 1, una hormona proteica polipeptídica que juega un papel importante en el crecimiento infantil y continúa teniendo efectos anabólicos en los adultos.


=== Desglose ===

El hígado es responsable de la descomposición de la insulina y otras hormonas. 

El hígado descompone la bilirrubina a través de la glucuronidación, lo que facilita su excreción en la bilis.

El hígado es responsable de la descomposición y excreción de muchos productos de desecho. 

Desempeña un papel clave en la descomposición o modificación de sustancias tóxicas (p. ej., metilación) y la mayoría de los medicamentos en un proceso denominado metabolismo de fármacos. 

Esto a veces resulta en intoxicación, cuando el metabolito es más tóxico que su precursor. 

Preferiblemente, las toxinas se conjugan para aprovechar la excreción en la bilis o la orina. 

El hígado convierte el amoníaco en urea como parte del ciclo de la ornitina o del ciclo de la urea, y la urea se excreta en la orina.


=== Depósito de sangre ===

Debido a que el hígado es un órgano expandible, grandes cantidades de
la sangre se puede almacenar en sus vasos sanguíneos. 

Su volumen normal de sangre, incluyendo tanto el de las venas hepáticas como el de los senos hepáticos, es de unos 450 mililitros, o casi el 10 por ciento del volumen total de sangre del cuerpo. 

Cuando la presión alta en la aurícula derecha causa una contrapresión en el hígado, el hígado se expande y ocasionalmente se almacena de 0,5 a 1 litro de sangre adicional en las venas y los senos paranasales hepáticos. 

Esto ocurre especialmente en la insuficiencia cardíaca con congestión periférica. 

Así, en efecto, el hígado es un órgano venoso grande, expandible, capaz de actuar como un valioso reservorio de sangre en tiempos de exceso de volumen de sangre y capaz de suministrar sangre extra en tiempos de volumen de sangre disminuido.


=== Producción de linfa ===

Debido a que los poros en los sinusoides hepáticos son muy permeables y permiten el paso fácil tanto de líquido como de proteínas al espacio perisinusoidal, la linfa que drena del hígado generalmente tiene una concentración de proteína de aproximadamente 6 g/dl, que es solo un poco menor que la proteína. concentración de plasma.

Además, la alta permeabilidad del epitelio sinusoidal hepático permite que se formen grandes cantidades de linfa.

Por lo tanto, aproximadamente la mitad de toda la linfa formada en el cuerpo en condiciones de reposo surge en el hígado.


=== Otro ===

El hígado almacena multitud de sustancias, como vitamina A (suministro para 1 a 2 años), vitamina D (suministro para 1 a 4 meses), vitamina B12 (suministro para 3 a 5 años), vitamina K, vitamina E, hierro, cobre, zinc, cobalto, molibdeno, etc.

Hemopoyesis: la formación de células sanguíneas se llama hemopoyesis. 

En la etapa embrionaria, los glóbulos rojos y los glóbulos blancos están formados por el hígado. 

En el primer trimestre del feto, el hígado es el sitio principal de producción de glóbulos rojos. 

Para la semana 32 de gestación, la médula ósea se ha hecho cargo casi por completo de esa tarea.

El hígado ayuda en la purificación de la sangre. 

Las células de Kupffer del hígado son células fagocíticas, ayudan en la fagocitosis de células sanguíneas muertas y bacterias de la sangre.

El hígado es responsable de los efectos inmunológicos: el sistema de fagocitos mononucleares del hígado contiene muchas células inmunológicamente activas, que actúan como un "tamiz" para los antígenos que llegan a través del sistema portal.

El hígado produce albúmina, la proteína más abundante en el suero sanguíneo.

Es esencial en el mantenimiento de la presión oncótica y actúa como transportador de ácidos grasos y hormonas esteroides.

El hígado sintetiza angiotensinógeno, una hormona que es responsable de elevar la presión arterial cuando es activada por la renina, una enzima que se libera cuando el riñón detecta una presión arterial baja.

El hígado produce la enzima catalasa para descomponer el peróxido de hidrógeno, un agente oxidante tóxico, en agua y oxígeno.


=== Con envejecimiento ===

La capacidad oxidativa del hígado disminuye con el envejecimiento y, por lo tanto, es más probable que cualquier medicamento que requiera oxidación (por ejemplo, las benzodiazepinas) se acumule a niveles tóxicos. 

Sin embargo, los medicamentos con vidas medias más cortas, como lorazepam y oxazepam, son los preferidos en la mayoría de los casos cuando se requieren benzodiazepinas en relación con la medicina geriátrica.


== Importancia clínica ==

=== Enfermedad ===

El hígado es un órgano vital y soporta casi todos los demás órganos del cuerpo. 

Debido a su ubicación estratégica y funciones multidimensionales, el hígado también es propenso a muchas enfermedades. 

El área desnuda del hígado es un sitio vulnerable al paso de la infección de la cavidad abdominal a la cavidad torácica. 

Las enfermedades hepáticas se pueden diagnosticar mediante pruebas de función hepática: análisis de sangre que pueden identificar varios marcadores. 

Por ejemplo, el hígado produce reactivos de fase aguda en respuesta a una lesión o inflamación.

La hepatitis es una condición común de inflamación del hígado. 

La causa más común de esto es viral, y las más comunes de estas infecciones son la hepatitis A, B, C, D y E. 

Algunas de estas infecciones son de transmisión sexual. 

La inflamación también puede ser causada por otros virus de la familia Herpesviridae, como el virus del herpes simple. 

La infección crónica (en lugar de aguda) por el virus de la hepatitis B o el virus de la hepatitis C es la causa principal del cáncer de hígado. 

A nivel mundial, alrededor de 248 millones de personas están crónicamente infectadas con hepatitis B (con 843 724 en los EE. UU.) y 142 millones están crónicamente infectadas con hepatitis C (con 2,7 millones en los EE. UU.). 

A nivel mundial hay alrededor de 114 millones y 20 millones de casos de hepatitis A y hepatitis E respectivamente, pero estos generalmente se resuelven y no se vuelven crónicos.

El virus de la hepatitis D es un "satélite" del virus de la hepatitis B (solo puede infectar en presencia de hepatitis B) y coinfecta a casi 20 millones de personas con hepatitis B en todo el mundo.

La encefalopatía hepática es causada por una acumulación de toxinas en el torrente sanguíneo que normalmente son eliminadas por el hígado.

Esta condición puede resultar en coma y puede resultar fatal.

El síndrome de Budd-Chiari es una afección causada por el bloqueo de las venas hepáticas (incluida la trombosis) que drenan el hígado.

Se presenta con la tríada clásica de dolor abdominal, ascitis y agrandamiento hepático.

Muchas enfermedades del hígado se acompañan de ictericia causada por niveles elevados de bilirrubina en el sistema.

La bilirrubina resulta de la descomposición de la hemoglobina de los glóbulos rojos muertos; normalmente, el hígado elimina la bilirrubina de la sangre y la excreta a través de la bilis.

Otros trastornos causados ​​por el consumo excesivo de alcohol se agrupan en enfermedades hepáticas alcohólicas y estos incluyen hepatitis alcohólica, hígado graso y cirrosis.

Los factores que contribuyen al desarrollo de enfermedades hepáticas alcohólicas no son solo la cantidad y la frecuencia del consumo de alcohol, sino que también pueden incluir el género, la genética y el daño hepático.

El daño hepático también puede ser causado por medicamentos, particularmente paracetamol y medicamentos utilizados para tratar el cáncer.

Una ruptura del hígado puede ser causada por una inyección de hígado utilizada en deportes de combate.
La colangitis biliar primaria es una enfermedad autoinmune del hígado.

Se caracteriza por la destrucción lenta y progresiva de los pequeños conductos biliares del hígado, con los conductos intralobulillares (canales de Hering) afectados al principio de la enfermedad.

Cuando estos conductos se dañan, la bilis y otras toxinas se acumulan en el hígado (colestasis) y, con el tiempo, dañan el tejido hepático en combinación con el daño continuo relacionado con el sistema inmunitario.

Esto puede provocar cicatrices (fibrosis) y cirrosis.

La cirrosis aumenta la resistencia al flujo sanguíneo en el hígado y puede provocar hipertensión portal.

Las anastomosis congestionadas entre el sistema venoso portal y la circulación sistémica pueden ser una condición posterior.

También hay muchas enfermedades hepáticas pediátricas, que incluyen atresia biliar, deficiencia de alfa-1 antitripsina, síndrome de alagille, colestasis intrahepática familiar progresiva, histiocitosis de células de Langerhans y hemangioma hepático, un tumor benigno, el tipo más común de tumor hepático, que se cree que es congénito.

Un trastorno genético que provoca la formación de múltiples quistes en el tejido hepático, por lo general en etapas posteriores de la vida y, por lo general, asintomático, es la enfermedad poliquística del hígado.

Las enfermedades que interfieren con la función hepática conducirán a la alteración de estos procesos.

Sin embargo, el hígado tiene una gran capacidad de regeneración y tiene una gran capacidad de reserva.

En la mayoría de los casos, el hígado solo produce síntomas después de un daño extenso.

La hepatomegalia se refiere a un hígado agrandado y puede deberse a muchas causas.

Se puede palpar en una medida de lapso hepático.


=== Síntomas ===

Los síntomas clásicos del daño hepático incluyen los siguientes:

Las heces pálidas ocurren cuando la estercobilina, un pigmento marrón, está ausente de las heces. 

La estercobilina se deriva de los metabolitos de bilirrubina producidos en el hígado.

La orina oscura ocurre cuando la bilirrubina se mezcla con la orina.

Ictericia (piel amarilla y/o blanco de los ojos) 

Aquí es donde la bilirrubina se deposita en la piel, causando una picazón intensa. 

La picazón es la queja más común de las personas que tienen insuficiencia hepática. 

A menudo, esta picazón no se puede aliviar con medicamentos.

La hinchazón del abdomen y de los tobillos y los pies se produce porque el hígado no produce albúmina.

La fatiga excesiva se produce por una pérdida generalizada de nutrientes, minerales y vitaminas.

Los moretones y el sangrado fácil son otras características de la enfermedad hepática. 

El hígado produce factores de coagulación, sustancias que ayudan a prevenir el sangrado. 

Cuando ocurre daño hepático, estos factores ya no están presentes y puede ocurrir un sangrado severo.

El dolor en el cuadrante superior derecho puede resultar del estiramiento de la cápsula de Glisson en condiciones de hepatitis y preeclampsia.


=== Diagnóstico ===

El diagnóstico de enfermedad hepática se realiza mediante pruebas de función hepática, grupos de análisis de sangre, que pueden mostrar fácilmente la extensión del daño hepático. 

Si se sospecha infección, se realizarán otras pruebas serológicas. 

Un examen físico del hígado solo puede revelar su tamaño y sensibilidad, y también puede ser necesaria alguna forma de imagen, como una ecografía o una tomografía computarizada.

A veces, será necesaria una biopsia de hígado y se toma una muestra de tejido a través de una aguja que se inserta en la piel justo debajo de la caja torácica. 

Este procedimiento puede contar con la ayuda de un ecografista que brinde orientación por ultrasonido a un radiólogo intervencionista.

 
=== Regeneración del hígado ===


El hígado es el único órgano interno humano capaz de regeneración natural del tejido perdido; tan solo el 25% de un hígado puede regenerarse en un hígado completo.

Sin embargo, esto no es una verdadera regeneración sino un crecimiento compensatorio en los mamíferos.

Los lóbulos que se extirpan no vuelven a crecer y el crecimiento del hígado es una restauración de la función, no de la forma original.

Esto contrasta con la verdadera regeneración donde se restauran tanto la función como la forma originales.

En algunas otras especies, como el pez cebra, el hígado experimenta una verdadera regeneración al restaurar tanto la forma como el tamaño del órgano.

En el hígado se forman grandes áreas de los tejidos pero para la formación de nuevas células debe haber suficiente cantidad de material para que la circulación de la sangre se vuelva más activa.

Esto se debe principalmente a que los hepatocitos vuelven a entrar en el ciclo celular.

Es decir, los hepatocitos pasan de la fase quiescente G0 a la fase G1 y sufren mitosis.

Este proceso es activado por los receptores p75.

También hay alguna evidencia de células madre bipotenciales, llamadas células ovales hepáticas u ovalocitos (que no deben confundirse con los glóbulos rojos ovalados de la ovalocitosis), que se cree que residen en los canales de Hering.

Estas células pueden diferenciarse en hepatocitos o colangiocitos.

Los colangiocitos son las células del revestimiento epitelial de los conductos biliares.

Son epitelios cúbicos en los pequeños conductos biliares interlobulillares, pero se vuelven columnares y secretan moco en los conductos biliares más grandes que se acercan a la porta hepática y los conductos extrahepáticos. 

Se investiga el uso de células madre para la generación de un hígado artificial.

Los trabajos científicos y médicos sobre la regeneración del hígado a menudo se refieren al titán griego Prometeo, que estaba encadenado a una roca en el Cáucaso donde, cada día, su hígado era devorado por un águila, solo para volver a crecer cada noche. 

El mito sugiere que los antiguos griegos podrían haber conocido la notable capacidad del hígado para repararse a sí mismo.


=== Trasplante de hígado ===

Los trasplantes de hígado humano fueron realizados por primera vez por Thomas Starzl en los Estados Unidos y Roy Calne en Cambridge, Inglaterra, en 1963 y 1967, respectivamente.

El trasplante de hígado es la única opción para las personas con insuficiencia hepática irreversible. 

La mayoría de los trasplantes se realizan para enfermedades hepáticas crónicas que conducen a la cirrosis, como la hepatitis C crónica, el alcoholismo y la hepatitis autoinmune. 

Con menos frecuencia, el trasplante de hígado se realiza por insuficiencia hepática fulminante, en la que la insuficiencia hepática se produce durante días o semanas.

Los aloinjertos de hígado para trasplante generalmente provienen de donantes que han muerto a causa de una lesión cerebral mortal. 

El trasplante de hígado de donante vivo es una técnica en la que se extrae una porción del hígado de una persona viva (hepatectomía) y se usa para reemplazar todo el hígado del receptor. 

Esto se realizó por primera vez en 1989 para el trasplante de hígado pediátrico. 

Solo se necesita el 20 por ciento del hígado de un adulto (segmentos 2 y 3 de Couinaud) para servir como aloinjerto de hígado para un bebé o un niño pequeño.

Más recientemente, se han realizado trasplantes de hígado de adulto a adulto utilizando el lóbulo hepático derecho del donante, que representa el 60 por ciento del hígado.

Debido a la capacidad del hígado para regenerarse, tanto el donante como el receptor terminan con una función hepática normal si todo va bien.

Este procedimiento es más controvertido, ya que implica realizar una operación mucho más grande en el donante y, de hecho, hubo al menos dos muertes de donantes de los primeros cientos de casos.

Una publicación de 2006 abordó el problema de la mortalidad de los donantes y encontró al menos catorce casos.

El riesgo de complicaciones postoperatorias (y muerte) es mucho mayor en las operaciones del lado derecho que en las operaciones del lado izquierdo.

Con los recientes avances en imágenes no invasivas, los donantes vivos de hígado generalmente deben someterse a exámenes de imágenes para la anatomía del hígado a fin de decidir si la anatomía es factible para la donación. 

La evaluación generalmente se realiza mediante tomografía computarizada de hileras multidetector (MDCT) y resonancia magnética nuclear (RMN). 

MDCT es bueno en anatomía vascular y volumetría. 

La resonancia magnética se utiliza para la anatomía del árbol biliar. 

Los donantes con anatomía vascular muy inusual, que los hace no aptos para la donación, podrían descartarse para evitar operaciones innecesarias.


== Sociedad y cultura ==

Algunas culturas consideran el hígado como el asiento del alma. 

En la mitología griega, los dioses castigaron a Prometeo por revelar el fuego a los humanos encadenándolo a una roca donde un buitre (o un águila) le picotearía el hígado, que se regeneraría durante la noche. 

(El hígado es el único órgano interno humano que realmente puede regenerarse a sí mismo en gran medida).

Muchos pueblos antiguos del Cercano Oriente y las áreas del Mediterráneo practicaban un tipo de adivinación llamada aruspicía o hepatomancia, donde intentaban obtener información examinando el hígado de ovejas y otros animales.

En Platón, y en la fisiología posterior, se pensaba que el hígado era el asiento de las emociones más oscuras (específicamente la ira, los celos y la codicia) que impulsan a los hombres a la acción.

El Talmud (tratado Berakhot 61b) se refiere al hígado como el asiento de la ira, y la vesícula biliar lo contrarresta.

Los idiomas persa, urdu e hindi (جگر o jigar) se refieren al discurso figurativo del hígado para indicar coraje y sentimientos fuertes, o "lo mejor de ellos"; ej., "¡Esta Meca te ha arrojado los pedazos de su hígado!".

El término jan e jigar, literalmente "la fuerza (poder) de mi hígado", es un término cariñoso en urdu. 

En la jerga persa, jigar se usa como adjetivo para cualquier objeto deseable, especialmente las mujeres. 

En el idioma zulú, la palabra para hígado (isibindi) es la misma que para coraje. 

En inglés, el término 'lily-livered' se usa para indicar la cobardía de la creencia medieval de que el hígado era el asiento del coraje.
hígados español también significa "coraje".

Sin embargo, el significado secundario de gibel vasco es "indolencia". En hebreo bíblico, la palabra para hígado, כבד (Kauved, derivada de KBD o KVD, similar al árabe الكبد), también significa pesado y se usa para describir a los ricos ("pesado" con posesiones) y honor (presumiblemente por la misma razón). 

En el Libro de las Lamentaciones (2:11) se usa para describir las respuestas fisiológicas a la tristeza por "mi hígado se derramó en la tierra" junto con el flujo de lágrimas y la amargura de los intestinos.

En varias ocasiones en el libro de los Salmos (sobre todo 16:9), la palabra se usa para describir la felicidad en el hígado, junto con el corazón (que late rápidamente) y la carne (que aparece roja debajo de la piel).

El uso adicional como el yo (similar a "tu honor") está ampliamente disponible en todo el antiguo testamento, a veces en comparación con el alma que respira (Génesis 49: 6, Salmos 7: 6, etc.).

También se hizo referencia a un sombrero honorable con esta palabra (Job 19:9, etc.) y bajo esa definición aparece muchas veces junto con פאר Pe'er - grandeza.

Estos cuatro significados se utilizaron en los idiomas semíticos antiguos anteriores, como el acadio y el egipcio antiguo, conservados en el idioma etíope clásico Ge'ez.


=== Comida ===


Los humanos comúnmente comen hígados de mamíferos, aves y peces como alimento. 

Los hígados domésticos de cerdo, buey, cordero, ternera, pollo y ganso están ampliamente disponibles en carnicerías y supermercados. 

En las lenguas romances, la palabra anatómica para "hígado" (francés foie, español hígado, etc.) no deriva del término anatómico latino jecur, sino del término culinario ficatum, literalmente "relleno de higos", que se refiere a los hígados. de gansos engordados con higos. 

Los hígados de animales son ricos en hierro, vitamina A y vitamina B12; y el aceite de hígado de bacalao se usa comúnmente como suplemento dietético.

El hígado se puede hornear, hervir, asar, freír, saltear o comer crudo (asbeh nayeh o sawda naye en la cocina libanesa, o sashimi de hígado en la cocina japonesa).

En muchas preparaciones, los trozos de hígado se combinan con trozos de carne o riñones, como en las diversas formas de parrillada mixta de Oriente Medio (por ejemplo, meurav Yerushalmi).

Entre los ejemplos más conocidos se incluyen el paté de hígado, el foie gras, el hígado picado y la pasta de palanca.

Las salchichas de hígado, como Braunschweiger y liverwurst, también son una comida valiosa.

Las salchichas de hígado también se pueden usar para untar.

Un manjar sudafricano tradicional, los skilpadjies, están hechos de hígado de cordero picado envuelto en netvet (grasa de red) y asado a la parrilla sobre un fuego abierto.

Tradicionalmente, algunos hígados de pescado fueron valorados como alimento, especialmente el hígado de raya.

Se utilizaba para preparar delicias, como el hígado de raya escalfado sobre tostadas en Inglaterra, así como los beignets de foie de raie y foie de raie en croute en la cocina francesa.


=== Hígado de jirafa ===

Los humr, una de las tribus de la etnia baggara, originarios del sudoeste de Kordofán en Sudán y hablantes de shuwa o árabe chadiano, preparan una bebida sin alcohol a partir del hígado y la médula ósea de la jirafa a la que llaman umm nyolokh, y que afirman que es intoxicante (árabe سكران sakran), provoca sueños e incluso alucinaciones al despertar. 

El antropólogo Ian Cunnison, que acompañó a los Humr en una de sus expediciones de caza de jirafas a finales de la década de 1950, señala que:

Se dice que una persona, una vez que ha bebido umm nyolokh, volverá a la jirafa una y otra vez. 

Humr, siendo mahdistas, son estrictos abstemios [del alcohol] y un Humrawi nunca se emborracha (sakran) con licor o cerveza.

Pero usa esta palabra para describir los efectos que umm nyolokh tiene sobre él.

El notable relato de Cunnison sobre un mamífero aparentemente psicoactivo pasó de ser un artículo científico un tanto oscuro a la literatura más convencional a través de una conversación entre el Dr.

Wendy James del Instituto de Antropología Social y Cultural de la Universidad de Oxford y especialista en el uso de alucinógenos e intoxicantes en la sociedad Richard Rudgley, quien consideró sus implicaciones en su popular obra La Enciclopedia de Sustancias Psicoactivas.

Rudgley plantea la hipótesis de que la presencia del compuesto alucinógeno DMT podría explicar las supuestas propiedades intoxicantes de umm nyolokh. El propio Cunnison, por otro lado, había encontrado difícil creer en la verdad literal de la afirmación de Humr de que su bebida era intoxicante:

Solo puedo suponer que no hay ninguna sustancia embriagante en la bebida y que el efecto que produce es simplemente una cuestión de convención, aunque puede producirse de forma subconsciente.

Sin embargo, el estudio de los enteógenos en general, incluidos los enteógenos de origen animal (por ejemplo, peces alucinógenos y veneno de sapo), ha progresado considerablemente en los sesenta y tantos años transcurridos desde el informe de Cunnison y la idea de que algún principio intoxicante podría residir en el hígado de jirafa. ya parece tan inverosímil como en tiempos de Cunnison, aunque la prueba concluyente (o la refutación) tendrá que esperar análisis detallados del órgano animal en cuestión y la bebida preparada a partir de él.


=== Veneno de flecha/bala ===

Ciertos pueblos tungusicos prepararon antiguamente un tipo de veneno para flechas a partir de hígados de animales en descomposición, que, en épocas posteriores, también se aplicó a las balas. 

El antropólogo ruso Sergei Mikhailovich Shirokogorov señala que: Antiguamente era común el uso de flechas envenenadas. 

Por ejemplo, entre los Kumarčen, [un subgrupo de los Oroqen] incluso en tiempos recientes se usaba un veneno que se preparaba con hígado en descomposición. 

Esto ha sido confirmado por el Kumarčen. 

No soy competente para juzgar las condiciones químicas de producción del veneno que no se destruye por el calor de la explosión. 

Sin embargo, los propios Tungus comparan este método [de envenenamiento de municiones] con el envenenamiento de flechas.


== Otros animales ==

El hígado se encuentra en todos los vertebrados y suele ser el órgano interno más grande. 

Su forma varía considerablemente en diferentes especies y está determinada en gran medida por la forma y disposición de los órganos circundantes. 

No obstante, en la mayoría de las especies se divide en lóbulos derecho e izquierdo; las excepciones a esta regla general incluyen serpientes, donde la forma del cuerpo requiere una forma simple similar a un cigarro.

La estructura interna del hígado es muy similar en todos los vertebrados.

Un órgano al que a veces se hace referencia como hígado se encuentra asociado con el tracto digestivo del cordado primitivo Amphioxus.

Aunque realiza muchas funciones de un hígado, no se considera un hígado verdadero sino un homólogo del hígado de vertebrado.

El ciego hepático del anfioxo produce las proteínas específicas del hígado vitelogenina, antitrombina, plasminógeno, alanina aminotransferasa e insulina/factor de crecimiento similar a la insulina (IGF)



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hígado

;;;FR;;;



FOIE


Le foie est un organe du système digestif que l'on ne trouve que chez les vertébrés. Il détoxifie divers métabolites, synthétise les protéines et produit les substances biochimiques nécessaires à la digestion et à la croissance.

Chez l'homme, il est situé dans le quadrant supérieur droit de l'abdomen, sous le diaphragme.

Ses autres rôles dans le métabolisme comprennent la régulation du stockage du glycogène, la décomposition des globules rouges et la production d'hormones.

Le foie est un organe digestif accessoire qui produit la bile, un liquide alcalin contenant du cholestérol et des acides biliaires, qui aide à la dégradation des graisses.

La vésicule biliaire, une petite poche qui se trouve juste sous le foie, stocke la bile produite par le foie qui est ensuite déplacée vers l'intestin grêle pour terminer la digestion.

Le tissu hautement spécialisé du foie, composé principalement d'hépatocytes, régule une grande variété de réactions biochimiques à haut volume, y compris la synthèse et la dégradation de petites molécules complexes, dont beaucoup sont nécessaires aux fonctions vitales normales. 

Les estimations concernant le nombre total de fonctions de l'organe varient, mais les manuels citent généralement qu'il est d'environ 500.

On ne sait pas comment compenser l'absence de fonction hépatique à long terme, bien que les techniques de dialyse hépatique puissent être utilisées à court terme. 

Les foies artificiels n'ont pas été développés pour favoriser le remplacement à long terme en l'absence de foie. 

Depuis 2018, la transplantation hépatique est la seule option en cas d'insuffisance hépatique complète.


== Structure ==

Le foie est un organe cunéiforme brun rougeâtre avec deux
lobes de taille et de forme inégales. 

Un foie humain pèse normalement environ 1,5 kg (3,3 lb) et a une largeur d'environ 15 cm (6 po).

Il existe une variation de taille considérable entre les individus, la plage de référence standard pour les hommes étant de 970 à 1 860 g (2,14 à 4,10 lb) et pour les femmes de 600 à 1 770 g (1,32 à 3,90 lb).

C'est à la fois l'organe interne le plus lourd et la plus grosse glande du corps humain.

Situé dans le quadrant supérieur droit de la cavité abdominale, il repose juste en dessous du diaphragme, à droite de l'estomac et recouvre la vésicule biliaire.

Le foie est relié à deux gros vaisseaux sanguins : l'artère hépatique et la veine porte.

L'artère hépatique transporte le sang riche en oxygène de l'aorte via le tronc coeliaque, tandis que la veine porte transporte le sang riche en nutriments digérés de l'ensemble du tractus gastro-intestinal ainsi que de la rate et du pancréas.

Ces vaisseaux sanguins se subdivisent en petits capillaires appelés sinusoïdes hépatiques, qui conduisent ensuite aux lobules.
Les lobules sont les unités fonctionnelles du foie.

Chaque lobule est composé de millions de cellules hépatiques (hépatocytes), qui sont les cellules métaboliques de base.

Les lobules sont maintenus ensemble par une couche de tissu conjonctif fin, dense, irrégulière et fibroélastique s'étendant de la capsule fibreuse recouvrant l'ensemble du foie, appelée capsule de Glisson.

Cela s'étend dans la structure du foie en accompagnant les vaisseaux sanguins, les conduits et les nerfs au niveau du hile hépatique.

Toute la surface du foie, à l'exception de la zone nue, est recouverte d'une couche séreuse dérivée du péritoine, et celle-ci adhère fermement à la capsule interne de Glisson.


=== Anatomie brute ===

La terminologie liée au foie commence souvent par hepat- de ἡπατο-, du mot grec pour foie.


==== Lobes ====

Le foie est grossièrement divisé en deux parties lorsqu'il est vu d'en haut - un lobe droit et un lobe gauche - et en quatre parties lorsqu'il est vu d'en bas (lobes gauche, droit, caudé et carré).

Le ligament falciforme forme une division superficielle du foie en un lobe gauche et droit.

D'en bas, les deux lobes supplémentaires sont situés entre les lobes droit et gauche, l'un devant l'autre.

On peut imaginer une ligne partant de la gauche de la veine cave et allant jusqu'en avant pour diviser le foie et la vésicule biliaire en deux moitiés.

Cette ligne s'appelle la ligne de Cantlie.

D'autres repères anatomiques comprennent le ligament veineux et le ligament rond du foie, qui divisent davantage le côté gauche du foie en deux sections.

Un repère anatomique important, la porte hépatique, divise cette partie gauche en quatre segments, qui peuvent être numérotés à partir du lobe caudé comme I dans le sens inverse des aiguilles d'une montre. 

De cette vue pariétale, sept segments peuvent être vus, car le huitième segment n'est visible que dans la vue viscérale.


==== Surfaces ====

Sur la surface diaphragmatique, à part une zone nue triangulaire où il se connecte au diaphragme, le foie est recouvert d'une fine membrane à double couche, le péritoine, qui aide à réduire les frottements contre les autres organes. 

Cette surface recouvre la forme convexe des deux lobes où elle épouse la forme du diaphragme. 

Le péritoine se replie sur lui-même pour former le ligament falciforme et les ligaments triangulaires droit et gauche.

Ces ligaments péritonéaux ne sont pas liés aux ligaments anatomiques des articulations, et les ligaments triangulaires droit et gauche n'ont aucune importance fonctionnelle connue, bien qu'ils servent de repères de surface. 

Le ligament falciforme a pour fonction de fixer le foie à la partie postérieure de la paroi antérieure du corps.

La surface viscérale ou surface inférieure est inégale et concave. 

Il est recouvert de péritoine à l'exception de l'endroit où il attache la vésicule biliaire et la porte hépatique. 

La fosse de la vésicule biliaire se trouve à droite du lobe carré, occupée par la vésicule biliaire avec son canal cystique près de l'extrémité droite de la porte hépatique.


==== Impressions ====

Plusieurs impressions à la surface du foie accueillent les différentes structures et organes adjacents. 

Sous le lobe droit et à droite de la fosse vésiculaire se trouvent deux empreintes, l'une derrière l'autre et séparées par une crête. 

Celui de devant est une empreinte colique peu profonde, formée par la flexion hépatique et celui de derrière est une empreinte rénale plus profonde accueillant une partie du rein droit et une partie de la glande surrénale.

L'impression surrénale est une petite zone triangulaire déprimée sur le foie. 

Il est situé près de la droite de la fosse, entre la zone nue et le lobe caudé, et immédiatement au-dessus de l'empreinte rénale. 

La plus grande partie de l'impression surrénale est dépourvue de péritoine et loge la glande surrénale droite. Médial à l'impression rénale se trouve une troisième impression légèrement marquée, située entre elle et le col de la vésicule biliaire. 

Ceci est causé par la partie descendante du duodénum et est connu sous le nom d'impression duodénale. La surface inférieure du lobe gauche du foie se présente derrière et à gauche de l'empreinte gastrique. 

C'est moulé sur la surface avant supérieure de l'estomac, et à droite de cela se trouve une éminence arrondie, le tubercule omentale, qui s'insère dans la concavité de la moindre courbure de l'estomac et se trouve devant la couche antérieure de la moindre épiploon.


=== Anatomie microscopique ===


Au microscope, chaque lobe du foie est constitué de lobules hépatiques. 

Les lobules sont à peu près hexagonaux et se composent de plaques d'hépatocytes et de sinusoïdes rayonnant d'une veine centrale vers un périmètre imaginaire de triades portales interlobulaires. 

La veine centrale rejoint la veine hépatique pour transporter le sang du foie. 

Un composant distinctif d'un lobule est la triade de portail, qui peut être trouvée le long de chacun des coins du lobule.

La triade porte comprend l'artère hépatique, la veine porte et le canal cholédoque.

La triade peut être vue sur une échographie hépatique, comme un signe de Mickey Mouse avec la veine porte comme tête, et l'artère hépatique et le canal cholédoque comme oreilles.

L'histologie, l'étude de l'anatomie microscopique, montre deux grands types de cellules hépatiques : les cellules parenchymateuses et les cellules non parenchymateuses.

Environ 70 à 85 % du volume du foie est occupé par des hépatocytes parenchymateux.

Les cellules non parenchymateuses constituent 40 % du nombre total de cellules hépatiques mais seulement 6,5 % de son volume.

Les sinusoïdes du foie sont tapissés de deux types de cellules, les cellules endothéliales sinusoïdales et les cellules phagocytaires de Kupffer.

Les cellules étoilées hépatiques sont des cellules non parenchymateuses trouvées dans l'espace périsinusoïdal, entre une sinusoïde et un hépatocyte.

De plus, des lymphocytes intrahépatiques sont souvent présents dans la lumière sinusoïdale.


=== Anatomie fonctionnelle ===


La zone centrale ou hile hépatique comprend l'ouverture connue sous le nom de porte hépatique qui porte le canal cholédoque et l'artère hépatique commune, et l'ouverture de la veine porte.

Le canal, la veine et l'artère se divisent en branches gauche et droite, et les zones du foie alimentées par ces branches constituent les lobes fonctionnels gauche et droit.

Les lobes fonctionnels sont séparés par le plan imaginaire, la ligne de Cantlie, joignant la fosse vésiculaire à la veine cave inférieure.

Le plan sépare le foie en vrais lobes droit et gauche.

La veine hépatique moyenne délimite également les vrais lobes droit et gauche.

Le lobe droit est ensuite divisé en un segment antérieur et postérieur par la veine hépatique droite.

Le lobe gauche est divisé en segments médial et latéral par la veine hépatique gauche.

Le hile du foie est décrit en termes de trois plaques qui contiennent les voies biliaires et les vaisseaux sanguins.

Le contenu de l'ensemble du système de plaques est entouré d'une gaine.

Les trois plaques sont la plaque hilaire, la plaque cystique et la plaque ombilicale et le système de plaques est le siège des nombreuses variations anatomiques que l'on trouve dans le foie.


=== Système de classification Couinaud ===

Dans le système Couinaud largement utilisé, les lobes fonctionnels sont ensuite divisés en un total de huit sous-segments basés sur un plan transversal passant par la bifurcation de la veine porte principale.

Le lobe caudé est une structure distincte qui reçoit le flux sanguin des branches vasculaires droite et gauche.

La classification de Couinaud divise le foie en huit segments hépatiques fonctionnellement indépendants.

Chaque segment a son propre flux vasculaire d'entrée, de sortie et de drainage biliaire.

Au centre de chaque segment se trouvent des branches de la veine porte, de l'artère hépatique et du canal cholédoque.

À la périphérie de chaque segment se trouve un écoulement vasculaire à travers les veines hépatiques.

Le système de classification utilise l'apport vasculaire dans le foie pour séparer les unités fonctionnelles (numérotées de I à VIII) avec l'unité 1, le lobe caudé, recevant son alimentation des branches droite et gauche de la veine porte.

Il contient une ou plusieurs veines hépatiques qui se drainent directement dans la veine cave inférieure.

Le reste des unités (II à VIII) sont numérotés dans le sens des aiguilles d'une montre :


=== Expression génique et protéique ===


Environ 20 000 gènes codant pour des protéines sont exprimés dans les cellules humaines et 60 % de ces gènes sont exprimés dans un foie adulte normal.

Plus de 400 gènes sont plus spécifiquement exprimés dans le foie, dont quelque 150 gènes hautement spécifiques du tissu hépatique.

Une grande partie des protéines spécifiques du foie correspondantes sont principalement exprimées dans les hépatocytes et sécrétées dans le sang et constituent des protéines plasmatiques.

D'autres protéines spécifiques du foie sont certaines enzymes hépatiques telles que HAO1 et RDH16, des protéines impliquées dans la synthèse de la bile telles que BAAT et SLC27A5, et des protéines de transport impliquées dans le métabolisme des médicaments, telles que ABCB11 et SLC2A2.

Des exemples de protéines hautement spécifiques du foie comprennent l'apolipoprotéine A II, les facteurs de coagulation F2 et F9, les protéines liées au facteur de complément et la protéine de la chaîne bêta du fibrinogène.


== Développement ==

L'organogenèse, le développement des organes, se déroule de la troisième à la huitième semaine au cours de l'embryogenèse.

Les origines du foie se trouvent à la fois dans la partie ventrale de l'endoderme de l'intestin antérieur (l'endoderme étant l'une des trois couches germinales embryonnaires) et dans les constituants du mésenchyme septum transversum adjacent.

Dans l'embryon humain, le diverticule hépatique est le tube d'endoderme qui s'étend de l'intestin antérieur dans le mésenchyme environnant.

Le mésenchyme du septum transversum induit la prolifération, la ramification et la formation de l'épithélium glandulaire du foie par cet endoderme.

Une partie du diverticule hépatique (cette région la plus proche du tube digestif) continue de fonctionner comme conduit de drainage du foie, et une branche de ce conduit produit la vésicule biliaire. 

Outre les signaux du mésenchyme du septum transversum, le facteur de croissance des fibroblastes du cœur en développement contribue également à la compétence hépatique, ainsi que l'acide rétinoïque émanant du mésoderme de la plaque latérale. 

Les cellules endodermiques hépatiques subissent une transition morphologique de colonnaire à pseudostratifiée entraînant un épaississement dans le bourgeon hépatique précoce. 

Leur expansion forme une population d'hépatoblastes bipotentiels. 

Les cellules étoilées hépatiques sont dérivées du mésenchyme. Après la migration des hépatoblastes dans le mésenchyme du septum transversum, l'architecture hépatique commence à s'établir, avec l'apparition de sinusoïdes hépatiques et de canalicules biliaires. 

Le bourgeon du foie se sépare en lobes.

La veine ombilicale gauche devient le canal veineux et la veine vitelline droite devient la veine porte.

Le bourgeon hépatique en expansion est colonisé par des cellules hématopoïétiques.

Les hépatoblastes bipotentiels commencent à se différencier en cellules épithéliales biliaires et en hépatocytes.

Les cellules épithéliales biliaires se différencient des hépatoblastes autour des veines portes, produisant d'abord une monocouche, puis une bicouche de cellules cuboïdes.

Dans la plaque canalaire, des dilatations focales émergent à des points de la bicouche, sont entourées de mésenchyme porte et subissent une tubulogenèse dans les voies biliaires intrahépatiques.

Les hépatoblastes non adjacents aux veines portes se différencient plutôt en hépatocytes et s'organisent en cordons tapissés de cellules épithéliales sinusoïdales et de canalicules biliaires.

Une fois que les hépatoblastes sont spécifiés dans les hépatocytes et subissent une expansion supplémentaire, ils commencent à acquérir les fonctions d'un hépatocyte mature, et finalement les hépatocytes matures apparaissent comme des cellules épithéliales hautement polarisées avec une accumulation abondante de glycogène.

Dans le foie adulte, les hépatocytes ne sont pas équivalents, leur position le long de l'axe portocentro-veinulaire dans un lobule hépatique dictant l'expression des gènes métaboliques impliqués dans le métabolisme des médicaments, le métabolisme des glucides, la détoxification de l'ammoniac et la production et la sécrétion de la bile.

Le WNT/β-caténine a maintenant été identifié comme jouant un rôle clé dans ce phénomène. À la naissance, le foie représente environ 4 % du poids corporel et pèse en moyenne environ 120 g (4 oz).

Au cours du développement ultérieur, il passera à 1,4–1,6 kg (3,1–3,5 lb) mais ne prendra que 2,5–3,5% du poids corporel.


=== Approvisionnement en sang fœtal ===

Chez le fœtus en croissance, une source majeure de sang vers le foie est la veine ombilicale, qui fournit des nutriments au fœtus en croissance.

La veine ombilicale pénètre dans l'abdomen au niveau de l'ombilic et remonte le long du bord libre du ligament falciforme du foie jusqu'à la surface inférieure du foie.

Là, il rejoint la branche gauche de la veine porte.

Le canal veineux transporte le sang de la veine porte gauche à la veine hépatique gauche puis à la veine cave inférieure, permettant au sang placentaire de contourner le foie.

Chez le fœtus, le foie n'effectue pas les processus digestifs normaux et la filtration du foie du nourrisson car les nutriments sont reçus directement de la mère via le placenta.

Le foie fœtal libère certaines cellules souches sanguines qui migrent vers le thymus fœtal, créant les cellules T ou les lymphocytes T.

Après la naissance, la formation des cellules souches sanguines se déplace vers la moelle osseuse rouge.

Après 2 à 5 jours, la veine ombilicale et le canal veineux sont complètement oblitérés ; le premier devient le ligament rond du foie et le second devient le ligament veineux.

Dans les troubles de la cirrhose et de l'hypertension portale, la veine ombilicale peut se rouvrir.


== Fonctions ==

Les différentes fonctions du foie sont assurées par les cellules hépatiques ou hépatocytes.

On pense que le foie est responsable de jusqu'à 500 fonctions distinctes, généralement en combinaison avec d'autres systèmes et organes.

Actuellement, aucun organe ou dispositif artificiel n'est capable de reproduire toutes les fonctions du foie.

Certaines fonctions peuvent être réalisées par dialyse hépatique, un traitement expérimental de l'insuffisance hépatique.

Le foie représente également environ 20 % de la consommation totale d'oxygène du corps au repos.


=== Approvisionnement en sang ===

Le foie reçoit un double apport sanguin de la veine porte hépatique et des artères hépatiques.

La veine porte hépatique fournit environ 75% de l'apport sanguin du foie et transporte le sang veineux drainé de la rate, du tractus gastro-intestinal et de ses organes associés.

Les artères hépatiques fournissent du sang artériel au foie, représentant le quart restant de son flux sanguin.

L'oxygène est fourni par les deux sources; environ la moitié de la demande en oxygène du foie est satisfaite par la veine porte hépatique et l'autre moitié par les artères hépatiques.

L'artère hépatique possède également des récepteurs alpha et bêta-adrénergiques; par conséquent, le flux à travers l'artère est contrôlé, en partie, par les nerfs splanchniques du système nerveux autonome.

Le sang circule dans les sinusoïdes du foie et se jette dans la veine centrale de chaque lobule.

Les veines centrales fusionnent dans les veines hépatiques, qui quittent le foie et se drainent dans la veine cave inférieure.


=== Débit biliaire ===

Les voies biliaires dérivent des branches des voies biliaires. 

Le tractus biliaire, également appelé arbre biliaire, est la voie par laquelle la bile est sécrétée par le foie puis transportée vers la première partie de l'intestin grêle, le duodénum. 

La bile produite dans le foie est collectée dans les canalicules biliaires, de petites rainures entre les faces des hépatocytes adjacents. 

Les canalicules rayonnent jusqu'au bord du lobule du foie, où ils fusionnent pour former des voies biliaires. 

Dans le foie, ces canaux sont appelés canaux biliaires intrahépatiques et, une fois qu'ils sortent du foie, ils sont considérés comme extrahépatiques. 

Les canaux intrahépatiques finissent par se drainer dans les canaux hépatiques droit et gauche, qui sortent du foie par la fissure transversale et fusionnent pour former le canal hépatique commun. 

Le canal cystique de la vésicule biliaire rejoint le canal hépatique commun pour former le canal cholédoque. 

Le système biliaire et le tissu conjonctif sont alimentés par l'artère hépatique seule.

La bile s'écoule directement dans le duodénum via le canal cholédoque ou est temporairement stockée dans la vésicule biliaire via le canal cystique. 

Le canal biliaire principal et le canal pancréatique pénètrent ensemble dans la deuxième partie du duodénum au niveau de l'ampoule hépatopancréatique, également connue sous le nom d'ampoule de Vater.


=== Synthèse ===

Le foie joue un rôle majeur dans le métabolisme des glucides, des protéines, des acides aminés et des lipides.


==== Métabolisme des glucides ====

Le foie joue plusieurs rôles dans le métabolisme des glucides : 

Le foie synthétise et stocke environ 100 g de glycogène via la glycogenèse, la formation de glycogène à partir du glucose.

En cas de besoin, le foie libère du glucose dans le sang en effectuant une glycogénolyse, la décomposition du glycogène en glucose.

Le foie est également responsable de la gluconéogenèse, qui est la synthèse du glucose à partir de certains acides aminés, du lactate ou du glycérol. 

Les cellules adipeuses et hépatiques produisent du glycérol par décomposition des graisses, que le foie utilise pour la gluconéogenèse.

Le foie fait également de la glyconéogenèse qui est la synthèse de glycogène à partir d'acide lactique.


==== Métabolisme des protéines ====

Le foie est responsable de la base du métabolisme, de la synthèse et de la dégradation des protéines. 

Toutes les protéines plasmatiques, à l'exception des gamma-globulines, sont synthétisées dans le foie. 

Il est également responsable d'une grande partie de la synthèse des acides aminés. 

Le foie joue un rôle dans la production de facteurs de coagulation, ainsi que dans la production de globules rouges. 

Certaines des protéines synthétisées par le foie comprennent les facteurs de coagulation I (fibrinogène), II (prothrombine), V, VII, VIII, IX, X, XI, XII, XIII, ainsi que la protéine C, la protéine S et l'antithrombine. 

Le foie est un site majeur de production de thrombopoïétine, une hormone glycoprotéique qui régule la production de plaquettes par la moelle osseuse.


==== Métabolisme lipidique ====

Le foie joue plusieurs rôles dans le métabolisme des lipides : il effectue la synthèse du cholestérol, la lipogenèse et la production de triglycérides, et une grande partie des lipoprotéines de l'organisme sont synthétisées dans le foie. 

Le foie joue un rôle clé dans la digestion, car il produit et excrète la bile (un liquide jaunâtre) nécessaire pour émulsifier les graisses et aider à l'absorption de la vitamine K de l'alimentation. 

Une partie de la bile s'écoule directement dans le duodénum et une partie est stockée dans la vésicule biliaire.

Le foie produit le facteur de croissance analogue à l'insuline 1, une hormone protéique polypeptidique qui joue un rôle important dans la croissance de l'enfant et continue d'avoir des effets anabolisants chez les adultes.


=== Répartition ===

Le foie est responsable de la dégradation de l'insuline et d'autres hormones.

Le foie décompose la bilirubine par glucuronidation, facilitant son excrétion dans la bile.

Le foie est responsable de la dégradation et de l'excrétion de nombreux déchets.

Il joue un rôle clé dans la dégradation ou la modification des substances toxiques (par exemple, la méthylation) et de la plupart des médicaments dans un processus appelé métabolisme des médicaments.

Il en résulte parfois une intoxication, lorsque le métabolite est plus toxique que son précurseur.

De préférence, les toxines sont conjuguées pour permettre l'excrétion dans la bile ou l'urine.

Le foie convertit l'ammoniac en urée dans le cadre du cycle de l'ornithine ou du cycle de l'urée, et l'urée est excrétée dans l'urine.


=== Réservoir de sang ===

Comme le foie est un organe extensible, de grandes quantités de
le sang peut être stocké dans ses vaisseaux sanguins.

Son volume sanguin normal, y compris celui des veines hépatiques et celui des sinus hépatiques, est d'environ 450 millilitres, soit près de 10 % du volume sanguin total du corps.

Lorsqu'une pression élevée dans l'oreillette droite provoque une contre-pression dans le foie, le foie se dilate et 0,5 à 1 litre de sang supplémentaire est parfois stocké dans les veines et les sinus hépatiques.

Cela se produit surtout en cas d'insuffisance cardiaque avec congestion périphérique.

Ainsi, en effet, le foie est un grand organe veineux expansible capable d'agir comme un précieux réservoir de sang en période d'excès de volume sanguin et capable de fournir du sang supplémentaire en période de diminution du volume sanguin.


=== Production de lymphe ===

Étant donné que les pores des sinusoïdes hépatiques sont très perméables et permettent un passage aisé du liquide et des protéines dans l'espace périsinusoïdal, la lymphe qui s'écoule du foie a généralement une concentration en protéines d'environ 6 g/dl, ce qui n'est que légèrement inférieur à la protéine concentration plasmatique. 

De plus, la haute perméabilité de l'épithélium sinusoïdal du foie permet la formation de grandes quantités de lymphe. 

Par conséquent, environ la moitié de toute la lymphe formée dans le corps au repos se produit dans le foie.


=== Autre ===

Le foie stocke une multitude de substances, y compris la vitamine A (approvisionnement de 1 à 2 ans), la vitamine D (approvisionnement de 1 à 4 mois), la vitamine B12 (approvisionnement de 3 à 5 ans), la vitamine K, la vitamine E, le fer, cuivre, zinc, cobalt, molybdène, etc.

Hématopoïèse - La formation des cellules sanguines est appelée hémopoïèse.

Au stade embryonnaire, les globules rouges et les globules blancs sont formés par le foie.

Au cours du premier trimestre du fœtus, le foie est le principal site de production de globules rouges.

À la 32e semaine de gestation, la moelle osseuse a presque entièrement pris en charge cette tâche.

Le foie aide à purifier le sang.

Les cellules de Kupffer du foie sont des cellules phagocytaires, elles aident à la phagocytose des cellules sanguines mortes et des bactéries du sang.

Le foie est responsable des effets immunologiques – le système phagocytaire mononucléaire du foie contient de nombreuses cellules immunologiquement actives, agissant comme un « tamis » pour les antigènes qui lui sont acheminés via le système porte.

Le foie produit de l'albumine, la protéine la plus abondante dans le sérum sanguin. 

Il est essentiel au maintien de la pression oncotique et agit comme un moyen de transport pour les acides gras et les hormones stéroïdes.

Le foie synthétise l'angiotensinogène, une hormone responsable de l'augmentation de la pression artérielle lorsqu'elle est activée par la rénine, une enzyme qui est libérée lorsque le rein détecte une pression artérielle basse.

Le foie produit l'enzyme catalase pour décomposer le peroxyde d'hydrogène, un agent oxydant toxique, en eau et en oxygène.


=== Avec le vieillissement ===

La capacité oxydative du foie diminue avec le vieillissement et, par conséquent, tous les médicaments qui nécessitent une oxydation (par exemple, les benzodiazépines) sont plus susceptibles de s'accumuler à des niveaux toxiques.

Cependant, les médicaments à demi-vie plus courte, tels que le lorazépam et l'oxazépam, sont préférés dans la plupart des cas lorsque les benzodiazépines sont nécessaires en médecine gériatrique.


== Signification clinique ==

=== Maladie ===

Le foie est un organe vital et soutient presque tous les autres organes du corps.

En raison de sa localisation stratégique et de ses fonctions multidimensionnelles, le foie est également sujet à de nombreuses maladies.

La zone nue du foie est un site vulnérable au passage de l'infection de la cavité abdominale à la cavité thoracique.

Les maladies du foie peuvent être diagnostiquées par des tests de la fonction hépatique – des tests sanguins qui peuvent identifier divers marqueurs.

Par exemple, les réactifs de phase aiguë sont produits par le foie en réponse à une blessure ou à une inflammation.

L'hépatite est une affection courante d'inflammation du foie.

La cause la plus courante est virale, et les plus courantes de ces infections sont les hépatites A, B, C, D et E.

Certaines de ces infections sont sexuellement transmissibles.

L'inflammation peut également être causée par d'autres virus de la famille des Herpesviridae tels que le virus de l'herpès simplex.

L'infection chronique (plutôt qu'aiguë) par le virus de l'hépatite B ou le virus de l'hépatite C est la principale cause de cancer du foie.

À l'échelle mondiale, environ 248 millions de personnes sont chroniquement infectées par l'hépatite B (dont 843 724 aux États-Unis) et 142 millions sont chroniquement infectées par l'hépatite C (dont 2,7 millions aux États-Unis).

À l'échelle mondiale, il y a respectivement environ 114 millions et 20 millions de cas d'hépatite A et d'hépatite E, mais ceux-ci disparaissent généralement et ne deviennent pas chroniques.

Le virus de l'hépatite D est un "satellite" du virus de l'hépatite B (ne peut infecter qu'en présence d'hépatite B) et co-infecte près de 20 millions de personnes atteintes d'hépatite B dans le monde.

L'encéphalopathie hépatique est causée par une accumulation de toxines dans le sang qui sont normalement éliminées par le foie.

Cette condition peut entraîner le coma et peut s'avérer mortelle.

Le syndrome de Budd-Chiari est une affection causée par le blocage des veines hépatiques (y compris la thrombose) qui drainent le foie.

Il se présente avec la triade classique de douleurs abdominales, d'ascite et d'hypertrophie du foie.

De nombreuses maladies du foie s'accompagnent d'un ictère causé par une augmentation des niveaux de bilirubine dans le système.

La bilirubine résulte de la rupture de l'hémoglobine des globules rouges morts ; normalement, le foie élimine la bilirubine du sang et l'excrète par la bile.

D'autres troubles causés par une consommation excessive d'alcool sont regroupés sous les maladies alcooliques du foie et comprennent l'hépatite alcoolique, la stéatose hépatique et la cirrhose. 

Les facteurs contribuant au développement des maladies alcooliques du foie ne sont pas seulement la quantité et la fréquence de la consommation d'alcool, mais peuvent également inclure le sexe, la génétique et l'atteinte hépatique. 

Les dommages au foie peuvent également être causés par des médicaments, en particulier le paracétamol et les médicaments utilisés pour traiter le cancer. 

Une rupture du foie peut être causée par un coup de foie utilisé dans les sports de combat.
La cholangite biliaire primitive est une maladie auto-immune du foie. 

Elle se caractérise par une destruction lente et progressive des petites voies biliaires du foie, les canaux intralobulaires (canaux de Hering) étant touchés au début de la maladie.

Lorsque ces canaux sont endommagés, la bile et d'autres toxines s'accumulent dans le foie (cholestase) et, avec le temps, endommagent le tissu hépatique en combinaison avec des dommages immunitaires continus.

Cela peut entraîner des cicatrices (fibrose) et une cirrhose.

La cirrhose augmente la résistance au flux sanguin dans le foie et peut entraîner une hypertension portale.

Les anastomoses congestionnées entre le système veineux porte et la circulation systémique peuvent être une condition ultérieure.

Il existe également de nombreuses maladies pédiatriques du foie, notamment l'atrésie des voies biliaires, le déficit en alpha-1 antitrypsine, le syndrome d'Alagille, la cholestase intrahépatique familiale progressive, l'histiocytose à cellules de Langerhans et l'hémangiome hépatique, une tumeur bénigne, le type le plus courant de tumeur du foie, que l'on pense être congénitale.

Une maladie génétique provoquant la formation de plusieurs kystes dans le tissu hépatique, généralement plus tard dans la vie et généralement asymptomatique, est la maladie polykystique du foie.

Les maladies qui interfèrent avec la fonction hépatique entraîneront un dérangement de ces processus.

Or, le foie a une grande capacité de régénération et dispose d'une grande capacité de réserve.

Dans la plupart des cas, le foie ne produit des symptômes qu'après des dommages importants.

L'hépatomégalie fait référence à une hypertrophie du foie et peut être due à de nombreuses causes.

Il peut être palpé lors d'une mesure de la durée du foie.


=== Symptômes ===

Les symptômes classiques des dommages au foie comprennent les suivants :

Des selles pâles se produisent lorsque la stercobiline, un pigment brun, est absente des selles.

La stercobiline est dérivée des métabolites de la bilirubine produits dans le foie.

L'urine foncée se produit lorsque la bilirubine se mélange à l'urine

Jaunisse (jaunissement de la peau et/ou du blanc des yeux)

C'est là que la bilirubine se dépose dans la peau, provoquant une démangeaison intense.

Les démangeaisons sont la plainte la plus courante chez les personnes souffrant d'insuffisance hépatique.

Souvent, ces démangeaisons ne peuvent pas être soulagées par des médicaments.

Un gonflement de l'abdomen et un gonflement des chevilles et des pieds surviennent parce que le foie ne produit pas d'albumine.

La fatigue excessive résulte d'une perte généralisée de nutriments, de minéraux et de vitamines.

Les ecchymoses et les saignements faciles sont d'autres caractéristiques de la maladie du foie.

Le foie fabrique des facteurs de coagulation, des substances qui aident à prévenir les saignements.

Lorsque des lésions hépatiques surviennent, ces facteurs ne sont plus présents et des saignements graves peuvent survenir.

La douleur dans le quadrant supérieur droit peut résulter de l'étirement de la capsule de Glisson dans des conditions d'hépatite et de pré-éclampsie.


=== Diagnostic ===

Le diagnostic d'une maladie du foie est posé par des tests de la fonction hépatique, des groupes de tests sanguins, qui peuvent facilement montrer l'étendue des dommages au foie.

Si une infection est suspectée, d'autres tests sérologiques seront effectués.

Un examen physique du foie ne peut que révéler sa taille et toute sensibilité, et une forme d'imagerie telle qu'une échographie ou une tomodensitométrie peut également être nécessaire.

Parfois, une biopsie du foie sera nécessaire et un échantillon de tissu est prélevé à l'aide d'une aiguille insérée dans la peau juste en dessous de la cage thoracique.

Cette procédure peut être assistée par un échographiste fournissant des conseils échographiques à un radiologue interventionnel.

 
=== Régénération du foie ===


Le foie est le seul organe interne humain capable de régénération naturelle des tissus perdus ; aussi peu que 25% d'un foie peut se régénérer en un foie entier.

Il ne s'agit cependant pas d'une véritable régénération mais plutôt d'une croissance compensatoire chez les mammifères.

Les lobes qui sont enlevés ne repoussent pas et la croissance du foie est une restauration de la fonction, pas de la forme originale.

Cela contraste avec la véritable régénération où la fonction et la forme d'origine sont restaurées.

Chez certaines autres espèces, comme le poisson zèbre, le foie subit une véritable régénération en restaurant à la fois la forme et la taille de l'organe.

Dans le foie, de vastes zones de tissus se forment, mais pour la formation de nouvelles cellules, il doit y avoir une quantité suffisante de matière pour que la circulation sanguine devienne plus active.

Ceci est principalement dû au retour des hépatocytes dans le cycle cellulaire. 

C'est-à-dire que les hépatocytes passent de la phase de repos G0 à la phase G1 et subissent une mitose. 

Ce processus est activé par les récepteurs p75. 

Il existe également des preuves de cellules souches bipotentielles, appelées cellules ovales hépatiques ou ovocytes (à ne pas confondre avec les globules rouges ovales de l'ovalocytose), dont on pense qu'elles résident dans les canaux de Hering. 

Ces cellules peuvent se différencier en hépatocytes ou en cholangiocytes. 

Les cholangiocytes sont les cellules épithéliales qui tapissent les voies biliaires. 

Ce sont des épithéliums cuboïdes dans les petits canaux biliaires interlobulaires, mais ils deviennent cylindriques et sécrétent du mucus dans les canaux biliaires plus grands à l'approche de la porte hépatique et des canaux extrahépatiques. 

Des recherches sont menées sur l'utilisation de cellules souches pour la génération d'un foie artificiel.

Les travaux scientifiques et médicaux sur la régénération du foie font souvent référence au titan grec Prométhée qui était enchaîné à un rocher dans le Caucase où, chaque jour, son foie était dévoré par un aigle, pour repousser chaque nuit. 

Le mythe suggère que les anciens Grecs connaissaient peut-être la remarquable capacité d'auto-réparation du foie.


=== Transplantation hépatique ===

Les greffes de foie humain ont été réalisées pour la première fois par Thomas Starzl aux États-Unis et Roy Calne à Cambridge, en Angleterre, en 1963 et 1967, respectivement.

La transplantation hépatique est la seule option pour les personnes souffrant d'insuffisance hépatique irréversible.

La plupart des greffes sont effectuées pour des maladies hépatiques chroniques conduisant à la cirrhose, telles que l'hépatite C chronique, l'alcoolisme et l'hépatite auto-immune.

Moins fréquemment, la transplantation hépatique est pratiquée en cas d'insuffisance hépatique fulminante, dans laquelle l'insuffisance hépatique survient en quelques jours ou semaines.

Les allogreffes hépatiques destinées à la transplantation proviennent généralement de donneurs décédés d'une lésion cérébrale mortelle.

La greffe de foie d'un donneur vivant est une technique dans laquelle une partie du foie d'une personne vivante est prélevée (hépatectomie) et utilisée pour remplacer tout le foie du receveur.

Cela a été réalisé pour la première fois en 1989 pour une transplantation hépatique pédiatrique.

Seuls 20 % du foie d'un adulte (segments Couinaud 2 et 3) sont nécessaires pour servir d'allogreffe hépatique à un nourrisson ou à un jeune enfant.

Plus récemment, une greffe de foie d'adulte à adulte a été réalisée en utilisant le lobe hépatique droit du donneur, qui représente 60 % du foie.

En raison de la capacité du foie à se régénérer, le donneur et le receveur retrouvent une fonction hépatique normale si tout se passe bien.

Cette procédure est plus controversée, car elle implique d'effectuer une opération beaucoup plus importante sur le donneur, et en effet il y a eu au moins deux décès de donneurs sur les premières centaines de cas.

Une publication de 2006 a abordé le problème de la mortalité des donneurs et a trouvé au moins quatorze cas.

Le risque de complications postopératoires (et de décès) est beaucoup plus élevé dans les opérations du côté droit que dans les opérations du côté gauche.

Avec les progrès récents de l'imagerie non invasive, les donneurs de foie vivants doivent généralement subir des examens d'imagerie pour l'anatomie du foie afin de décider si l'anatomie est faisable pour le don. 

L'évaluation est généralement réalisée par tomodensitométrie multidétecteur (MDCT) et imagerie par résonance magnétique (IRM). 

MDCT est bon en anatomie vasculaire et en volumétrie. 

L'IRM est utilisée pour l'anatomie de l'arbre biliaire. 

Les donneurs présentant une anatomie vasculaire très inhabituelle, ce qui les rend inaptes au don, pourraient être éliminés pour éviter des opérations inutiles.


== Société et culture ==

Certaines cultures considèrent le foie comme le siège de l'âme. 

Dans la mythologie grecque, les dieux ont puni Prométhée pour avoir révélé le feu aux humains en l'enchaînant à un rocher où un vautour (ou un aigle) picorait son foie, qui se régénérait du jour au lendemain. 

(Le foie est le seul organe interne humain capable de se régénérer de manière significative.) 

De nombreux peuples anciens du Proche-Orient et des régions méditerranéennes pratiquaient un type de divination appelé haruspice ou hépatomancie, où ils essayaient d'obtenir des informations en examinant les foies de moutons et d'autres animaux.

Chez Platon, et dans la physiologie ultérieure, le foie était considéré comme le siège des émotions les plus sombres (en particulier la colère, la jalousie et la cupidité) qui poussent les hommes à l'action. 

Le Talmud (traité Berakhot 61b) fait référence au foie comme siège de la colère, la vésicule biliaire contrecarrant cela. 

Les langues persane , ourdou et hindi ( جگر ou jigar ) font référence au discours figuratif du foie pour indiquer le courage et les sentiments forts, ou «leur meilleur»; par exemple, "Cette Mecque vous a jeté les morceaux de son foie!".

Le terme jan e jigar, littéralement "la force (puissance) de mon foie", est un terme affectueux en ourdou. 

En argot persan, jigar est utilisé comme adjectif pour tout objet désirable, en particulier les femmes. 

Dans la langue zoulou, le mot pour le foie (isibindi) est le même que le mot pour le courage. 

En anglais, le terme «lily-livered» est utilisé pour indiquer la lâcheté de la croyance médiévale selon laquelle le foie était le siège du courage.
Hígados en espagnol signifie aussi "courage".

Cependant, le sens secondaire du gibel basque est "indolence". En hébreu biblique, le mot pour le foie, כבד (Kauved, radical KBD ou KVD, similaire à l'arabe الكبد), signifie aussi lourd et est utilisé pour décrire les riches ("lourds" avec possessions) et l'honneur (vraisemblablement pour la même raison). 

Dans le Livre des Lamentations (2:11), il est utilisé pour décrire les réponses physiologiques à la tristesse par "mon foie renversé sur la terre" avec le flux de larmes et le renversement dans l'amertume des intestins. 

À plusieurs reprises dans le livre des Psaumes (notamment 16:9), le mot est utilisé pour décrire le bonheur dans le foie, ainsi que le cœur (qui bat rapidement) et la chair (qui apparaît rouge sous la peau). 

Une autre utilisation en tant que soi (similaire à «votre honneur») est largement disponible dans l'ancien testament, parfois comparée à l'âme qui respire (Genèse 49: 6, Psaumes 7: 6, etc.). 

Un chapeau honorable a également été mentionné avec ce mot (Job 19: 9, etc.) et sous cette définition apparaît plusieurs fois avec פאר Pe'er - grandeur.

Ces quatre significations ont été utilisées dans les langues sémitiques anciennes telles que l'Accadien et l'Égypte ancienne conservées dans la langue éthiopienne classique Ge'ez.


=== Nourriture ===


Les humains mangent couramment le foie des mammifères, des volailles et des poissons comme nourriture.

Les foies domestiques de porc, de bœuf, d'agneau, de veau, de poulet et d'oie sont largement disponibles dans les boucheries et les supermarchés.

Dans les langues romanes, le mot anatomique pour « foie » (français foie, espagnol hígado, etc.) ne dérive pas du terme anatomique latin, jecur, mais du terme culinaire ficatum, littéralement « farci aux figues », faisant référence aux foies. d'oies qui avaient été engraissées de figues.

Les foies d'animaux sont riches en fer, en vitamine A et en vitamine B12 ; et l'huile de foie de morue est couramment utilisée comme complément alimentaire.

Le foie peut être cuit, bouilli, grillé, frit, sauté ou mangé cru (asbeh nayeh ou sawda naye dans la cuisine libanaise, ou sashimi de foie dans la cuisine japonaise). 

Dans de nombreuses préparations, les morceaux de foie sont associés à des morceaux de viande ou de rognons, comme dans les diverses formes de grillades mixtes du Moyen-Orient (par exemple meurav Yerushalmi). 

Des exemples bien connus incluent le pâté de foie, le foie gras, le foie haché et le leverpastej. 

Les saucisses de foie, telles que Braunschweiger et la saucisse de foie, sont également un repas apprécié. 

Les saucisses de foie peuvent également être utilisées comme tartinades. 

Une délicatesse sud-africaine traditionnelle, les skipadjies, est faite de foie d'agneau haché enveloppé dans du netvet (graisse de caul) et grillé sur un feu ouvert. 

Traditionnellement, certains foies de poisson étaient appréciés comme nourriture, en particulier le foie de raie. 

Il était utilisé pour préparer des mets délicats, comme le foie de raie poché sur toast en Angleterre, ainsi que les beignets de foie de raie et le foie de raie en croûte dans la cuisine française.


=== Foie de girafe ===

Les Humr, une des tribus de l'ethnie baggara, originaire du sud-ouest du Kordofan au Soudan et parlant le shuwa ou l'arabe tchadien, préparent une boisson non alcoolisée à base de foie et de moelle osseuse de girafe qu'ils appellent umm nyolokh, et qui ils prétendent qu'il est enivrant (arabe سكران sakran), provoquant des rêves et même des hallucinations au réveil.

L'anthropologue Ian Cunnison, qui a accompagné les Humr lors d'une de leurs expéditions de chasse aux girafes à la fin des années 1950, note que :

On dit qu'une personne, une fois qu'elle a bu du umm nyolokh, reviendra encore et encore à la girafe.

Humr, étant Mahdistes, sont des abstinents stricts [d'alcool] et un Humrawi n'est jamais ivre (sakran) d'alcool ou de bière. 

Mais il utilise ce mot pour décrire les effets que umm nyolokh a sur lui.

Le récit remarquable de Cunnison sur un mammifère apparemment psychoactif a trouvé son chemin d'un article scientifique quelque peu obscur à une littérature plus grand public grâce à une conversation entre le Dr. 

Wendy James de l'Institut d'anthropologie sociale et culturelle de l'Université d'Oxford et spécialiste de l'utilisation des hallucinogènes et des substances intoxicantes dans la société Richard Rudgley, qui a examiné ses implications dans son ouvrage populaire The Encyclopedia of Psychoactive Substances. 

Rudgley émet l'hypothèse que la présence du composé hallucinogène DMT pourrait expliquer les propriétés enivrantes putatives de umm nyolokh. Cunnison lui-même, d'autre part, avait eu du mal à croire pleinement à la vérité littérale de l'affirmation des Humr selon laquelle leur boisson était enivrante :

Je ne peux que supposer qu'il n'y a pas de substance intoxicante dans la boisson et que l'effet qu'elle produit est simplement une question de convention, bien qu'elle puisse être provoquée inconsciemment.

L'étude des enthéogènes en général - y compris les enthéogènes d'origine animale ( p. semble plus tiré par les cheveux qu'à l'époque de Cunnison, bien que la preuve concluante (ou la réfutation) devra attendre des analyses détaillées de l'organe animal en question et de la boisson préparée à partir de celui-ci.


=== Poison de flèche/balle ===

Certains peuples toungouses préparaient autrefois un type de poison de flèche à partir de foies d'animaux en décomposition, qui fut, plus tard, également appliqué aux balles. 

L'anthropologue russe Sergei Mikhailovich Shirokogorov note que : Autrefois, l'utilisation de flèches empoisonnées était courante. 

Par exemple, parmi les Kumarčen, [un sous-groupe des Oroqen], même ces derniers temps, un poison était utilisé, préparé à partir de foie en décomposition. 

Cela a été confirmé par le Kumarčen. 

Je ne suis pas compétent pour juger des conditions chimiques de production du poison qui n'est pas détruit par la chaleur de l'explosion. 

Cependant, les Toungous eux-mêmes comparent cette méthode [d'empoisonnement des munitions] à l'empoisonnement des flèches.


== Autres animaux ==

Le foie se trouve chez tous les vertébrés et est généralement le plus grand organe interne. 

Sa forme varie considérablement selon les espèces et est largement déterminée par la forme et la disposition des organes environnants. 

Néanmoins, chez la plupart des espèces, il est divisé en lobes droit et gauche; les exceptions à cette règle générale incluent les serpents, où la forme du corps nécessite une forme simple semblable à un cigare.

La structure interne du foie est globalement similaire chez tous les vertébrés.

Un organe parfois appelé foie est associé au tube digestif de l'Amphioxus cordé primitif. 

Bien qu'il remplisse de nombreuses fonctions d'un foie, il n'est pas considéré comme un vrai foie mais comme un homologue du foie des vertébrés. 

Le caecum hépatique de l'amphioxus produit les protéines spécifiques du foie, la vitellogénine, l'antithrombine, le plasminogène, l'alanine aminotransférase et l'insuline/facteur de croissance analogue à l'insuline (IGF).



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Foie

;;;PT;;;



FÍGADO


O fígado é um órgão do sistema digestivo encontrado apenas em vertebrados que desintoxica vários metabólitos, sintetiza proteínas e produz bioquímicos necessários para a digestão e crescimento. 

Nos humanos, localiza-se no quadrante superior direito do abdome, abaixo do diafragma. 

Suas outras funções no metabolismo incluem a regulação do armazenamento de glicogênio, a decomposição dos glóbulos vermelhos e a produção de hormônios.

O fígado é um órgão digestivo acessório que produz a bile, um líquido alcalino que contém colesterol e ácidos biliares, o que ajuda na quebra da gordura.

A vesícula biliar, uma pequena bolsa que fica logo abaixo do fígado, armazena a bile produzida pelo fígado, que depois é movida para o intestino delgado para completar a digestão.

O tecido altamente especializado do fígado, composto principalmente de hepatócitos, regula uma ampla variedade de reações bioquímicas de alto volume, incluindo a síntese e a quebra de moléculas pequenas e complexas, muitas das quais são necessárias para funções vitais normais.

As estimativas sobre o número total de funções do órgão variam, mas os livros geralmente citam que é em torno de 500.

Não se sabe como compensar a ausência de função hepática a longo prazo, embora as técnicas de diálise hepática possam ser utilizadas a curto prazo. 

Os fígados artificiais não foram desenvolvidos para promover a substituição a longo prazo na ausência do fígado. 

A partir de 2018, o transplante de fígado é a única opção para insuficiência hepática completa.


== Estrutura ==

O fígado é um órgão marrom-avermelhado, em forma de cunha, com duas
lobos de tamanho e forma desiguais. 

Um fígado humano normalmente pesa aproximadamente 1,5 kg (3,3 lb) e tem uma largura de cerca de 15 cm (6 pol). 

Há uma variação de tamanho considerável entre os indivíduos, com o intervalo de referência padrão para homens sendo de 970 a 1.860 g (2,14 a 4,10 lb) e para mulheres de 600 a 1.770 g (1,32 a 3,90 lb). 

É o órgão interno mais pesado e a maior glândula do corpo humano.

Localizado no quadrante superior direito da cavidade abdominal, repousa logo abaixo do diafragma, à direita do estômago e sobrepõe-se à vesícula biliar.

O fígado está conectado a dois grandes vasos sanguíneos: a artéria hepática e a veia porta.

A artéria hepática transporta sangue rico em oxigênio da aorta através do tronco celíaco, enquanto a veia porta transporta sangue rico em nutrientes digeridos de todo o trato gastrointestinal e também do baço e pâncreas.

Esses vasos sanguíneos subdividem-se em pequenos capilares conhecidos como sinusóides hepáticos, que então levam aos lóbulos.
Os lóbulos são as unidades funcionais do fígado.

Cada lóbulo é composto por milhões de células hepáticas (hepatócitos), que são as células metabólicas básicas.

Os lóbulos são mantidos juntos por uma camada de tecido conjuntivo fibroelástico fino, denso, irregular e que se estende desde a cápsula fibrosa que cobre todo o fígado, conhecida como cápsula de Glisson. 

Isso se estende para a estrutura do fígado acompanhando os vasos sanguíneos, ductos e nervos no hilo hepático. 

Toda a superfície do fígado, exceto a área nua, é coberta por uma camada serosa derivada do peritônio, que adere firmemente à cápsula interna de Glisson.


=== Anatomia geral ===

A terminologia relacionada ao fígado geralmente começa em hepat- de ἡπατο-, da palavra grega para fígado.


==== Lobos ====

O fígado é grosseiramente dividido em duas partes quando visto de cima – um lobo direito e um esquerdo – e quatro partes quando visto de baixo (lobos esquerdo, direito, caudado e quadrado).

O ligamento falciforme faz uma divisão superficial do fígado em lobos esquerdo e direito. 

De baixo, os dois lobos adicionais estão localizados entre os lobos direito e esquerdo, um na frente do outro. 

Uma linha pode ser imaginada correndo da esquerda da veia cava e todo o caminho para a frente para dividir o fígado e a vesícula biliar em duas metades. 

Esta linha é chamada de linha de Cantlie.

Outros marcos anatômicos incluem o ligamento venoso e o ligamento redondo do fígado, que dividem ainda mais o lado esquerdo do fígado em duas seções. 

Um importante marco anatômico, a porta hepatis, divide essa porção esquerda em quatro segmentos, que podem ser numerados a partir do lobo caudado como I no sentido anti-horário. 

A partir desta visão parietal, sete segmentos podem ser vistos, pois o oitavo segmento é visível apenas na visão visceral.


==== Superfícies ====

Na superfície diafragmática, além de uma área triangular nua onde se conecta ao diafragma, o fígado é coberto por uma fina membrana de dupla camada, o peritônio, que ajuda a reduzir o atrito contra outros órgãos. 

Esta superfície cobre a forma convexa dos dois lóbulos onde acomoda a forma do diafragma. 

O peritônio dobra-se sobre si mesmo para formar o ligamento falciforme e os ligamentos triangulares direito e esquerdo.

Esses ligamentos peritoneais não estão relacionados aos ligamentos anatômicos nas articulações, e os ligamentos triangulares direito e esquerdo não têm importância funcional conhecida, embora sirvam como pontos de referência da superfície. 

O ligamento falciforme funciona para fixar o fígado à porção posterior da parede anterior do corpo.

A superfície visceral ou superfície inferior é irregular e côncava. 

É coberto por peritônio, além de onde se fixa a vesícula biliar e a porta hepatis. 

A fossa da vesícula biliar situa-se à direita do lobo quadrado, ocupada pela vesícula biliar com seu ducto cístico próximo à extremidade direita da porta hepatis.


==== Impressões ====

Várias impressões na superfície do fígado acomodam as várias estruturas e órgãos adjacentes. 

Abaixo do lobo direito e à direita da fossa da vesícula biliar há duas impressões, uma atrás da outra e separadas por uma crista. 

A anterior é uma impressão cólica rasa, formada pela flexura hepática e a posterior é uma impressão renal mais profunda acomodando parte do rim direito e parte da glândula supra-renal.

A impressão suprarrenal é uma pequena área triangular e deprimida no fígado. 

Localiza-se próximo à direita da fossa, entre a área nua e o lobo caudado, e imediatamente acima da impressão renal. 

A maior parte da impressão suprarrenal é desprovida de peritônio e aloja a glândula suprarrenal direita. Medial à impressão renal há uma terceira impressão ligeiramente marcada, situada entre ela e o colo da vesícula biliar. 

Isso é causado pela porção descendente do duodeno e é conhecido como impressão duodenal. A superfície inferior do lobo esquerdo do fígado apresenta-se atrás e à esquerda da impressão gástrica. 

Este é moldado sobre a superfície frontal superior do estômago, e à direita deste encontra-se uma eminência arredondada, o tubérculo omental, que se encaixa na concavidade da curvatura menor do estômago e situa-se na frente da camada anterior do menor. omento.


=== Anatomia microscópica ===


Microscopicamente, observa-se que cada lobo hepático é constituído por lóbulos hepáticos.

Os lóbulos são aproximadamente hexagonais e consistem em placas de hepatócitos e sinusóides que se irradiam de uma veia central em direção a um perímetro imaginário de tríades portais interlobulares.

A veia central se une à veia hepática para levar o sangue para fora do fígado.

Um componente distintivo de um lóbulo é a tríade portal, que pode ser encontrada ao longo de cada um dos cantos do lóbulo.

A tríade portal consiste na artéria hepática, na veia porta e no ducto biliar comum.

A tríade pode ser vista em um ultra-som do fígado, como um sinal de Mickey Mouse com a veia porta como a cabeça e a artéria hepática e o ducto biliar comum como as orelhas.

A histologia, o estudo da anatomia microscópica, mostra dois tipos principais de células hepáticas: células parenquimatosas e células não parenquimatosas.

Cerca de 70-85% do volume hepático é ocupado por hepatócitos parenquimatosos.

As células não parenquimatosas constituem 40% do número total de células hepáticas, mas apenas 6,5% do seu volume.

Os sinusóides hepáticos são revestidos com dois tipos de células, células endoteliais sinusoidais e células fagocitárias de Kupffer.

As células estreladas hepáticas são células não parenquimatosas encontradas no espaço perissinusoidal, entre um sinusóide e um hepatócito.

Além disso, linfócitos intra-hepáticos estão frequentemente presentes no lúmen sinusoidal.


=== Anatomia funcional ===


A área central ou hilo hepático inclui a abertura conhecida como porta hepatis que transporta o ducto biliar comum e a artéria hepática comum e a abertura para a veia porta.

O ducto, a veia e a artéria se dividem em ramos direito e esquerdo, e as áreas do fígado supridas por esses ramos constituem os lobos esquerdo e direito funcionais. 

Os lobos funcionais são separados pelo plano imaginário, a linha de Cantlie, unindo a fossa da vesícula biliar à veia cava inferior. 

O plano separa o fígado em lobos direito e esquerdo verdadeiros. 

A veia hepática média também demarca os lobos direito e esquerdo verdadeiros. 

O lobo direito é ainda dividido em segmento anterior e posterior pela veia hepática direita. 

O lobo esquerdo é dividido em segmentos medial e lateral pela veia hepática esquerda.

O hilo do fígado é descrito em termos de três placas que contêm os ductos biliares e os vasos sanguíneos. 

O conteúdo de todo o sistema de placas é envolvido por uma bainha. 

As três placas são a placa hilar, a placa cística e a placa umbilical e o sistema de placas é o local das muitas variações anatômicas encontradas no fígado.


=== Sistema de classificação Couinaud ===

No sistema de Couinaud amplamente utilizado, os lobos funcionais são ainda divididos em um total de oito subsegmentos com base em um plano transversal através da bifurcação da veia porta principal. 

O lobo caudado é uma estrutura separada que recebe o fluxo sanguíneo de ambos os ramos vasculares do lado direito e esquerdo. 

A classificação de Couinaud divide o fígado em oito segmentos hepáticos funcionalmente independentes. 

Cada segmento tem sua própria entrada vascular, saída e drenagem biliar. 

No centro de cada segmento estão ramos da veia porta, artéria hepática e ducto biliar. 

Na periferia de cada segmento há saída vascular através das veias hepáticas.

O sistema de classificação utiliza o suprimento vascular do fígado para separar as unidades funcionais (numeradas de I a VIII) com a unidade 1, o lobo caudado, recebendo seu suprimento tanto do ramo direito quanto do esquerdo da veia porta.

Contém uma ou mais veias hepáticas que drenam diretamente para a veia cava inferior.

As restantes unidades (II a VIII) são numeradas no sentido dos ponteiros do relógio:


=== Expressão de genes e proteínas ===


Cerca de 20.000 genes codificadores de proteínas são expressos em células humanas e 60% desses genes são expressos em um fígado adulto normal.

Mais de 400 genes são expressos mais especificamente no fígado, com cerca de 150 genes altamente específicos para o tecido hepático.

Uma grande fração das proteínas específicas do fígado correspondentes são expressas principalmente nos hepatócitos e secretadas no sangue e constituem proteínas plasmáticas. 

Outras proteínas específicas do fígado são certas enzimas hepáticas, como HAO1 e RDH16, proteínas envolvidas na síntese da bile, como BAAT e SLC27A5, e proteínas transportadoras envolvidas no metabolismo de drogas, como ABCB11 e SLC2A2. 

Exemplos de proteínas altamente específicas do fígado incluem apolipoproteína A II, fatores de coagulação F2 e F9, proteínas relacionadas ao fator do complemento e a proteína da cadeia beta do fibrinogênio.


== Desenvolvimento ==

A organogênese, o desenvolvimento dos órgãos, ocorre da terceira à oitava semana durante a embriogênese. 

As origens do fígado estão tanto na porção ventral do endoderma do intestino anterior (o endoderma é uma das três camadas germinativas embrionárias) quanto nos constituintes do mesênquima do septo transverso adjacente.

No embrião humano, o divertículo hepático é o tubo do endoderma que se estende do intestino anterior para o mesênquima circundante.

O mesênquima do septo transverso induz esse endoderma a proliferar, ramificar e formar o epitélio glandular do fígado.

Uma porção do divertículo hepático (aquela região mais próxima do tubo digestivo) continua a funcionar como ducto de drenagem do fígado, e um ramo desse ducto produz a vesícula biliar.

Além dos sinais do mesênquima do septo transverso, o fator de crescimento de fibroblastos do coração em desenvolvimento também contribui para a competência hepática, juntamente com o ácido retinóico emanado do mesoderma da placa lateral.

As células endodérmicas hepáticas sofrem uma transição morfológica de colunar para pseudoestratificada, resultando em espessamento no broto hepático inicial.

Sua expansão forma uma população de hepatoblastos bipotenciais.

As células estreladas hepáticas são derivadas do mesênquima. Após a migração dos hepatoblastos para o mesênquima do septo transverso, a arquitetura hepática começa a se estabelecer, aparecendo os sinusóides hepáticos e os canalículos biliares.

O broto do fígado se separa nos lobos.

A veia umbilical esquerda torna-se o ducto venoso e a veia vitelina direita torna-se a veia porta.

O broto hepático em expansão é colonizado por células hematopoiéticas. 

Os hepatoblastos bipotenciais começam a se diferenciar em células epiteliais biliares e hepatócitos. 

As células epiteliais biliares diferenciam-se dos hepatoblastos ao redor das veias porta, produzindo primeiro uma monocamada e depois uma bicamada de células cuboidais. 

Na placa ductal, dilatações focais emergem em pontos da bicamada, tornam-se circundadas pelo mesênquima portal e sofrem tubulogênese nos ductos biliares intra-hepáticos. 

Os hepatoblastos não adjacentes às veias porta diferenciam-se em hepatócitos e organizam-se em cordões revestidos por células epiteliais sinusoidais e canalículos biliares. 

Uma vez que os hepatoblastos são especificados em hepatócitos e sofrem expansão adicional, eles começam a adquirir as funções de um hepatócito maduro e, eventualmente, os hepatócitos maduros aparecem como células epiteliais altamente polarizadas com abundante acúmulo de glicogênio. 

No fígado adulto, os hepatócitos não são equivalentes, com posição ao longo do eixo portocentrovenular dentro de um lóbulo hepático ditando a expressão de genes metabólicos envolvidos no metabolismo de drogas, metabolismo de carboidratos, desintoxicação de amônia e produção e secreção de bile. 

WNT/β-catenina foi agora identificado como tendo um papel fundamental neste fenômeno. Ao nascimento, o fígado compreende cerca de 4% do peso corporal e pesa em média cerca de 120 g (4 onças). 

Ao longo do desenvolvimento, aumentará para 1,4–1,6 kg (3,1–3,5 lb), mas ocupará apenas 2,5–3,5% do peso corporal.


=== Suprimento sanguíneo fetal ===

No feto em crescimento, a principal fonte de sangue para o fígado é a veia umbilical, que fornece nutrientes ao feto em crescimento. 

A veia umbilical entra no abdome pelo umbigo e segue para cima ao longo da margem livre do ligamento falciforme do fígado até a superfície inferior do fígado. 

Lá, ele se une ao ramo esquerdo da veia porta. 

O ducto venoso transporta sangue da veia porta esquerda para a veia hepática esquerda e depois para a veia cava inferior, permitindo que o sangue placentário contorne o fígado. 

No feto, o fígado não realiza os processos digestivos e de filtração normais do fígado infantil porque os nutrientes são recebidos diretamente da mãe através da placenta. 

O fígado fetal libera algumas células-tronco sanguíneas que migram para o timo fetal, criando as células T ou linfócitos T. 

Após o nascimento, a formação de células-tronco do sangue se desloca para a medula óssea vermelha. 

Após 2 a 5 dias, a veia umbilical e o ducto venoso estão completamente obliterados; o primeiro torna-se o ligamento redondo do fígado e o último torna-se o ligamento venoso.

Nos distúrbios de cirrose e hipertensão portal, a veia umbilical pode se abrir novamente.


== Funções ==

As várias funções do fígado são realizadas pelas células hepáticas ou hepatócitos. 

Acredita-se que o fígado seja responsável por até 500 funções separadas, geralmente em combinação com outros sistemas e órgãos. 

Atualmente, nenhum órgão ou dispositivo artificial é capaz de reproduzir todas as funções do fígado. 

Algumas funções podem ser realizadas pela diálise hepática, um tratamento experimental para insuficiência hepática. 

O fígado também é responsável por cerca de 20% do consumo total de oxigênio do corpo em repouso.


=== Suprimento sanguíneo ===

O fígado recebe um suprimento sanguíneo duplo da veia porta hepática e das artérias hepáticas. 

A veia porta hepática fornece cerca de 75% do suprimento sanguíneo do fígado e transporta o sangue venoso drenado do baço, trato gastrointestinal e seus órgãos associados. 

As artérias hepáticas fornecem sangue arterial para o fígado, respondendo pelo quarto restante de seu fluxo sanguíneo. 

O oxigênio é fornecido por ambas as fontes; cerca de metade da demanda de oxigênio do fígado é atendida pela veia porta hepática e metade é atendida pelas artérias hepáticas.

A artéria hepática também possui receptores alfa e beta-adrenérgicos; portanto, o fluxo através da artéria é controlado, em parte, pelos nervos esplâncnicos do sistema nervoso autônomo.

O sangue flui através dos sinusóides hepáticos e desemboca na veia central de cada lóbulo. 

As veias centrais coalescem em veias hepáticas, que saem do fígado e drenam para a veia cava inferior.


=== Fluxo biliar ===

O trato biliar é derivado dos ramos dos ductos biliares. 

O trato biliar, também conhecido como árvore biliar, é o caminho pelo qual a bile é secretada pelo fígado e depois transportada para a primeira parte do intestino delgado, o duodeno. 

A bile produzida no fígado é coletada nos canalículos biliares, pequenos sulcos entre as faces dos hepatócitos adjacentes. 

Os canalículos irradiam para a borda do lóbulo hepático, onde se fundem para formar os ductos biliares. 

Dentro do fígado, esses ductos são denominados ductos biliares intra-hepáticos e, uma vez que saem do fígado, são considerados extra-hepáticos. 

Os ductos intra-hepáticos eventualmente drenam para os ductos hepáticos direito e esquerdo, que saem do fígado na fissura transversa e se fundem para formar o ducto hepático comum. 

O ducto cístico da vesícula biliar se une ao ducto hepático comum para formar o ducto biliar comum. 

O sistema biliar e o tecido conjuntivo são supridos apenas pela artéria hepática.

A bile drena diretamente para o duodeno através do ducto biliar comum ou é temporariamente armazenada na vesícula biliar pelo ducto cístico. 

O ducto biliar comum e o ducto pancreático entram na segunda parte do duodeno juntos na ampola hepatopancreática, também conhecida como ampola de Vater.


=== Síntese ===

O fígado desempenha um papel importante no metabolismo de carboidratos, proteínas, aminoácidos e lipídios.


==== Metabolismo de carboidratos ====

O fígado desempenha vários papéis no metabolismo de carboidratos: 

O fígado sintetiza e armazena cerca de 100g de glicogênio via glicogênese, a formação de glicogênio a partir da glicose.

Quando necessário, o fígado libera glicose no sangue realizando glicogenólise, a quebra do glicogênio em glicose.

O fígado também é responsável pela gliconeogênese, que é a síntese de glicose a partir de certos aminoácidos, lactato ou glicerol. 

As células adiposas e hepáticas produzem glicerol pela quebra da gordura, que o fígado usa para a gliconeogênese.

O fígado também faz a gliconeogênese, que é a síntese de glicogênio a partir do ácido lático.


==== Metabolismo de proteínas ====

O fígado é responsável pela base do metabolismo de proteínas, síntese e degradação. 

Todas as proteínas plasmáticas, exceto as gamaglobulinas, são sintetizadas no fígado. 

Também é responsável por grande parte da síntese de aminoácidos. 

O fígado desempenha um papel na produção de fatores de coagulação, bem como na produção de glóbulos vermelhos.

Algumas das proteínas sintetizadas pelo fígado incluem fatores de coagulação I (fibrinogênio), II (protrombina), V, VII, VIII, IX, X, XI, XII, XIII, bem como proteína C, proteína S e antitrombina.

O fígado é o principal local de produção de trombopoietina, um hormônio glicoproteico que regula a produção de plaquetas pela medula óssea.


==== Metabolismo lipídico ====

O fígado desempenha vários papéis no metabolismo lipídico: realiza a síntese do colesterol, a lipogênese e a produção de triglicerídeos, e uma grande parte das lipoproteínas do corpo é sintetizada no fígado.

O fígado desempenha um papel fundamental na digestão, pois produz e excreta a bile (um líquido amarelado) necessária para emulsionar as gorduras e ajudar na absorção da vitamina K da dieta.

Parte da bile drena diretamente para o duodeno e parte é armazenada na vesícula biliar.

O fígado produz fator de crescimento semelhante à insulina 1, um hormônio proteico polipeptídico que desempenha um papel importante no crescimento infantil e continua a ter efeitos anabólicos em adultos.


=== Divisão ===

O fígado é responsável pela quebra de insulina e outros hormônios.

O fígado degrada a bilirrubina via glucuronidação, facilitando sua excreção na bile.

O fígado é responsável pela decomposição e excreção de muitos resíduos.

Desempenha um papel fundamental na decomposição ou modificação de substâncias tóxicas (por exemplo, metilação) e na maioria dos medicamentos em um processo chamado metabolismo de drogas.

Isso às vezes resulta em intoxicação, quando o metabólito é mais tóxico que seu precursor.

De preferência, as toxinas são conjugadas para permitir a excreção na bílis ou na urina.

O fígado converte amônia em uréia como parte do ciclo da ornitina ou ciclo da uréia, e a uréia é excretada na urina.


=== Reservatório de sangue ===

Como o fígado é um órgão expansível, grandes quantidades de
sangue pode ser armazenado em seus vasos sanguíneos. 

Seu volume sanguíneo normal, incluindo tanto o das veias hepáticas quanto o dos seios hepáticos, é de cerca de 450 mililitros, ou quase 10% do volume total de sangue do corpo. 

Quando a pressão alta no átrio direito causa contrapressão no fígado, o fígado se expande e 0,5 a 1 litro de sangue extra é ocasionalmente armazenado nas veias e seios hepáticos. 

Isso ocorre especialmente na insuficiência cardíaca com congestão periférica. 

Assim, com efeito, o fígado é um órgão venoso grande, expansível, capaz de atuar como um valioso reservatório de sangue em tempos de excesso de volume sanguíneo e capaz de fornecer sangue extra em tempos de volume sanguíneo diminuído.


=== Produção de linfa ===

Como os poros nos sinusóides hepáticos são muito permeáveis ​​e permitem a passagem rápida de líquidos e proteínas para o espaço perissinusoidal, a linfa drenada do fígado geralmente tem uma concentração de proteína de cerca de 6 g/dl, que é apenas um pouco menor do que a proteína. concentração de plasma. 

Além disso, a alta permeabilidade do epitélio sinusóide do fígado permite a formação de grandes quantidades de linfa. 

Portanto, cerca de metade de toda a linfa formada no corpo em condições de repouso surge no fígado.


=== Outro ===

O fígado armazena uma grande quantidade de substâncias, incluindo vitamina A (fornecimento de 1-2 anos), vitamina D (fornecimento de 1-4 meses), vitamina B12 (fornecimento de 3-5 anos), vitamina K, vitamina E, ferro, cobre, zinco, cobalto, molibdênio, etc.

Hemopoiese - A formação de células do sangue é chamada de hemopoiese.

Na fase embrionária RBC e WBC são formados pelo fígado.

No feto do primeiro trimestre, o fígado é o principal local de produção de glóbulos vermelhos.

Na 32ª semana de gestação, a medula óssea assumiu quase completamente essa tarefa.

Fígado ajuda na purificação do sangue.

As células de Kupffer do fígado são células fagocíticas, auxilia na fagocitose de células mortas do sangue e bactérias do sangue.

O fígado é responsável pelos efeitos imunológicos – o sistema fagocitário mononuclear do fígado contém muitas células imunologicamente ativas, atuando como uma “peneira” para os antígenos transportados para ele através do sistema portal.

O fígado produz albumina, a proteína mais abundante no soro sanguíneo.

É essencial na manutenção da pressão oncótica e atua como transportador de ácidos graxos e hormônios esteroides.

O fígado sintetiza o angiotensinogênio, hormônio responsável por elevar a pressão arterial quando ativado pela renina, uma enzima que é liberada quando o rim detecta a pressão arterial baixa.

O fígado produz a enzima catalase para quebrar o peróxido de hidrogênio, um agente oxidante tóxico, em água e oxigênio.


=== Com o envelhecimento ===

A capacidade oxidativa do fígado diminui com o envelhecimento e, portanto, quaisquer medicamentos que requeiram oxidação (por exemplo, benzodiazepínicos) são mais propensos a se acumularem em níveis tóxicos.

No entanto, medicamentos com meias-vidas mais curtas, como lorazepam e oxazepam, são preferidos na maioria dos casos quando os benzodiazepínicos são necessários em relação à medicina geriátrica.


== Significado clínico ==

=== Doença ===

O fígado é um órgão vital e suporta quase todos os outros órgãos do corpo.

Devido à sua localização estratégica e funções multidimensionais, o fígado também é propenso a muitas doenças.

A área nua do fígado é um local vulnerável à passagem de infecção da cavidade abdominal para a cavidade torácica.

Doenças hepáticas podem ser diagnosticadas por testes de função hepática – exames de sangue que podem identificar vários marcadores.

Por exemplo, os reagentes de fase aguda são produzidos pelo fígado em resposta a lesão ou inflamação.

A hepatite é uma condição comum de inflamação do fígado. 

A causa mais comum disso é viral, e as mais comuns dessas infecções são as hepatites A, B, C, D e E. 

Algumas dessas infecções são sexualmente transmissíveis. 

A inflamação também pode ser causada por outros vírus da família Herpesviridae, como o vírus herpes simplex. 

A infecção crônica (em vez de aguda) pelo vírus da hepatite B ou vírus da hepatite C é a principal causa de câncer de fígado. 

Globalmente, cerca de 248 milhões de indivíduos estão cronicamente infectados com hepatite B (com 843.724 nos EUA) e 142 milhões estão cronicamente infectados com hepatite C (com 2,7 milhões nos EUA). 

Globalmente, existem cerca de 114 milhões e 20 milhões de casos de hepatite A e hepatite E, respectivamente, mas estes geralmente desaparecem e não se tornam crônicos. 

O vírus da hepatite D é um "satélite" do vírus da hepatite B (só pode infectar na presença de hepatite B) e co-infecta quase 20 milhões de pessoas com hepatite B, globalmente.

A encefalopatia hepática é causada por um acúmulo de toxinas na corrente sanguínea que normalmente são removidas pelo fígado. 

Esta condição pode resultar em coma e pode ser fatal. 

A síndrome de Budd-Chiari é uma condição causada pelo bloqueio das veias hepáticas (incluindo trombose) que drenam o fígado. 

Apresenta-se com a tríade clássica de dor abdominal, ascite e aumento do fígado. 

Muitas doenças do fígado são acompanhadas de icterícia causada pelo aumento dos níveis de bilirrubina no sistema. 

A bilirrubina resulta da quebra da hemoglobina dos glóbulos vermelhos mortos; normalmente, o fígado remove a bilirrubina do sangue e a excreta através da bile.

Outros distúrbios causados ​​pelo consumo excessivo de álcool são agrupados em doenças hepáticas alcoólicas e incluem hepatite alcoólica, fígado gorduroso e cirrose. 

Os fatores que contribuem para o desenvolvimento de doenças hepáticas alcoólicas não são apenas a quantidade e a frequência do consumo de álcool, mas também podem incluir sexo, genética e insulto hepático. 

Os danos no fígado também podem ser causados ​​por medicamentos, principalmente paracetamol e medicamentos usados ​​para tratar o câncer. 

Uma ruptura do fígado pode ser causada por uma injeção de fígado usada em esportes de combate.
A colangite biliar primária é uma doença autoimune do fígado. 

É marcada pela destruição lenta e progressiva dos pequenos ductos biliares do fígado, com os ductos intralobulares (Canais de Hering) afetados no início da doença. 

Quando esses dutos são danificados, a bile e outras toxinas se acumulam no fígado (colestase) e, com o tempo, danificam o tecido hepático em combinação com danos contínuos relacionados ao sistema imunológico. 

Isso pode levar a cicatrizes (fibrose) e cirrose. 

A cirrose aumenta a resistência ao fluxo sanguíneo no fígado e pode resultar em hipertensão portal. 

Anastomoses congestionadas entre o sistema venoso portal e a circulação sistêmica podem ser uma condição subsequente.

Existem também muitas doenças hepáticas pediátricas, incluindo atresia biliar, deficiência de alfa-1 antitripsina, síndrome de alagille, colestase intra-hepática familiar progressiva, histiocitose de células de Langerhans e hemangioma hepático, um tumor benigno o tipo mais comum de tumor hepático, considerado congênito.

Um distúrbio genético que causa a formação de múltiplos cistos no tecido hepático, geralmente mais tarde na vida e geralmente assintomático, é a doença hepática policística.

Doenças que interferem na função hepática levarão ao desarranjo desses processos.

No entanto, o fígado tem uma grande capacidade de regeneração e uma grande capacidade de reserva.

Na maioria dos casos, o fígado só produz sintomas após danos extensos.

Hepatomegalia refere-se a um fígado aumentado e pode ser devido a muitas causas.

Ele pode ser palpado em uma medição da extensão do fígado.


=== Sintomas ===

Os sintomas clássicos de dano hepático incluem o seguinte:

As fezes pálidas ocorrem quando a estercobilina, um pigmento marrom, está ausente das fezes.

A estercobilina é derivada dos metabólitos da bilirrubina produzidos no fígado.

A urina escura ocorre quando a bilirrubina se mistura com a urina

Icterícia (pele amarela e/ou branco dos olhos)

É aqui que a bilirrubina se deposita na pele, causando uma coceira intensa.

A coceira é a queixa mais comum de pessoas com insuficiência hepática.

Muitas vezes, essa coceira não pode ser aliviada por drogas.

Inchaço do abdome e inchaço dos tornozelos e pés ocorrem porque o fígado não consegue produzir albumina.

A fadiga excessiva ocorre a partir de uma perda generalizada de nutrientes, minerais e vitaminas.

Hematomas e sangramento fácil são outras características da doença hepática.

O fígado produz fatores de coagulação, substâncias que ajudam a prevenir sangramentos.

Quando ocorre dano hepático, esses fatores não estão mais presentes e pode ocorrer sangramento grave.

A dor no quadrante superior direito pode resultar do estiramento da cápsula de Glisson em condições de hepatite e pré-eclâmpsia.


=== Diagnóstico ===

O diagnóstico de doença hepática é feito por testes de função hepática, grupos de exames de sangue, que podem mostrar prontamente a extensão do dano hepático.

Se houver suspeita de infecção, outros testes sorológicos serão realizados.

Um exame físico do fígado só pode revelar seu tamanho e qualquer sensibilidade, e alguma forma de imagem, como ultrassonografia ou tomografia computadorizada, também pode ser necessária.

Às vezes, uma biópsia hepática será necessária e uma amostra de tecido é coletada através de uma agulha inserida na pele logo abaixo da caixa torácica.

Este procedimento pode ser auxiliado por um ultrassonografista fornecendo orientação por ultrassom a um radiologista intervencionista.

 
=== Regeneração do fígado ===


O fígado é o único órgão interno humano capaz de regeneração natural do tecido perdido; apenas 25% de um fígado pode se regenerar em um fígado inteiro.

Isso, no entanto, não é uma regeneração verdadeira, mas sim um crescimento compensatório em mamíferos. 

Os lobos que são removidos não crescem novamente e o crescimento do fígado é uma restauração da função, não da forma original. 

Isso contrasta com a verdadeira regeneração, onde tanto a função original quanto a forma são restauradas. 

Em algumas outras espécies, como o peixe-zebra, o fígado sofre uma verdadeira regeneração, restaurando a forma e o tamanho do órgão. 

No fígado, grandes áreas de tecidos são formadas, mas para a formação de novas células deve haver quantidade suficiente de material para que a circulação do sangue se torne mais ativa.

Isto é predominantemente devido à reentrada dos hepatócitos no ciclo celular. 

Ou seja, os hepatócitos passam da fase quiescente G0 para a fase G1 e sofrem mitose. 

Este processo é ativado pelos receptores p75. 

Há também algumas evidências de células-tronco bipotenciais, chamadas células ovais hepáticas ou ovalócitos (não confundir com eritrócitos ovais da ovalocitose), que se acredita residirem nos canais de Hering. 

Essas células podem se diferenciar em hepatócitos ou colangiócitos. 

Os colangiócitos são as células epiteliais de revestimento dos ductos biliares. 

São epitélio cúbico nos pequenos ductos biliares interlobulares, mas tornam-se colunares e secretam muco nos ductos biliares maiores, aproximando-se da porta hepatis e dos ductos extra-hepáticos. 

Pesquisas estão sendo realizadas sobre o uso de células-tronco para a geração de um fígado artificial.

Trabalhos científicos e médicos sobre a regeneração do fígado muitas vezes se referem ao titã grego Prometeu, que foi acorrentado a uma rocha no Cáucaso, onde, todos os dias, seu fígado era devorado por uma águia, apenas para voltar a crescer a cada noite.

O mito sugere que os antigos gregos podem ter conhecido a notável capacidade de auto-reparação do fígado.


=== Transplante de fígado ===

Os transplantes de fígado humano foram realizados pela primeira vez por Thomas Starzl nos Estados Unidos e Roy Calne em Cambridge, Inglaterra, em 1963 e 1967, respectivamente.

O transplante de fígado é a única opção para aqueles com insuficiência hepática irreversível.

A maioria dos transplantes é feita para doenças hepáticas crônicas que levam à cirrose, como hepatite C crônica, alcoolismo e hepatite autoimune.

Menos comumente, o transplante de fígado é feito para insuficiência hepática fulminante, na qual a insuficiência hepática ocorre ao longo de dias a semanas.

Os aloenxertos de fígado para transplante geralmente vêm de doadores que morreram de lesão cerebral fatal.

O transplante de fígado de doador vivo é uma técnica na qual uma porção do fígado de uma pessoa viva é removida (hepatectomia) e usada para substituir todo o fígado do receptor.

Isso foi realizado pela primeira vez em 1989 para transplante de fígado pediátrico.

Apenas 20 por cento do fígado de um adulto (segmentos Couinaud 2 e 3) é necessário para servir como um aloenxerto de fígado para um bebê ou criança pequena.

Mais recentemente, o transplante de fígado de adulto para adulto foi feito usando o lobo hepático direito do doador, que equivale a 60% do fígado.

Devido à capacidade do fígado de se regenerar, tanto o doador quanto o receptor acabam com função hepática normal se tudo correr bem.

Esse procedimento é mais controverso, pois envolve a realização de uma operação muito maior no doador e, de fato, houve pelo menos duas mortes de doadores nas primeiras centenas de casos.

Uma publicação de 2006 abordou o problema da mortalidade de doadores e encontrou pelo menos quatorze casos.

O risco de complicações pós-operatórias (e morte) é muito maior nas operações do lado direito do que nas operações do lado esquerdo.

Com os recentes avanços da imagem não invasiva, os doadores vivos de fígado geralmente precisam passar por exames de imagem da anatomia do fígado para decidir se a anatomia é viável para doação.

A avaliação geralmente é realizada por tomografia computadorizada multidetectores (TCMD) e ressonância magnética (RM).

MDCT é bom em anatomia vascular e volumetria.

A ressonância magnética é usada para a anatomia da árvore biliar.

Doadores com anatomia vascular muito incomum, o que os torna inadequados para doação, podem ser selecionados para evitar operações desnecessárias.


== Sociedade e cultura ==

Algumas culturas consideram o fígado como a sede da alma.

Na mitologia grega, os deuses puniram Prometeu por revelar o fogo aos humanos, acorrentando-o a uma rocha onde um abutre (ou uma águia) bicava seu fígado, que se regenerava da noite para o dia.

(O fígado é o único órgão interno humano que realmente pode se regenerar de forma significativa.)

Muitos povos antigos do Oriente Próximo e do Mediterrâneo praticavam um tipo de adivinhação chamado haruspicia ou hepatomancia, onde tentavam obter informações examinando os fígados de ovelhas e outros animais.

Em Platão, e na fisiologia posterior, pensava-se que o fígado era a sede das emoções mais sombrias (especificamente ira, ciúme e ganância) que levam os homens à ação.

O Talmud (tratado Berakhot 61b) refere-se ao fígado como a sede da raiva, com a vesícula biliar neutralizando isso.

As línguas persa, urdu e hindi (جگر ou jigar) referem-se ao discurso figurativo do fígado para indicar coragem e sentimentos fortes, ou "seu melhor"; por exemplo, "Esta Meca jogou para você os pedaços de seu fígado!".

O termo jan e jigar, literalmente "a força (poder) do meu fígado", é um termo carinhoso em Urdu.

Na gíria persa, jigar é usado como adjetivo para qualquer objeto que seja desejável, especialmente mulheres.

Na língua zulu, a palavra para fígado (isibindi) é a mesma palavra para coragem.

Em inglês, o termo 'lily-livered' é usado para indicar covardia da crença medieval de que o fígado era a sede da coragem.
Espanhol hígados também significa "coragem".

No entanto, o significado secundário de gibel basco é "indolência". No hebraico bíblico, a palavra para fígado, כבד (Kauved, derivado KBD ou KVD, semelhante ao árabe الكبد), também significa pesado e é usado para descrever os ricos ("pesados" com posses) e honra (presumivelmente pelo mesmo motivo). 

No Livro das Lamentações (2:11) é usado para descrever as respostas fisiológicas à tristeza por "meu fígado derramado na terra" junto com o fluxo de lágrimas e a reviravolta em amargura dos intestinos. 

Em várias ocasiões no livro dos Salmos (mais notavelmente 16:9), a palavra é usada para descrever a felicidade no fígado, junto com o coração (que bate rapidamente) e a carne (que aparece vermelha sob a pele).

O uso adicional como o eu (semelhante a "sua honra") está amplamente disponível em todo o Antigo Testamento, às vezes comparado à alma que respira (Gênesis 49:6, Salmos 7:6, etc.).

Um chapéu honroso também foi referido com esta palavra (Jó 19:9, etc.) e sob essa definição aparece muitas vezes junto com פאר Pe'er - grandeza.

Esses quatro significados foram usados ​​em línguas semíticas anteriores, como o acadiano e o egípcio antigo, preservados na língua ge'ez etíope clássica.


=== Comida ===


Os humanos geralmente comem os fígados de mamíferos, aves e peixes como alimento.

Fígados domésticos de porco, boi, cordeiro, bezerro, galinha e ganso estão amplamente disponíveis em açougues e supermercados. 

Nas línguas românicas, a palavra anatômica para "fígado" (francês foie, espanhol hígado, etc.) de gansos que haviam sido engordados com figos. 

Os fígados de animais são ricos em ferro, vitamina A e vitamina B12; e o óleo de fígado de bacalhau é comumente usado como suplemento dietético.

O fígado pode ser assado, cozido, grelhado, frito, frito ou comido cru (asbeh nayeh ou sawda naye na culinária libanesa, ou sashimi de fígado na culinária japonesa). 

Em muitas preparações, pedaços de fígado são combinados com pedaços de carne ou rins, como nas várias formas de grelhados mistos do Oriente Médio (por exemplo, meurav Yerushalmi). 

Exemplos bem conhecidos incluem patê de fígado, foie gras, fígado picado e LeverPastej. 

Salsichas de fígado, como Braunschweiger e linguiça de fígado, também são uma refeição valiosa. 

As salsichas de fígado também podem ser usadas como cremes para barrar. 

Uma iguaria tradicional sul-africana, skilpadjies, é feita de fígado de cordeiro picado envolto em netvet (gordura de caul) e grelhado em fogo aberto. 

Tradicionalmente, alguns fígados de peixes eram valorizados como alimento, especialmente o fígado de arraia. 

Foi usado para preparar iguarias, como fígado de raia escalfado na torrada na Inglaterra, bem como os beignets de foie de raie e foie de raie en croute na culinária francesa.


=== Fígado de girafa ===

Os Humr, uma das tribos do grupo étnico Baggara, nativa do sudoeste do Cordofão no Sudão e falantes de Shuwa ou árabe chadiano, preparam uma bebida não alcoólica do fígado e da medula óssea da girafa que eles chamam de umm nyolokh, e que eles afirmam ser intoxicante (árabe سكران sakran), causando sonhos e até mesmo alucinações. 

O antropólogo Ian Cunnison, que acompanhou o Humr em uma de suas expedições de caça às girafas no final da década de 1950, observa que:

Diz-se que uma pessoa, uma vez que tenha bebido umm nyolokh, retornará à girafa de novo e de novo. 

Humr, sendo mahdistas, são abstêmios estritos [de álcool] e um Humrawi nunca está bêbado (sakran) com licor ou cerveja. 

Mas ele usa esta palavra para descrever os efeitos que umm nyolokh tem sobre ele.

O notável relato de Cunnison de um mamífero aparentemente psicoativo encontrou o caminho de um artigo científico um tanto obscuro para a literatura mais convencional através de uma conversa entre o Dr. 

Wendy James do Instituto de Antropologia Social e Cultural da Universidade de Oxford e especialista no uso de alucinógenos e intoxicantes na sociedade Richard Rudgley, que considerou suas implicações em seu popular trabalho The Encyclopedia of Psychoactive Substances. 

Rudgley supõe que a presença do composto alucinógeno DMT pode explicar as propriedades intoxicantes putativas de umm nyolokh. O próprio Cunnison, por outro lado, achou difícil acreditar totalmente na verdade literal da afirmação do Humr de que sua bebida era intoxicante:

Só posso supor que não há substância intoxicante na bebida e que o efeito que ela produz é simplesmente uma questão de convenção, embora possa ser produzido inconscientemente.

O estudo de enteógenos em geral - incluindo enteógenos de origem animal (por exemplo, peixes alucinógenos e veneno de sapo) - tem, no entanto, feito progressos consideráveis ​​nos sessenta e poucos anos desde o relatório de Cunnison e a ideia de que algum princípio intoxicante pode residir no fígado da girafa. já parece tão improvável quanto na época de Cunnison, embora uma prova conclusiva (ou refutação) tenha que aguardar análises detalhadas do órgão animal em questão e da bebida preparada a partir dele.


=== Flecha / veneno de bala ===

Certos povos tungúsicos preparavam antigamente um tipo de veneno de flecha a partir de fígados de animais apodrecidos, que foi, em tempos posteriores, também aplicado a balas.

O antropólogo russo Sergei Mikhailovich Shirokogorov observa que: Antigamente o uso de flechas envenenadas era comum.

Por exemplo, entre os Kumarčen, [um subgrupo dos Oroqen] mesmo em tempos recentes foi usado um veneno que foi preparado a partir de fígado em decomposição.

Isto foi confirmado pelo Kumarčen.

Não sou competente para julgar as condições químicas de produção de veneno que não é destruído pelo calor da explosão.

No entanto, os próprios tungus comparam esse método [de envenenamento de munição] com o envenenamento de flechas.


== Outros animais ==

O fígado é encontrado em todos os vertebrados e é tipicamente o maior órgão interno.

Sua forma varia consideravelmente em diferentes espécies e é amplamente determinada pela forma e disposição dos órgãos circundantes.

No entanto, na maioria das espécies é dividido em lobos direito e esquerdo; exceções a esta regra geral incluem cobras, onde a forma do corpo requer uma forma simples semelhante a um charuto.

A estrutura interna do fígado é amplamente semelhante em todos os vertebrados.

Um órgão às vezes chamado de fígado é encontrado associado ao trato digestivo do cordado primitivo Amphioxus.

Embora desempenhe muitas funções de um fígado, não é considerado um fígado verdadeiro, mas um homólogo do fígado de vertebrados.

O ceco hepático do anfioxo produz as proteínas específicas do fígado vitelogenina, antitrombina, plasminogênio, alanina aminotransferase e fator de crescimento semelhante à insulina (IGF).



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Liver
