

LYMPHOID ORGANS


    -Primary lymphoid organs
        -Red bone marrows
        -Thymus
    -Secondary lymphoid organs
        -Spleen
        -Pharyngeal lymphoid ring
        -Lymph nodes


LYMPHATIC SYSTEM


The lymphatic system, or lymphoid system, is an organ system in vertebrates that is part of the circulatory system and the immune system. 

It is made up of a large network of lymph, lymphatic vessels, lymph nodes, lymphatic or lymphoid organs, and lymphoid tissues. 

The vessels carry a clear fluid called lymph (the Latin word lympha refers to the deity of fresh water, "Lympha") towards the heart.

Unlike the cardiovascular system, the lymphatic system is not a closed system. 

The human circulatory system processes an average of 20 litres of blood per day through capillary filtration, which removes plasma from the blood. 

Roughly 17 litres of the filtered blood is reabsorbed directly into the blood vessels, while the remaining three litres are left in the interstitial fluid. 

One of the main functions of the lymphatic system is to provide an accessory return route to the blood for the surplus three litres.

The other main function is that of immune defense. 

Lymph is very similar to blood plasma, in that it contains waste products and cellular debris, together with bacteria and proteins. 

The cells of the lymph are mostly lymphocytes. 

Associated lymphoid organs are composed of lymphoid tissue, and are the sites either of lymphocyte production or of lymphocyte activation. 

These include the lymph nodes (where the highest lymphocyte concentration is found), the spleen, the thymus, and the tonsils. 

Lymphocytes are initially generated in the bone marrow. 

The lymphoid organs also contain other types of cells such as stromal cells for support. 

Lymphoid tissue is also associated with mucosas such as mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT).Fluid from circulating blood leaks into the tissues of the body by capillary action, carrying nutrients to the cells. 

The fluid bathes the tissues as interstitial fluid, collecting waste products, bacteria, and damaged cells, and then drains as lymph into the lymphatic capillaries and lymphatic vessels. 

These vessels carry the lymph throughout the body, passing through numerous lymph nodes which filter out unwanted materials such as bacteria and damaged cells. 

Lymph then passes into much larger lymph vessels known as lymph ducts. 

The right lymphatic duct drains the right side of the region and the much larger left lymphatic duct, known as the thoracic duct, drains the left side of the body. 

The ducts empty into the subclavian veins to return to the blood circulation. 

Lymph is moved through the system by muscle contractions. 

In some vertebrates, a lymph heart is present that pumps the lymph to the veins.

The lymphatic system was first described in the 17th century independently by Olaus Rudbeck and Thomas Bartholin.


== Structure ==


The lymphatic system consists of a conducting network of lymphatic vessels, lymphoid organs, lymphoid tissues, and the circulating lymph.


=== Primary lymphoid organs ===

The primary (or central) lymphoid organs generate lymphocytes from immature progenitor cells. 

The thymus and the bone marrow constitute the primary lymphoid organs involved in the production and early clonal selection of lymphocyte tissues.


==== Bone marrow ====

Bone marrow is responsible for both the creation of T cell precursors and the production and maturation of B cells, which are important cell types of the immune system. 

From the bone marrow, B cells immediately join the circulatory system and travel to secondary lymphoid organs in search of pathogens. 

T cells, on the other hand, travel from the bone marrow to the thymus, where they develop further and mature. 

Mature T cells then join B cells in search of pathogens. 

The other 95% of T cells begin a process of apoptosis, a form of programmed cell death.


==== Thymus ====

The thymus increases in size from birth in response to postnatal antigen stimulation. 

It is most active during the neonatal and pre-adolescent periods. 

At puberty, by the early teens, the thymus begins to atrophy and regress, with adipose tissue mostly replacing the thymic stroma. 

However, residual T lymphopoiesis continues throughout adult life. 

The loss or lack of the thymus results in severe immunodeficiency and subsequent high susceptibility to infection. 

In most species, the thymus consists of lobules divided by septa which are made up of epithelium; it is therefore often considered an epithelial organ. 

T cells mature from thymocytes, proliferate, and undergo a selection process in the thymic cortex before entering the medulla to interact with epithelial cells.

The thymus provides an inductive environment for the development of T cells from hematopoietic progenitor cells. 

In addition, thymic stromal cells allow for the selection of a functional and self-tolerant T cell repertoire. 

Therefore, one of the most important roles of the thymus is the induction of central tolerance.


=== Secondary lymphoid organs ===

The secondary (or peripheral) lymphoid organs (SLO), which include lymph nodes and the spleen, maintain mature naive lymphocytes and initiate an adaptive immune response. 

The secondary lymphoid organs are the sites of lymphocyte activation by antigens. 

Activation leads to clonal expansion and affinity maturation. 

Mature lymphocytes recirculate between the blood and the secondary lymphoid organs until they encounter their specific antigen.


==== Spleen ====

The main functions of the spleen are:

to produce immune cells to fight antigens
to remove particulate matter and aged blood cells, mainly red blood cells to produce blood cells during fetal life.

The spleen synthesizes antibodies in its white pulp and removes antibody-coated bacteria and antibody-coated blood cells by way of blood and lymph node circulation. 

A study published in 2009 using mice found that the spleen contains, in its reserve, half of the body's monocytes within the red pulp. 

These monocytes, upon moving to injured tissue (such as the heart), turn into dendritic cells and macrophages while promoting tissue healing. 

The spleen is a center of activity of the mononuclear phagocyte system and can be considered analogous to a large lymph node, as its absence causes a predisposition to certain infections.

Like the thymus, the spleen has only efferent lymphatic vessels. 

Both the short gastric arteries and the splenic artery supply it with blood. 

The germinal centers are supplied by arterioles called penicilliary radicles.Until the fifth month of prenatal development, the spleen creates red blood cells; after birth, the bone marrow is solely responsible for hematopoiesis. 

As a major lymphoid organ and a central player in the reticuloendothelial system, the spleen retains the ability to produce lymphocytes. 

The spleen stores red blood cells and lymphocytes. 

It can store enough blood cells to help in an emergency. 

Up to 25% of lymphocytes can be stored at any one time.


==== Lymph nodes ====

A lymph node is an organized collection of lymphoid tissue, through which the lymph passes on its way back to the blood. 

Lymph nodes are located at intervals along the lymphatic system. 

Several afferent lymph vessels bring in lymph, which percolates through the substance of the lymph node, and is then drained out by an efferent lymph vessel. 

Of the nearly 800 lymph nodes in the human body, about 300 are located in the head and neck. 

Many are grouped in clusters in different regions, as in the underarm and abdominal areas. 

Lymph node clusters are commonly found at the proximal ends of limbs (groin, armpits) and in the neck, where lymph is collected from regions of the body likely to sustain pathogen contamination from injuries. 

Lymph nodes are particularly numerous in the mediastinum in the chest, neck, pelvis, axilla, inguinal region, and in association with the blood vessels of the intestines.

The substance of a lymph node consists of lymphoid follicles in an outer portion called the cortex. 

The inner portion of the node is called the medulla, which is surrounded by the cortex on all sides except for a portion known as the hilum. 

The hilum presents as a depression on the surface of the lymph node, causing the otherwise spherical lymph node to be bean-shaped or ovoid. 

The efferent lymph vessel directly emerges from the lymph node at the hilum. 

The arteries and veins supplying the lymph node with blood enter and exit through the hilum. 

The region of the lymph node called the paracortex immediately surrounds the medulla. 

Unlike the cortex, which has mostly immature T cells, or thymocytes, the paracortex has a mixture of immature and mature T cells. 

Lymphocytes enter the lymph nodes through specialised high endothelial venules found in the paracortex.

A lymph follicle is a dense collection of lymphocytes, the number, size, and configuration of which change in accordance with the functional state of the lymph node. 

For example, the follicles expand significantly when encountering a foreign antigen. 

The selection of B cells, or B lymphocytes, occurs in the germinal centre of the lymph nodes.

Secondary lymphoid tissue provides the environment for the foreign or altered native molecules (antigens) to interact with the lymphocytes. 

It is exemplified by the lymph nodes, and the lymphoid follicles in tonsils, Peyer's patches, spleen, adenoids, skin, etc. that are associated with the mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT).

In the gastrointestinal wall, the appendix has mucosa resembling that of the colon, but here it is heavily infiltrated with lymphocytes.


=== Tertiary lymphoid organs ===

Tertiary lymphoid organs (TLOs) are abnormal lymph node-like structures that form in peripheral tissues at sites of chronic inflammation, such as chronic infection, transplanted organs undergoing graft rejection, some cancers, and autoimmune and autoimmune-related diseases. 

TLOs are regulated differently from the normal process whereby lymphoid tissues are formed during ontogeny, being dependent on cytokines and hematopoietic cells, but still drain interstitial fluid and transport lymphocytes in response to the same chemical messengers and gradients. 

TLOs typically contain far fewer lymphocytes, and assume an immune role only when challenged with antigens that result in inflammation. 

They achieve this by importing the lymphocytes from blood and lymph. 

TLOs often have an active germinal center, surrounded by a network of follicular dendritic cells (FDCs).

TLOs are thought to play an important role in the immune response to cancer and to have possible implications in immunotherapy. 

They have been observed in a number of cancer types such as melanoma, non-small cell lung cancer and colorectal cancer (reviewed in ) as well as glioma. 

Patients with TLOs in the vicinity of their tumors tend to have a better prognosis, although the opposite is true for certain cancers. 

TLOs that contain an active germinal center tend to have a better prognosis than those with TLOs without a germinal center. 

The reason that these patients tend to live longer is thought to be the immune response against the tumor, which is mediated by the TLOs. 

TLOs may also promote an anti-tumor response when patients are treated with immunotherapy. 

TLOs have been referred to in many different ways, including as tertiary lymphoid structures (TLS) and ectopic lymphoid structures (ELS). 

When associated with colorectal cancer, they are often referred to as a Crohn's-like lymphoid reaction.


=== Other lymphoid tissue ===

Lymphoid tissue associated with the lymphatic system is concerned with immune functions in defending the body against infections and the spread of tumours. 

It consists of connective tissue formed of reticular fibers, with various types of leukocytes (white blood cells), mostly lymphocytes enmeshed in it, through which the lymph passes. 

Regions of the lymphoid tissue that are densely packed with lymphocytes are known as lymphoid follicles. 

Lymphoid tissue can either be structurally well organized as lymph nodes or may consist of loosely organized lymphoid follicles known as the mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT).

The central nervous system also has lymphatic vessels. 

The search for T cell gateways into and out of the meninges uncovered functional meningeal lymphatic vessels lining the dural sinuses, anatomically integrated into the membrane surrounding the brain.


=== Lymphatic vessels ===


The lymphatic vessels, also called lymph vessels, are thin-walled vessels that conduct lymph between different parts of the body. 

They include the tubular vessels of the lymph capillaries, and the larger collecting vessels–the right lymphatic duct and the thoracic duct (the left lymphatic duct). 

The lymph capillaries are mainly responsible for the absorption of interstitial fluid from the tissues, while lymph vessels propel the absorbed fluid forward into the larger collecting ducts, where it ultimately returns to the bloodstream via one of the subclavian veins.

The tissues of the lymphatic system are responsible for maintaining the balance of the body fluids. 

Its network of capillaries and collecting lymphatic vessels work to efficiently drain and transport extravasated fluid, along with proteins and antigens, back to the circulatory system. 

Numerous intraluminal valves in the vessels ensure a unidirectional flow of lymph without reflux. 

Two valve systems, a primary and a secondary valve system, are used to achieve this unidirectional flow. 

The capillaries are blind-ended, and the valves at the ends of capillaries use specialised junctions together with anchoring filaments to allow a unidirectional flow to the primary vessels. 

The collecting lymphatics, however, act to propel the lymph by the combined actions of the intraluminal valves and lymphatic muscle cells.


== Development ==

Lymphatic tissues begin to develop by the end of the fifth week of embryonic development. 

Lymphatic vessels develop from lymph sacs that arise from developing veins, which are derived from mesoderm.

The first lymph sacs to appear are the paired jugular lymph sacs at the junction of the internal jugular and subclavian veins. 

From the jugular lymph sacs, lymphatic capillary plexuses spread to the thorax, upper limbs, neck, and head. 

Some of the plexuses enlarge and form lymphatic vessels in their respective regions. 

Each jugular lymph sac retains at least one connection with its jugular vein, the left one developing into the superior portion of the thoracic duct.

The next lymph sac to appear is the unpaired retroperitoneal lymph sac at the root of the mesentery of the intestine. 

It develops from the primitive vena cava and mesonephric veins. 

Capillary plexuses and lymphatic vessels spread from the retroperitoneal lymph sac to the abdominal viscera and diaphragm. 

The sac establishes connections with the cisterna chyli but loses its connections with neighbouring veins.

The last of the lymph sacs, the paired posterior lymph sacs, develop from the iliac veins. 

The posterior lymph sacs produce capillary plexuses and lymphatic vessels of the abdominal wall, pelvic region, and lower limbs. 

The posterior lymph sacs join the cisterna chyli and lose their connections with adjacent veins.

With the exception of the anterior part of the sac from which the cisterna chyli develops, all lymph sacs become invaded by mesenchymal cells and are converted into groups of lymph nodes.

The spleen develops from mesenchymal cells between layers of the dorsal mesentery of the stomach. 

The thymus arises as an outgrowth of the third pharyngeal pouch.


== Function ==

The lymphatic system has multiple interrelated functions:

It is responsible for the removal of interstitial fluid from tissues

It absorbs and transports fatty acids and fats as chyle from the digestive system.

It transports white blood cells to and from the lymph nodes into the bones.

The lymph transports antigen-presenting cells, such as dendritic cells, to the lymph nodes where an immune response is stimulated.


=== Fat absorption ===


Lymph vessels called lacteals are at the beginning of the gastrointestinal tract, predominantly in the small intestine. 

While most other nutrients absorbed by the small intestine are passed on to the portal venous system to drain via the portal vein into the liver for processing, fats (lipids) are passed on to the lymphatic system to be transported to the blood circulation via the thoracic duct. 

(There are exceptions, for example medium-chain triglycerides are fatty acid esters of glycerol that passively diffuse from the GI tract to the portal system.) 

The enriched lymph originating in the lymphatics of the small intestine is called chyle. 

The nutrients that are released into the circulatory system are processed by the liver, having passed through the systemic circulation.


=== Immune function ===


The lymphatic system plays a major role in the body's immune system, as the primary site for cells relating to adaptive immune system including T-cells and B-cells. 

Cells in the lymphatic system react to antigens presented or found by the cells directly or by other dendritic cells. 

When an antigen is recognized, an immunological cascade begins involving the activation and recruitment of more and more cells, the production of antibodies and cytokines and the recruitment of other immunological cells such as macrophages.


== Clinical significance ==

The study of lymphatic drainage of various organs is important in the diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment of cancer. 

The lymphatic system, because of its closeness to many tissues of the body, is responsible for carrying cancerous cells between the various parts of the body in a process called metastasis. 

The intervening lymph nodes can trap the cancer cells. 

If they are not successful in destroying the cancer cells the nodes may become sites of secondary tumours.


=== Enlarged lymph nodes ===

Lymphadenopathy refers to one or more enlarged lymph nodes. 

Small groups or individually enlarged lymph nodes are generally reactive in response to infection or inflammation. 

This is called local lymphadenopathy. 

When many lymph nodes in different areas of the body are involved, this is called generalised lymphadenopathy. 

Generalised lymphadenopathy may be caused by infections such as infectious mononucleosis, tuberculosis and HIV, connective tissue diseases such as SLE and rheumatoid arthritis, and cancers, including both cancers of tissue within lymph nodes, discussed below, and metastasis of cancerous cells from other parts of the body, that have arrived via the lymphatic system.


=== Lymphedema ===

Lymphedema is the swelling caused by the accumulation of lymph, which may occur if the lymphatic system is damaged or has malformations. 

It usually affects limbs, though the face, neck and abdomen may also be affected. 

In an extreme state, called elephantiasis, the edema progresses to the extent that the skin becomes thick with an appearance similar to the skin on elephant limbs.

Causes are unknown in most cases, but sometimes there is a previous history of severe infection, usually caused by a parasitic disease, such as lymphatic filariasis.

Lymphangiomatosis is a disease involving multiple cysts or lesions formed from lymphatic vessels.

Lymphedema can also occur after surgical removal of lymph nodes in the armpit (causing the arm to swell due to poor lymphatic drainage) or groin (causing swelling of the leg). 

Conventional treatment is by manual lymphatic drainage and compression garments. 

Two drugs for the treatment of lymphedema are in clinical trials: Lymfactin and Ubenimex/Bestatin.

There is no evidence to suggest that the effects of manual lymphatic drainage are permanent.


=== Cancer ===

Cancer of the lymphatic system can be primary or secondary. 

Lymphoma refers to cancer that arises from lymphatic tissue. 

Lymphoid leukaemias and lymphomas are now considered to be tumours of the same type of cell lineage. 

They are called "leukaemia" when in the blood or marrow and "lymphoma" when in lymphatic tissue. 

They are grouped together under the name "lymphoid malignancy".Lymphoma is generally considered as either Hodgkin lymphoma or non-Hodgkin lymphoma. 

Hodgkin lymphoma is characterised by a particular type of cell, called a Reed–Sternberg cell, visible under microscope. 

It is associated with past infection with the Epstein–Barr virus, and generally causes a painless "rubbery" lymphadenopathy. 

It is staged, using Ann Arbor staging. 

Chemotherapy generally involves the ABVD and may also involve radiotherapy. 

Non-Hodgkin lymphoma is a cancer characterised by increased proliferation of B-cells or T-cells, generally occurs in an older age group than Hodgkin lymphoma. 

It is treated according to whether it is high-grade or low-grade, and carries a poorer prognosis than Hodgkin lymphoma.

Lymphangiosarcoma is a malignant soft tissue tumour, whereas lymphangioma is a benign tumour occurring frequently in association with Turner syndrome. 

Lymphangioleiomyomatosis is a benign tumour of the smooth muscles of the lymphatics that occurs in the lungs.

Lymphoid leukaemia is another form of cancer where the host is devoid of different lymphatic cells.


=== Other ===



== History ==

Hippocrates, in the 5th century BC, was one of the first people to mention the lymphatic system. 

In his work On Joints, he briefly mentioned the lymph nodes in one sentence. 

Rufus of Ephesus, a Roman physician, identified the axillary, inguinal and mesenteric lymph nodes as well as the thymus during the 1st to 2nd century AD. 

The first mention of lymphatic vessels was in the 3rd century BC by Herophilos, a Greek anatomist living in Alexandria, who incorrectly concluded that the "absorptive veins of the lymphatics," by which he meant the lacteals (lymph vessels of the intestines), drained into the hepatic portal veins, and thus into the liver. 

The findings of Ruphus and Herophilos were further propagated by the Greek physician Galen, who described the lacteals and mesenteric lymph nodes which he observed in his dissection of apes and pigs in the 2nd century AD.

In the mid 16th century, Gabriele Falloppio (discoverer of the fallopian tubes), described what is now known as the lacteals as "coursing over the intestines full of yellow matter." 

In about 1563 Bartolomeo Eustachi, a professor of anatomy, described the thoracic duct in horses as vena alba thoracis. 

The next breakthrough came when in 1622 a physician, Gaspare Aselli, identified lymphatic vessels of the intestines in dogs and termed them venae albae et lacteae, which are now known as simply the lacteals. 

The lacteals were termed the fourth kind of vessels (the other three being the artery, vein and nerve, which was then believed to be a type of vessel), and disproved Galen's assertion that chyle was carried by the veins. 

But, he still believed that the lacteals carried the chyle to the liver (as taught by Galen). 

He also identified the thoracic duct but failed to notice its connection with the lacteals. 

This connection was established by Jean Pecquet in 1651, who found a white fluid mixing with blood in a dog's heart. 

He suspected that fluid to be chyle as its flow increased when abdominal pressure was applied. 

He traced this fluid to the thoracic duct, which he then followed to a chyle-filled sac he called the chyli receptaculum, which is now known as the cisternae chyli; further investigations led him to find that lacteals' contents enter the venous system via the thoracic duct. 

Thus, it was proven convincingly that the lacteals did not terminate in the liver, thus disproving Galen's second idea: that the chyle flowed to the liver. 

Johann Veslingius drew the earliest sketches of the lacteals in humans in 1647.

The idea that blood recirculates through the body rather than being produced anew by the liver and the heart was first accepted as a result of works of William Harvey—a work he published in 1628. 

In 1652, Olaus Rudbeck (1630–1702), a Swede, discovered certain transparent vessels in the liver that contained clear fluid (and not white), and thus named them hepatico-aqueous vessels. 

He also learned that they emptied into the thoracic duct and that they had valves. 

He announced his findings in the court of Queen Christina of Sweden, but did not publish his findings for a year, and in the interim similar findings were published by Thomas Bartholin, who additionally published that such vessels are present everywhere in the body, not just in the liver. 

He is also the one to have named them "lymphatic vessels." This had resulted in a bitter dispute between one of Bartholin's pupils, Martin Bogdan, and Rudbeck, whom he accused of plagiarism.

Galen's ideas prevailed in medicine until the 17th century. 

It was thought that blood was produced by the liver from chyle contaminated with ailments by the intestine and stomach, to which various spirits were added by other organs, and that this blood was consumed by all the organs of the body. 

This theory required that the blood be consumed and produced many times over. 

Even in the 17th century, his ideas were defended by some physicians.

Alexander Monro, of the University of Edinburgh Medical School, was the first to describe the function of the lymphatic system in detail.

		
=== Etymology ===

Lymph originates in the Classical Latin word lympha "water", which is also the source of the English word limpid. 

The spelling with y and ph was influenced by folk etymology with Greek νύμϕη (nýmphē) "nymph".

The adjective used for the lymph-transporting system is lymphatic. 

The adjective used for the tissues where lymphocytes are formed is lymphoid. 

Lymphatic comes from the Latin word lymphaticus, meaning "connected to water."



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lymphatic_system
;;;ES;;;



ÓRGANOS LINFOIDES


-Órganos linfoides primarios
-Tuétanos rojos
-timo
-Órganos linfoides secundarios
-Bazo
-Anillo linfoide faríngeo
-Los ganglios linfáticos


SISTEMA LINFÁTICO


El sistema linfático, o sistema linfoide, es un sistema de órganos en los vertebrados que forma parte del sistema circulatorio y del sistema inmunitario.

Está formado por una gran red de linfa, vasos linfáticos, ganglios linfáticos, órganos linfáticos o linfoides y tejidos linfoides.

Los vasos transportan un líquido claro llamado linfa (la palabra latina linfa se refiere a la deidad del agua dulce, "Lympha") hacia el corazón.

A diferencia del sistema cardiovascular, el sistema linfático no es un sistema cerrado.

El sistema circulatorio humano procesa una media de 20 litros de sangre al día a través de la filtración capilar, que elimina el plasma de la sangre. 

Aproximadamente 17 litros de la sangre filtrada se reabsorben directamente en los vasos sanguíneos, mientras que los tres litros restantes quedan en el líquido intersticial. 

Una de las principales funciones del sistema linfático es proporcionar una vía accesoria de retorno a la sangre para los tres litros sobrantes.

La otra función principal es la de defensa inmunológica. 

La linfa es muy similar al plasma sanguíneo, ya que contiene productos de desecho y desechos celulares, junto con bacterias y proteínas. 

Las células de la linfa son en su mayoría linfocitos. 

Los órganos linfoides asociados están compuestos de tejido linfoide y son los sitios de producción de linfocitos o de activación de linfocitos. 

Estos incluyen los ganglios linfáticos (donde se encuentra la mayor concentración de linfocitos), el bazo, el timo y las amígdalas.

Los linfocitos se generan inicialmente en la médula ósea.

Los órganos linfoides también contienen otros tipos de células, como las células del estroma, como apoyo.

El tejido linfoide también está asociado con mucosas como el tejido linfoide asociado a mucosas (MALT). El líquido de la sangre circulante se filtra hacia los tejidos del cuerpo por acción capilar, transportando nutrientes a las células.

El líquido baña los tejidos como líquido intersticial, recolectando productos de desecho, bacterias y células dañadas, y luego drena como linfa en los capilares y vasos linfáticos.

Estos vasos transportan la linfa por todo el cuerpo, pasando a través de numerosos ganglios linfáticos que filtran materiales no deseados, como bacterias y células dañadas.

Luego, la linfa pasa a vasos linfáticos mucho más grandes conocidos como conductos linfáticos. 

El conducto linfático derecho drena el lado derecho de la región y el conducto linfático izquierdo mucho más grande, conocido como conducto torácico, drena el lado izquierdo del cuerpo. 

Los conductos desembocan en las venas subclavias para volver a la circulación sanguínea. 

La linfa se mueve a través del sistema mediante contracciones musculares. 

En algunos vertebrados, existe un corazón linfático que bombea la linfa a las venas.

El sistema linfático fue descrito por primera vez en el siglo XVII de forma independiente por Olaus Rudbeck y Thomas Bartholin.


== Estructura ==


El sistema linfático consta de una red conductora de vasos linfáticos, órganos linfoides, tejidos linfoides y la linfa circulante.


=== Órganos linfoides primarios ===

Los órganos linfoides primarios (o centrales) generan linfocitos a partir de células progenitoras inmaduras. 

El timo y la médula ósea constituyen los órganos linfoides primarios involucrados en la producción y selección clonal temprana de tejidos de linfocitos.


==== Médula ósea ====

La médula ósea es responsable tanto de la creación de precursores de células T como de la producción y maduración de células B, que son tipos de células importantes del sistema inmunitario.

Desde la médula ósea, las células B se incorporan inmediatamente al sistema circulatorio y viajan a los órganos linfoides secundarios en busca de patógenos.

Las células T, por otro lado, viajan desde la médula ósea hasta el timo, donde se desarrollan y maduran.

Luego, las células T maduras se unen a las células B en busca de patógenos.

El otro 95% de las células T comienzan un proceso de apoptosis, una forma de muerte celular programada.


==== Timo ====

El timo aumenta de tamaño desde el nacimiento en respuesta a la estimulación antigénica posnatal.

Es más activo durante los períodos neonatal y preadolescente. 

En la pubertad, al comienzo de la adolescencia, el timo comienza a atrofiarse y retroceder, y el tejido adiposo reemplaza principalmente al estroma tímico. 

Sin embargo, la linfopoyesis T residual continúa a lo largo de la vida adulta. 

La pérdida o falta del timo da como resultado una inmunodeficiencia grave y una alta susceptibilidad subsiguiente a la infección. 

En la mayoría de las especies, el timo consta de lóbulos divididos por tabiques formados por epitelio; por lo tanto, a menudo se considera un órgano epitelial.

Las células T maduran a partir de los timocitos, proliferan y se someten a un proceso de selección en la corteza tímica antes de ingresar a la médula para interactuar con las células epiteliales.

El timo proporciona un entorno inductivo para el desarrollo de células T a partir de células progenitoras hematopoyéticas. 

Además, las células del estroma tímico permiten la selección de un repertorio de células T funcionales y autotolerantes.

Por lo tanto, una de las funciones más importantes del timo es la inducción de la tolerancia central.


=== Órganos linfoides secundarios ===

Los órganos linfoides secundarios (o periféricos) (SLO), que incluyen los ganglios linfáticos y el bazo, mantienen linfocitos vírgenes maduros e inician una respuesta inmunitaria adaptativa.

Los órganos linfoides secundarios son los sitios de activación de linfocitos por antígenos.

La activación conduce a la expansión clonal y la maduración por afinidad.

Los linfocitos maduros recirculan entre la sangre y los órganos linfoides secundarios hasta encontrar su antígeno específico.


==== Bazo ====

Las principales funciones del bazo son:

para producir células inmunitarias para combatir los antígenos
para eliminar partículas y glóbulos envejecidos, principalmente glóbulos rojos para producir glóbulos durante la vida fetal.

El bazo sintetiza anticuerpos en su pulpa blanca y elimina las bacterias recubiertas de anticuerpos y las células sanguíneas recubiertas de anticuerpos a través de la circulación sanguínea y de los ganglios linfáticos.

Un estudio publicado en 2009 con ratones encontró que el bazo contiene, en su reserva, la mitad de los monocitos del cuerpo dentro de la pulpa roja.

Estos monocitos, al pasar al tejido lesionado (como el corazón), se convierten en células dendríticas y macrófagos mientras promueven la cicatrización del tejido.

El bazo es un centro de actividad del sistema de fagocitos mononucleares y puede considerarse análogo a un gran ganglio linfático, ya que su ausencia predispone a ciertas infecciones.

Al igual que el timo, el bazo solo tiene vasos linfáticos eferentes.

Tanto las arterias gástricas cortas como la arteria esplénica le suministran sangre.

Los centros germinales están irrigados por arteriolas llamadas radículas penicilliarias. Hasta el quinto mes de desarrollo prenatal, el bazo crea glóbulos rojos; después del nacimiento, la médula ósea es la única responsable de la hematopoyesis.

Como órgano linfoide principal y actor central en el sistema reticuloendotelial, el bazo conserva la capacidad de producir linfocitos.

El bazo almacena glóbulos rojos y linfocitos.

Puede almacenar suficientes células sanguíneas para ayudar en una emergencia.

Hasta el 25% de los linfocitos se pueden almacenar en cualquier momento.


==== Ganglios linfáticos ====

Un ganglio linfático es una colección organizada de tejido linfoide, a través del cual pasa la linfa en su camino de regreso a la sangre.

Los ganglios linfáticos se encuentran a intervalos a lo largo del sistema linfático.

Varios vasos linfáticos aferentes traen linfa, que se filtra a través de la sustancia del ganglio linfático y luego es drenada por un vaso linfático eferente. 

De los casi 800 ganglios linfáticos del cuerpo humano, unos 300 se encuentran en la cabeza y el cuello. 

Muchos se agrupan en grupos en diferentes regiones, como en las axilas y las áreas abdominales. 

Los grupos de ganglios linfáticos se encuentran comúnmente en los extremos proximales de las extremidades (ingle, axilas) y en el cuello, donde se recolecta la linfa de las regiones del cuerpo que probablemente sufran la contaminación patógena de las lesiones. 

Los ganglios linfáticos son particularmente numerosos en el mediastino en el tórax, el cuello, la pelvis, la axila, la región inguinal y en asociación con los vasos sanguíneos de los intestinos.

La sustancia de un ganglio linfático consta de folículos linfoides en una porción externa llamada corteza. 

La porción interna del nódulo se llama médula, que está rodeada por la corteza por todos lados excepto por una porción conocida como hilio.

El hilio se presenta como una depresión en la superficie del ganglio linfático, lo que hace que el ganglio linfático esférico tenga forma de frijol u ovoide.

El vaso linfático eferente emerge directamente del ganglio linfático en el hilio.

Las arterias y venas que irrigan el ganglio linfático con sangre entran y salen a través del hilio.

La región del ganglio linfático llamada paracorteza rodea inmediatamente la médula.

A diferencia de la corteza, que tiene principalmente células T inmaduras o timocitos, la paracorteza tiene una mezcla de células T inmaduras y maduras.

Los linfocitos ingresan a los ganglios linfáticos a través de vénulas endoteliales altas especializadas que se encuentran en la paracorteza.

Un folículo linfático es una colección densa de linfocitos, cuyo número, tamaño y configuración cambian de acuerdo con el estado funcional del ganglio linfático.

Por ejemplo, los folículos se expanden significativamente cuando se encuentran con un antígeno extraño.

La selección de células B, o linfocitos B, se produce en el centro germinal de los ganglios linfáticos.

El tejido linfoide secundario proporciona el entorno para que las moléculas nativas extrañas o alteradas (antígenos) interactúen con los linfocitos.

Está ejemplificado por los ganglios linfáticos y los folículos linfoides en las amígdalas, placas de Peyer, bazo, adenoides, piel, etc. que están asociados con el tejido linfoide asociado a la mucosa (MALT).

En la pared gastrointestinal, el apéndice tiene una mucosa parecida a la del colon, pero aquí está fuertemente infiltrado con linfocitos.


=== Órganos linfoides terciarios ===

Los órganos linfoides terciarios (TLO, por sus siglas en inglés) son estructuras similares a ganglios linfáticos anormales que se forman en tejidos periféricos en sitios de inflamación crónica, como infecciones crónicas, órganos trasplantados que sufren rechazo de injertos, algunos tipos de cáncer y enfermedades autoinmunes y relacionadas con autoinmunidad.

Los TLO se regulan de manera diferente al proceso normal por el cual los tejidos linfoides se forman durante la ontogenia, siendo dependientes de citoquinas y células hematopoyéticas, pero aún drenan líquido intersticial y transportan linfocitos en respuesta a los mismos gradientes y mensajeros químicos.

Los TLO suelen contener muchos menos linfocitos y asumen un papel inmunitario solo cuando se enfrentan a antígenos que provocan inflamación.

Lo logran importando los linfocitos de la sangre y la linfa.

Los TLO a menudo tienen un centro germinal activo, rodeado por una red de células dendríticas foliculares (FDC).

Se cree que los TLO desempeñan un papel importante en la respuesta inmunitaria al cáncer y que tienen posibles implicaciones en la inmunoterapia.

Se han observado en varios tipos de cáncer, como el melanoma, el cáncer de pulmón de células no pequeñas y el cáncer colorrectal (revisado en), así como en el glioma.

Los pacientes con TLO en la vecindad de sus tumores tienden a tener un mejor pronóstico, aunque lo contrario es cierto para ciertos tipos de cáncer.

Los TLO que contienen un centro germinal activo tienden a tener un mejor pronóstico que aquellos con TLO sin centro germinal.

Se cree que la razón por la que estos pacientes tienden a vivir más tiempo es la respuesta inmunitaria contra el tumor, que está mediada por los TLO.

Los TLO también pueden promover una respuesta antitumoral cuando los pacientes son tratados con inmunoterapia.

Se ha hecho referencia a las TLO de muchas maneras diferentes, incluso como estructuras linfoides terciarias (TLS) y estructuras linfoides ectópicas (ELS).

Cuando se asocian con el cáncer colorrectal, a menudo se las denomina reacción linfoide similar a la de Crohn.


=== Otro tejido linfoide ===

El tejido linfoide asociado con el sistema linfático se ocupa de las funciones inmunitarias en la defensa del cuerpo contra infecciones y la propagación de tumores.

Consiste en tejido conectivo formado por fibras reticulares, con varios tipos de leucocitos (glóbulos blancos), en su mayoría linfocitos enredados en él, a través del cual pasa la linfa.

Las regiones del tejido linfoide que están densamente llenas de linfocitos se conocen como folículos linfoides.

El tejido linfoide puede estar estructuralmente bien organizado como ganglios linfáticos o puede consistir en folículos linfoides poco organizados conocidos como tejido linfoide asociado a la mucosa (MALT).

El sistema nervioso central también tiene vasos linfáticos. 

La búsqueda de puertas de entrada de células T dentro y fuera de las meninges descubrió vasos linfáticos meníngeos funcionales que recubren los senos durales, integrados anatómicamente en la membrana que rodea el cerebro.


=== Vasos linfáticos ===


Los vasos linfáticos, también llamados vasos linfáticos, son vasos de paredes delgadas que conducen la linfa entre diferentes partes del cuerpo. 

Incluyen los vasos tubulares de los capilares linfáticos y los vasos colectores más grandes: el conducto linfático derecho y el conducto torácico (el conducto linfático izquierdo). 

Los capilares linfáticos son los principales responsables de la absorción del líquido intersticial de los tejidos, mientras que los vasos linfáticos impulsan el líquido absorbido hacia los conductos colectores más grandes, donde finalmente regresa al torrente sanguíneo a través de una de las venas subclavias.

Los tejidos del sistema linfático son los encargados de mantener el equilibrio de los fluidos corporales.

Su red de capilares y vasos linfáticos colectores funcionan para drenar y transportar eficientemente el líquido extravasado, junto con proteínas y antígenos, de regreso al sistema circulatorio.

Numerosas válvulas intraluminales en los vasos aseguran un flujo unidireccional de linfa sin reflujo.

Se utilizan dos sistemas de válvulas, un sistema de válvulas primario y otro secundario, para lograr este flujo unidireccional.

Los capilares tienen extremos ciegos y las válvulas en los extremos de los capilares usan uniones especializadas junto con filamentos de anclaje para permitir un flujo unidireccional a los vasos primarios.

Los linfáticos colectores, sin embargo, actúan para propulsar la linfa mediante las acciones combinadas de las válvulas intraluminales y las células musculares linfáticas.


== Desarrollo ==

Los tejidos linfáticos comienzan a desarrollarse al final de la quinta semana de desarrollo embrionario.

Los vasos linfáticos se desarrollan a partir de sacos linfáticos que surgen de venas en desarrollo, que se derivan del mesodermo.

Los primeros sacos linfáticos que aparecen son los sacos linfáticos yugulares emparejados en la unión de las venas yugular interna y subclavia.

Desde los sacos linfáticos yugulares, los plexos capilares linfáticos se extienden hacia el tórax, las extremidades superiores, el cuello y la cabeza.

Algunos de los plexos se agrandan y forman vasos linfáticos en sus respectivas regiones. 

Cada saco linfático yugular conserva al menos una conexión con su vena yugular, la izquierda se desarrolla en la porción superior del conducto torácico.

El siguiente saco linfático que aparece es el saco linfático retroperitoneal impar en la raíz del mesenterio del intestino. 

Se desarrolla a partir de la vena cava primitiva y las venas mesonéfricas. 

Los plexos capilares y los vasos linfáticos se extienden desde el saco linfático retroperitoneal hasta las vísceras abdominales y el diafragma. 

El saco establece conexiones con la cisterna chyli pero pierde sus conexiones con las venas vecinas.

El último de los sacos linfáticos, los sacos linfáticos posteriores emparejados, se desarrollan a partir de las venas ilíacas. 

Los sacos linfáticos posteriores producen plexos capilares y vasos linfáticos de la pared abdominal, región pélvica y miembros inferiores.

Los sacos linfáticos posteriores se unen a la cisterna del quilo y pierden sus conexiones con las venas adyacentes.

Con la excepción de la parte anterior del saco a partir de la cual se desarrolla la cisterna del quilo, todos los sacos linfáticos son invadidos por células mesenquimatosas y se convierten en grupos de ganglios linfáticos.

El bazo se desarrolla a partir de células mesenquimatosas entre las capas del mesenterio dorsal del estómago.

El timo surge como una excrecencia de la tercera bolsa faríngea.


== Función ==

El sistema linfático tiene múltiples funciones interrelacionadas:

Es responsable de la eliminación del líquido intersticial de los tejidos.

Absorbe y transporta ácidos grasos y grasas como quilo desde el sistema digestivo.

Transporta glóbulos blancos hacia y desde los ganglios linfáticos hacia los huesos.

La linfa transporta células presentadoras de antígenos, como las células dendríticas, a los ganglios linfáticos donde se estimula una respuesta inmunitaria.


=== Absorción de grasa ===


Los vasos linfáticos llamados lacteales se encuentran al comienzo del tracto gastrointestinal, predominantemente en el intestino delgado.

Mientras que la mayoría de los otros nutrientes absorbidos por el intestino delgado pasan al sistema venoso portal para drenar a través de la vena porta hacia el hígado para su procesamiento, las grasas (lípidos) pasan al sistema linfático para ser transportadas a la circulación sanguínea a través del torácico. conducto.

(Hay excepciones, por ejemplo, los triglicéridos de cadena media son ésteres de ácidos grasos de glicerol que se difunden pasivamente desde el tracto gastrointestinal hasta el sistema porta).

La linfa enriquecida que se origina en los vasos linfáticos del intestino delgado se llama quilo. 

Los nutrientes que se liberan al sistema circulatorio son procesados ​​por el hígado, habiendo pasado por la circulación sistémica.


=== Función inmunológica ===


El sistema linfático juega un papel importante en el sistema inmunitario del cuerpo, ya que es el sitio principal para las células relacionadas con el sistema inmunitario adaptativo, incluidas las células T y las células B. 

Las células del sistema linfático reaccionan a los antígenos presentados o encontrados por las células directamente o por otras células dendríticas. 

Cuando se reconoce un antígeno, comienza una cascada inmunológica que involucra la activación y el reclutamiento de más y más células, la producción de anticuerpos y citocinas y el reclutamiento de otras células inmunológicas como los macrófagos.


== Importancia clínica ==

El estudio del drenaje linfático de varios órganos es importante en el diagnóstico, pronóstico y tratamiento del cáncer. 

El sistema linfático, debido a su cercanía a muchos tejidos del cuerpo, es responsable de transportar células cancerosas entre las distintas partes del cuerpo en un proceso llamado metástasis. 

Los ganglios linfáticos intermedios pueden atrapar las células cancerosas. 

Si no logran destruir las células cancerosas, los ganglios pueden convertirse en sitios de tumores secundarios.


=== Ganglios linfáticos agrandados ===

La linfadenopatía se refiere a uno o más ganglios linfáticos agrandados. 

Los grupos pequeños o los ganglios linfáticos agrandados individualmente generalmente son reactivos en respuesta a la infección o la inflamación. 

Esto se llama linfadenopatía local. 

Cuando están involucrados muchos ganglios linfáticos en diferentes áreas del cuerpo, esto se denomina linfadenopatía generalizada. 

La linfadenopatía generalizada puede ser causada por infecciones como la mononucleosis infecciosa, la tuberculosis y el VIH, enfermedades del tejido conjuntivo como el LES y la artritis reumatoide, y cánceres, incluidos los cánceres de tejido dentro de los ganglios linfáticos, que se analizan a continuación, y metástasis de células cancerosas de otras partes del cuerpo. el cuerpo, que han llegado a través del sistema linfático.


=== Linfedema ===

El linfedema es la hinchazón causada por la acumulación de linfa, que puede ocurrir si el sistema linfático está dañado o tiene malformaciones.

Suele afectar a las extremidades, aunque también puede afectar a la cara, el cuello y el abdomen.

En un estado extremo, llamado elefantiasis, el edema progresa hasta el punto de que la piel se vuelve gruesa con una apariencia similar a la piel de las extremidades de los elefantes.

Las causas son desconocidas en la mayoría de los casos, pero a veces hay antecedentes de infección grave, generalmente causada por una enfermedad parasitaria, como la filariasis linfática.

La linfangiomatosis es una enfermedad que involucra múltiples quistes o lesiones formadas a partir de los vasos linfáticos.

El linfedema también puede ocurrir después de la extirpación quirúrgica de los ganglios linfáticos en la axila (lo que provoca que el brazo se hinche debido a un drenaje linfático deficiente) o en la ingle (lo que provoca la hinchazón de la pierna).

El tratamiento convencional es mediante drenaje linfático manual y prendas de compresión.

Dos medicamentos para el tratamiento del linfedema se encuentran en ensayos clínicos: Lymfactin y Ubenimex/Bestatin.

No hay evidencia que sugiera que los efectos del drenaje linfático manual sean permanentes.


=== Cáncer ===

El cáncer del sistema linfático puede ser primario o secundario.

El linfoma se refiere al cáncer que surge del tejido linfático.

Las leucemias linfoides y los linfomas ahora se consideran tumores del mismo tipo de linaje celular.

Se denominan "leucemia" cuando se encuentran en la sangre o la médula y "linfoma" cuando se encuentran en el tejido linfático.

Se agrupan bajo el nombre de "neoplasia maligna linfoide". El linfoma generalmente se considera como linfoma de Hodgkin o linfoma no Hodgkin.

El linfoma de Hodgkin se caracteriza por un tipo particular de célula, llamada célula de Reed-Sternberg, visible al microscopio.

Se asocia con una infección anterior por el virus de Epstein-Barr y, por lo general, causa una linfadenopatía "gomosa" indolora.

Está escenificado, utilizando la puesta en escena de Ann Arbor.

La quimioterapia generalmente implica el ABVD y también puede implicar la radioterapia.

El linfoma no Hodgkin es un cáncer caracterizado por una mayor proliferación de células B o células T, generalmente ocurre en un grupo de mayor edad que el linfoma de Hodgkin.

Se trata según sea de alto o bajo grado y tiene peor pronóstico que el linfoma de Hodgkin.

El linfangiosarcoma es un tumor maligno de tejidos blandos, mientras que el linfangioma es un tumor benigno que se presenta con frecuencia en asociación con el síndrome de Turner.

La linfangioleiomiomatosis es un tumor benigno de los músculos lisos de los vasos linfáticos que se presenta en los pulmones.

La leucemia linfoide es otra forma de cáncer en la que el huésped carece de diferentes células linfáticas.


=== Otro ===



== Historia ==

Hipócrates, en el siglo V a. C., fue una de las primeras personas en mencionar el sistema linfático.

En su trabajo Sobre las articulaciones, mencionó brevemente los ganglios linfáticos en una oración.

Rufo de Éfeso, un médico romano, identificó los ganglios linfáticos axilares, inguinales y mesentéricos, así como el timo durante el siglo I al II d.C. 

La primera mención de los vasos linfáticos fue en el siglo III a. C. por Herófilo, un anatomista griego que vivía en Alejandría, quien concluyó incorrectamente que las "venas de absorción de los linfáticos", con lo que se refería a los lacteales (vasos linfáticos de los intestinos), drenaban en las venas porta hepáticas, y por lo tanto en el hígado. 

Los hallazgos de Ruphus y Herophilos fueron propagados aún más por el médico griego Galeno, quien describió los ganglios linfáticos lacteales y mesentéricos que observó en su disección de simios y cerdos en el siglo II d.C.

A mediados del siglo XVI, Gabriele Falloppio (descubridor de las trompas de Falopio), describió lo que ahora se conoce como los lacteales como "recorriendo los intestinos llenos de materia amarilla".

Alrededor de 1563, Bartolomeo Eustachi, profesor de anatomía, describió el conducto torácico en los caballos como vena alba thoracis.

El siguiente avance se produjo cuando en 1622 un médico, Gaspare Aselli, identificó los vasos linfáticos de los intestinos de los perros y los denominó venae albae et lacteae, que ahora se conocen simplemente como lacteales.

Los lacteales se denominaron el cuarto tipo de vasos (los otros tres eran la arteria, la vena y el nervio, que entonces se creía que era un tipo de vaso), y refutó la afirmación de Galeno de que las venas transportaban el quilo.

Pero, todavía creía que los lácteos llevaban el quilo al hígado (como lo enseñó Galeno).

También identificó el conducto torácico pero no notó su conexión con los lacteales.

Esta conexión fue establecida por Jean Pecquet en 1651, quien encontró un líquido blanco mezclado con sangre en el corazón de un perro.

Sospechaba que el líquido era quilo ya que su flujo aumentaba cuando se aplicaba presión abdominal.

Rastreó este fluido hasta el conducto torácico, que luego siguió hasta un saco lleno de quilo que llamó receptáculo de quilo, que ahora se conoce como cisternae quilo; Investigaciones posteriores lo llevaron a encontrar que el contenido de los lácteos ingresa al sistema venoso a través del conducto torácico.

Así, se probó de manera convincente que los lácteos no terminaban en el hígado, refutando así la segunda idea de Galeno: que el quilo fluía hacia el hígado.

Johann Veslingius dibujó los primeros bocetos de los lacteales en humanos en 1647.

La idea de que la sangre recircula a través del cuerpo en lugar de ser producida de nuevo por el hígado y el corazón fue aceptada por primera vez como resultado de los trabajos de William Harvey, un trabajo que publicó en 1628. 

En 1652, Olaus Rudbeck (1630-1702), un sueco, descubrió ciertos vasos transparentes en el hígado que contenían un líquido claro (y no blanco), por lo que los denominó vasos hepático-acuosos. 

También supo que desembocaban en el conducto torácico y que tenían válvulas. 

Anunció sus hallazgos en la corte de la reina Cristina de Suecia, pero no publicó sus hallazgos durante un año, y en el ínterin, Thomas Bartholin publicó hallazgos similares, quien además publicó que tales vasos están presentes en todas partes del cuerpo, no solo en el hígado 

Él es también el que los ha llamado "vasos linfáticos". Esto dio lugar a una amarga disputa entre uno de los alumnos de Bartholin, Martin Bogdan, y Rudbeck, a quien acusó de plagio.

Las ideas de Galeno prevalecieron en la medicina hasta el siglo XVII. 

Se pensaba que la sangre la producía el hígado a partir del quilo contaminado con enfermedades del intestino y del estómago, al que se añadían diversos espíritus por otros órganos, y que esta sangre era consumida por todos los órganos del cuerpo. 

Esta teoría requería que la sangre se consumiera y se produjera muchas veces. 

Incluso en el siglo XVII, sus ideas fueron defendidas por algunos médicos.

Alexander Monro, de la Facultad de Medicina de la Universidad de Edimburgo, fue el primero en describir en detalle la función del sistema linfático.

 
=== Etimología ===

La linfa se origina en la palabra latina clásica linfa "agua", que también es la fuente de la palabra inglesa límpida.

La ortografía con y y ph fue influenciada por la etimología popular con el griego νύμϕη (nýmphē) "ninfa".

El adjetivo utilizado para el sistema de transporte de linfa es linfático.

El adjetivo utilizado para los tejidos donde se forman los linfocitos es linfoide.

Linfático proviene de la palabra latina linfática, que significa "conectado al agua".



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lymphatic_system

;;;FR;;;



ORGANES LYMPHOÏDES


 - Organes lymphoïdes primaires
 -Moelles osseuses rouges
 -Thymus
 - Organes lymphoïdes secondaires
 -Rate
 - Anneau lymphoïde pharyngé
 -Noeuds lymphatiques


SYSTÈME LYMPHATIQUE


Le système lymphatique, ou système lymphoïde, est un système d'organes chez les vertébrés qui fait partie du système circulatoire et du système immunitaire. 

Il est constitué d'un vaste réseau de lymphe, de vaisseaux lymphatiques, de ganglions lymphatiques, d'organes lymphatiques ou lymphoïdes et de tissus lymphoïdes. 

Les vaisseaux transportent un liquide clair appelé lymphe (le mot latin lympha fait référence à la divinité de l'eau douce, "Lympha") vers le cœur.

Contrairement au système cardiovasculaire, le système lymphatique n'est pas un système fermé. 

Le système circulatoire humain traite en moyenne 20 litres de sang par jour par filtration capillaire, qui élimine le plasma du sang.

Environ 17 litres de sang filtré sont réabsorbés directement dans les vaisseaux sanguins, tandis que les trois litres restants sont laissés dans le liquide interstitiel.

L'une des principales fonctions du système lymphatique est de fournir une voie de retour accessoire vers le sang pour les trois litres excédentaires.

L'autre fonction principale est celle de la défense immunitaire.

La lymphe est très similaire au plasma sanguin, en ce sens qu'elle contient des déchets et des débris cellulaires, ainsi que des bactéries et des protéines.

Les cellules de la lymphe sont principalement des lymphocytes.

Les organes lymphoïdes associés sont composés de tissu lymphoïde et sont les sites de production ou d'activation des lymphocytes.

Ceux-ci comprennent les ganglions lymphatiques (où se trouve la plus forte concentration de lymphocytes), la rate, le thymus et les amygdales. 

Les lymphocytes sont initialement générés dans la moelle osseuse. 

Les organes lymphoïdes contiennent également d'autres types de cellules telles que les cellules stromales de soutien. 

Le tissu lymphoïde est également associé aux muqueuses telles que le tissu lymphoïde associé aux muqueuses (MALT). Le liquide provenant du sang circulant s'écoule dans les tissus du corps par action capillaire, transportant les nutriments vers les cellules. 

Le liquide baigne les tissus sous forme de liquide interstitiel, collectant les déchets, les bactéries et les cellules endommagées, puis s'écoule sous forme de lymphe dans les capillaires lymphatiques et les vaisseaux lymphatiques. 

Ces vaisseaux transportent la lymphe dans tout le corps, en passant par de nombreux ganglions lymphatiques qui filtrent les matières indésirables telles que les bactéries et les cellules endommagées. 

La lymphe passe ensuite dans des vaisseaux lymphatiques beaucoup plus gros appelés canaux lymphatiques. 

Le canal lymphatique droit draine le côté droit de la région et le canal lymphatique gauche beaucoup plus grand, connu sous le nom de canal thoracique, draine le côté gauche du corps. 

Les conduits se vident dans les veines sous-clavières pour retourner dans la circulation sanguine. 

La lymphe est déplacée à travers le système par des contractions musculaires. 

Chez certains vertébrés, un cœur lymphatique est présent qui pompe la lymphe vers les veines.

Le système lymphatique a été décrit pour la première fois au 17ème siècle indépendamment par Olaus Rudbeck et Thomas Bartholin.


== Structure ==


Le système lymphatique est constitué d'un réseau conducteur de vaisseaux lymphatiques, d'organes lymphoïdes, de tissus lymphoïdes et de la lymphe circulante.


=== Organes lymphoïdes primaires ===

Les organes lymphoïdes primaires (ou centraux) génèrent des lymphocytes à partir de cellules progénitrices immatures. 

Le thymus et la moelle osseuse constituent les principaux organes lymphoïdes impliqués dans la production et la sélection clonale précoce des tissus lymphocytaires.


==== Moelle osseuse ====

La moelle osseuse est responsable à la fois de la création des précurseurs des lymphocytes T et de la production et de la maturation des lymphocytes B, qui sont des types cellulaires importants du système immunitaire.

A partir de la moelle osseuse, les cellules B rejoignent immédiatement le système circulatoire et voyagent vers les organes lymphoïdes secondaires à la recherche d'agents pathogènes.

Les lymphocytes T, quant à eux, voyagent de la moelle osseuse au thymus, où ils se développent davantage et mûrissent.

Les lymphocytes T matures rejoignent alors les lymphocytes B à la recherche de pathogènes.

Les autres 95 % des cellules T entament un processus d'apoptose, une forme de mort cellulaire programmée.


==== Thymus ====

Le thymus augmente de taille dès la naissance en réponse à la stimulation antigénique postnatale.

Il est le plus actif pendant les périodes néonatale et pré-adolescente.

À la puberté, au début de l'adolescence, le thymus commence à s'atrophier et à régresser, le tissu adipeux remplaçant principalement le stroma thymique.

Cependant, la lymphopoïèse T résiduelle persiste tout au long de la vie adulte.

La perte ou l'absence de thymus entraîne une immunodéficience sévère et une forte sensibilité subséquente aux infections.

Chez la plupart des espèces, le thymus est constitué de lobules divisés par des septa constitués d'épithélium; il est donc souvent considéré comme un organe épithélial.

Les cellules T mûrissent à partir des thymocytes, prolifèrent et subissent un processus de sélection dans le cortex thymique avant d'entrer dans la moelle pour interagir avec les cellules épithéliales.

Le thymus fournit un environnement inducteur pour le développement de lymphocytes T à partir de cellules progénitrices hématopoïétiques.

De plus, les cellules stromales thymiques permettent la sélection d'un répertoire de lymphocytes T fonctionnels et auto-tolérants.

Par conséquent, l'un des rôles les plus importants du thymus est l'induction de la tolérance centrale.


=== Organes lymphoïdes secondaires ===

Les organes lymphoïdes secondaires (ou périphériques) (SLO), qui comprennent les ganglions lymphatiques et la rate, maintiennent les lymphocytes naïfs matures et initient une réponse immunitaire adaptative.

Les organes lymphoïdes secondaires sont les sites d'activation des lymphocytes par les antigènes.

L'activation conduit à l'expansion clonale et à la maturation d'affinité.

Les lymphocytes matures recirculent entre le sang et les organes lymphoïdes secondaires jusqu'à ce qu'ils rencontrent leur antigène spécifique.


==== Rate ====

Les principales fonctions de la rate sont :

produire des cellules immunitaires pour combattre les antigènes
pour éliminer les particules et les cellules sanguines âgées, principalement les globules rouges pour produire des cellules sanguines pendant la vie fœtale.

La rate synthétise des anticorps dans sa pulpe blanche et élimine les bactéries recouvertes d'anticorps et les cellules sanguines recouvertes d'anticorps par le biais de la circulation sanguine et des ganglions lymphatiques. 

Une étude publiée en 2009 sur des souris a révélé que la rate contient, dans sa réserve, la moitié des monocytes du corps dans la pulpe rouge. 

Ces monocytes, en se déplaçant vers les tissus lésés (comme le cœur), se transforment en cellules dendritiques et en macrophages tout en favorisant la cicatrisation des tissus. 

La rate est un centre d'activité du système phagocytaire mononucléaire et peut être considérée comme analogue à un gros ganglion lymphatique, car son absence entraîne une prédisposition à certaines infections.

Comme le thymus, la rate n'a que des vaisseaux lymphatiques efférents. 

Les artères gastriques courtes et l'artère splénique l'alimentent en sang. 

Les centres germinatifs sont alimentés par des artérioles appelées radicules pénicillaires. Jusqu'au cinquième mois du développement prénatal, la rate crée des globules rouges ; après la naissance, la moelle osseuse est seule responsable de l'hématopoïèse.

En tant qu'organe lymphoïde majeur et acteur central du système réticulo-endothélial, la rate conserve la capacité de produire des lymphocytes. 

La rate stocke les globules rouges et les lymphocytes. 

Il peut stocker suffisamment de cellules sanguines pour aider en cas d'urgence. 

Jusqu'à 25 % des lymphocytes peuvent être stockés à tout moment.


==== Ganglions lymphatiques ====

Un ganglion lymphatique est une collection organisée de tissu lymphoïde, à travers laquelle passe la lymphe pour retourner dans le sang. 

Les ganglions lymphatiques sont situés à intervalles le long du système lymphatique. 

Plusieurs vaisseaux lymphatiques afférents amènent la lymphe, qui percole à travers la substance du ganglion lymphatique, puis est drainée par un vaisseau lymphatique efférent.

Sur les près de 800 ganglions lymphatiques du corps humain, environ 300 sont situés dans la tête et le cou.

Beaucoup sont regroupés en grappes dans différentes régions, comme dans les aisselles et les zones abdominales.

Les grappes de ganglions lymphatiques se trouvent généralement aux extrémités proximales des membres (aine, aisselles) et dans le cou, où la lymphe est collectée dans les régions du corps susceptibles de subir une contamination par des agents pathogènes à la suite de blessures.

Les ganglions lymphatiques sont particulièrement nombreux dans le médiastin au niveau de la poitrine, du cou, du bassin, des aisselles, de la région inguinale et en association avec les vaisseaux sanguins des intestins.

La substance d'un ganglion lymphatique est constituée de follicules lymphoïdes dans une partie externe appelée cortex.

La partie interne du nœud s'appelle la moelle, qui est entourée par le cortex de tous les côtés à l'exception d'une partie connue sous le nom de hile. 

Le hile se présente comme une dépression à la surface du ganglion lymphatique, ce qui fait que le ganglion lymphatique autrement sphérique est en forme de haricot ou ovoïde. 

Le vaisseau lymphatique efférent émerge directement du ganglion lymphatique au niveau du hile. 

Les artères et les veines alimentant le ganglion lymphatique en sang entrent et sortent par le hile. 

La région du ganglion lymphatique appelée le paracortex entoure immédiatement la moelle. 

Contrairement au cortex, qui contient principalement des cellules T immatures, ou thymocytes, le paracortex contient un mélange de cellules T immatures et matures. 

Les lymphocytes pénètrent dans les ganglions lymphatiques par des veinules endothéliales hautes spécialisées trouvées dans le paracortex.

Un follicule lymphatique est un ensemble dense de lymphocytes dont le nombre, la taille et la configuration changent en fonction de l'état fonctionnel du ganglion lymphatique. 

Par exemple, les follicules se dilatent considérablement lorsqu'ils rencontrent un antigène étranger. 

La sélection des cellules B, ou lymphocytes B, se produit au centre germinatif des ganglions lymphatiques.

Le tissu lymphoïde secondaire fournit l'environnement permettant aux molécules natives étrangères ou altérées (antigènes) d'interagir avec les lymphocytes. 

Il est illustré par les ganglions lymphatiques et les follicules lymphoïdes dans les amygdales, les plaques de Peyer, la rate, les végétations adénoïdes, la peau, etc. qui sont associés au tissu lymphoïde associé aux muqueuses (MALT).

Dans la paroi gastro-intestinale, l'appendice a une muqueuse ressemblant à celle du côlon, mais ici il est fortement infiltré de lymphocytes.


=== Organes lymphoïdes tertiaires ===

Les organes lymphoïdes tertiaires (TLO) sont des structures anormales semblables à des ganglions lymphatiques qui se forment dans les tissus périphériques aux sites d'inflammation chronique, tels que les infections chroniques, les organes transplantés subissant un rejet de greffe, certains cancers et les maladies auto-immunes et auto-immunes. 

Les TLO sont régulés différemment du processus normal par lequel les tissus lymphoïdes se forment pendant l'ontogenèse, étant dépendants des cytokines et des cellules hématopoïétiques, mais drainent toujours le liquide interstitiel et transportent les lymphocytes en réponse aux mêmes messagers chimiques et gradients. 

Les TLO contiennent généralement beaucoup moins de lymphocytes et n'assument un rôle immunitaire que lorsqu'ils sont confrontés à des antigènes qui entraînent une inflammation. 

Ils y parviennent en important les lymphocytes du sang et de la lymphe. 

Les TLO ont souvent un centre germinal actif, entouré d'un réseau de cellules folliculaires dendritiques (FDC).

On pense que les TLO jouent un rôle important dans la réponse immunitaire au cancer et qu'ils ont des implications possibles en immunothérapie.

Ils ont été observés dans un certain nombre de types de cancer tels que le mélanome, le cancer du poumon non à petites cellules et le cancer colorectal (examiné dans ) ainsi que le gliome.

Les patients avec des TLO à proximité de leurs tumeurs ont tendance à avoir un meilleur pronostic, bien que l'inverse soit vrai pour certains cancers.

Les TLO qui contiennent un centre germinal actif ont tendance à avoir un meilleur pronostic que ceux qui ont des TLO sans centre germinal.

On pense que la raison pour laquelle ces patients ont tendance à vivre plus longtemps est la réponse immunitaire contre la tumeur, qui est médiée par les TLO.

Les TLO peuvent également favoriser une réponse anti-tumorale lorsque les patients sont traités par immunothérapie.

Les TLO ont été désignés de différentes manières, notamment en tant que structures lymphoïdes tertiaires (TLS) et structures lymphoïdes ectopiques (ELS).

Lorsqu'ils sont associés au cancer colorectal, ils sont souvent appelés réaction lymphoïde de type Crohn.


=== Autre tissu lymphoïde ===

Le tissu lymphoïde associé au système lymphatique est concerné par les fonctions immunitaires dans la défense de l'organisme contre les infections et la propagation des tumeurs.

Il est constitué d'un tissu conjonctif formé de fibres réticulaires, avec différents types de leucocytes (globules blancs), principalement des lymphocytes enchevêtrés, à travers lesquels passe la lymphe.

Les régions du tissu lymphoïde qui sont densément remplies de lymphocytes sont appelées follicules lymphoïdes.

Le tissu lymphoïde peut soit être structurellement bien organisé en ganglions lymphatiques, soit consister en des follicules lymphoïdes peu organisés connus sous le nom de tissu lymphoïde associé à la muqueuse (MALT).

Le système nerveux central possède également des vaisseaux lymphatiques.

La recherche de passerelles de cellules T dans et hors des méninges a révélé des vaisseaux lymphatiques méningés fonctionnels tapissant les sinus duraux, anatomiquement intégrés dans la membrane entourant le cerveau.


=== Vaisseaux lymphatiques ===


Les vaisseaux lymphatiques, également appelés vaisseaux lymphatiques, sont des vaisseaux à paroi mince qui conduisent la lymphe entre différentes parties du corps.

Ils comprennent les vaisseaux tubulaires des capillaires lymphatiques et les plus grands vaisseaux collecteurs - le canal lymphatique droit et le canal thoracique (le canal lymphatique gauche).

Les capillaires lymphatiques sont principalement responsables de l'absorption du liquide interstitiel des tissus, tandis que les vaisseaux lymphatiques propulsent le liquide absorbé vers les plus grands canaux collecteurs, où il retourne finalement dans la circulation sanguine via l'une des veines sous-clavières.

Les tissus du système lymphatique sont responsables du maintien de l'équilibre des fluides corporels. 

Son réseau de capillaires et de vaisseaux lymphatiques collecteurs fonctionne pour drainer et transporter efficacement le liquide extravasé, ainsi que les protéines et les antigènes, vers le système circulatoire. 

De nombreuses valves intraluminales dans les vaisseaux assurent un flux lymphatique unidirectionnel sans reflux. 

Deux systèmes de vannes, un système de vanne primaire et un système de vanne secondaire, sont utilisés pour obtenir ce flux unidirectionnel. 

Les capillaires sont à extrémité aveugle et les valves aux extrémités des capillaires utilisent des jonctions spécialisées avec des filaments d'ancrage pour permettre un écoulement unidirectionnel vers les vaisseaux primaires. 

Les lymphatiques collecteurs, cependant, agissent pour propulser la lymphe par les actions combinées des valves intraluminales et des cellules musculaires lymphatiques.


== Développement ==

Les tissus lymphatiques commencent à se développer à la fin de la cinquième semaine de développement embryonnaire. 

Les vaisseaux lymphatiques se développent à partir de sacs lymphatiques issus de veines en développement, dérivées du mésoderme.

Les premiers sacs lymphatiques à apparaître sont les sacs lymphatiques jugulaires appariés à la jonction des veines jugulaire interne et sous-clavière. 

À partir des sacs lymphatiques jugulaires, les plexus capillaires lymphatiques se propagent au thorax, aux membres supérieurs, au cou et à la tête. 

Certains des plexus grossissent et forment des vaisseaux lymphatiques dans leurs régions respectives. 

Chaque sac lymphatique jugulaire conserve au moins une connexion avec sa veine jugulaire, celle de gauche se développant dans la partie supérieure du canal thoracique.

Le prochain sac lymphatique à apparaître est le sac lymphatique rétropéritonéal non apparié à la racine du mésentère de l'intestin. 

Il se développe à partir de la veine cave primitive et des veines mésonéphriques. 

Les plexus capillaires et les vaisseaux lymphatiques se propagent du sac lymphatique rétropéritonéal aux viscères abdominaux et au diaphragme. 

Le sac établit des connexions avec la citerne chyli mais perd ses connexions avec les veines voisines.

Le dernier des sacs lymphatiques, les sacs lymphatiques postérieurs appariés, se développe à partir des veines iliaques. 

Les sacs lymphatiques postérieurs produisent des plexus capillaires et des vaisseaux lymphatiques de la paroi abdominale, de la région pelvienne et des membres inférieurs. 

Les sacs lymphatiques postérieurs rejoignent la citerne chyli et perdent leurs connexions avec les veines adjacentes.

À l'exception de la partie antérieure du sac à partir de laquelle se développe la citerne chyli, tous les sacs lymphatiques sont envahis par des cellules mésenchymateuses et sont convertis en groupes de ganglions lymphatiques.

La rate se développe à partir de cellules mésenchymateuses entre les couches du mésentère dorsal de l'estomac. 

Le thymus apparaît comme une excroissance de la troisième poche pharyngienne.


== Fonction ==

Le système lymphatique a plusieurs fonctions interdépendantes :

Il est responsable de l'élimination du liquide interstitiel des tissus

Il absorbe et transporte les acides gras et les graisses sous forme de chyle du système digestif.

Il transporte les globules blancs vers et depuis les ganglions lymphatiques dans les os.

La lymphe transporte les cellules présentatrices d'antigène, telles que les cellules dendritiques, vers les ganglions lymphatiques où une réponse immunitaire est stimulée.


=== Absorption des graisses ===


Les vaisseaux lymphatiques appelés lactés sont au début du tractus gastro-intestinal, principalement dans l'intestin grêle.

Alors que la plupart des autres nutriments absorbés par l'intestin grêle sont transmis au système veineux porte pour s'écouler via la veine porte dans le foie en vue de leur traitement, les graisses (lipides) sont transmises au système lymphatique pour être transportées vers la circulation sanguine via la veine thoracique. canal.

(Il existe des exceptions, par exemple les triglycérides à chaîne moyenne sont des esters d'acides gras de glycérol qui diffusent passivement du tractus gastro-intestinal au système porte.)

La lymphe enrichie provenant des lymphatiques de l'intestin grêle est appelée chyle.

Les nutriments qui sont libérés dans le système circulatoire sont traités par le foie, après avoir traversé la circulation systémique.


=== Fonction immunitaire ===


Le système lymphatique joue un rôle majeur dans le système immunitaire de l'organisme, en tant que site principal des cellules liées au système immunitaire adaptatif, notamment les lymphocytes T et les lymphocytes B.

Les cellules du système lymphatique réagissent aux antigènes présentés ou trouvés par les cellules directement ou par d'autres cellules dendritiques.

Lorsqu'un antigène est reconnu, une cascade immunologique commence impliquant l'activation et le recrutement de plus en plus de cellules, la production d'anticorps et de cytokines et le recrutement d'autres cellules immunologiques telles que les macrophages.


== Signification clinique ==

L'étude du drainage lymphatique de divers organes est importante dans le diagnostic, le pronostic et le traitement du cancer. 

Le système lymphatique, en raison de sa proximité avec de nombreux tissus du corps, est responsable du transport des cellules cancéreuses entre les différentes parties du corps dans un processus appelé métastase. 

Les ganglions lymphatiques intermédiaires peuvent piéger les cellules cancéreuses. 

S'ils ne parviennent pas à détruire les cellules cancéreuses, les ganglions peuvent devenir des sites de tumeurs secondaires.


=== Ganglions lymphatiques élargis ===

La lymphadénopathie fait référence à un ou plusieurs ganglions lymphatiques hypertrophiés. 

De petits groupes ou des ganglions lymphatiques agrandis individuellement sont généralement réactifs en réponse à une infection ou à une inflammation. 

C'est ce qu'on appelle une lymphadénopathie locale. 

Lorsque de nombreux ganglions lymphatiques dans différentes zones du corps sont impliqués, on parle d'adénopathie généralisée. 

La lymphadénopathie généralisée peut être causée par des infections telles que la mononucléose infectieuse, la tuberculose et le VIH, des maladies du tissu conjonctif telles que le LES et la polyarthrite rhumatoïde, et des cancers, y compris les cancers des tissus dans les ganglions lymphatiques, décrits ci-dessous, et des métastases de cellules cancéreuses provenant d'autres parties du corps. le corps, qui sont arrivés via le système lymphatique.


=== Lymphœdème ===

Le lymphoedème est le gonflement causé par l'accumulation de lymphe, qui peut survenir si le système lymphatique est endommagé ou présente des malformations. 

Elle affecte généralement les membres, bien que le visage, le cou et l'abdomen puissent également être touchés. 

Dans un état extrême, appelé éléphantiasis, l'œdème progresse au point que la peau devient épaisse avec un aspect similaire à la peau des membres d'éléphants.

Les causes sont inconnues dans la plupart des cas, mais il existe parfois des antécédents d'infection grave, généralement causée par une maladie parasitaire, telle que la filariose lymphatique.

La lymphangiomatose est une maladie impliquant de multiples kystes ou lésions formés à partir de vaisseaux lymphatiques.

Le lymphœdème peut également survenir après l'ablation chirurgicale des ganglions lymphatiques de l'aisselle (provoquant un gonflement du bras en raison d'un mauvais drainage lymphatique) ou de l'aine (provoquant un gonflement de la jambe).

Le traitement conventionnel consiste en un drainage lymphatique manuel et des vêtements de compression.

Deux médicaments pour le traitement du lymphœdème font l'objet d'essais cliniques : Lymfactin et Ubenimex/Bestatin.

Il n'y a aucune preuve suggérant que les effets du drainage lymphatique manuel sont permanents.


=== Cancer ===

Le cancer du système lymphatique peut être primaire ou secondaire.

Le lymphome fait référence à un cancer qui provient du tissu lymphatique.

Les leucémies lymphoïdes et les lymphomes sont désormais considérés comme des tumeurs du même type de lignée cellulaire. 

Ils sont appelés « leucémie » lorsqu'ils se trouvent dans le sang ou la moelle et « lymphome » lorsqu'ils se trouvent dans le tissu lymphatique. 

Ils sont regroupés sous le nom de "malignité lymphoïde". Le lymphome est généralement considéré comme un lymphome hodgkinien ou un lymphome non hodgkinien. 

Le lymphome de Hodgkin est caractérisé par un type particulier de cellule, appelée cellule de Reed-Sternberg, visible au microscope. 

Elle est associée à une infection antérieure par le virus d'Epstein-Barr et provoque généralement une lymphadénopathie « caoutchouteuse » indolore. 

Il est mis en scène, en utilisant la mise en scène d'Ann Arbor. 

La chimiothérapie implique généralement l'ABVD et peut également impliquer la radiothérapie. 

Le lymphome non hodgkinien est un cancer caractérisé par une prolifération accrue de lymphocytes B ou de lymphocytes T, survient généralement dans un groupe d'âge plus avancé que le lymphome hodgkinien. 

Il est traité selon qu'il est de haut grade ou de bas grade et est de moins bon pronostic que le lymphome de Hodgkin.

Le lymphangiosarcome est une tumeur maligne des tissus mous, tandis que le lymphangiome est une tumeur bénigne survenant fréquemment en association avec le syndrome de Turner. 

La lymphangioléiomyomatose est une tumeur bénigne des muscles lisses des lymphatiques qui se produit dans les poumons.

La leucémie lymphoïde est une autre forme de cancer où l'hôte est dépourvu de différentes cellules lymphatiques.


=== Autre ===



== Historique ==

Hippocrate, au Ve siècle av. J.-C., fut l'un des premiers à mentionner le système lymphatique. 

Dans son ouvrage On Joints, il mentionne brièvement les ganglions lymphatiques en une phrase. 

Rufus d'Ephèse, un médecin romain, a identifié les ganglions lymphatiques axillaires, inguinaux et mésentériques ainsi que le thymus au cours du 1er au 2ème siècle après JC. 

La première mention des vaisseaux lymphatiques remonte au IIIe siècle av. dans les veines portes hépatiques, et donc dans le foie. 

Les découvertes de Ruphus et d'Herophilos ont ensuite été propagées par le médecin grec Galien, qui a décrit les ganglions lymphatiques lactés et mésentériques qu'il a observés lors de sa dissection de singes et de porcs au IIe siècle après JC.

Au milieu du XVIe siècle, Gabriele Falloppio (découvreur des trompes de Fallope), a décrit ce que l'on appelle maintenant les lactées comme "courant sur les intestins pleins de matière jaune". 

Vers 1563, Bartolomeo Eustachi, professeur d'anatomie, a décrit le canal thoracique chez les chevaux comme la veine alba thoracis. 

La percée suivante est survenue lorsqu'en 1622 un médecin, Gaspare Aselli, a identifié les vaisseaux lymphatiques des intestins chez les chiens et les a appelés venae albae et lacteae, qui sont maintenant simplement connus sous le nom de lactéaux. 

Les vaisseaux lactés ont été appelés le quatrième type de vaisseaux (les trois autres étant l'artère, la veine et le nerf, que l'on croyait alors être un type de vaisseau), et ont réfuté l'affirmation de Galen selon laquelle le chyle était transporté par les veines. 

Mais, il croyait toujours que les lactés transportaient le chyle jusqu'au foie (comme l'enseignait Galien). 

Il a également identifié le canal thoracique mais n'a pas remarqué sa connexion avec les lactées. 

Cette connexion a été établie par Jean Pecquet en 1651, qui a trouvé un liquide blanc se mélangeant avec du sang dans le cœur d'un chien. 

Il soupçonnait que le liquide était du chyle car son débit augmentait lorsqu'une pression abdominale était appliquée. 

Il a tracé ce fluide jusqu'au canal thoracique, qu'il a ensuite suivi jusqu'à un sac rempli de chyle qu'il a appelé le réceptacle chyli, qui est maintenant connu sous le nom de citernes chyli ; d'autres investigations l'ont amené à découvrir que le contenu des lactées pénètre dans le système veineux via le canal thoracique.

Ainsi, il a été prouvé de manière convaincante que les lactées ne se terminaient pas dans le foie, réfutant ainsi la deuxième idée de Galien : que le chyle coulait vers le foie. 

Johann Veslingius a dessiné les premiers croquis des lactés chez l'homme en 1647.

L'idée que le sang recircule à travers le corps plutôt que d'être produit à nouveau par le foie et le cœur a été acceptée pour la première fois à la suite des travaux de William Harvey, un travail qu'il a publié en 1628.

En 1652, Olaus Rudbeck (1630-1702), un Suédois, découvrit dans le foie certains vaisseaux transparents contenant un liquide clair (et non blanc), et les nomma ainsi vaisseaux hépatico-aqueux.

Il a également appris qu'elles se vidaient dans le canal thoracique et qu'elles avaient des valves.

Il a annoncé ses conclusions à la cour de la reine Christine de Suède, mais n'a pas publié ses conclusions pendant un an, et dans l'intervalle, des conclusions similaires ont été publiées par Thomas Bartholin, qui a également publié que de tels vaisseaux sont présents partout dans le corps, pas seulement dans le foie.

C'est aussi lui qui les a nommés "vaisseaux lymphatiques". Cela avait donné lieu à une âpre dispute entre l'un des élèves de Bartholin, Martin Bogdan, et Rudbeck, qu'il accusait de plagiat.

Les idées de Galien ont prévalu en médecine jusqu'au XVIIe siècle. 

On pensait que le sang était produit par le foie à partir de chyle contaminé par des affections de l'intestin et de l'estomac, auquel divers alcools étaient ajoutés par d'autres organes, et que ce sang était consommé par tous les organes du corps. 

Cette théorie exigeait que le sang soit consommé et produit plusieurs fois. 

Même au XVIIe siècle, ses idées sont défendues par certains médecins.

Alexander Monro, de la faculté de médecine de l'Université d'Édimbourg, a été le premier à décrire en détail la fonction du système lymphatique.

 
=== Étymologie ===

La lymphe provient du mot latin classique lympha "eau", qui est également la source du mot anglais limpide.

L'orthographe avec y et ph a été influencée par l'étymologie populaire avec le grec νύμϕη (nýmphē) "nymphe".

L'adjectif utilisé pour le système de transport lymphatique est lymphatique.

L'adjectif utilisé pour les tissus où se forment les lymphocytes est lymphoïde.

Lymphatique vient du mot latin lymphaticus, qui signifie « relié à l'eau ».



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lymphatic_system

;;;PT;;;



ÓRGÃOS LINFOIDES


 - Órgãos linfoides primários
 - Medula óssea vermelha
 -Timo
 - Órgãos linfoides secundários
 -Baço
 - Anel linfóide faríngeo
 -Linfonodos


SISTEMA LINFÁTICO


O sistema linfático, ou sistema linfóide, é um sistema de órgãos em vertebrados que faz parte do sistema circulatório e do sistema imunológico. 

É composto por uma grande rede de linfa, vasos linfáticos, linfonodos, órgãos linfáticos ou linfoides e tecidos linfoides. 

Os vasos transportam um fluido claro chamado linfa (a palavra latina linfa refere-se à divindade da água doce, "Lympha") em direção ao coração.

Ao contrário do sistema cardiovascular, o sistema linfático não é um sistema fechado. 

O sistema circulatório humano processa em média 20 litros de sangue por dia por meio de filtração capilar, que remove o plasma do sangue.

Aproximadamente 17 litros do sangue filtrado são reabsorvidos diretamente nos vasos sanguíneos, enquanto os três litros restantes são deixados no líquido intersticial.

Uma das principais funções do sistema linfático é fornecer uma via acessória de retorno ao sangue para os três litros excedentes.

A outra função principal é a de defesa imunológica.

A linfa é muito semelhante ao plasma sanguíneo, pois contém resíduos e detritos celulares, juntamente com bactérias e proteínas.

As células da linfa são principalmente linfócitos.

Os órgãos linfoides associados são compostos de tecido linfoide e são os locais de produção de linfócitos ou de ativação de linfócitos.

Estes incluem os gânglios linfáticos (onde se encontra a maior concentração de linfócitos), o baço, o timo e as amígdalas. 

Os linfócitos são inicialmente gerados na medula óssea. 

Os órgãos linfoides também contêm outros tipos de células, como células estromais para suporte. 

O tecido linfóide também está associado a mucosas, como o tecido linfóide associado à mucosa (MALT). O fluido do sangue circulante vaza para os tecidos do corpo por ação capilar, transportando nutrientes para as células. 

O fluido banha os tecidos como fluido intersticial, coletando produtos residuais, bactérias e células danificadas, e então drena como linfa para os capilares linfáticos e vasos linfáticos. 

Esses vasos transportam a linfa por todo o corpo, passando por vários linfonodos que filtram materiais indesejados, como bactérias e células danificadas. 

A linfa então passa para vasos linfáticos muito maiores, conhecidos como ductos linfáticos.

O ducto linfático direito drena o lado direito da região e o ducto linfático esquerdo muito maior, conhecido como ducto torácico, drena o lado esquerdo do corpo.

Os ductos desembocam nas veias subclávias para retornar à circulação sanguínea.

A linfa é movida através do sistema por contrações musculares.

Em alguns vertebrados, está presente um coração linfático que bombeia a linfa para as veias.

O sistema linfático foi descrito pela primeira vez no século XVII de forma independente por Olaus Rudbeck e Thomas Bartholin.


== Estrutura ==


O sistema linfático consiste em uma rede condutora de vasos linfáticos, órgãos linfoides, tecidos linfoides e a linfa circulante.


=== Órgãos linfoides primários ===

Os órgãos linfoides primários (ou centrais) geram linfócitos a partir de células progenitoras imaturas.

O timo e a medula óssea constituem os órgãos linfoides primários envolvidos na produção e seleção clonal precoce de tecidos de linfócitos.


==== Medula óssea ====

A medula óssea é responsável tanto pela criação de precursores de células T quanto pela produção e maturação de células B, que são tipos celulares importantes do sistema imunológico. 

Da medula óssea, as células B se juntam imediatamente ao sistema circulatório e viajam para os órgãos linfoides secundários em busca de patógenos. 

As células T, por outro lado, viajam da medula óssea para o timo, onde se desenvolvem e amadurecem. 

As células T maduras então se juntam às células B em busca de patógenos. 

Os outros 95% das células T iniciam um processo de apoptose, uma forma de morte celular programada.


==== Timo ====

O timo aumenta de tamanho desde o nascimento em resposta à estimulação antigênica pós-natal. 

É mais ativo durante os períodos neonatal e pré-adolescente.

Na puberdade, no início da adolescência, o timo começa a atrofiar e regredir, com o tecido adiposo substituindo principalmente o estroma tímico.

No entanto, a linfopoiese T residual continua ao longo da vida adulta.

A perda ou falta do timo resulta em imunodeficiência grave e subsequente alta suscetibilidade à infecção.

Na maioria das espécies, o timo consiste em lóbulos divididos por septos constituídos por epitélio; é, portanto, muitas vezes considerado um órgão epitelial.

As células T amadurecem a partir dos timócitos, proliferam e passam por um processo de seleção no córtex tímico antes de entrar na medula para interagir com as células epiteliais.

O timo fornece um ambiente indutor para o desenvolvimento de células T a partir de células progenitoras hematopoiéticas.

Além disso, as células estromais tímicas permitem a seleção de um repertório de células T funcional e auto-tolerante.

Portanto, um dos papéis mais importantes do timo é a indução da tolerância central.


=== Órgãos linfoides secundários ===

Os órgãos linfoides secundários (ou periféricos), que incluem os linfonodos e o baço, mantêm os linfócitos virgens maduros e iniciam uma resposta imune adaptativa.

Os órgãos linfoides secundários são os locais de ativação de linfócitos por antígenos.

A ativação leva à expansão clonal e maturação de afinidade.

Os linfócitos maduros recirculam entre o sangue e os órgãos linfoides secundários até encontrarem seu antígeno específico.


==== Baço ====

As principais funções do baço são:

para produzir células imunes para combater antígenos
para remover partículas e células sanguíneas envelhecidas, principalmente glóbulos vermelhos para produzir células sanguíneas durante a vida fetal.

O baço sintetiza anticorpos em sua polpa branca e remove bactérias revestidas de anticorpos e células sanguíneas revestidas de anticorpos por meio da circulação sanguínea e linfonodal.

Um estudo publicado em 2009 com camundongos descobriu que o baço contém, em sua reserva, metade dos monócitos do corpo dentro da polpa vermelha.

Esses monócitos, ao se moverem para o tecido lesionado (como o coração), se transformam em células dendríticas e macrófagos enquanto promovem a cicatrização do tecido.

O baço é um centro de atividade do sistema fagocitário mononuclear e pode ser considerado análogo a um grande linfonodo, pois sua ausência predispõe a certas infecções.

Assim como o timo, o baço tem apenas vasos linfáticos eferentes.

Tanto as artérias gástricas curtas quanto a artéria esplênica a suprem com sangue. 

Os centros germinativos são supridos por arteríolas chamadas radículas peniciliares. Até o quinto mês de desenvolvimento pré-natal, o baço cria glóbulos vermelhos; após o nascimento, a medula óssea é a única responsável pela hematopoiese.

Como um órgão linfóide importante e um ator central no sistema reticuloendotelial, o baço retém a capacidade de produzir linfócitos. 

O baço armazena glóbulos vermelhos e linfócitos. 

Ele pode armazenar células sanguíneas suficientes para ajudar em uma emergência. 

Até 25% dos linfócitos podem ser armazenados a qualquer momento.


==== Linfonodos ====

Um linfonodo é uma coleção organizada de tecido linfóide, através do qual a linfa passa em seu caminho de volta ao sangue. 

Os linfonodos estão localizados em intervalos ao longo do sistema linfático. 

Vários vasos linfáticos aferentes trazem a linfa, que percola através da substância do linfonodo e é então drenada por um vaso linfático eferente. 

Dos cerca de 800 linfonodos do corpo humano, cerca de 300 estão localizados na cabeça e no pescoço. 

Muitos estão agrupados em aglomerados em diferentes regiões, como nas axilas e nas regiões abdominais. 

Aglomerados de linfonodos são comumente encontrados nas extremidades proximais dos membros (virilha, axilas) e no pescoço, onde a linfa é coletada de regiões do corpo susceptíveis de sustentar a contaminação por patógenos de lesões. 

Os linfonodos são particularmente numerosos no mediastino no tórax, pescoço, pelve, axila, região inguinal e em associação com os vasos sanguíneos do intestino.

A substância de um linfonodo consiste em folículos linfóides em uma porção externa chamada córtex. 

A porção interna do nó é chamada de medula, que é cercada pelo córtex em todos os lados, exceto por uma porção conhecida como hilo.

O hilo apresenta-se como uma depressão na superfície do linfonodo, fazendo com que o linfonodo esférico fique em forma de feijão ou ovoide.

O vaso linfático eferente emerge diretamente do linfonodo no hilo.

As artérias e veias que suprem o linfonodo com sangue entram e saem pelo hilo.

A região do linfonodo chamada paracórtex envolve imediatamente a medula.

Ao contrário do córtex, que tem principalmente células T imaturas, ou timócitos, o paracórtex tem uma mistura de células T imaturas e maduras.

Os linfócitos entram nos linfonodos através de vênulas endoteliais altas especializadas encontradas no paracórtex.

Um folículo linfático é uma coleção densa de linfócitos, cujo número, tamanho e configuração mudam de acordo com o estado funcional do linfonodo. 

Por exemplo, os folículos se expandem significativamente ao encontrar um antígeno estranho. 

A seleção de células B, ou linfócitos B, ocorre no centro germinativo dos linfonodos.

O tecido linfóide secundário fornece o ambiente para que as moléculas nativas estranhas ou alteradas (antígenos) interajam com os linfócitos. 

É exemplificado pelos gânglios linfáticos e pelos folículos linfóides nas amígdalas, placas de Peyer, baço, adenóides, pele, etc. que estão associados ao tecido linfóide associado à mucosa (MALT).

Na parede gastrointestinal, o apêndice apresenta mucosa semelhante à do cólon, mas aqui está fortemente infiltrado por linfócitos.


=== Órgãos linfoides terciários ===

Órgãos linfoides terciários (TLOs) são estruturas anormais semelhantes a linfonodos que se formam em tecidos periféricos em locais de inflamação crônica, como infecção crônica, órgãos transplantados submetidos a rejeição de enxertos, alguns cânceres e doenças autoimunes e relacionadas a doenças autoimunes. 

Os TLOs são regulados de forma diferente do processo normal pelo qual os tecidos linfoides são formados durante a ontogenia, sendo dependentes de citocinas e células hematopoiéticas, mas ainda drenam o fluido intersticial e transportam linfócitos em resposta aos mesmos mensageiros químicos e gradientes. 

Os TLOs normalmente contêm muito menos linfócitos e assumem um papel imunológico apenas quando desafiados com antígenos que resultam em inflamação. 

Eles conseguem isso importando os linfócitos do sangue e da linfa. 

Os TLOs geralmente têm um centro germinativo ativo, cercado por uma rede de células dendríticas foliculares (FDCs).

Acredita-se que os TLOs desempenhem um papel importante na resposta imune ao câncer e tenham possíveis implicações na imunoterapia. 

Eles foram observados em vários tipos de câncer, como melanoma, câncer de pulmão de células não pequenas e câncer colorretal (revisado em ), bem como glioma. 

Pacientes com TLOs nas proximidades de seus tumores tendem a ter um prognóstico melhor, embora o oposto seja verdadeiro para certos tipos de câncer. 

Os TLOs que contêm um centro germinativo ativo tendem a ter um prognóstico melhor do que aqueles com TLOs sem um centro germinativo. 

Acredita-se que a razão pela qual esses pacientes tendem a viver mais tempo seja a resposta imune contra o tumor, que é mediada pelos TLOs. 

Os TLOs também podem promover uma resposta antitumoral quando os pacientes são tratados com imunoterapia.

Os TLOs têm sido referidos de muitas maneiras diferentes, inclusive como estruturas linfóides terciárias (TLS) e estruturas linfóides ectópicas (ELS).

Quando associados ao câncer colorretal, eles são frequentemente referidos como uma reação linfóide semelhante à de Crohn.


=== Outro tecido linfóide ===

O tecido linfóide associado ao sistema linfático está relacionado com as funções imunológicas na defesa do organismo contra infecções e a disseminação de tumores.

Consiste em tecido conjuntivo formado por fibras reticulares, com vários tipos de leucócitos (glóbulos brancos), principalmente linfócitos nele enredados, por onde passa a linfa.

As regiões do tecido linfóide que são densamente empacotadas com linfócitos são conhecidas como folículos linfóides.

O tecido linfóide pode ser estruturalmente bem organizado como linfonodos ou pode consistir em folículos linfóides frouxamente organizados, conhecidos como tecido linfóide associado à mucosa (MALT).

O sistema nervoso central também possui vasos linfáticos.

A busca por portas de células T para dentro e para fora das meninges descobriu vasos linfáticos meníngeos funcionais que revestem os seios durais, anatomicamente integrados à membrana que envolve o cérebro.


=== Vasos linfáticos ===


Os vasos linfáticos, também chamados de vasos linfáticos, são vasos de paredes finas que conduzem a linfa entre diferentes partes do corpo.

Eles incluem os vasos tubulares dos capilares linfáticos e os vasos coletores maiores – o ducto linfático direito e o ducto torácico (o ducto linfático esquerdo).

Os capilares linfáticos são os principais responsáveis ​​pela absorção do fluido intersticial dos tecidos, enquanto os vasos linfáticos impulsionam o fluido absorvido para dentro dos ductos coletores maiores, onde finalmente retorna à corrente sanguínea através de uma das veias subclávias.

Os tecidos do sistema linfático são responsáveis ​​por manter o equilíbrio dos fluidos corporais.

Sua rede de capilares e vasos linfáticos coletores funcionam para drenar e transportar eficientemente o fluido extravasado, juntamente com proteínas e antígenos, de volta ao sistema circulatório.

Numerosas válvulas intraluminais nos vasos garantem um fluxo unidirecional de linfa sem refluxo.

Dois sistemas de válvulas, um primário e um secundário, são usados ​​para alcançar esse fluxo unidirecional.

Os capilares são cegos e as válvulas nas extremidades dos capilares usam junções especializadas juntamente com filamentos de ancoragem para permitir um fluxo unidirecional para os vasos primários.

Os linfáticos coletores, no entanto, agem para impulsionar a linfa pelas ações combinadas das válvulas intraluminais e das células musculares linfáticas.


== Desenvolvimento ==

Os tecidos linfáticos começam a se desenvolver no final da quinta semana de desenvolvimento embrionário.

Os vasos linfáticos se desenvolvem a partir de sacos linfáticos que surgem das veias em desenvolvimento, que são derivadas do mesoderma.

Os primeiros sacos linfáticos a aparecer são os sacos linfáticos jugulares pareados na junção das veias jugular interna e subclávia.

Dos sacos linfáticos jugulares, os plexos capilares linfáticos se espalham para o tórax, membros superiores, pescoço e cabeça.

Alguns dos plexos aumentam e formam vasos linfáticos em suas respectivas regiões.

Cada saco linfático jugular retém pelo menos uma conexão com sua veia jugular, a esquerda se desenvolvendo na porção superior do ducto torácico.

O próximo saco linfático a aparecer é o saco linfático retroperitoneal não pareado na raiz do mesentério do intestino. 

Desenvolve-se a partir da veia cava primitiva e das veias mesonéfricas. 

Os plexos capilares e os vasos linfáticos se espalham do saco linfático retroperitoneal para as vísceras abdominais e o diafragma. 

O saco estabelece conexões com a cisterna do quilo, mas perde suas conexões com as veias vizinhas.

O último dos sacos linfáticos, os sacos linfáticos posteriores pareados, desenvolvem-se a partir das veias ilíacas. 

Os sacos linfáticos posteriores produzem plexos capilares e vasos linfáticos da parede abdominal, região pélvica e membros inferiores. 

Os sacos linfáticos posteriores unem-se à cisterna do quilo e perdem suas conexões com as veias adjacentes.

Com exceção da parte anterior do saco a partir do qual a cisterna do quilo se desenvolve, todos os sacos linfáticos são invadidos por células mesenquimais e são convertidos em grupos de linfonodos.

O baço se desenvolve a partir de células mesenquimais entre as camadas do mesentério dorsal do estômago.

O timo surge como uma conseqüência da terceira bolsa faríngea.


== Função ==

O sistema linfático tem múltiplas funções inter-relacionadas:

É responsável pela remoção do líquido intersticial dos tecidos

Ele absorve e transporta ácidos graxos e gorduras como quilo do sistema digestivo.

Ele transporta glóbulos brancos de e para os gânglios linfáticos para os ossos.

A linfa transporta células apresentadoras de antígenos, como células dendríticas, para os linfonodos, onde uma resposta imune é estimulada.


=== Absorção de gordura ===


Os vasos linfáticos chamados lacteais estão no início do trato gastrointestinal, predominantemente no intestino delgado. 

Enquanto a maioria dos outros nutrientes absorvidos pelo intestino delgado são passados ​​para o sistema venoso portal para drenar através da veia porta para o fígado para processamento, as gorduras (lipídios) são passadas para o sistema linfático para serem transportadas para a circulação sanguínea através do tórax. duto. 

(Há exceções, por exemplo, triglicerídeos de cadeia média são ésteres de ácidos graxos de glicerol que se difundem passivamente do trato GI para o sistema portal.) 

A linfa enriquecida originada nos linfáticos do intestino delgado é chamada de quilo. 

Os nutrientes que são liberados no sistema circulatório são processados ​​pelo fígado, tendo passado pela circulação sistêmica.


=== Função imunológica ===


O sistema linfático desempenha um papel importante no sistema imunológico do corpo, como o principal local para as células relacionadas ao sistema imunológico adaptativo, incluindo células T e células B. 

As células do sistema linfático reagem aos antígenos apresentados ou encontrados pelas células diretamente ou por outras células dendríticas. 

Quando um antígeno é reconhecido, inicia-se uma cascata imunológica envolvendo a ativação e recrutamento de mais e mais células, a produção de anticorpos e citocinas e o recrutamento de outras células imunológicas, como macrófagos.


== Significado clínico ==

O estudo da drenagem linfática de vários órgãos é importante no diagnóstico, prognóstico e tratamento do câncer. 

O sistema linfático, por sua proximidade com muitos tecidos do corpo, é responsável por transportar células cancerígenas entre as diversas partes do corpo em um processo chamado de metástase. 

Os gânglios linfáticos intervenientes podem prender as células cancerosas. 

Se eles não forem bem sucedidos em destruir as células cancerosas, os nódulos podem se tornar locais de tumores secundários.


=== Linfonodos aumentados ===

Linfadenopatia refere-se a um ou mais linfonodos aumentados. 

Pequenos grupos ou linfonodos aumentados individualmente são geralmente reativos em resposta à infecção ou inflamação. 

Isso é chamado de linfadenopatia local. 

Quando muitos linfonodos em diferentes áreas do corpo estão envolvidos, isso é chamado de linfadenopatia generalizada. 

A linfadenopatia generalizada pode ser causada por infecções, como mononucleose infecciosa, tuberculose e HIV, doenças do tecido conjuntivo, como LES e artrite reumatóide, e cânceres, incluindo ambos os cânceres de tecido nos linfonodos, discutidos abaixo, e metástases de células cancerosas de outras partes do corpo. do corpo, que chegaram através do sistema linfático.


=== Linfedema ===

O linfedema é o inchaço causado pelo acúmulo de linfa, que pode ocorrer se o sistema linfático estiver danificado ou tiver malformações.

Geralmente afeta os membros, embora a face, o pescoço e o abdômen também possam ser afetados.

Em um estado extremo, chamado elefantíase, o edema progride na medida em que a pele fica espessa com aparência semelhante à pele dos membros do elefante.

As causas são desconhecidas na maioria dos casos, mas às vezes há história prévia de infecção grave, geralmente causada por uma doença parasitária, como a filariose linfática.

A linfangiomatose é uma doença que envolve múltiplos cistos ou lesões formadas a partir de vasos linfáticos.

O linfedema também pode ocorrer após a remoção cirúrgica dos gânglios linfáticos na axila (causando o inchaço do braço devido à drenagem linfática deficiente) ou na virilha (causando inchaço da perna).

O tratamento convencional é por drenagem linfática manual e roupas de compressão.

Dois medicamentos para o tratamento do linfedema estão em ensaios clínicos: Lymfactin e Ubenimex/Bestatin.

Não há evidências que sugiram que os efeitos da drenagem linfática manual sejam permanentes.


=== Câncer ===

O câncer do sistema linfático pode ser primário ou secundário.

Linfoma refere-se ao câncer que surge do tecido linfático.

As leucemias linfóides e os linfomas são agora considerados tumores do mesmo tipo de linhagem celular. 

Eles são chamados de "leucemia" quando no sangue ou medula e "linfoma" quando no tecido linfático. 

Eles são agrupados sob o nome de "malignidade linfóide". O linfoma é geralmente considerado como linfoma de Hodgkin ou linfoma não-Hodgkin. 

O linfoma de Hodgkin é caracterizado por um tipo particular de célula, chamada célula de Reed-Sternberg, visível ao microscópio. 

Está associada a uma infecção passada pelo vírus Epstein-Barr e geralmente causa uma linfadenopatia "emborrachada" indolor. 

É encenado, usando a encenação de Ann Arbor. 

A quimioterapia geralmente envolve o ABVD e também pode envolver radioterapia. 

O linfoma não Hodgkin é um câncer caracterizado pelo aumento da proliferação de células B ou células T, geralmente ocorre em uma faixa etária mais avançada do que o linfoma de Hodgkin.

É tratado de acordo com se é de alto ou baixo grau e tem um prognóstico pior do que o linfoma de Hodgkin.

O linfangiossarcoma é um tumor maligno dos tecidos moles, enquanto o linfangioma é um tumor benigno que ocorre frequentemente em associação com a síndrome de Turner.

A linfangioleiomiomatose é um tumor benigno dos músculos lisos dos vasos linfáticos que ocorre nos pulmões.

A leucemia linfóide é outra forma de câncer em que o hospedeiro é desprovido de diferentes células linfáticas.


=== Outro ===



== História ==

Hipócrates, no século V a.C., foi um dos primeiros a mencionar o sistema linfático.

Em seu trabalho On Joints, ele mencionou brevemente os linfonodos em uma frase.

Rufus de Éfeso, um médico romano, identificou os linfonodos axilares, inguinais e mesentéricos, bem como o timo, durante os séculos I e II dC.

A primeira menção de vasos linfáticos foi no século III a.C. por Herófilo, um anatomista grego que vivia em Alexandria, que concluiu incorretamente que as "veias absortivas dos linfáticos", com o qual ele se referia aos lacteais (vasos linfáticos dos intestinos), drenavam para as veias porta hepáticas e, portanto, para o fígado.

As descobertas de Ruphus e Herophilos foram propagadas pelo médico grego Galeno, que descreveu os linfonodos lácteos e mesentéricos que ele observou em sua dissecação de macacos e porcos no século II dC.

Em meados do século 16, Gabriele Falloppio (descobridor das trompas de falópio), descreveu o que hoje é conhecido como os lácteos como "percorrendo os intestinos cheios de matéria amarela".

Por volta de 1563, Bartolomeo Eustachi, professor de anatomia, descreveu o ducto torácico em cavalos como vena alba thoracis.

O próximo avanço veio quando em 1622 um médico, Gaspare Aselli, identificou vasos linfáticos do intestino em cães e os denominou venae albae et lacteae, que agora são conhecidos simplesmente como lacteals.

Os lácteos foram denominados o quarto tipo de vasos (os outros três são a artéria, a veia e o nervo, que então se acreditava ser um tipo de vaso), e refutou a afirmação de Galeno de que o quilo era transportado pelas veias.

Mas, ele ainda acreditava que os lácteos carregavam o quilo para o fígado (como ensinado por Galeno).

Ele também identificou o ducto torácico, mas não percebeu sua conexão com os lácteos. 

Essa conexão foi estabelecida por Jean Pecquet em 1651, que encontrou um fluido branco misturado com sangue no coração de um cão. 

Ele suspeitava que o fluido fosse quilo, pois seu fluxo aumentava quando a pressão abdominal era aplicada. 

Ele traçou esse fluido até o ducto torácico, que ele então seguiu até um saco cheio de quilo que ele chamou de receptáculo do quilo, que agora é conhecido como cisterna do quilo; outras investigações o levaram a descobrir que o conteúdo lácteo entra no sistema venoso através do ducto torácico.

Assim, ficou provado de forma convincente que os lácteos não terminavam no fígado, refutando assim a segunda ideia de Galeno: que o quilo fluía para o fígado. 

Johann Veslingius desenhou os primeiros esboços dos lacteais em humanos em 1647.

A ideia de que o sangue recircula pelo corpo em vez de ser produzido novamente pelo fígado e pelo coração foi aceita pela primeira vez como resultado dos trabalhos de William Harvey – um trabalho que ele publicou em 1628.

Em 1652, Olaus Rudbeck (1630-1702), um sueco, descobriu certos vasos transparentes no fígado que continham líquido claro (e não branco), e assim os nomeou vasos hepato-aquosos.

Ele também descobriu que eles desembocavam no ducto torácico e que tinham válvulas.

Ele anunciou suas descobertas na corte da rainha Cristina da Suécia, mas não publicou suas descobertas por um ano, e nesse ínterim descobertas semelhantes foram publicadas por Thomas Bartholin, que também publicou que tais vasos estão presentes em todo o corpo, não apenas no fígado.

Ele também é quem os nomeou "vasos linfáticos". Isso resultou em uma disputa acirrada entre um dos alunos de Bartholin, Martin Bogdan, e Rudbeck, a quem ele acusou de plágio.

As ideias de Galeno prevaleceram na medicina até o século XVII.

Pensava-se que o sangue era produzido pelo fígado do quilo contaminado com doenças do intestino e do estômago, ao qual vários espíritos eram adicionados por outros órgãos, e que esse sangue era consumido por todos os órgãos do corpo.

Essa teoria exigia que o sangue fosse consumido e produzido muitas vezes.

Ainda no século XVII, suas ideias foram defendidas por alguns médicos.

Alexander Monro, da Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de Edimburgo, foi o primeiro a descrever em detalhes a função do sistema linfático.

 
=== Etimologia ===

A linfa tem origem na palavra latina clássica lympha "água", que também é a fonte da palavra inglesa limpid.

A grafia com y e ph foi influenciada pela etimologia popular com o grego νύμϕη (nýmphē) "ninfa".

O adjetivo usado para o sistema de transporte da linfa é linfático.

O adjetivo usado para os tecidos onde os linfócitos são formados é linfóide.

Linfático vem da palavra latina lymphaticus, que significa "conectado à água".



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lymphatic_system
