

OESOPHAGUS/ESOPHAGUS


The oesophagus (British English; both) or esophagus (American English), informally known as the food pipe or gullet, is an organ in vertebrates through which food passes, aided by peristaltic contractions, from the pharynx to the stomach. 

The oesophagus is a fibromuscular tube, about 25 cm (10 in) long in adults, that travels behind the trachea and heart, passes through the diaphragm, and empties into the uppermost region of the stomach. 

During swallowing, the epiglottis tilts backwards to prevent food from going down the larynx and lungs. 

The word ooesophagus is from Ancient Greek οἰσοφάγος (oisophágos), from οἴσω (oísō), future form of φέρω (phérō, “I carry”) + ἔφαγον (éphagon, “I ate”).

The wall of the oesophagus from the lumen outwards consists of mucosa, submucosa (connective tissue), layers of muscle fibers between layers of fibrous tissue, and an outer layer of connective tissue. 

The mucosa is a stratified squamous epithelium of around three layers of squamous cells, which contrasts to the single layer of columnar cells of the stomach. 

The transition between these two types of epithelium is visible as a zig-zag line. 

Most of the muscle is smooth muscle although striated muscle predominates in its upper third. 

It has two muscular rings or sphincters in its wall, one at the top and one at the bottom. 

The lower sphincter helps to prevent reflux of acidic stomach content. 

The oesophagus has a rich blood supply and venous drainage. 

Its smooth muscle is innervated by involuntary nerves (sympathetic nerves via the sympathetic trunk and parasympathetic nerves via the vagus nerve) and in addition voluntary nerves (lower motor neurons) which are carried in the vagus nerve to innervate its striated muscle.

The oesophagus passes through the thoracic cavity into the diaphragm into the stomach.

The oesophagus may be affected by gastric reflux, cancer, prominent dilated blood vessels called varices that can bleed heavily, tears, constrictions, and disorders of motility. 

Diseases may cause difficulty swallowing (dysphagia), painful swallowing (odynophagia), chest pain, or cause no symptoms at all. 

Clinical investigations include X-rays when swallowing barium sulfate, endoscopy, and CT scans. 

Surgically, 
the oesophagus is difficult to access in part due to its position between critical organs and directly between the sternum and spinal column.


== Structure ==

The oesophagus is one of the upper parts of the digestive system. 

There are taste buds on its upper part. 

It begins at the back of the mouth, passing downward through the rear part of the mediastinum, through the diaphragm, and into the stomach. 

In humans, the oesophagus generally starts around the level of the sixth cervical vertebra behind the cricoid cartilage of the trachea, enters the diaphragm at about the level of the tenth thoracic vertebra, and ends at the cardia of the stomach, at the level of the eleventh thoracic vertebra. 

The oesophagus is usually about 25 cm (10 in) in length.Many blood vessels serve the oesophagus, with blood supply varying along its course. 

The upper parts of the oesophagus and the upper esophageal sphincter receive blood from the inferior thyroid artery, the parts of the oesophagus in the thorax from the bronchial arteries and branches directly from the thoracic aorta, and the lower parts of the oesophagus and the lower esophageal sphincter receive blood from the left gastric artery and the left inferior phrenic artery. 

The venous drainage also differs along the course of the oesophagus. 

The upper and middle parts of the oesophagus drain into the azygos and hemiazygos veins, and blood from the lower part drains into the left gastric vein. 

All these veins drain into the superior vena cava, with the exception of the left gastric vein, which is a branch of the portal vein. 

Lymphatically, the upper third of the oesophagus drains into the deep cervical lymph nodes, the middle into the superior and posterior mediastinal lymph nodes, and the lower oesophagus into the gastric and celiac lymph nodes. 

This is similar to the lymphatic drainage of the abdominal structures that arise from the foregut, which all drain into the celiac nodes.

Position
The upper oesophagus lies at the back of the mediastinum behind the trachea, adjoining along the tracheoesophageal stripe, and in front of the erector spinae muscles and the vertebral column. 

The lower oesophagus lies behind the heart and curves in front of the thoracic aorta. 

From the bifurcation of the trachea downwards, the oesophagus passes behind the right pulmonary artery, left main bronchus, and left atrium. 

At this point, it passes through the diaphragm.

The thoracic duct, which drains the majority of the body's lymph, passes behind the oesophagus, curving from lying behind the oesophagus on the right in the lower part of the oesophagus, to lying behind the oesophagus on the left in the upper oesophagus. 

The oesophagus also lies in front of parts of the hemiazygos veins and the intercostal veins on the right side. 

The vagus nerve divides and covers the oesophagus in a plexus.

Constrictions
The oesophagus has four points of constriction. 

When a corrosive substance, or a solid object is swallowed, it is most likely to lodge and damage one of these four points. 

These constrictions arise from particular structures that compress the oesophagus. 

These constrictions are:
-At the start of the oesophagus, where the laryngopharynx joins the oesophagus, behind the cricoid cartilage
-Where it is crossed on the front by the aortic arch in the superior mediastinum
-Where the oesophagus is compressed by the left main bronchus in the posterior mediastinum
-The esophageal hiatus, where it passes through the diaphragm in the posterior mediastinum


=== Sphincters ===

The oesophagus is surrounded at the top and bottom by two muscular rings, known respectively as the upper esophageal sphincter and the lower esophageal sphincter. 

These sphincters act to close the oesophagus when food is not being swallowed. 

The upper esophageal sphincter is an anatomical sphincter, which is formed by the lower portion of the inferior pharyngeal constrictor, also known as the cricopharyngeal sphincter due to its relation with cricoid cartilage of the larynx anteriorly. 

However, the lower esophageal sphincter is not an anatomical but rather a functional sphincter, meaning that it acts as a sphincter but does not have a distinct thickening like other sphincters.
The upper esophageal sphincter surrounds the upper part of the oesophagus. 

It consists of skeletal muscle but is not under voluntary control. 

Opening of the upper esophageal sphincter is triggered by the swallowing reflex. 

The primary muscle of the upper esophageal sphincter is the cricopharyngeal part of the inferior pharyngeal constrictor.

The lower esophageal sphincter, or gastroesophageal sphincter, surrounds the lower part of the oesophagus at the junction between the oesophagus and the stomach. 

It is also called the cardiac sphincter or cardioesophageal sphincter, named from the adjacent part of the stomach, the cardia. 

Dysfunction of the gastroesophageal sphincter causes gastroesophageal reflux, which causes heartburn and if it happens often enough, can lead to gastroesophageal reflux disease, with damage of the esophageal mucosa.


=== Nerve supply ===

The oesophagus is innervated by the vagus nerve and the cervical and thoracic sympathetic trunk. 

The vagus nerve has a parasympathetic function, supplying the muscles of the oesophagus and stimulating glandular contraction. 

Two sets of nerve fibers travel in the vagus nerve to supply the muscles. 

The upper striated muscle, and upper esophageal sphincter, are supplied by neurons with bodies in the nucleus ambiguus, whereas fibers that supply the smooth muscle and lower esophageal sphincter have bodies situated in the dorsal motor nucleus. 

The vagus nerve plays the primary role in initiating peristalsis. 

The sympathetic trunk has a sympathetic function. 

It may enhance the function of the vagus nerve, increasing peristalsis and glandular activity, and causing sphincter contraction. 

In addition, sympathetic activation may relax the muscle wall and cause blood vessel constriction. 

Sensation along the oesophagus is supplied by both nerves, with gross sensation being passed in the vagus nerve and pain passed up the sympathetic trunk.


=== Gastro-esophageal junction ===

The gastro-esophageal junction (also known as the esophagogastric junction) is the junction between the oesophagus and the stomach, at the lower end of the oesophagus. 

The pink color of the esophageal mucosa contrasts to the deeper red of the gastric mucosa, and the mucosal transition can be seen as an irregular zig-zag line, which is often called the z-line. 

Histological examination reveals abrupt transition between the stratified squamous epithelium of the oesophagus and the simple columnar epithelium of the stomach. 

Normally, the cardia of the stomach is immediately distal to the z-line and the z-line coincides with the upper limit of the gastric folds of the cardia; however, when the anatomy of the mucosa is distorted in Barrett's oesophagus the true gastro-eshophageal junction can be identified by the upper limit of the gastric folds rather than the mucosal transition. 

The functional location of the lower oesophageal sphincter is generally situated about 3 cm (1+1⁄4 in) below the z-line.


=== Microanatomy ===


The human oesophagus has a mucous membrane consisting of a tough stratified squamous epithelium without keratin, a smooth lamina propria, and a muscularis mucosae. 

The epithelium of the oesophagus has a relatively rapid turnover and serves a protective function against the abrasive effects of food. 

In many animals, the epithelium contains a layer of keratin, representing a coarser diet. 

There are two types of glands, with mucus-secreting esophageal glands being found in the submucosa and esophageal cardiac glands, similar to cardiac glands of the stomach, located in the lamina propria and most frequent in the terminal part of the organ. 

The mucus from the glands gives a good protection to the lining. 

The submucosa also contains the submucosal plexus, a network of nerve cells that is part of the enteric nervous system.The muscular layer of the oesophagus has two types of muscle. 

The upper third of the oesophagus contains striated muscle, the lower third contains smooth muscle, and the middle third contains a mixture of both. 

Muscle is arranged in two layers: one in which the muscle fibers run longitudinal to the oesophagus, and the other in which the fibers encircle the oesophagus. 

These are separated by the myenteric plexus, a tangled network of nerve fibers involved in the secretion of mucus and in peristalsis of the smooth muscle of the oesophagus. 

The outermost layer of the oesophagus is the adventitia in most of its length, with the abdominal part being covered in serosa. 

This makes it distinct from many other structures in the gastrointestinal tract that only have a serosa.


== Development ==

In early embryogenesis, the oesophagus develops from the endodermal primitive gut tube. 

The ventral part of the embryo abuts the yolk sac. 

During the second week of embryological development, as the embryo grows, it begins to surround parts of the sac. 

The enveloped portions form the basis for the adult gastrointestinal tract. 

The sac is surrounded by a network of vitelline arteries. 

Over time, these arteries consolidate into the three main arteries that supply the developing gastrointestinal tract: the celiac artery, superior mesenteric artery, and inferior mesenteric artery. 

The areas supplied by these arteries are used to define the midgut, hindgut and foregut.The surrounded sac becomes the primitive gut. 

Sections of this gut begin to differentiate into the organs of the gastrointestinal tract, such as the oesophagus, stomach, and intestines. 

The oesophagus develops as part of the foregut tube. 

The innervation of the oesophagus develops from the pharyngeal arches.


== Function ==

=== Swallowing ===

Food is ingested through the mouth and when swallowed passes first into the pharynx and then into the oesophagus. 

The oesophagus is thus one of the first components of the digestive system and the gastrointestinal tract. 

After food passes through the oesophagus, it enters the stomach. 

When food is being swallowed, the epiglottis moves backward to cover the larynx, preventing food from entering the trachea. 

At the same time, the upper esophageal sphincter relaxes, allowing a bolus of food to enter. 

Peristaltic contractions of the esophageal muscle push the food down the oesophagus. 

These rhythmic contractions occur both as a reflex response to food that is in the mouth, and also as a response to the sensation of food within the oesophagus itself. 

Along with peristalsis, the lower esophageal sphincter relaxes.


=== Reducing gastric reflux ===

The stomach produces gastric acid, a strongly acidic mixture consisting of hydrochloric acid (HCl) and potassium and sodium salts to enable food digestion. 

Constriction of the upper and lower esophageal sphincters helps to prevent reflux (backflow) of gastric contents and acid into the oesophagus, protecting the esophageal mucosa. 

The acute angle of His and the lower crura of the diaphragm also help this sphincteric action.


== Gene and protein expression ==

About 20,000 protein-coding genes are expressed in human cells and nearly 70% of these genes are expressed in the normal oesophagus. 

Some 250 of these genes are more specifically expressed in the oesophagus with less than 50 genes being highly specific. 

The corresponding oesophagus-specific proteins are mainly involved in squamous differentiation such as keratins KRT13, KRT4 and KRT6C. 

Other specific proteins that help lubricate the inner surface of oesophagus are mucins such as MUC21 and MUC22. 

Many genes with elevated expression are also shared with skin and other organs that are composed of squamous epithelia.


== Clinical significance ==

The main conditions affecting the oesophagus are described here. 

For a more complete list, see esophageal disease.


=== Inflammation ===


Inflammation of the oesophagus is known as esophagitis. 

Reflux of gastric acids from the stomach, infection, substances ingested (for example, corrosives), some medications (such as bisphosphonates), and food allergies can all lead to esophagitis. 

Esophageal candidiasis is an infection of the yeast Candida albicans that may occur when a person is immunocompromised. 

As of 2021 the causes of some forms of esophagitis, such as eosinophilic esophagitis, are not well-characterized, but may include Th2-mediated atopies or genetic factors. 

There appear to be correlations between eosinophilic esophagitis, asthma (itself with an eosinophilic component), eczema, and allergic rhinitis, though it is not clear whether these conditions contribute to eosinophilic esophagitis or vice versa, or if they are symptoms of mutual underlying factors. 

Esophagitis can cause painful swallowing and is usually treated by managing the cause of the esophagitis - such as managing reflux or treating infection.


=== Barrett's oesophagus ===


Prolonged esophagitis, particularly from gastric reflux, is one factor thought to play a role in the development of Barrett's oesophagus. 

In this condition, there is metaplasia of the lining of the lower oesophagus, which changes from stratified squamous epithelia to simple columnar epithelia. 

Barrett's oesophagus is thought to be one of the main contributors to the development of esophageal cancer.


=== Cancer ===


There are two main types of cancer of the oesophagus. 

Squamous cell carcinoma is a carcinoma that can occur in the squamous cells lining the oesophagus. 

This type is much more common in China and Iran. 

The other main type is an adenocarcinoma that occurs in the glands or columnar tissue of the oesophagus. 

This is most common in developed countries in those with Barrett's oesophagus, and occurs in the cuboidal cells.

In its early stages, esophageal cancer may not have any symptoms at all. 

When severe, esophageal cancer may eventually cause obstruction of the oesophagus, making swallowing of any solid foods very difficult and causing weight loss. 

The progress of the cancer is staged using a system that measures how far into the esophageal wall the cancer has invaded, how many lymph nodes are affected, and whether there are any metastases in different parts of the body. 

Esophageal cancer is often managed with radiotherapy, chemotherapy, and may also be managed by partial surgical removal of the oesophagus. 

Inserting a stent into the oesophagus, or inserting a nasogastric tube, may also be used to ensure that a person is able to digest enough food and water. 

As of 2014, the prognosis for esophageal cancer is still poor, so palliative therapy may also be a focus of treatment.


=== Varices ===


Esophageal varices are swollen twisted branches of the azygous vein in the lower third of the oesophagus. 

These blood vessels anastomose (join up) with those of the portal vein when portal hypertension develops. 

These blood vessels are engorged more than normal, and in the worst cases may partially obstruct the oesophagus. 

These blood vessels develop as part of a collateral circulation that occurs to drain blood from the abdomen as a result of portal hypertension, usually as a result of liver diseases such as cirrhosis.

This collateral circulation occurs because the lower part of the oesophagus drains into the left gastric vein, which is a branch of the portal vein. 

Because of the extensive venous plexus that exists between this vein and other veins, if portal hypertension occurs, the direction of blood drainage in this vein may reverse, with blood draining from the portal venous system, through the plexus. 

Veins in the plexus may engorge and lead to varices.Esophageal varices often do not have symptoms until they rupture. 

A ruptured varix is considered a medical emergency because varices can bleed a lot. 

A bleeding varix may cause a person to vomit blood, or suffer shock. 

To deal with a ruptured varix, a band may be placed around the bleeding blood vessel, or a small amount of a clotting agent may be injected near the bleed. 

A surgeon may also try to use a small inflatable balloon to apply pressure to stop the wound. 

IV fluids and blood products may be given in order to prevent hypovolemia from excess blood loss.


=== Motility disorders ===

Several disorders affect the motility of food as it travels down the oesophagus. 

This can cause difficult swallowing, called dysphagia, or painful swallowing, called odynophagia. 

Achalasia refers to a failure of the lower esophageal sphincter to relax properly, and generally develops later in life. 

This leads to progressive enlargement of the oesophagus, and possibly eventual megaoesophagus. 

A nutcracker oesophagus refers to swallowing that can be extremely painful. 

Diffuse esophageal spasm is a spasm of the oesophagus that can be one cause of chest pain. 

Such referred pain to the wall of the upper chest is quite common in esophageal conditions. 

Sclerosis of the oesophagus, such as with systemic sclerosis or in CREST syndrome may cause hardening of the walls of the oesophagus and interfere with peristalsis.


=== Malformations ===

Esophageal strictures are usually benign and typically develop after a person has had reflux for many years. 

Other strictures may include esophageal webs (which can also be congenital) and damage to the oesophagus by radiotherapy, corrosive ingestion, or eosinophilic esophagitis. 

A Schatzki ring is fibrosis at the gastro-esophageal junction. 

Strictures may also develop in chronic anemia, and Plummer-Vinson syndrome.

Two of the most common congenital malformations affecting the oesophagus are an esophageal atresia where the oesophagus ends in a blind sac instead of connecting to the stomach; and an esophageal fistula – an abnormal connection between the oesophagus and the trachea. 

Both of these conditions usually occur together. 

These are found in about 1 in 3500 births. 

Half of these cases may be part of a syndrome where other abnormalities are also present, particularly of the heart or limbs. 

The other cases occur singly.


=== Imaging ===


An X-ray of swallowed barium may be used to reveal the size and shape of the oesophagus, and the presence of any masses. 

The oesophagus may also be imaged using a flexible camera inserted into the oesophagus, in a procedure called an endoscopy. 

If an endoscopy is used on the stomach, the camera will also have to pass through the oesophagus. 

During an endoscopy, a biopsy may be taken. 

If cancer of the oesophagus is being investigated, other methods, including a CT scan, may also be used.


== History ==

The word oesophagus (British English: ooesophagus), comes from the Greek: οἰσοφάγος (oisophagos) meaning gullet. 

It derives from two roots (eosin) to carry and (phagos) to eat. 

The use of the word ooesophagus, has been documented in anatomical literature since at least the time of Hippocrates, who noted that "the ooesophagus ... receives the greatest amount of what we consume." 

Its existence in other animals and its relationship with the stomach was documented by the Roman naturalist Pliny the Elder (AD23–AD79), and the peristaltic contractions of the oesophagus have been documented since at least the time of Galen.

The first attempt at surgery on the oesophagus focused in the neck, and was conducted in dogs by Theodore Billroth in 1871. 

In 1877 Czerny carried out surgery in people. 

By 1908, an operation had been performed by Voeckler to remove the oesophagus, and in 1933 the first surgical removal of parts of the lower oesophagus, (to control esophageal cancer), had been conducted.

The Nissen fundoplication, in which the stomach is wrapped around the lower esophageal sphincter to stimulate its function and control reflux, was first conducted by Rudolph Nissen in 1955.


== Other animals ==



=== Vertebrates ===

In tetrapods, the pharynx is much shorter, and the oesophagus correspondingly longer, than in fish. 

In the majority of vertebrates, the oesophagus is simply a connecting tube, but in some birds, which regurgitate components to feed their young, it is extended towards the lower end to form a crop for storing food before it enters the true stomach. 

In ruminants, animals with four stomachs, a groove called the sulcus reticuli is often found in the oesophagus, allowing milk to drain directly into the hind stomach, the abomasum. 

In the horse the oesophagus is about 1.2 to 1.5 m (4 to 5 ft) in length, and carries food to the stomach. 

A muscular ring, called the cardiac sphincter, connects the stomach to the oesophagus. 

This sphincter is very well developed in horses. 

This and the oblique angle at which the oesophagus connects to the stomach explains why horses cannot vomit. 

The oesophagus is also the area of the digestive tract where horses may suffer from the condition known as choke.

The oesophagus of snakes is remarkable for the distension it undergoes when swallowing prey.In most fish, the oesophagus is extremely short, primarily due to the length of the pharynx (which is associated with the gills). 

However, some fish, including lampreys, chimaeras, and lungfish, have no true stomach, so that the oesophagus effectively runs from the pharynx directly to the intestine, and is therefore somewhat longer.

In many vertebrates, the oesophagus is lined by stratified squamous epithelium without glands. 

In fish, the oesophagus is often lined with columnar epithelium, and in amphibians, sharks and rays, the esophageal epithelium is ciliated, helping to wash food along, in addition to the action of muscular peristalsis. 

In addition, in the bat Plecotus auritus, fish and some amphibians, glands secreting pepsinogen or hydrochloric acid have been found.The muscle of the oesophagus in many mammals is initially striated but then becomes smooth muscle in the caudal third or so. 

In canines and ruminants, however, it is entirely striated to allow regurgitation to feed young (canines) or regurgitation to chew cud (ruminants). 

It is entirely smooth muscle in amphibians, reptiles and birds.

Contrary to popular belief, an adult human body would not be able to pass through the oesophagus of a whale, which generally measures less than 10 cm (4 in) in diameter, although in larger baleen whales it may be up to 25 cm (10 in) when fully distended.


=== Invertebrates ===

A structure with the same name is often found in invertebrates, including molluscs and arthropods, connecting the oral cavity with the stomach. 

In terms of the digestive system of snails and slugs, the mouth opens into an oesophagus, which connects to the stomach. 

Because of torsion, which is the rotation of the main body of the animal during larval development, the oesophagus usually passes around the stomach, and opens into its back, furthest from the mouth. 

In species that have undergone de-torsion, however, the oesophagus may open into the anterior of the stomach, which is the reverse of the usual gastropod arrangement. 

There is an extensive rostrum at the front of the oesophagus in all carnivorous snails and slugs. 

In the freshwater snail species Tarebia granifera, the brood pouch is above the oesophagus.In the cephalopods, the brain often surrounds the oesophagus.


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/oesophagus
;;;ES;;;



ESÓFAGO/ESÓFAGO


El esófago (inglés británico; ambos) o esófago (inglés americano), conocido informalmente como tubo de alimentación o garganta, es un órgano en los vertebrados a través del cual pasa la comida, con la ayuda de contracciones peristálticas, desde la faringe hasta el estómago. 

El esófago es un tubo fibromuscular, de unos 25 cm (10 pulgadas) de largo en adultos, que viaja detrás de la tráquea y el corazón, atraviesa el diafragma y desemboca en la región superior del estómago.

Durante la deglución, la epiglotis se inclina hacia atrás para evitar que la comida baje por la laringe y los pulmones.

La palabra esófago proviene del griego antiguo οἰσοφάγος (oisophágos), de οἴσω (oísō), forma futura de φέρω (phérō, “yo llevo”) + ἔφαγον (éphagon, “yo comí”).

La pared del esófago desde la luz hacia el exterior consta de mucosa, submucosa (tejido conectivo), capas de fibras musculares entre capas de tejido fibroso y una capa externa de tejido conectivo.

La mucosa es un epitelio escamoso estratificado de alrededor de tres capas de células escamosas, que contrasta con la capa única de células columnares del estómago.

La transición entre estos dos tipos de epitelio es visible como una línea en zig-zag. 

La mayor parte del músculo es músculo liso aunque en su tercio superior predomina el músculo estriado. 

Tiene dos anillos musculares o esfínteres en su pared, uno en la parte superior y otro en la parte inferior. 

El esfínter inferior ayuda a prevenir el reflujo del contenido ácido del estómago. 

El esófago tiene un rico suministro de sangre y drenaje venoso. 

Su músculo liso está inervado por nervios involuntarios (nervios simpáticos a través del tronco simpático y nervios parasimpáticos a través del nervio vago) y además nervios voluntarios (neuronas motoras inferiores) que se transportan en el nervio vago para inervar su músculo estriado.

El esófago pasa a través de la cavidad torácica hacia el diafragma hacia el estómago.

El esófago puede verse afectado por reflujo gástrico, cáncer, vasos sanguíneos dilatados prominentes llamados várices que pueden sangrar abundantemente, desgarros, constricciones y trastornos de la motilidad. 

Las enfermedades pueden causar dificultad para tragar (disfagia), dolor al tragar (odinofagia), dolor en el pecho o no causar ningún síntoma. 

Las investigaciones clínicas incluyen radiografías al tragar sulfato de bario, endoscopia y tomografías computarizadas. 

Quirúrgicamente, 
el esófago es de difícil acceso en parte debido a su posición entre órganos críticos y directamente entre el esternón y la columna vertebral.


== Estructura ==

El esófago es una de las partes superiores del sistema digestivo. 

Hay papilas gustativas en su parte superior. 

Comienza en la parte posterior de la boca, pasa hacia abajo a través de la parte posterior del mediastino, a través del diafragma y hacia el estómago. 

En los humanos, el esófago generalmente comienza alrededor del nivel de la sexta vértebra cervical detrás del cartílago cricoides de la tráquea, ingresa al diafragma aproximadamente al nivel de la décima vértebra torácica y termina en el cardias del estómago, al nivel del undécima vértebra torácica.

El esófago suele medir unos 25 cm (10 pulgadas) de largo. Muchos vasos sanguíneos irrigan el esófago, y el suministro de sangre varía a lo largo de su curso.

Las partes superiores del esófago y el esfínter esofágico superior reciben sangre de la arteria tiroidea inferior, las partes del esófago en el tórax de las arterias bronquiales y las ramas directamente de la aorta torácica, y las partes inferiores del esófago y el esófago inferior. el esfínter recibe sangre de la arteria gástrica izquierda y de la arteria frénica inferior izquierda.

El drenaje venoso también difiere a lo largo del trayecto del esófago. 

Las partes superior y media del esófago drenan en las venas ácigos y hemiácigos, y la sangre de la parte inferior drena en la vena gástrica izquierda. 

Todas estas venas desembocan en la vena cava superior, a excepción de la vena gástrica izquierda, que es rama de la vena porta. 

Linfáticamente, el tercio superior del esófago drena en los ganglios linfáticos cervicales profundos, el medio en los ganglios linfáticos mediastínicos superior y posterior, y el esófago inferior en los ganglios linfáticos gástricos y celíacos. 

Esto es similar al drenaje linfático de las estructuras abdominales que surgen del intestino anterior, que drenan todas hacia los ganglios celíacos.

Posición
El esófago superior se encuentra en la parte posterior del mediastino, detrás de la tráquea, junto a la franja traqueoesofágica, y frente a los músculos erectores de la columna y la columna vertebral. 

El esófago inferior se encuentra detrás del corazón y se curva frente a la aorta torácica. 

Desde la bifurcación de la tráquea hacia abajo, el esófago pasa por detrás de la arteria pulmonar derecha, el bronquio principal izquierdo y la aurícula izquierda. 

En este punto, pasa a través del diafragma.

El conducto torácico, que drena la mayor parte de la linfa del cuerpo, pasa por detrás del esófago y se curva desde detrás del esófago a la derecha en la parte inferior del esófago hasta detrás del esófago a la izquierda en la parte superior del esófago. 

El esófago también se encuentra frente a partes de las venas hemiácigos y las venas intercostales del lado derecho. 

El nervio vago se divide y cubre el esófago en un plexo.

Constricciones
El esófago tiene cuatro puntos de constricción. 

Cuando se traga una sustancia corrosiva, o un objeto sólido, lo más probable es que se aloje y dañe uno de estos cuatro puntos. 

Estas constricciones surgen de estructuras particulares que comprimen el esófago. 

Estas constricciones son:
-En el inicio del esófago, donde la laringofaringe se une al esófago, detrás del cartílago cricoides
-Donde lo cruza por delante el arco aórtico en el mediastino superior
-Donde el bronquio principal izquierdo comprime el esófago en el mediastino posterior
-El hiato esofágico, donde pasa a través del diafragma en el mediastino posterior


=== Esfínteres ===

El esófago está rodeado por arriba y por abajo por dos anillos musculares, conocidos respectivamente como esfínter esofágico superior y esfínter esofágico inferior.

Estos esfínteres actúan para cerrar el esófago cuando no se traga la comida.

El esfínter esofágico superior es un esfínter anatómico, que está formado por la porción inferior del constrictor faríngeo inferior, también conocido como esfínter cricofaríngeo debido a su relación con el cartílago cricoides de la laringe anteriormente.

Sin embargo, el esfínter esofágico inferior no es un esfínter anatómico sino funcional, lo que significa que actúa como un esfínter pero no tiene un engrosamiento distintivo como otros esfínteres.
El esfínter esofágico superior rodea la parte superior del esófago.

Se compone de músculo esquelético pero no está bajo control voluntario.

El reflejo de deglución desencadena la apertura del esfínter esofágico superior. 

El músculo principal del esfínter esofágico superior es la parte cricofaríngea del constrictor faríngeo inferior.

El esfínter esofágico inferior, o esfínter gastroesofágico, rodea la parte inferior del esófago en la unión entre el esófago y el estómago. 

También se le llama esfínter cardíaco o esfínter cardioesofágico, llamado así por la parte adyacente del estómago, el cardias. 

La disfunción del esfínter gastroesofágico provoca reflujo gastroesofágico, que provoca acidez estomacal y, si ocurre con la suficiente frecuencia, puede provocar la enfermedad por reflujo gastroesofágico, con daño de la mucosa esofágica.


=== Suministro nervioso ===

El esófago está inervado por el nervio vago y el tronco simpático cervical y torácico. 

El nervio vago tiene una función parasimpática, inerva los músculos del esófago y estimula la contracción glandular. 

Dos conjuntos de fibras nerviosas viajan en el nervio vago para inervar los músculos. 

El músculo estriado superior y el esfínter esofágico superior están inervados por neuronas con cuerpos en el núcleo ambiguo, mientras que las fibras que inervan el músculo liso y el esfínter esofágico inferior tienen cuerpos situados en el núcleo motor dorsal. 

El nervio vago juega el papel principal en el inicio del peristaltismo. 

El tronco simpático tiene una función simpática. 

Puede mejorar la función del nervio vago, aumentando el peristaltismo y la actividad glandular, y provocando la contracción del esfínter. 

Además, la activación simpática puede relajar la pared muscular y provocar la constricción de los vasos sanguíneos. 

La sensibilidad a lo largo del esófago es suministrada por ambos nervios, la sensación macroscópica se transmite al nervio vago y el dolor asciende por el tronco simpático.


=== Unión gastroesofágica ===

La unión gastroesofágica (también conocida como unión esofagogástrica) es la unión entre el esófago y el estómago, en el extremo inferior del esófago.

El color rosa de la mucosa esofágica contrasta con el rojo más intenso de la mucosa gástrica, y la transición de la mucosa se puede ver como una línea irregular en zigzag, que a menudo se denomina línea z.

El examen histológico revela una transición abrupta entre el epitelio escamoso estratificado del esófago y el epitelio cilíndrico simple del estómago.

Normalmente, el cardias del estómago es inmediatamente distal a la línea z y la línea z coincide con el límite superior de los pliegues gástricos del cardias; sin embargo, cuando la anatomía de la mucosa está distorsionada en el esófago de Barrett, la verdadera unión gastroesofágica puede identificarse por el límite superior de los pliegues gástricos en lugar de la transición de la mucosa.

La ubicación funcional del esfínter esofágico inferior generalmente se sitúa a unos 3 cm (1+1⁄4 pulgadas) por debajo de la línea z.


=== Microanatomía ===


El esófago humano tiene una membrana mucosa que consta de un epitelio escamoso estratificado duro sin queratina, una lámina propia lisa y una muscularis mucosae.

El epitelio del esófago tiene una renovación relativamente rápida y cumple una función protectora contra los efectos abrasivos de los alimentos.

En muchos animales, el epitelio contiene una capa de queratina, lo que representa una dieta más gruesa. 

Existen dos tipos de glándulas, las glándulas esofágicas secretoras de moco se encuentran en la submucosa y las glándulas cardíacas esofágicas, similares a las glándulas cardíacas del estómago, ubicadas en la lámina propia y más frecuentes en la parte terminal del órgano. 

El moco de las glándulas brinda una buena protección al revestimiento. 

La submucosa también contiene el plexo submucoso, una red de células nerviosas que forma parte del sistema nervioso entérico. La capa muscular del esófago tiene dos tipos de músculos. 

El tercio superior del esófago contiene músculo estriado, el tercio inferior contiene músculo liso y el tercio medio contiene una mezcla de ambos. 

El músculo está dispuesto en dos capas: una en la que las fibras musculares discurren longitudinalmente al esófago y la otra en la que las fibras rodean el esófago.

Estos están separados por el plexo mientérico, una red enmarañada de fibras nerviosas involucradas en la secreción de moco y en el peristaltismo del músculo liso del esófago.

La capa más externa del esófago es la adventicia en la mayor parte de su longitud, con la parte abdominal cubierta de serosa.

Esto lo distingue de muchas otras estructuras en el tracto gastrointestinal que solo tienen una serosa.


== Desarrollo ==

En la embriogénesis temprana, el esófago se desarrolla a partir del tubo intestinal primitivo endodérmico.

La parte ventral del embrión se apoya en el saco vitelino.

Durante la segunda semana de desarrollo embriológico, a medida que el embrión crece, comienza a rodear partes del saco.

Las porciones envueltas forman la base para el tracto gastrointestinal adulto. 

El saco está rodeado por una red de arterias vitelinas. 

Con el tiempo, estas arterias se consolidan en las tres arterias principales que irrigan el tracto gastrointestinal en desarrollo: la arteria celíaca, la arteria mesentérica superior y la arteria mesentérica inferior. 

Las áreas irrigadas por estas arterias se utilizan para definir el intestino medio, el intestino posterior y el intestino anterior. El saco rodeado se convierte en el intestino primitivo. 

Las secciones de este intestino comienzan a diferenciarse en los órganos del tracto gastrointestinal, como el esófago, el estómago y los intestinos. 

El esófago se desarrolla como parte del tubo del intestino anterior. 

La inervación del esófago se desarrolla a partir de los arcos faríngeos.


== Función ==

=== Tragar ===

El alimento se ingiere por la boca y al tragarlo pasa primero a la faringe y luego al esófago. 

El esófago es así uno de los primeros componentes del sistema digestivo y del tracto gastrointestinal.

Después de que la comida pasa por el esófago, entra al estómago.

Cuando se traga la comida, la epiglotis se mueve hacia atrás para cubrir la laringe, evitando que la comida entre en la tráquea.

Al mismo tiempo, el esfínter esofágico superior se relaja, permitiendo la entrada de un bolo alimenticio.

Las contracciones peristálticas del músculo esofágico empujan la comida hacia el esófago.

Estas contracciones rítmicas ocurren como una respuesta refleja a la comida que está en la boca y también como una respuesta a la sensación de comida dentro del esófago mismo.

Junto con el peristaltismo, el esfínter esofágico inferior se relaja.


=== Reducir el reflujo gástrico ===

El estómago produce ácido gástrico, una mezcla fuertemente ácida que consiste en ácido clorhídrico (HCl) y sales de potasio y sodio para permitir la digestión de los alimentos.

La constricción de los esfínteres esofágicos superior e inferior ayuda a prevenir el reflujo (reflujo) del contenido gástrico y el ácido hacia el esófago, protegiendo la mucosa esofágica.

El ángulo agudo de His y los pilares inferiores del diafragma también ayudan a esta acción esfinteriana.


== Expresión de genes y proteínas ==

Aproximadamente 20.000 genes que codifican proteínas se expresan en células humanas y casi el 70% de estos genes se expresan en el esófago normal.

Unos 250 de estos genes se expresan más específicamente en el esófago y menos de 50 genes son altamente específicos.

Las proteínas específicas del esófago correspondientes están involucradas principalmente en la diferenciación escamosa, como las queratinas KRT13, KRT4 y KRT6C.

Otras proteínas específicas que ayudan a lubricar la superficie interna del esófago son mucinas como MUC21 y MUC22. 

Muchos genes con expresión elevada también se comparten con la piel y otros órganos que están compuestos por epitelio escamoso.


== Importancia clínica ==

Las principales condiciones que afectan el esófago se describen aquí. 

Para obtener una lista más completa, consulte enfermedad esofágica.


=== Inflamación ===


La inflamación del esófago se conoce como esofagitis. 

El reflujo de ácidos gástricos del estómago, la infección, las sustancias ingeridas (por ejemplo, los corrosivos), algunos medicamentos (como los bisfosfonatos) y las alergias alimentarias pueden provocar esofagitis. 

La candidiasis esofágica es una infección de la levadura Candida albicans que puede ocurrir cuando una persona está inmunodeprimida. 

A partir de 2021, las causas de algunas formas de esofagitis, como la esofagitis eosinofílica, no están bien caracterizadas, pero pueden incluir atopias mediadas por Th2 o factores genéticos. 

Parece haber correlaciones entre la esofagitis eosinofílica, el asma (en sí mismo con un componente eosinofílico), el eccema y la rinitis alérgica, aunque no está claro si estas condiciones contribuyen a la esofagitis eosinofílica o viceversa, o si son síntomas de factores subyacentes mutuos. 

La esofagitis puede causar dolor al tragar y generalmente se trata controlando la causa de la esofagitis, como controlar el reflujo o tratar una infección.


=== Esófago de Barrett ===


La esofagitis prolongada, particularmente por reflujo gástrico, es un factor que se cree que juega un papel en el desarrollo del esófago de Barrett. 

En esta condición, hay metaplasia del revestimiento del esófago inferior, que cambia de epitelio escamoso estratificado a epitelio cilíndrico simple.

Se cree que el esófago de Barrett es uno de los principales contribuyentes al desarrollo del cáncer de esófago.


=== Cáncer ===


Hay dos tipos principales de cáncer de esófago.

El carcinoma de células escamosas es un carcinoma que puede ocurrir en las células escamosas que recubren el esófago.

Este tipo es mucho más común en China e Irán.

El otro tipo principal es un adenocarcinoma que se presenta en las glándulas o tejido cilíndrico del esófago.

Esto es más común en los países desarrollados en aquellos con esófago de Barrett y ocurre en las células cuboidales.

En sus primeras etapas, es posible que el cáncer de esófago no presente ningún síntoma.

Cuando es grave, el cáncer de esófago puede llegar a causar la obstrucción del esófago, lo que dificulta mucho la deglución de cualquier alimento sólido y provoca la pérdida de peso.

El progreso del cáncer se clasifica por etapas usando un sistema que mide qué tan lejos ha invadido el cáncer en la pared esofágica, cuántos ganglios linfáticos están afectados y si hay metástasis en diferentes partes del cuerpo.

El cáncer de esófago a menudo se trata con radioterapia, quimioterapia y también puede tratarse mediante la extirpación quirúrgica parcial del esófago.

También se puede usar la inserción de un stent en el esófago o la inserción de una sonda nasogástrica para garantizar que una persona pueda digerir suficiente comida y agua.

A partir de 2014, el pronóstico del cáncer de esófago sigue siendo malo, por lo que la terapia paliativa también puede ser un enfoque de tratamiento.


=== Várices ===


Las várices esofágicas son ramas torcidas e hinchadas de la vena ácigos en el tercio inferior del esófago.

Estos vasos sanguíneos se anastomosan (se unen) con los de la vena porta cuando se desarrolla hipertensión portal.

Estos vasos sanguíneos están más congestionados de lo normal y, en el peor de los casos, pueden obstruir parcialmente el esófago.

Estos vasos sanguíneos se desarrollan como parte de una circulación colateral que se produce para drenar la sangre del abdomen como resultado de la hipertensión portal, generalmente como resultado de enfermedades hepáticas como la cirrosis.

Esta circulación colateral se produce porque la parte inferior del esófago drena en la vena gástrica izquierda, que es una rama de la vena porta.

Debido al extenso plexo venoso que existe entre esta vena y otras venas, si se produce hipertensión portal, la dirección del drenaje de sangre en esta vena puede invertirse y la sangre drena desde el sistema venoso portal a través del plexo. 

Las venas en el plexo pueden hincharse y provocar várices. Las várices esofágicas a menudo no presentan síntomas hasta que se rompen. 

Una várice rota se considera una emergencia médica porque las várices pueden sangrar mucho. 

Una várice sangrante puede hacer que una persona vomite sangre o sufra un shock. 

Para tratar una várice rota, se puede colocar una banda alrededor del vaso sanguíneo que sangra o se puede inyectar una pequeña cantidad de un agente coagulante cerca del sangrado. 

Un cirujano también puede intentar usar un pequeño globo inflable para aplicar presión y detener la herida. 

Se pueden administrar líquidos y hemoderivados por vía intravenosa para prevenir la hipovolemia por pérdida excesiva de sangre.


=== Trastornos de la motilidad ===

Varios trastornos afectan la motilidad de los alimentos a medida que descienden por el esófago. 

Esto puede causar dificultad para tragar, llamada disfagia, o dolor al tragar, llamado odinofagia. 

La acalasia se refiere a una falla del esfínter esofágico inferior para relajarse adecuadamente y generalmente se desarrolla más tarde en la vida. 

Esto conduce al agrandamiento progresivo del esófago y posiblemente al megaesófago final. 

Un esófago en cascanueces se refiere a la deglución que puede ser extremadamente dolorosa. 

El espasmo esofágico difuso es un espasmo del esófago que puede ser una de las causas del dolor torácico. 

Tal dolor referido a la pared de la parte superior del tórax es bastante común en condiciones esofágicas. 

La esclerosis del esófago, como la esclerosis sistémica o el síndrome CREST, puede causar el endurecimiento de las paredes del esófago e interferir con el peristaltismo.


=== Malformaciones ===

Las estenosis esofágicas suelen ser benignas y normalmente se desarrollan después de que una persona ha tenido reflujo durante muchos años. 

Otras estenosis pueden incluir membranas esofágicas (que también pueden ser congénitas) y daño al esófago por radioterapia, ingestión corrosiva o esofagitis eosinofílica. 

Un anillo de Schatzki es una fibrosis en la unión gastroesofágica. 

Las estenosis también pueden desarrollarse en la anemia crónica y el síndrome de Plummer-Vinson.

Dos de las malformaciones congénitas más comunes que afectan al esófago son una atresia esofágica en la que el esófago termina en un saco ciego en lugar de conectarse con el estómago; y una fístula esofágica, una conexión anormal entre el esófago y la tráquea.

Ambas condiciones generalmente ocurren juntas.

Estos se encuentran en aproximadamente 1 de cada 3500 nacimientos.

La mitad de estos casos pueden ser parte de un síndrome en el que también están presentes otras anomalías, en particular del corazón o las extremidades.

Los demás casos se dan de forma aislada.


=== Imágenes ===


Se puede usar una radiografía de bario ingerido para revelar el tamaño y la forma del esófago y la presencia de masas.

También se pueden obtener imágenes del esófago usando una cámara flexible insertada en el esófago, en un procedimiento llamado endoscopia.

Si se utiliza una endoscopia en el estómago, la cámara también tendrá que pasar por el esófago.

Durante una endoscopia, se puede tomar una biopsia.

Si se está investigando el cáncer de esófago, también se pueden usar otros métodos, incluida una tomografía computarizada.


== Historia ==

La palabra esófago (inglés británico: ooesophagus), proviene del griego: οἰσοφάγος (oisophagos) que significa garganta.

Deriva de dos raíces (eosina) llevar y (phagos) comer.

El uso de la palabra esófago se ha documentado en la literatura anatómica desde al menos la época de Hipócrates, quien señaló que "el esófago ... recibe la mayor cantidad de lo que consumimos".

Su existencia en otros animales y su relación con el estómago fue documentada por el naturalista romano Plinio el Viejo (23-79 d. C.), y las contracciones peristálticas del esófago se han documentado desde al menos la época de Galeno.

El primer intento de cirugía en el esófago se centró en el cuello y fue realizado en perros por Theodore Billroth en 1871.

En 1877 Czerny realizó cirugías en personas.

En 1908, Voeckler había realizado una operación para extirpar el esófago, y en 1933 se había realizado la primera extirpación quirúrgica de partes del esófago inferior (para controlar el cáncer de esófago).

La fundoplicatura de Nissen, en la que el estómago se envuelve alrededor del esfínter esofágico inferior para estimular su función y controlar el reflujo, fue realizada por primera vez por Rudolph Nissen en 1955.


== Otros animales ==



=== Vertebrados ===

En los tetrápodos, la faringe es mucho más corta y el esófago correspondientemente más largo que en los peces.

En la mayoría de los vertebrados, el esófago es simplemente un tubo de conexión, pero en algunas aves, que regurgitan componentes para alimentar a sus crías, se extiende hacia el extremo inferior para formar un buche para almacenar alimentos antes de que entren en el verdadero estómago.

En los rumiantes, animales con cuatro estómagos, a menudo se encuentra en el esófago un surco llamado sulcus reticuli, que permite que la leche drene directamente hacia el estómago posterior, el abomaso.

En el caballo, el esófago mide aproximadamente 1,2 a 1,5 m (4 a 5 pies) de largo y lleva la comida al estómago.

Un anillo muscular, llamado esfínter cardíaco, conecta el estómago con el esófago.

Este esfínter está muy bien desarrollado en los caballos.

Esto y el ángulo oblicuo en el que el esófago se conecta con el estómago explican por qué los caballos no pueden vomitar.

El esófago es también el área del tracto digestivo donde los caballos pueden sufrir de la condición conocida como estrangulamiento.

El esófago de las serpientes es notable por la distensión que sufre al tragar presas. En la mayoría de los peces, el esófago es extremadamente corto, principalmente debido a la longitud de la faringe (que está asociada con las branquias).

Sin embargo, algunos peces, incluidas las lampreas, las quimeras y los peces pulmonados, no tienen un verdadero estómago, por lo que el esófago va desde la faringe directamente hasta el intestino y, por lo tanto, es un poco más largo.

En muchos vertebrados, el esófago está revestido por epitelio escamoso estratificado sin glándulas.

En los peces, el esófago a menudo está revestido con epitelio cilíndrico, y en anfibios, tiburones y rayas, el epitelio esofágico está ciliado, lo que ayuda a lavar los alimentos, además de la acción del peristaltismo muscular. 

Además, en el murciélago Plecotus auritus, peces y algunos anfibios, se han encontrado glándulas que secretan pepsinógeno o ácido clorhídrico. El músculo del esófago en muchos mamíferos es inicialmente estriado pero luego se convierte en músculo liso en el tercio caudal más o menos. 

En caninos y rumiantes, sin embargo, está completamente estriado para permitir la regurgitación para alimentar a las crías (caninos) o la regurgitación para rumiar (rumiantes). 

Es totalmente músculo liso en anfibios, reptiles y aves.

Contrariamente a la creencia popular, un cuerpo humano adulto no podría atravesar el esófago de una ballena, que generalmente mide menos de 10 cm (4 pulgadas) de diámetro, aunque en las ballenas barbadas más grandes puede llegar a los 25 cm (10 pulgadas). adentro) cuando está completamente distendido.


=== Invertebrados ===

Una estructura con el mismo nombre se encuentra a menudo en invertebrados, incluidos moluscos y artrópodos, que conectan la cavidad bucal con el estómago.

En cuanto al sistema digestivo de los caracoles y las babosas, la boca se abre en un esófago, que se conecta con el estómago.

Debido a la torsión, que es la rotación del cuerpo principal del animal durante el desarrollo larvario, el esófago generalmente pasa alrededor del estómago y se abre hacia la espalda, lo más alejado de la boca.

Sin embargo, en las especies que han sufrido detorsión, el esófago puede abrirse hacia la parte anterior del estómago, que es el reverso de la disposición habitual de los gasterópodos.

Hay una tribuna extensa en la parte delantera del esófago en todos los caracoles y babosas carnívoros.

En la especie de caracol de agua dulce Tarebia granifera, la bolsa de cría está por encima del esófago. En los cefalópodos, el cerebro a menudo rodea el esófago.


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/esófago

;;;FR;;;



ŒSOPHAGE/ŒSOPHAGE


L' œsophage ( anglais britannique ; les deux ) ou œsophage ( anglais américain ), officieusement connu sous le nom de tuyau alimentaire ou oesophage , est un organe chez les vertébrés à travers lequel la nourriture passe, aidée par des contractions péristaltiques , du pharynx à l'estomac. 

L'œsophage est un tube fibromusculaire, d'environ 25 cm (10 po) de long chez l'adulte, qui se déplace derrière la trachée et le cœur, traverse le diaphragme et se vide dans la région la plus haute de l'estomac. 

Lors de la déglutition, l'épiglotte s'incline vers l'arrière pour empêcher les aliments de descendre dans le larynx et les poumons. 

Le mot ooesophage vient du grec ancien οἰσοφάγος (oisophágos), de οἴσω (oísō), forme future de φέρω (phérō, « je porte ») + ἔφαγον (éphagon, « j'ai mangé »).

La paroi de l'œsophage depuis la lumière vers l'extérieur est constituée de muqueuse, de sous-muqueuse (tissu conjonctif), de couches de fibres musculaires entre les couches de tissu fibreux et d'une couche externe de tissu conjonctif.

La muqueuse est un épithélium squameux stratifié d'environ trois couches de cellules squameuses, qui contraste avec la couche unique de cellules cylindriques de l'estomac.

La transition entre ces deux types d'épithélium est visible sous la forme d'une ligne en zigzag.

La majeure partie du muscle est du muscle lisse bien que le muscle strié prédomine dans son tiers supérieur.

Il a deux anneaux musculaires ou sphincters dans sa paroi, un en haut et un en bas.

Le sphincter inférieur aide à prévenir le reflux du contenu acide de l'estomac.

L'œsophage a un riche apport sanguin et un drainage veineux.

Son muscle lisse est innervé par des nerfs involontaires (nerfs sympathiques via le tronc sympathique et nerfs parasympathiques via le nerf vague) et par des nerfs volontaires (neurones moteurs inférieurs) qui sont transportés dans le nerf vague pour innerver son muscle strié.

L'œsophage passe à travers la cavité thoracique dans le diaphragme dans l'estomac.

L'œsophage peut être affecté par le reflux gastrique, le cancer, des vaisseaux sanguins dilatés proéminents appelés varices qui peuvent saigner abondamment, des déchirures, des constrictions et des troubles de la motilité.

Les maladies peuvent entraîner des difficultés à avaler (dysphagie), une déglutition douloureuse (odynophagie), des douleurs thoraciques ou ne causer aucun symptôme.

Les investigations cliniques comprennent des rayons X lors de l'ingestion de sulfate de baryum, une endoscopie et des tomodensitogrammes.

Chirurgicalement,
l'œsophage est difficile d'accès en partie à cause de sa position entre les organes critiques et directement entre le sternum et la colonne vertébrale.


== Structure ==

L'œsophage est l'une des parties supérieures du système digestif.

Il y a des papilles gustatives sur sa partie supérieure.

Il commence à l'arrière de la bouche, passant vers le bas à travers la partie arrière du médiastin, à travers le diaphragme et dans l'estomac.

Chez l'homme, l'œsophage commence généralement autour du niveau de la sixième vertèbre cervicale derrière le cartilage cricoïde de la trachée, pénètre dans le diaphragme à peu près au niveau de la dixième vertèbre thoracique et se termine au niveau du cardia de l'estomac, au niveau du onzième vertèbre thoracique.

L'œsophage mesure généralement environ 25 cm (10 po) de longueur. De nombreux vaisseaux sanguins desservent l'œsophage, l'apport sanguin variant le long de son parcours.

Les parties supérieures de l'œsophage et le sphincter supérieur de l'œsophage reçoivent le sang de l'artère thyroïdienne inférieure, les parties de l'œsophage dans le thorax des artères bronchiques et des branches directement de l'aorte thoracique, et les parties inférieures de l'œsophage et de l'œsophage inférieur sphincter reçoivent le sang de l'artère gastrique gauche et de l'artère phrénique inférieure gauche. 

Le drainage veineux diffère également le long du trajet de l'œsophage. 

Les parties supérieure et médiane de l'œsophage s'écoulent dans les veines azygos et hémiazygos, et le sang de la partie inférieure s'écoule dans la veine gastrique gauche. 

Toutes ces veines se déversent dans la veine cave supérieure, à l'exception de la veine gastrique gauche, qui est une branche de la veine porte. 

Lymphatiquement, le tiers supérieur de l'œsophage se draine dans les ganglions lymphatiques cervicaux profonds, le milieu dans les ganglions lymphatiques médiastinaux supérieurs et postérieurs et l'œsophage inférieur dans les ganglions lymphatiques gastriques et coeliaques.

Ceci est similaire au drainage lymphatique des structures abdominales qui proviennent de l'intestin antérieur, qui se drainent toutes dans les nœuds coeliaques.

Position
L'œsophage supérieur se situe à l'arrière du médiastin derrière la trachée, attenant le long de la bande trachéo-œsophagienne, et devant les muscles érecteurs du rachis et la colonne vertébrale.

L'œsophage inférieur se situe derrière le cœur et se courbe devant l'aorte thoracique.

De la bifurcation de la trachée vers le bas, l'œsophage passe derrière l'artère pulmonaire droite, la bronche principale gauche et l'oreillette gauche.

À ce stade, il traverse le diaphragme.

Le canal thoracique, qui draine la majorité de la lymphe du corps, passe derrière l'œsophage, se courbant de derrière l'œsophage à droite dans la partie inférieure de l'œsophage, à derrière l'œsophage à gauche dans l'œsophage supérieur.

L'œsophage se trouve également devant des parties des veines hémiazygos et des veines intercostales du côté droit.

Le nerf vague se divise et recouvre l'œsophage en un plexus.

Constrictions
L'œsophage a quatre points de constriction.

Lorsqu'une substance corrosive ou un objet solide est avalé, il est fort probable qu'il se loge et endommage l'un de ces quatre points.

Ces constrictions proviennent de structures particulières qui compriment l'œsophage.

Ces contraintes sont :
-Au début de l'œsophage, là où le laryngopharynx rejoint l'œsophage, derrière le cartilage cricoïde
-Où il est traversé en avant par la crosse aortique dans le médiastin supérieur
-Où l'œsophage est comprimé par la bronche principale gauche dans le médiastin postérieur
-Le hiatus oesophagien, où il traverse le diaphragme dans le médiastin postérieur


=== Sphincters ===

L'œsophage est entouré en haut et en bas par deux anneaux musculaires, appelés respectivement sphincter œsophagien supérieur et sphincter œsophagien inférieur. 

Ces sphincters agissent pour fermer l'œsophage lorsque la nourriture n'est pas avalée. 

Le sphincter supérieur de l'œsophage est un sphincter anatomique formé par la partie inférieure du constricteur pharyngé inférieur, également connu sous le nom de sphincter cricopharyngé en raison de sa relation avec le cartilage cricoïde du larynx en avant. 

Cependant, le sphincter inférieur de l'œsophage n'est pas un sphincter anatomique mais plutôt un sphincter fonctionnel, ce qui signifie qu'il agit comme un sphincter mais n'a pas d'épaississement distinct comme les autres sphincters.
Le sphincter supérieur de l'œsophage entoure la partie supérieure de l'œsophage.

Il se compose de muscle squelettique mais n'est pas sous contrôle volontaire.

L'ouverture du sphincter supérieur de l'œsophage est déclenchée par le réflexe de déglutition.

Le muscle principal du sphincter supérieur de l'œsophage est la partie cricopharyngée du constricteur pharyngé inférieur.

Le sphincter inférieur de l'œsophage, ou sphincter gastro-œsophagien, entoure la partie inférieure de l'œsophage à la jonction entre l'œsophage et l'estomac.

Il est aussi appelé sphincter cardiaque ou sphincter cardio-oesophagien, du nom de la partie adjacente de l'estomac, le cardia.

Le dysfonctionnement du sphincter gastro-œsophagien provoque un reflux gastro-œsophagien, qui provoque des brûlures d'estomac et, s'il se produit assez souvent, peut entraîner un reflux gastro-œsophagien, avec des lésions de la muqueuse œsophagienne.


=== Innervation ===

L'œsophage est innervé par le nerf vague et le tronc sympathique cervical et thoracique. 

Le nerf vague a une fonction parasympathique, irriguant les muscles de l'œsophage et stimulant la contraction glandulaire. 

Deux ensembles de fibres nerveuses voyagent dans le nerf vague pour irriguer les muscles. 

Le muscle strié supérieur et le sphincter supérieur de l'œsophage sont alimentés par des neurones avec des corps dans le noyau ambigu, tandis que les fibres qui alimentent le muscle lisse et le sphincter inférieur de l'œsophage ont des corps situés dans le noyau moteur dorsal. 

Le nerf vague joue le rôle principal dans l'initiation du péristaltisme. 

Le tronc sympathique a une fonction sympathique. 

Il peut améliorer la fonction du nerf vague, augmenter le péristaltisme et l'activité glandulaire et provoquer une contraction du sphincter. 

De plus, l'activation sympathique peut détendre la paroi musculaire et provoquer une constriction des vaisseaux sanguins. 

La sensation le long de l'œsophage est fournie par les deux nerfs, la sensation grossière étant transmise dans le nerf vague et la douleur transmise par le tronc sympathique.


=== Jonction gastro-oesophagienne ===

La jonction gastro-œsophagienne (également appelée jonction œsogastrique) est la jonction entre l'œsophage et l'estomac, à l'extrémité inférieure de l'œsophage. 

La couleur rose de la muqueuse œsophagienne contraste avec le rouge plus profond de la muqueuse gastrique, et la transition muqueuse peut être considérée comme une ligne irrégulière en zig-zag, souvent appelée ligne z. 

L'examen histologique révèle une transition abrupte entre l'épithélium pavimenteux stratifié de l'œsophage et l'épithélium cylindrique simple de l'estomac. 

Normalement, le cardia de l'estomac est immédiatement distal à la ligne z et la ligne z coïncide avec la limite supérieure des plis gastriques du cardia ; cependant, lorsque l'anatomie de la muqueuse est déformée dans l'œsophage de Barrett, la véritable jonction gastro-œsophagienne peut être identifiée par la limite supérieure des plis gastriques plutôt que par la transition muqueuse.

L'emplacement fonctionnel du sphincter inférieur de l'œsophage est généralement situé à environ 3 cm (1+1⁄4 po) sous la ligne z.


=== Microanatomie ===


L'œsophage humain a une membrane muqueuse constituée d'un épithélium squameux stratifié dur sans kératine, d'une lamina propria lisse et d'une musculeuse muqueuse. 

L'épithélium de l'œsophage a un renouvellement relativement rapide et remplit une fonction protectrice contre les effets abrasifs des aliments.

Chez de nombreux animaux, l'épithélium contient une couche de kératine, représentant une alimentation plus grossière.

Il existe deux types de glandes, les glandes œsophagiennes sécrétant du mucus se trouvant dans la sous-muqueuse et les glandes cardiaques œsophagiennes, semblables aux glandes cardiaques de l'estomac, situées dans la lamina propria et plus fréquentes dans la partie terminale de l'organe.

Le mucus des glandes donne une bonne protection à la muqueuse.

La sous-muqueuse contient également le plexus sous-muqueux, un réseau de cellules nerveuses faisant partie du système nerveux entérique. La couche musculaire de l'œsophage comporte deux types de muscles.

Le tiers supérieur de l'œsophage contient des muscles striés, le tiers inférieur contient des muscles lisses et le tiers médian contient un mélange des deux. 

Le muscle est disposé en deux couches : l'une dans laquelle les fibres musculaires s'étendent longitudinalement à l'œsophage et l'autre dans laquelle les fibres entourent l'œsophage. 

Ceux-ci sont séparés par le plexus myentérique, un réseau enchevêtré de fibres nerveuses impliquées dans la sécrétion de mucus et dans le péristaltisme du muscle lisse de l'œsophage. 

La couche la plus externe de l'œsophage est l'adventice sur la majeure partie de sa longueur, la partie abdominale étant recouverte de séreuse. 

Cela le distingue de nombreuses autres structures du tractus gastro-intestinal qui n'ont qu'une séreuse.


== Développement ==

Au début de l'embryogenèse, l'œsophage se développe à partir du tube intestinal primitif endodermique. 

La partie ventrale de l'embryon est contiguë au sac vitellin. 

Au cours de la deuxième semaine de développement embryologique, à mesure que l'embryon se développe, il commence à entourer des parties du sac. 

Les parties enveloppées forment la base du tractus gastro-intestinal adulte. 

Le sac est entouré d'un réseau d'artères vitellines. 

Au fil du temps, ces artères se consolident en trois artères principales qui alimentent le tractus gastro-intestinal en développement : l'artère coeliaque, l'artère mésentérique supérieure et l'artère mésentérique inférieure. 

Les zones alimentées par ces artères sont utilisées pour définir l'intestin moyen, l'intestin postérieur et l'intestin antérieur. Le sac entouré devient l'intestin primitif. 

Des sections de cet intestin commencent à se différencier en organes du tractus gastro-intestinal, tels que l'œsophage, l'estomac et les intestins. 

L'œsophage se développe dans le cadre du tube de l'intestin antérieur. 

L'innervation de l'œsophage se développe à partir des arcs pharyngés.


== Fonction ==

=== Avaler ===

La nourriture est ingérée par la bouche et, lorsqu'elle est avalée, passe d'abord dans le pharynx, puis dans l'œsophage. 

L'œsophage est ainsi l'un des premiers composants du système digestif et du tractus gastro-intestinal. 

Après avoir traversé l'œsophage, les aliments pénètrent dans l'estomac. 

Lorsque de la nourriture est avalée, l'épiglotte recule pour recouvrir le larynx, empêchant la nourriture de pénétrer dans la trachée. 

Dans le même temps, le sphincter supérieur de l'œsophage se détend, permettant à un bol alimentaire d'entrer. 

Les contractions péristaltiques du muscle œsophagien poussent les aliments vers le bas de l'œsophage. 

Ces contractions rythmiques se produisent à la fois comme une réponse réflexe à la nourriture qui se trouve dans la bouche et également comme une réponse à la sensation de nourriture dans l'œsophage lui-même. 

Parallèlement au péristaltisme, le sphincter inférieur de l'œsophage se détend.


=== Réduire le reflux gastrique ===

L'estomac produit de l'acide gastrique, un mélange fortement acide composé d'acide chlorhydrique (HCl) et de sels de potassium et de sodium pour permettre la digestion des aliments.

La constriction des sphincters œsophagiens supérieur et inférieur aide à prévenir le reflux (retour) du contenu gastrique et de l'acide dans l'œsophage, protégeant ainsi la muqueuse œsophagienne.

L'angle aigu de His et les piliers inférieurs du diaphragme favorisent également cette action sphinctérienne.


== Expression des gènes et des protéines ==

Environ 20 000 gènes codant pour des protéines sont exprimés dans les cellules humaines et près de 70 % de ces gènes sont exprimés dans l'œsophage normal.

Quelque 250 de ces gènes sont plus spécifiquement exprimés dans l'œsophage, moins de 50 gènes étant hautement spécifiques.

Les protéines spécifiques de l'œsophage correspondantes sont principalement impliquées dans la différenciation squameuse telles que les kératines KRT13, KRT4 et KRT6C.

D'autres protéines spécifiques qui aident à lubrifier la surface interne de l'œsophage sont les mucines telles que MUC21 et MUC22.

De nombreux gènes à expression élevée sont également partagés avec la peau et d'autres organes composés d'épithéliums squameux.


== Signification clinique ==

Les principales conditions affectant l'œsophage sont décrites ici.

Pour une liste plus complète, voir maladie de l'œsophage.


=== Inflammations ===


L'inflammation de l'œsophage est connue sous le nom d'œsophagite.

Le reflux des acides gastriques de l'estomac, l'infection, les substances ingérées (par exemple, les corrosifs), certains médicaments (tels que les bisphosphonates) et les allergies alimentaires peuvent tous entraîner une œsophagite.

La candidose œsophagienne est une infection de la levure Candida albicans qui peut survenir lorsqu'une personne est immunodéprimée.

À partir de 2021, les causes de certaines formes d'œsophagite, telles que l'œsophagite à éosinophiles, ne sont pas bien caractérisées, mais peuvent inclure des atopies à médiation Th2 ou des facteurs génétiques.

Il semble y avoir des corrélations entre l'œsophagite à éosinophiles, l'asthme (lui-même avec une composante éosinophile), l'eczéma et la rhinite allergique, bien qu'il ne soit pas clair si ces conditions contribuent à l'œsophagite à éosinophiles ou vice versa, ou si elles sont des symptômes de facteurs sous-jacents mutuels.

L'œsophagite peut provoquer une déglutition douloureuse et est généralement traitée en prenant en charge la cause de l'œsophagite, comme la prise en charge du reflux ou le traitement d'une infection.


=== Oesophage de Barrett ===


L'œsophagite prolongée, en particulier due au reflux gastrique, est un facteur censé jouer un rôle dans le développement de l'œsophage de Barrett.

Dans cette condition, il existe une métaplasie de la muqueuse de l'œsophage inférieur, qui passe d'un épithélium pavimenteux stratifié à un épithélium cylindrique simple.

On pense que l'œsophage de Barrett est l'un des principaux contributeurs au développement du cancer de l'œsophage.


=== Cancer ===


Il existe deux principaux types de cancer de l'œsophage.

Le carcinome épidermoïde est un carcinome qui peut survenir dans les cellules squameuses tapissant l'œsophage.

Ce type est beaucoup plus courant en Chine et en Iran.

L'autre type principal est un adénocarcinome qui se produit dans les glandes ou le tissu cylindrique de l'œsophage.

Ceci est plus fréquent dans les pays développés chez les personnes atteintes de l'œsophage de Barrett et se produit dans les cellules cuboïdes.

À ses débuts, le cancer de l'œsophage peut ne présenter aucun symptôme. 

Lorsqu'il est grave, le cancer de l'œsophage peut éventuellement provoquer une obstruction de l'œsophage, rendant la déglutition de tout aliment solide très difficile et entraînant une perte de poids. 

La progression du cancer est mise en scène à l'aide d'un système qui mesure jusqu'où le cancer a envahi la paroi œsophagienne, combien de ganglions lymphatiques sont touchés et s'il y a des métastases dans différentes parties du corps. 

Le cancer de l'œsophage est souvent pris en charge par la radiothérapie, la chimiothérapie et peut également être pris en charge par l'ablation chirurgicale partielle de l'œsophage. 

L'insertion d'un stent dans l'œsophage ou l'insertion d'une sonde nasogastrique peut également être utilisée pour s'assurer qu'une personne est capable de digérer suffisamment de nourriture et d'eau. 

En 2014, le pronostic du cancer de l'œsophage est toujours médiocre, de sorte que la thérapie palliative peut également être au centre du traitement.


=== Varices ===


Les varices œsophagiennes sont des branches gonflées et tordues de la veine azygote dans le tiers inférieur de l'œsophage. 

Ces vaisseaux sanguins s'anastomosent (se rejoignent) avec ceux de la veine porte lorsque l'hypertension portale se développe. 

Ces vaisseaux sanguins sont plus engorgés que la normale et, dans le pire des cas, peuvent obstruer partiellement l'œsophage. 

Ces vaisseaux sanguins se développent dans le cadre d'une circulation collatérale qui se produit pour drainer le sang de l'abdomen à la suite d'une hypertension portale, généralement à la suite de maladies du foie telles que la cirrhose.

Cette circulation collatérale se produit parce que la partie inférieure de l'œsophage se draine dans la veine gastrique gauche, qui est une branche de la veine porte. 

En raison du plexus veineux étendu qui existe entre cette veine et d'autres veines, si une hypertension portale se produit, la direction du drainage sanguin dans cette veine peut s'inverser, le sang s'écoulant du système veineux porte à travers le plexus. 

Les veines du plexus peuvent s'engorger et entraîner des varices. Les varices œsophagiennes ne présentent souvent aucun symptôme jusqu'à leur rupture. 

Une varice rompue est considérée comme une urgence médicale car les varices peuvent saigner beaucoup. 

Une varice hémorragique peut amener une personne à vomir du sang ou à subir un choc. 

Pour traiter une varice rompue, une bande peut être placée autour du vaisseau sanguin qui saigne, ou une petite quantité d'un agent de coagulation peut être injectée près du saignement. 

Un chirurgien peut également essayer d'utiliser un petit ballon gonflable pour appliquer une pression pour arrêter la plaie. 

Des fluides intraveineux et des produits sanguins peuvent être administrés afin de prévenir l'hypovolémie due à une perte de sang excessive.


=== Troubles moteurs ===

Plusieurs troubles affectent la motilité des aliments lorsqu'ils voyagent dans l'œsophage.

Cela peut entraîner une déglutition difficile, appelée dysphagie, ou une déglutition douloureuse, appelée odynophagie.

L'achalasie fait référence à une incapacité du sphincter inférieur de l'œsophage à se détendre correctement et se développe généralement plus tard dans la vie.

Cela conduit à un élargissement progressif de l'œsophage et éventuellement à un mégaœsophage.

Un œsophage casse-noisette fait référence à une déglutition qui peut être extrêmement douloureuse.

Le spasme diffus de l'œsophage est un spasme de l'œsophage qui peut être une cause de douleur thoracique.

Une telle douleur référée à la paroi de la partie supérieure de la poitrine est assez courante dans les affections œsophagiennes.

La sclérose de l'œsophage, comme la sclérodermie systémique ou le syndrome CREST, peut provoquer un durcissement des parois de l'œsophage et interférer avec le péristaltisme.


=== Malformations ===

Les sténoses œsophagiennes sont généralement bénignes et se développent généralement après qu'une personne a eu un reflux pendant de nombreuses années.

D'autres sténoses peuvent inclure des toiles œsophagiennes (qui peuvent également être congénitales) et des lésions de l'œsophage par radiothérapie, ingestion corrosive ou œsophagite à éosinophiles.

Un anneau de Schatzki est une fibrose au niveau de la jonction gastro-oesophagienne.

Des sténoses peuvent également se développer dans l'anémie chronique et le syndrome de Plummer-Vinson.

Deux des malformations congénitales les plus courantes affectant l'œsophage sont une atrésie de l'œsophage où l'œsophage se termine par un sac aveugle au lieu de se connecter à l'estomac; et une fistule œsophagienne - une connexion anormale entre l'œsophage et la trachée.

Ces deux conditions se produisent généralement ensemble. 

Ceux-ci se retrouvent dans environ 1 naissance sur 3500. 

La moitié de ces cas peuvent faire partie d'un syndrome où d'autres anomalies sont également présentes, notamment du cœur ou des membres. 

Les autres cas surviennent isolément.


=== Imagerie ===


Une radiographie du baryum avalé peut être utilisée pour révéler la taille et la forme de l'œsophage et la présence d'éventuelles masses. 

L'œsophage peut également être imagé à l'aide d'une caméra flexible insérée dans l'œsophage, lors d'une procédure appelée endoscopie. 

Si une endoscopie est utilisée sur l'estomac, la caméra devra également passer par l'œsophage.

Lors d'une endoscopie, une biopsie peut être pratiquée.

Si le cancer de l'œsophage est à l'étude, d'autres méthodes, y compris un scanner, peuvent également être utilisées.


== Historique ==

Le mot œsophage ( anglais britannique : ooesophagus ), vient du grec : οἰσοφάγος ( oisophagos ) signifiant oesophage .

Il dérive de deux racines (éosine) pour transporter et (phagos) pour manger.

L'utilisation du mot œsophage est documentée dans la littérature anatomique depuis au moins l'époque d'Hippocrate, qui notait que "l'œsophage ... reçoit la plus grande quantité de ce que nous consommons".

Son existence chez d'autres animaux et sa relation avec l'estomac ont été documentées par le naturaliste romain Pline l'Ancien (AD23-AD79), et les contractions péristaltiques de l'œsophage ont été documentées depuis au moins l'époque de Galien.

La première tentative de chirurgie de l'œsophage s'est concentrée sur le cou et a été menée chez des chiens par Theodore Billroth en 1871. 

En 1877, Czerny a effectué des interventions chirurgicales sur des personnes. 

En 1908, une opération avait été réalisée par Voeckler pour enlever l'œsophage, et en 1933, la première ablation chirurgicale de parties de l'œsophage inférieur (pour contrôler le cancer de l'œsophage) avait été réalisée.

La fundoplication de Nissen, dans laquelle l'estomac est enroulé autour du sphincter inférieur de l'œsophage pour stimuler sa fonction et contrôler le reflux, a été réalisée pour la première fois par Rudolph Nissen en 1955.


== Autres animaux ==



=== Vertébrés ===

Chez les tétrapodes, le pharynx est beaucoup plus court et l'œsophage proportionnellement plus long que chez les poissons. 

Chez la majorité des vertébrés, l'œsophage est simplement un tube de connexion, mais chez certains oiseaux, qui régurgitent des composants pour nourrir leurs petits, il est prolongé vers l'extrémité inférieure pour former une récolte pour stocker les aliments avant qu'ils ne pénètrent dans le véritable estomac. 

Chez les ruminants, animaux à quatre estomacs, une rainure appelée sulcus reticuli se trouve souvent dans l'œsophage, permettant au lait de s'écouler directement dans l'estomac postérieur, la caillette. 

Chez le cheval, l'œsophage mesure environ 1,2 à 1,5 m (4 à 5 pieds) de longueur et transporte la nourriture vers l'estomac. 

Un anneau musculaire, appelé sphincter cardiaque, relie l'estomac à l'œsophage. 

Ce sphincter est très bien développé chez le cheval. 

Ceci et l'angle oblique auquel l'œsophage se connecte à l'estomac expliquent pourquoi les chevaux ne peuvent pas vomir. 

L'œsophage est également la zone du tube digestif où les chevaux peuvent souffrir de la maladie connue sous le nom d'étouffement.

L'œsophage des serpents est remarquable par la distension qu'il subit lorsqu'il avale des proies. Chez la plupart des poissons, l'œsophage est extrêmement court, principalement en raison de la longueur du pharynx (qui est associé aux branchies). 

Cependant, certains poissons, y compris les lamproies, les chimères et les dipneustes, n'ont pas de véritable estomac, de sorte que l'œsophage s'étend effectivement du pharynx directement à l'intestin, et est donc un peu plus long.

Chez de nombreux vertébrés, l'œsophage est tapissé d'un épithélium pavimenteux stratifié sans glandes. 

Chez les poissons, l'œsophage est souvent tapissé d'épithélium cylindrique, et chez les amphibiens, les requins et les raies, l'épithélium œsophagien est cilié, aidant à laver les aliments, en plus de l'action du péristaltisme musculaire.

De plus, chez la chauve-souris Plecotus auritus, les poissons et certains amphibiens, des glandes sécrétant du pepsinogène ou de l'acide chlorhydrique ont été trouvées. Le muscle de l'œsophage chez de nombreux mammifères est initialement strié mais devient ensuite un muscle lisse dans le tiers caudal environ.

Chez les canidés et les ruminants, en revanche, il est entièrement strié pour permettre des régurgitations pour nourrir les petits (canidés) ou des régurgitations pour ruminer (ruminants).

C'est un muscle entièrement lisse chez les amphibiens, les reptiles et les oiseaux.

Contrairement à la croyance populaire, un corps humain adulte ne pourrait pas passer à travers l'œsophage d'une baleine, qui mesure généralement moins de 10 cm (4 po) de diamètre, bien que chez les baleines à fanons plus grosses, il puisse atteindre 25 cm (10 in) lorsqu'il est complètement distendu.


=== Invertébrés ===

Une structure portant le même nom se trouve souvent chez les invertébrés, y compris les mollusques et les arthropodes, reliant la cavité buccale à l'estomac. 

En ce qui concerne le système digestif des escargots et des limaces, la bouche s'ouvre sur un œsophage, qui se connecte à l'estomac. 

En raison de la torsion, qui est la rotation du corps principal de l'animal pendant le développement larvaire, l'œsophage passe généralement autour de l'estomac et s'ouvre dans son dos, le plus éloigné de la bouche. 

Chez les espèces qui ont subi une détorsion, cependant, l'œsophage peut s'ouvrir dans la partie antérieure de l'estomac, ce qui est l'inverse de la disposition habituelle des gastéropodes.

Il y a une tribune étendue à l'avant de l'œsophage chez tous les escargots et limaces carnivores.

Chez les espèces d'escargots d'eau douce Tarebia granifera, la poche à couvain se situe au-dessus de l'œsophage. Chez les céphalopodes, le cerveau entoure souvent l'œsophage.


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/oesophage

;;;PT;;;



ESÔFAGO/ESÔFAGO


O esôfago (inglês britânico; ambos) ou esôfago (inglês americano), informalmente conhecido como tubo de comida ou esôfago, é um órgão em vertebrados através do qual o alimento passa, auxiliado por contrações peristálticas, da faringe ao estômago.

O esôfago é um tubo fibromuscular, com cerca de 25 cm (10 pol) de comprimento em adultos, que viaja atrás da traqueia e do coração, passa pelo diafragma e desemboca na região superior do estômago. 

Durante a deglutição, a epiglote se inclina para trás para evitar que o alimento desça pela laringe e pelos pulmões. 

A palavra ooesôfago é do grego antigo οἰσοφάγος (oisophágos), de οἴσω (oísō), forma futura de φέρω (phérō, "eu carrego") + ἔφαγον (éphagon, "eu comi").

A parede do esôfago do lúmen para fora consiste em mucosa, submucosa (tecido conjuntivo), camadas de fibras musculares entre as camadas de tecido fibroso e uma camada externa de tecido conjuntivo. 

A mucosa é um epitélio escamoso estratificado de cerca de três camadas de células escamosas, que contrasta com a camada única de células colunares do estômago. 

A transição entre esses dois tipos de epitélio é visível como uma linha em ziguezague.

A maior parte do músculo é músculo liso, embora o músculo estriado predomine em seu terço superior.

Possui dois anéis musculares ou esfíncteres em sua parede, um na parte superior e outro na parte inferior.

O esfíncter inferior ajuda a prevenir o refluxo do conteúdo ácido do estômago.

O esôfago tem um rico suprimento sanguíneo e drenagem venosa.

Seu músculo liso é inervado por nervos involuntários (nervos simpáticos via tronco simpático e nervos parassimpáticos via nervo vago) e, além disso, nervos voluntários (neurônios motores inferiores) que são transportados no nervo vago para inervar seu músculo estriado.

O esôfago passa através da cavidade torácica para o diafragma no estômago.

O esôfago pode ser afetado por refluxo gástrico, câncer, vasos sanguíneos dilatados proeminentes chamados varizes que podem sangrar muito, lágrimas, constrições e distúrbios de motilidade. 

As doenças podem causar dificuldade para engolir (disfagia), dor ao engolir (odinofagia), dor no peito ou não causar nenhum sintoma. 

As investigações clínicas incluem raios-X ao engolir sulfato de bário, endoscopia e tomografia computadorizada. 

Cirurgicamente, 
o esôfago é de difícil acesso em parte devido à sua posição entre órgãos críticos e diretamente entre o esterno e a coluna vertebral.


== Estrutura ==

O esôfago é uma das partes superiores do sistema digestivo. 

Há papilas gustativas em sua parte superior. 

Começa na parte posterior da boca, descendo pela parte posterior do mediastino, passando pelo diafragma e entrando no estômago. 

Em humanos, o esôfago geralmente começa em torno do nível da sexta vértebra cervical atrás da cartilagem cricóide da traqueia, entra no diafragma aproximadamente no nível da décima vértebra torácica e termina na cárdia do estômago, no nível da décima primeira vértebra torácica.

O esôfago geralmente tem cerca de 25 cm (10 pol.) de comprimento. Muitos vasos sanguíneos servem ao esôfago, com suprimento sanguíneo variando ao longo de seu curso.

As partes superiores do esôfago e o esfíncter esofágico superior recebem sangue da artéria tireóidea inferior, as partes do esôfago no tórax das artérias brônquicas e ramos diretamente da aorta torácica e as partes inferiores do esôfago e do esôfago inferior. esfíncter recebem sangue da artéria gástrica esquerda e da artéria frênica inferior esquerda.

A drenagem venosa também difere ao longo do curso do esôfago. 

As partes superior e média do esôfago drenam para as veias ázigos e hemiázigos, e o sangue da parte inferior drena para a veia gástrica esquerda. 

Todas essas veias drenam para a veia cava superior, com exceção da veia gástrica esquerda, que é um ramo da veia porta. 

Linfaticamente, o terço superior do esôfago drena para os linfonodos cervicais profundos, o médio para os linfonodos mediastinais superiores e posteriores e o esôfago inferior para os linfonodos gástricos e celíacos. 

Isso é semelhante à drenagem linfática das estruturas abdominais que surgem do intestino anterior, que drenam para os linfonodos celíacos.

Posição
O esôfago superior situa-se na parte posterior do mediastino atrás da traqueia, adjacente ao longo da faixa traqueoesofágica e na frente dos músculos eretores da espinha e da coluna vertebral. 

O esôfago inferior fica atrás do coração e curva-se na frente da aorta torácica. 

Da bifurcação da traqueia para baixo, o esôfago passa atrás da artéria pulmonar direita, brônquio principal esquerdo e átrio esquerdo. 

Neste ponto, ele passa pelo diafragma.

O ducto torácico, que drena a maior parte da linfa do corpo, passa atrás do esôfago, curvando-se de atrás do esôfago à direita na parte inferior do esôfago, para atrás do esôfago à esquerda no esôfago superior. 

O esôfago também fica na frente de partes das veias hemiázigos e das veias intercostais do lado direito. 

O nervo vago se divide e cobre o esôfago em um plexo.

Constrições
O esôfago tem quatro pontos de constrição.

Quando uma substância corrosiva ou um objeto sólido é ingerido, é mais provável que se aloje e danifique um desses quatro pontos.

Essas constrições surgem de estruturas particulares que comprimem o esôfago.

Essas restrições são:
-No início do esôfago, onde a laringofaringe se une ao esôfago, atrás da cartilagem cricóide
-Onde é cruzado na frente pelo arco aórtico no mediastino superior
-Onde o esôfago é comprimido pelo brônquio principal esquerdo no mediastino posterior
-O hiato esofágico, onde passa pelo diafragma no mediastino posterior


=== Esfíncteres ===

O esôfago é circundado na parte superior e inferior por dois anéis musculares, conhecidos respectivamente como esfíncter esofágico superior e esfíncter esofágico inferior. 

Esses esfíncteres agem para fechar o esôfago quando o alimento não está sendo engolido. 

O esfíncter esofágico superior é um esfíncter anatômico, que é formado pela porção inferior do constritor inferior da faringe, também conhecido como esfíncter cricofaríngeo devido à sua relação com a cartilagem cricóide da laringe anteriormente. 

No entanto, o esfíncter esofágico inferior não é um esfíncter anatômico, mas sim funcional, o que significa que atua como um esfíncter, mas não possui um espessamento distinto como outros esfíncteres.
O esfíncter esofágico superior envolve a parte superior do esôfago. 

Consiste em músculo esquelético, mas não está sob controle voluntário. 

A abertura do esfíncter esofágico superior é desencadeada pelo reflexo de deglutição. 

O músculo primário do esfíncter esofágico superior é a parte cricofaríngea do constritor inferior da faringe.

O esfíncter esofágico inferior, ou esfíncter gastroesofágico, envolve a parte inferior do esôfago na junção entre o esôfago e o estômago. 

Também é chamado de esfíncter cardíaco ou esfíncter cardioesofágico, nomeado a partir da parte adjacente do estômago, a cárdia. 

A disfunção do esfíncter gastroesofágico causa refluxo gastroesofágico, que causa azia e, se acontecer com frequência suficiente, pode levar à doença do refluxo gastroesofágico, com danos na mucosa esofágica.


=== Suprimento nervoso ===

O esôfago é inervado pelo nervo vago e pelo tronco simpático cervical e torácico. 

O nervo vago tem função parassimpática, suprindo os músculos do esôfago e estimulando a contração glandular.

Dois conjuntos de fibras nervosas viajam no nervo vago para suprir os músculos.

O músculo estriado superior e o esfíncter esofágico superior são supridos por neurônios com corpos no núcleo ambíguo, enquanto as fibras que suprem o músculo liso e o esfíncter esofágico inferior têm corpos situados no núcleo motor dorsal.

O nervo vago desempenha o papel principal no início do peristaltismo.

O tronco simpático tem uma função simpática.

Pode melhorar a função do nervo vago, aumentando o peristaltismo e a atividade glandular e causando contração do esfíncter.

Além disso, a ativação simpática pode relaxar a parede muscular e causar constrição dos vasos sanguíneos.

A sensação ao longo do esôfago é suprida por ambos os nervos, com a sensação grosseira passando pelo nervo vago e a dor passando pelo tronco simpático.


=== Junção gastroesofágica ===

A junção gastroesofágica (também conhecida como junção esofagogástrica) é a junção entre o esôfago e o estômago, na extremidade inferior do esôfago. 

A cor rosada da mucosa esofágica contrasta com o vermelho mais profundo da mucosa gástrica, e a transição mucosa pode ser vista como uma linha em zigue-zague irregular, que muitas vezes é chamada de linha z. 

O exame histológico revela transição abrupta entre o epitélio escamoso estratificado do esôfago e o epitélio colunar simples do estômago. 

Normalmente, a cárdia do estômago é imediatamente distal à linha z e a linha z coincide com o limite superior das pregas gástricas da cárdia; entretanto, quando a anatomia da mucosa está distorcida no esôfago de Barrett, a verdadeira junção gastroesofágica pode ser identificada pelo limite superior das pregas gástricas em vez da transição mucosa.

A localização funcional do esfíncter esofágico inferior está geralmente situada cerca de 3 cm abaixo da linha z.


=== Microanatomia ===


O esôfago humano tem uma membrana mucosa que consiste em um epitélio escamoso estratificado resistente sem queratina, uma lâmina própria lisa e uma mucosa muscular.

O epitélio do esôfago tem uma renovação relativamente rápida e desempenha uma função protetora contra os efeitos abrasivos dos alimentos.

Em muitos animais, o epitélio contém uma camada de queratina, representando uma dieta mais grosseira. 

Existem dois tipos de glândulas, sendo as glândulas esofágicas secretoras de muco encontradas na submucosa e as glândulas cardíacas esofágicas, semelhantes às glândulas cardíacas do estômago, localizadas na lâmina própria e mais frequentes na parte terminal do órgão. 

O muco das glândulas dá uma boa proteção ao revestimento. 

A submucosa também contém o plexo submucoso, uma rede de células nervosas que faz parte do sistema nervoso entérico. A camada muscular do esôfago possui dois tipos de músculos. 

O terço superior do esôfago contém músculo estriado, o terço inferior contém músculo liso e o terço médio contém uma mistura de ambos. 

O músculo é organizado em duas camadas: uma na qual as fibras musculares correm longitudinalmente ao esôfago e a outra na qual as fibras circundam o esôfago.

Estes são separados pelo plexo mioentérico, uma rede emaranhada de fibras nervosas envolvidas na secreção de muco e no peristaltismo do músculo liso do esôfago.

A camada mais externa do esôfago é a adventícia na maior parte de seu comprimento, sendo a parte abdominal coberta por serosa.

Isso o diferencia de muitas outras estruturas do trato gastrointestinal que possuem apenas uma serosa.


== Desenvolvimento ==

No início da embriogênese, o esôfago se desenvolve a partir do tubo intestinal primitivo endodérmico.

A parte ventral do embrião confina com o saco vitelino.

Durante a segunda semana de desenvolvimento embriológico, à medida que o embrião cresce, ele começa a envolver partes do saco.

As porções envelopadas formam a base do trato gastrointestinal adulto.

O saco é cercado por uma rede de artérias vitelinas.

Com o tempo, essas artérias se consolidam nas três principais artérias que suprem o trato gastrointestinal em desenvolvimento: a artéria celíaca, a artéria mesentérica superior e a artéria mesentérica inferior.

As áreas supridas por essas artérias são usadas para definir o intestino médio, posterior e anterior. O saco circundado torna-se o intestino primitivo.

Seções desse intestino começam a se diferenciar em órgãos do trato gastrointestinal, como esôfago, estômago e intestinos.

O esôfago se desenvolve como parte do tubo do intestino anterior.

A inervação do esôfago se desenvolve a partir dos arcos faríngeos.


== Função ==

=== Engolir ===

O alimento é ingerido pela boca e, quando ingerido, passa primeiro para a faringe e depois para o esôfago.

O esôfago é, portanto, um dos primeiros componentes do sistema digestivo e do trato gastrointestinal. 

Depois que o alimento passa pelo esôfago, ele entra no estômago. 

Quando o alimento está sendo engolido, a epiglote se move para trás para cobrir a laringe, impedindo que o alimento entre na traqueia. 

Ao mesmo tempo, o esfíncter esofágico superior relaxa, permitindo a entrada de um bolo alimentar. 

As contrações peristálticas do músculo esofágico empurram o alimento para o esôfago. 

Essas contrações rítmicas ocorrem tanto como resposta reflexa ao alimento que está na boca, quanto como resposta à sensação de alimento dentro do próprio esôfago. 

Junto com o peristaltismo, o esfíncter esofágico inferior relaxa.


=== Redução do refluxo gástrico ===

O estômago produz ácido gástrico, uma mistura fortemente ácida composta de ácido clorídrico (HCl) e sais de potássio e sódio para permitir a digestão dos alimentos.

A constrição dos esfíncteres esofágicos superior e inferior ajuda a prevenir o refluxo (refluxo) do conteúdo gástrico e ácido para o esôfago, protegendo a mucosa esofágica.

O ângulo agudo de His e os pilares inferiores do diafragma também auxiliam nessa ação esfincteriana.


== Expressão de genes e proteínas ==

Cerca de 20.000 genes codificadores de proteínas são expressos em células humanas e quase 70% desses genes são expressos no esôfago normal.

Cerca de 250 desses genes são expressos mais especificamente no esôfago, com menos de 50 genes sendo altamente específicos.

As proteínas específicas do esôfago correspondentes estão envolvidas principalmente na diferenciação escamosa, como as queratinas KRT13, KRT4 e KRT6C.

Outras proteínas específicas que ajudam a lubrificar a superfície interna do esôfago são as mucinas, como MUC21 e MUC22.

Muitos genes com expressão elevada também são compartilhados com a pele e outros órgãos compostos de epitélio escamoso.


== Significado clínico ==

As principais condições que afetam o esôfago são descritas aqui.

Para uma lista mais completa, veja doença esofágica.


=== Inflamação ===


A inflamação do esôfago é conhecida como esofagite.

Refluxo de ácidos gástricos do estômago, infecção, substâncias ingeridas (por exemplo, corrosivos), alguns medicamentos (como bifosfonatos) e alergias alimentares podem levar à esofagite.

A candidíase esofágica é uma infecção da levedura Candida albicans que pode ocorrer quando uma pessoa está imunocomprometida.

A partir de 2021, as causas de algumas formas de esofagite, como a esofagite eosinofílica, não estão bem caracterizadas, mas podem incluir atopias mediadas por Th2 ou fatores genéticos. 

Parece haver correlações entre esofagite eosinofílica, asma (com componente eosinofílico), eczema e rinite alérgica, embora não esteja claro se essas condições contribuem para esofagite eosinofílica ou vice-versa, ou se são sintomas de fatores subjacentes mútuos. 

A esofagite pode causar dor ao engolir e geralmente é tratada controlando a causa da esofagite - como controlar o refluxo ou tratar a infecção.


=== Esôfago de Barrett ===


A esofagite prolongada, particularmente por refluxo gástrico, é um fator que se acredita desempenhar um papel no desenvolvimento do esôfago de Barrett. 

Nessa condição, há metaplasia do revestimento do esôfago inferior, que muda de epitélio escamoso estratificado para epitélio colunar simples. 

Acredita-se que o esôfago de Barrett seja um dos principais contribuintes para o desenvolvimento do câncer de esôfago.


=== Câncer ===


Existem dois tipos principais de câncer de esôfago. 

O carcinoma de células escamosas é um carcinoma que pode ocorrer nas células escamosas que revestem o esôfago. 

Esse tipo é muito mais comum na China e no Irã. 

O outro tipo principal é um adenocarcinoma que ocorre nas glândulas ou tecido colunar do esôfago. 

Isso é mais comum em países desenvolvidos naqueles com esôfago de Barrett e ocorre nas células cuboidais.

Em seus estágios iniciais, o câncer de esôfago pode não apresentar nenhum sintoma. 

Quando grave, o câncer de esôfago pode eventualmente causar obstrução do esôfago, dificultando a deglutição de qualquer alimento sólido e causando perda de peso.

O progresso do câncer é encenado usando um sistema que mede o quão longe na parede do esôfago o câncer invadiu, quantos linfonodos são afetados e se há metástases em diferentes partes do corpo.

O câncer de esôfago é frequentemente tratado com radioterapia, quimioterapia e também pode ser controlado por remoção cirúrgica parcial do esôfago.

A inserção de um stent no esôfago ou a inserção de uma sonda nasogástrica também pode ser usada para garantir que uma pessoa seja capaz de digerir alimentos e água suficientes.

A partir de 2014, o prognóstico para o câncer de esôfago ainda é ruim, então a terapia paliativa também pode ser um foco de tratamento.


=== Varizes ===


As varizes esofágicas são ramos torcidos e inchados da veia ázigos no terço inferior do esôfago.

Esses vasos sanguíneos se anastomosam (se unem) com os da veia porta quando a hipertensão portal se desenvolve.

Esses vasos sanguíneos estão ingurgitados mais do que o normal e, nos piores casos, podem obstruir parcialmente o esôfago.

Esses vasos sanguíneos se desenvolvem como parte de uma circulação colateral que ocorre para drenar o sangue do abdome como resultado da hipertensão portal, geralmente como resultado de doenças hepáticas como a cirrose.

Essa circulação colateral ocorre porque a parte inferior do esôfago drena para a veia gástrica esquerda, que é um ramo da veia porta.

Devido ao extenso plexo venoso que existe entre esta veia e outras veias, se ocorrer hipertensão portal, a direção da drenagem do sangue nesta veia pode ser revertida, com o sangue drenando do sistema venoso portal, através do plexo.

As veias do plexo podem ingurgitar e levar a varizes. As varizes esofágicas geralmente não apresentam sintomas até que se rompam.

Uma variz rompida é considerada uma emergência médica porque as varizes podem sangrar muito.

Uma variz sangrando pode fazer com que uma pessoa vomite sangue ou sofra choque.

Para lidar com uma variz rompida, uma faixa pode ser colocada ao redor do vaso sanguíneo sangrando, ou uma pequena quantidade de um agente de coagulação pode ser injetada perto do sangramento.

Um cirurgião também pode tentar usar um pequeno balão inflável para aplicar pressão para parar a ferida.

Fluidos IV e hemoderivados podem ser administrados para prevenir hipovolemia por perda excessiva de sangue.


=== Distúrbios da motilidade ===

Vários distúrbios afetam a motilidade dos alimentos à medida que viajam pelo esôfago.

Isso pode causar dificuldade para engolir, chamada disfagia, ou deglutição dolorosa, chamada odinofagia.

Acalasia refere-se a uma falha do esfíncter esofágico inferior em relaxar adequadamente e geralmente se desenvolve mais tarde na vida.

Isso leva ao aumento progressivo do esôfago e, possivelmente, ao megaesôfago.

Um esôfago quebra-nozes refere-se à deglutição que pode ser extremamente dolorosa.

Espasmo esofágico difuso é um espasmo do esôfago que pode ser uma causa de dor no peito.

Essa dor referida à parede do tórax superior é bastante comum em condições esofágicas.

A esclerose do esôfago, como na esclerose sistêmica ou na síndrome CREST, pode causar endurecimento das paredes do esôfago e interferir no peristaltismo.


=== Malformações ===

As estenoses esofágicas geralmente são benignas e geralmente se desenvolvem após uma pessoa ter refluxo por muitos anos. 

Outras estenoses podem incluir membranas esofágicas (que também podem ser congênitas) e danos ao esôfago por radioterapia, ingestão corrosiva ou esofagite eosinofílica. 

Um anel de Schatzki é fibrose na junção gastroesofágica. 

As estenoses também podem se desenvolver na anemia crônica e na síndrome de Plummer-Vinson.

Duas das malformações congênitas mais comuns que afetam o esôfago são uma atresia esofágica onde o esôfago termina em um saco cego em vez de se conectar ao estômago; e uma fístula esofágica – uma conexão anormal entre o esôfago e a traqueia.

Ambas as condições geralmente ocorrem juntas. 

Estes são encontrados em cerca de 1 em 3500 nascimentos. 

Metade desses casos pode fazer parte de uma síndrome em que outras anormalidades também estão presentes, principalmente do coração ou dos membros. 

Os demais casos ocorrem isoladamente.


=== Imagens ===


Uma radiografia de bário ingerido pode ser usada para revelar o tamanho e a forma do esôfago e a presença de quaisquer massas. 

O esôfago também pode ser fotografado usando uma câmera flexível inserida no esôfago, em um procedimento chamado endoscopia. 

Se uma endoscopia for usada no estômago, a câmera também terá que passar pelo esôfago. 

Durante uma endoscopia, uma biópsia pode ser feita. 

Se o câncer de esôfago estiver sendo investigado, outros métodos, incluindo uma tomografia computadorizada, também podem ser usados.


== História ==

A palavra esôfago (inglês britânico: ooesophagus), vem do grego: οἰσοφάγος (oisophagos) que significa esôfago. 

Deriva de duas raízes (eosina) para transportar e (fagos) para comer. 

O uso da palavra esôfago está documentado na literatura anatômica desde pelo menos a época de Hipócrates, que observou que "o esôfago... recebe a maior quantidade do que consumimos". 

Sua existência em outros animais e sua relação com o estômago foi documentada pelo naturalista romano Plínio, o Velho (23-79 dC), e as contrações peristálticas do esôfago foram documentadas desde pelo menos a época de Galeno.

A primeira tentativa de cirurgia no esôfago concentrou-se no pescoço, e foi realizada em cães por Theodore Billroth em 1871. 

Em 1877 Czerny realizou cirurgias em pessoas. 

Em 1908, uma operação foi realizada por Voeckler para remover o esôfago, e em 1933 foi realizada a primeira remoção cirúrgica de partes do esôfago inferior (para controlar o câncer de esôfago).

A fundoplicatura de Nissen, na qual o estômago é enrolado ao redor do esfíncter esofágico inferior para estimular sua função e controlar o refluxo, foi realizada pela primeira vez por Rudolph Nissen em 1955.


== Outros animais ==



=== Vertebrados ===

Nos tetrápodes, a faringe é muito mais curta e o esôfago correspondentemente mais longo do que nos peixes. 

Na maioria dos vertebrados, o esôfago é simplesmente um tubo de conexão, mas em algumas aves, que regurgitam componentes para alimentar seus filhotes, ele se estende até a extremidade inferior para formar um papo para armazenar alimentos antes de entrar no estômago verdadeiro. 

Em ruminantes, animais com quatro estômagos, um sulco chamado sulco retículo é frequentemente encontrado no esôfago, permitindo que o leite escoe diretamente para o estômago posterior, o abomaso. 

No cavalo, o esôfago tem cerca de 1,2 a 1,5 m (4 a 5 pés) de comprimento e transporta comida para o estômago. 

Um anel muscular, chamado de esfíncter cardíaco, conecta o estômago ao esôfago. 

Este esfíncter é muito bem desenvolvido em cavalos. 

Isso e o ângulo oblíquo em que o esôfago se conecta ao estômago explica por que os cavalos não podem vomitar.

O esôfago também é a área do trato digestivo onde os cavalos podem sofrer da condição conhecida como estrangulamento.

O esôfago das cobras é notável pela distensão que sofre ao engolir a presa. Na maioria dos peixes, o esôfago é extremamente curto, principalmente devido ao comprimento da faringe (que está associada às brânquias).

No entanto, alguns peixes, incluindo lampreias, quimeras e peixes pulmonados, não têm estômago verdadeiro, de modo que o esôfago efetivamente corre da faringe diretamente para o intestino e, portanto, é um pouco mais longo.

Em muitos vertebrados, o esôfago é revestido por epitélio escamoso estratificado sem glândulas.

Nos peixes, o esôfago é frequentemente revestido por epitélio colunar, e em anfíbios, tubarões e raias, o epitélio esofágico é ciliado, auxiliando no transporte dos alimentos, além da ação do peristaltismo muscular.

Além disso, no morcego Plecotus auritus, peixes e alguns anfíbios, foram encontradas glândulas secretoras de pepsinogênio ou ácido clorídrico. O músculo do esôfago em muitos mamíferos é inicialmente estriado, mas depois se torna músculo liso no terço caudal ou mais.

Em caninos e ruminantes, no entanto, é inteiramente estriado para permitir que a regurgitação alimente os filhotes (caninos) ou a regurgitação para ruminar (ruminantes).

É inteiramente músculo liso em anfíbios, répteis e aves.

Ao contrário da crença popular, um corpo humano adulto não seria capaz de passar pelo esôfago de uma baleia, que geralmente mede menos de 10 cm (4 pol) de diâmetro, embora em baleias maiores possa ter até 25 cm (10 pol.) in) quando totalmente distendido.


=== Invertebrados ===

Uma estrutura com o mesmo nome é frequentemente encontrada em invertebrados, incluindo moluscos e artrópodes, conectando a cavidade oral ao estômago.

Em termos do sistema digestivo de caracóis e lesmas, a boca se abre em um esôfago, que se conecta ao estômago.

Por causa da torção, que é a rotação do corpo principal do animal durante o desenvolvimento larval, o esôfago geralmente passa ao redor do estômago e se abre nas costas, mais distante da boca.

Em espécies que sofreram destorção, no entanto, o esôfago pode se abrir na parte anterior do estômago, que é o inverso do arranjo usual dos gastrópodes.

Há um extenso rostro na frente do esôfago em todos os caracóis e lesmas carnívoros.

Nas espécies de caracóis de água doce Tarebia granifera, a bolsa incubadora está acima do esófago. Nos cefalópodes, o cérebro envolve frequentemente o esófago.


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/oesophagus
