

PANCREAS


The pancreas is an organ of the digestive system and endocrine system of vertebrates. 

In humans, it is located in the abdomen behind the stomach and functions as a gland. 

The pancreas is a mixed or heterocrine gland, i.e. it has both an endocrine and a digestive exocrine function. 99% of the pancreas is exocrine and 1% is endocrine. 

As an endocrine gland, it functions mostly to regulate blood sugar levels, secreting the hormones insulin, glucagon, somatostatin, and pancreatic polypeptide. 

As a part of the digestive system, it functions as an exocrine gland secreting pancreatic juice into the duodenum through the pancreatic duct. 

This juice contains bicarbonate, which neutralizes acid entering the duodenum from the stomach; and digestive enzymes, which break down carbohydrates, proteins, and fats in food entering the duodenum from the stomach.
Inflammation of the pancreas is known as pancreatitis, with common causes including chronic alcohol use and gallstones. 

Because of its role in the regulation of blood sugar, the pancreas is also a key organ in diabetes mellitus. 

Pancreatic cancer can arise following chronic pancreatitis or due to other reasons, and carries a very poor prognosis, as it is often identified when it has spread to other areas of the body.
The word pancreas comes from the Greek πᾶν (pân, “all”) & κρέας (kréas, “flesh”). 

The function of the pancreas in diabetes has been known since at least 1889, with its role in insulin production identified in 1921.


== Structure ==


The pancreas is an organ that in humans lies in the abdomen, stretching from behind the stomach to the left upper abdomen near the spleen. 

In adults, it is about 12–15 centimetres (4.7–5.9 in) long, lobulated, and salmon-coloured in appearance.Anatomically, the pancreas is divided into a head, neck, body, and tail. 

The pancreas stretches from the inner curvature of the duodenum, where the head surrounds two blood vessels: the superior mesenteric artery, and vein. 

The longest part of the pancreas, the body, stretches across behind the stomach, and the tail of the pancreas ends adjacent to the spleen.Two ducts, the main pancreatic duct and a smaller accessory pancreatic duct run through the body of the pancreas. 

The main pancreatic duct joins with the common bile duct forming a small ballooning called the ampulla of Vater (hepatopancreatic ampulla). 

This ampulla is surrounded by a muscle, the sphincter of Oddi. 

This ampulla opens into the descending part of the duodenum. 

The opening of the common bile duct into main pancreatic duct is controlled by sphincter of Boyden. 

The accessory pancreatic duct opens into duodenum with separate openings located above the opening of the main pancreatic duct.


=== Parts ===

The head of the pancreas sits within the curvature of the duodenum, and wraps around the superior mesenteric artery and vein. 

To the right sits the descending part of the duodenum, and between these travel the superior and inferior pancreaticoduodenal arteries. 

Behind rests the inferior vena cava, and the common bile duct. 

In front sits the peritoneal membrane and the transverse colon. 

A small uncinate process emerges from below the head, situated behind the superior mesenteric vein and sometimes artery.The neck of the pancreas separates the head of the pancreas, located in the curvature of the duodenum, from the body. 

The neck is about 2 cm (0.79 in) wide, and sits in front of where the portal vein is formed. 

The neck lies mostly behind the pylorus of the stomach, and is covered with peritoneum. 

The anterior superior pancreaticoduodenal artery travels in front of the neck of the pancreas.The body is the largest part of the pancreas, and mostly lies behind the stomach, tapering along its length. 

The peritoneum sits on top of the body of the pancreas, and the transverse colon in front of the peritoneum. 

Behind the pancreas are several blood vessels, including the aorta, the splenic vein, and the left renal vein, as well as the beginning of the superior mesenteric artery. 

Below the body of the pancreas sits some of the small intestine, specifically the last part of the duodenum and the jejunum to which it connects, as well as the suspensory ligament of the duodenum which falls between these two. 

In front of the pancreas sits the transverse colon.The pancreas narrows towards the tail, which sits near to the spleen. 

It is usually between 1.3–3.5 cm (0.51–1.38 in) long, and sits between the layers of the ligament between the spleen and the left kidney. 

The splenic artery and vein, which also passes behind the body of the pancreas, pass behind the tail of the pancreas.


=== Blood supply ===

The pancreas has a rich blood supply, with vessels originating as branches of both the coeliac artery and superior mesenteric artery. 

The splenic artery runs along the top of the pancreas, and supplies the left part of the body and the tail of the pancreas through its pancreatic branches, the largest of which is called the greater pancreatic artery. 

The superior and inferior pancreaticoduodenal arteries run along the back and front surfaces of the head of the pancreas adjacent to the duodenum. 

These supply the head of the pancreas. 

These vessels join together (anastamose) in the middle.The body and neck of the pancreas drain into the splenic vein, which sits behind the pancreas. 

The head drains into, and wraps around, the superior mesenteric and portal veins, via the pancreaticoduodenal veins.The pancreas drains into lymphatic vessels that travel alongside its arteries, and has a rich lymphatic supply. 

The lymphatic vessels of the body and tail drain into splenic lymph nodes, and eventually into lymph nodes that lie in front of the aorta, between the coeliac and superior mesenteric arteries. 

The lymphatic vessels of the head and neck drain into intermediate lymphatic vessels around the pancreaticoduodenal, mesenteric and hepatic arteries, and from there into the lymph nodes that lie in front of the aorta.


=== Microanatomy ===


The pancreas contains tissue with an endocrine and exocrine role, and this division is also visible when the pancreas is viewed under a microscope.The majority of pancreatic tissue has a digestive role. 

The cells with this role form clusters (Latin: acini) around small ducts, and are arranged in lobes that have thin fibrous walls. 

The cells of each acinus secrete inactive digestive enzymes called zymogens into the small intercalated ducts which they surround. 

In each acinus, the cells are pyramid-shaped and situated around the intercalated ducts, with the nuclei resting on the basement membrane, a large endoplasmic reticulum, and a number of zymogen granules visible within the cytoplasm. 

The intercalated ducts drain into larger intralobular ducts within the lobule, and finally interlobular ducts. 

The ducts are lined by a single layer of column-shaped cells. 

There is more than one layer of cells as the diameter of the ducts increases.The tissues with an endocrine role within the pancreas exist as clusters of cells called pancreatic islets (also called islets of Langerhans) that are distributed throughout the pancreas. 

Pancreatic islets contain alpha cells, beta cells, and delta cells, each of which releases a different hormone. 

These cells have characteristic positions, with alpha cells (secreting glucagon) tending to be situated around the periphery of the islet, and beta cells (secreting insulin) more numerous and found throughout the islet. 

Enterochromaffin cells are also scattered throughout the islets. 

Islets are composed of up to 3,000 secretory cells, and contain several small arterioles to receive blood, and venules that allow the hormones secreted by the cells to enter the systemic circulation.


=== Variation ===

The size of the pancreas varies considerably. 

Several anatomical variations exist, relating to the embryological development of the two pancreatic buds. 

The pancreas develops from these buds on either side of the duodenum. 

The ventral bud rotates to lie next to the dorsal bud, eventually fusing. 

In about 10% of adults, an accessory pancreatic duct may be present if the main duct of the dorsal bud of the pancreas does not regress; this duct opens into the minor duodenal papilla. 

If the two buds themselves, each having a duct, do not fuse, a pancreas may exist with two separate ducts, a condition known as a pancreas divisum. 

This condition has no physiologic consequence. 

If the ventral bud does not fully rotate, an annular pancreas may exist, where part or all of the duodenum is encircled by the pancreas. 

This may be associated with duodenal atresia.


=== Gene and protein expression ===


10,000 protein coding genes (50% of all genes) are expressed in the normal human pancreas. 

Less than 100 of these genes are specifically expressed in the pancreas. 

Similar to the salivary glands, most pancreas-specific genes encode for secreted proteins. 

Corresponding pancreas-specific proteins are either expressed in the exocrine cellular compartment and have functions related to digestion or food uptake such as digestive chymotrypsinogen enzymes and pancreatic lipase PNLIP, or are expressed in the various cells of the endocrine pancreatic islets and have functions related to secreted hormones such as insulin, glucagon, somatostatin and pancreatic polypeptide.


== Development ==


The pancreas forms during development from two buds that arise from the duodenal part of the foregut, an embryonic tube that is a precursor to the gastrointestinal tract. 

It is of endodermal origin. 

Pancreatic development begins with the formation of a dorsal and ventral pancreatic bud. 

Each joins with the foregut through a duct. 

The dorsal pancreatic bud forms the neck, body, and tail of the developed pancreas, and the ventral pancreatic bud forms the head and uncinate process.The definitive pancreas results from rotation of the ventral bud and the fusion of the two buds. 

During development, the duodenum rotates to the right, and the ventral bud rotates with it, moving to a position that becomes more dorsal. 

Upon reaching its final destination, the ventral pancreatic bud is below the larger dorsal bud, and eventually fuses with it. 

At this point of fusion, the main ducts of the ventral and dorsal pancreatic buds fuse, forming the main pancreatic duct. 

Usually, the duct of the dorsal bud regresses, leaving the main pancreatic duct.


=== Cellular development ===

Pancreatic progenitor cells are precursor cells that differentiate into the functional pancreatic cells, including exocrine acinar cells, endocrine islet cells, and ductal cells. 

These progenitor cells are characterised by the co-expression of the transcription factors PDX1 and NKX6-1.The cells of the exocrine pancreas differentiate through molecules that induce differentiation including follistatin, fibroblast growth factors, and activation of the Notch receptor system. 

Development of the exocrine acini progresses through three successive stages. 

These are the predifferentiated, protodifferentiated, and differentiated stages, which correspond to undetectable, low, and high levels of digestive enzyme activity, respectively.Pancreatic progenitor cells differentiate into endocrine islet cells under the influence of neurogenin-3 and ISL1, but only in the absence of notch receptor signaling. 

Under the direction of a Pax gene, the endocrine precursor cells differentiate to form alpha and gamma cells. 

Under the direction of Pax-6, the endocrine precursor cells differentiate to form beta and delta cells. 

The pancreatic islets form as the endocrine cells migrate from the duct system to form small clusters around capillaries. 

This occurs around the third month of development, and insulin and glucagon can be detected in the human fetal circulation by the fourth or fifth month of development.


== Function ==

The pancreas is involved in blood sugar control and metabolism within the body, and also in the secretion of substances (collectively pancreatic juice) that help digestion. 

These are divided into an "endocrine" role, relating to the secretion of insulin and other substances within pancreatic islets that help control blood sugar levels and metabolism within the body, and an "exocrine" role, relating to the secretion of enzymes involved in digesting substances in the digestive tract.


=== Blood glucose regulation ===


Cells within the pancreas help to maintain blood glucose levels (homeostasis). 

The cells that do this are located within the pancreatic islets that are present throughout the pancreas. 

When blood glucose levels are low, alpha cells secrete glucagon, which increases blood glucose levels. 

When blood glucose levels are high beta cells secrete insulin to decrease glucose in blood. 

Delta cells in the islet also secrete somatostatin which decreases the release of insulin and glucagon.Glucagon acts to increase glucose levels by promoting the creation of glucose and the breakdown of glycogen to glucose in the liver. 

It also decreases the uptake of glucose in fat and muscle. 

Glucagon release is stimulated by low blood glucose or insulin levels, and during exercise. 

Insulin acts to decrease blood glucose levels by facilitating uptake by cells (particularly skeletal muscle), and promoting its use in the creation of proteins, fats and carbohydrates. 

Insulin is initially created as a precursor form called preproinsulin. 

This is converted to proinsulin and cleaved by C-peptide to insulin which is then stored in granules in beta cells. 

Glucose is taken into the beta cells and degraded. 

The end effect of this is to cause depolarisation of the cell membrane which stimulates the release of the insulin.The main factor influencing the secretion of insulin and glucagon are the levels of glucose in blood plasma. 

Low blood sugar stimulates glucagon release, and high blood sugar stimulates insulin release. 

Other factors also influence the secretion of these hormones. 

Some amino acids, that are byproducts of the digestion of protein, stimulate insulin and glucagon release. 

Somatostatin acts as an inhibitor of both insulin and glucagon. 

The autonomic nervous system also plays a role. 

Activation of Beta-2 receptors of the sympathetic nervous system by catecholamines secreted from sympathetic nerves stimulates secretion of insulin and glucagon, whereas activation of Alpha-1 receptors inhibits secretion. 

M3 receptors of the parasympathetic nervous system act when stimulated by the right vagus nerve to stimulate release of insulin from beta cells.


=== Digestion ===


The pancreas plays a vital role in the digestive system. 

It does this by secreting a fluid that contains digestive enzymes into the duodenum, the first part of the small intestine that receives food from the stomach. 

These enzymes help to break down carbohydrates, proteins and lipids (fats). 

This role is called the "exocrine" role of the pancreas. 

The cells that do this are arranged in clusters called acini. 

Secretions into the middle of the acinus accumulate in intralobular ducts, which drain to the main pancreatic duct, which drains directly into the duodenum. 

About 1.5 - 3 liters of fluid are secreted in this manner every day.The cells in each acinus are filled with granules containing the digestive enzymes. 

These are secreted in an inactive form termed zymogens or proenzymes. 

When released into the duodenum, they are activated by the enzyme enterokinase present in the lining of the duodenum. 

The proenzymes are cleaved, creating a cascade of activating enzymes.
Enzymes that break down proteins begin with activation of trypsinogen to trypsin. 

The free trypsin then cleaves the rest of the trypsinogen, as well as chymotrypsinogen to its active form chymotrypsin.
Enzymes secreted involved in the digestion of fats include lipase, phospholipase A2, lysophospholipase, and cholesterol esterase.
Enzymes that break down starch and other carbohydrates include amylase.These enzymes are secreted in a fluid rich in bicarbonate. 

Bicarbonate helps maintain an alkaline pH for the fluid, a pH in which most of the enzymes act most efficiently, and also helps to neutralise the stomach acids that enter the duodenum. 

Secretion is influenced by hormones including secretin, cholecystokinin, and VIP, as well as acetylcholine stimulation from the vagus nerve. 

Secretin is released from the S cells which form part of the lining of the duodenum in response to stimulation by gastric acid. 

Along with VIP, it increases the secretion of enzymes and bicarbonate. 

Cholecystokinin is released from Ito cells of the lining of the duodenum and jejunum mostly in response to long chain fatty acids, and increases the effects of secretin. 

At a cellular level, bicarbonate is secreted from the acinar cells through a sodium and bicarbonate cotransporter that acts because of membrane depolarisation caused by the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator. 

Secretin and VIP act to increase the opening of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator, which leads to more membrane depolarisation and more secretion of bicarbonate.A variety of mechanisms act to ensure that the digestive action of the pancreas does not act to digest pancreatic tissue itself. 

These include the secretion of inactive enzymes (zymogens), the secretion of the protective enzyme trypsin inhibitor, which inactivates trypsin, the changes in pH that occur with bicarbonate secretion that stimulate digestion only when the pancreas is stimulated, and the fact that the low calcium within cells causes inactivation of trypsin.


=== Additional functions ===

The pancreas also secretes vasoactive intestinal peptide and pancreatic polypeptide. 

Enterochromaffin cells of the pancreas secrete the hormones motilin, serotonin, and substance P.


== Clinical significance ==



=== Inflammation ===


Inflammation of the pancreas is known as pancreatitis. 

Pancreatitis is most often associated with recurrent gallstones or chronic alcohol use, with other common causes including traumatic damage, damage following an ERCP, some medications, infections such as mumps and very high blood triglyceride levels. 

Acute pancreatitis is likely to cause intense pain in the central abdomen, that often radiates to the back, and may be associated with nausea or vomiting. 

Severe pancreatitis may lead to bleeding or perforation of the pancreas resulting in shock or a systemic inflammatory response syndrome, bruising of the flanks or the region around the belly button. 

These severe complications are often managed in an intensive care unit.In pancreatitis, enzymes of the exocrine pancreas damage the structure and tissue of the pancreas. 

Detection of some of these enzymes, such as amylase and lipase in the blood, along with symptoms and findings on medical imaging such as ultrasound or a CT scan, are often used to indicate that a person has pancreatitis. 

Pancreatitis is often managed medically with pain reliefs, and monitoring to prevent or manage shock, and management of any identified underlying causes. 

This may include removal of gallstones, lowering of blood triglyceride or glucose levels, the use of corticosteroids for autoimmune pancreatitis, and the cessation of any medication triggers.Chronic pancreatitis refers to the development of pancreatitis over time. 

It shares many similar causes, with the most common being chronic alcohol use, with other causes including recurrent acute episodes and cystic fibrosis. 

Abdominal pain, characteristically relieved by sitting forward or drinking alcohol, is the most common symptom. 

When the digestive function of the pancreas is severely affected, this may lead to problems with fat digestion and the development of steatorrhoea; when the endocrine function is affected, this may lead to diabetes. 

Chronic pancreatitis is investigated in a similar way to acute pancreatitis. 

In addition to management of pain and nausea, and management of any identified causes (which may include alcohol cessation), because of the digestive role of the pancreas, enzyme replacement may be needed to prevent malabsorption.


=== Cancer ===


Pancreatic cancers, particularly the most common type, pancreatic adenocarcinoma, remain very difficult to treat, and are mostly diagnosed only at a stage that is too late for surgery, which is the only curative treatment. 

Pancreatic cancer is rare in people younger than 40 and the median age of diagnosis is 71. 

Risk factors include chronic pancreatitis, older age, smoking, obesity, diabetes, and certain rare genetic conditions including multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1, hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer and dysplastic nevus syndrome among others. 

About 25% of cases are attributable to tobacco smoking, while 5–10% of cases are linked to inherited genes.Pancreatic adenocarcinoma is the most common form of pancreatic cancer, and is cancer arising from the exocrine digestive part of the pancreas. 

Most occur in the head of the pancreas. 

Symptoms tend to arise late in the course of the cancer, when it causes abdominal pain, weight loss, or yellowing of the skin (jaundice). 

Jaundice occurs when the outflow of bile is blocked by the cancer. 

Other less common symptoms include nausea, vomiting, pancreatitis, diabetes or recurrent venous thrombosis. 

Pancreatic cancer is usually diagnosed by medical imaging in the form of an ultrasound or CT scan with contrast enhancement. 

An endoscopic ultrasound may be used if a tumour is being considered for surgical removal, and biopsy guided by ERCP or ultrasound can be used to confirm an uncertain diagnosis.Because of the late development of symptoms, most cancer presents at an advanced stage. 

Only 10 to 15% of tumours are suitable for surgical resection. 

As of 2018, when chemotherapy is given the FOLFIRINOX regimen containing fluorouracil, irinotecan, oxaliplatin and leucovorin has been shown to extend survival beyond traditional gemcitabine regimens. 

For the most part, treatment is palliative, focus on the management of symptoms that develop. 

This may include management of itch, a choledochojejunostomy or the insertion of stents with ERCP to facilitate the drainage of bile, and medications to help control pain. 

In the United States pancreatic cancer is the fourth most common cause of deaths due to cancer. 

The disease occurs more often in the developed world, which had 68% of new cases in 2012. 

Pancreatic adenocarcinoma typically has poor outcomes with the average percentage alive for at least one and five years after diagnosis being 25% and 5% respectively. 

In localized disease where the cancer is small (< 2 cm) the number alive at five years is approximately 20%.There are several types of pancreatic cancer, involving both the endocrine and exocrine tissue. 

The many types of pancreatic endocrine tumors are all uncommon or rare, and have varied outlooks. 

However the incidence of these cancers has been rising sharply; it is not clear to what extent this reflects increased detection, especially through medical imaging, of tumors that would be very slow to develop. 

Insulinomas (largely benign) and gastrinomas are the most common types. 

For those with neuroendocrine cancers the number alive after five years is much better at 65%, varying considerably with type.A solid pseudopapillary tumour is a low-grade malignant tumour of the pancreas of papillary architecture that typically afflicts young women.


=== Diabetes mellitus ===



==== Type 1 diabetes ====

Diabetes mellitus type 1 is a chronic autoimmune disease in which the immune system attacks the insulin-secreting beta cells of the pancreas. 

Insulin is needed to keep blood sugar levels within optimal ranges, and its lack can lead to high blood sugar. 

As an untreated chronic condition, complications including accelerated vascular disease, diabetic retinopathy, kidney disease and neuropathy can result. 

In addition, if there is not enough insulin for glucose to be used within cells, the medical emergency diabetic ketoacidosis, which is often the first symptom that a person with type 1 diabetes may have, can result. 

Type 1 diabetes can develop at any age but is most often diagnosed before age 40. 

For people living with type 1 diabetes, insulin injections are critical for survival. 

An experimental procedure to treat type 1 diabetes is pancreas transplantation or isolated transplantation of islet cells to supply a person with functioning beta cells.


==== Type 2 diabetes ====

Diabetes mellitus type 2 is the most common form of diabetes. 

The causes for high blood sugar in this form of diabetes usually are a combination of insulin resistance and impaired insulin secretion, with both genetic and environmental factors playing a role in the development of the disease. 

Over time, pancreatic beta cells may become "exhausted" and less functional. 

The management of type 2 diabetes involves a combination of lifestyle measures, medications if required and potentially insulin. 
With relevance to the pancreas, several medications act to enhance the secretion of insulin from beta cells, particularly sulphonylureas, which act directly on beta cells; incretins which replicate the action of the hormones glucagon-like peptide 1, increasing the secretion of insulin from beta cells after meals, and are more resistant to breakdown; and DPP-4 inhibitors, which slow the breakdown of incretins.


=== Removal ===

It is possible for a person to live without a pancreas, provided that the person takes insulin for proper regulation of blood glucose concentration and pancreatic enzyme supplements to aid digestion.


== History ==

The pancreas was first identified by Herophilus (335–280 BC), a Greek anatomist and surgeon. 

A few hundred years later, Rufus of Ephesus, another Greek anatomist, gave the pancreas its name. 

Etymologically, the term "pancreas", a modern Latin adaptation of Greek πάγκρεας, [πᾶν ("all", "whole"), and κρέας ("flesh")], originally means sweetbread, although literally meaning all-flesh, presumably because of its fleshy consistency. 

It was only in 1889 when Oskar Minkowski discovered that removing the pancreas from a dog caused it to become diabetic. 

Insulin was later isolated from pancreatic islets by Frederick Banting and Charles Herbert Best in 1921.The way the tissue of the pancreas has been viewed has also changed. 

Previously, it was viewed using simple staining methods such as H&E stains. 

Now, immunohistochemistry can be used to more easily differentiate cell types. 

This involves visible antibodies to the products of certain cell types, and helps identify with greater ease cell types such as alpha and beta cells.


== Other animals ==

Pancreatic tissue is present in all vertebrates, but its precise form and arrangement varies widely. 

There may be up to three separate pancreases, two of which arise from ventral buds, and the other dorsally. 

In most species (including humans), these "fuse" in the adult, but there are several exceptions. 

Even when a single pancreas is present, two or three pancreatic ducts may persist, each draining separately into the duodenum (or equivalent part of the foregut). 

Birds, for example, typically have three such ducts.In teleost fish, and a few other species (such as rabbits), there is no discrete pancreas at all, with pancreatic tissue being distributed diffusely across the mesentery and even within other nearby organs, such as the liver or spleen. 

In a few teleost species, the endocrine tissue has fused to form a distinct gland within the abdominal cavity, but otherwise it is distributed among the exocrine components. 

The most primitive arrangement, however, appears to be that of lampreys and lungfish, in which pancreatic tissue is found as a number of discrete nodules within the wall of the gut itself, with the exocrine portions being little different from other glandular structures of the intestine.


== Cuisine ==

The pancreas of calf (ris de veau) or lamb (ris d'agneau), and, less commonly, of beef or pork, are used as food under the culinary name of sweetbread.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pancreas
;;;ES;;;



PÁNCREAS


El páncreas es un órgano del sistema digestivo y del sistema endocrino de los vertebrados. 

En los humanos, se encuentra en el abdomen detrás del estómago y funciona como una glándula. 

El páncreas es una glándula mixta o heterocrina, es decir, tiene una función tanto endocrina como digestiva exocrina. El 99% del páncreas es exocrino y el 1% es endocrino.

Como glándula endocrina, funciona principalmente para regular los niveles de azúcar en la sangre, secretando las hormonas insulina, glucagón, somatostatina y polipéptido pancreático. 

Como parte del sistema digestivo, funciona como una glándula exocrina que secreta jugo pancreático hacia el duodeno a través del conducto pancreático. 

Este jugo contiene bicarbonato, que neutraliza el ácido que ingresa al duodeno desde el estómago; y enzimas digestivas, que descomponen los carbohidratos, las proteínas y las grasas de los alimentos que ingresan al duodeno desde el estómago.
La inflamación del páncreas se conoce como pancreatitis, y sus causas comunes incluyen el consumo crónico de alcohol y los cálculos biliares. 

Debido a su papel en la regulación del azúcar en la sangre, el páncreas también es un órgano clave en la diabetes mellitus. 

El cáncer de páncreas puede surgir después de una pancreatitis crónica o por otras razones, y tiene un pronóstico muy malo, ya que a menudo se identifica cuando se ha diseminado a otras áreas del cuerpo.
La palabra páncreas proviene del griego πᾶν (pân, “todo”) & κρέας (kréas, “carne”). 

La función del páncreas en la diabetes se conoce desde al menos 1889, y su papel en la producción de insulina se identificó en 1921.


== Estructura ==


El páncreas es un órgano que en los humanos se encuentra en el abdomen y se extiende desde detrás del estómago hasta la parte superior izquierda del abdomen cerca del bazo. 

En los adultos, mide entre 12 y 15 centímetros (4,7 y 5,9 pulgadas) de largo, es lobulado y tiene un aspecto de color salmón. Anatómicamente, el páncreas se divide en cabeza, cuello, cuerpo y cola. 

El páncreas se extiende desde la curvatura interna del duodeno, donde la cabeza rodea dos vasos sanguíneos: la arteria y la vena mesentérica superior. 

La parte más larga del páncreas, el cuerpo, se extiende detrás del estómago y la cola del páncreas termina junto al bazo. Dos conductos, el conducto pancreático principal y un conducto pancreático accesorio más pequeño, atraviesan el cuerpo del páncreas. 

El conducto pancreático principal se une con el conducto biliar común formando un pequeño abultamiento llamado ampolla de Vater (ampolla hepatopancreática). 

Esta ampolla está rodeada por un músculo, el esfínter de Oddi. 

Esta ampolla se abre en la parte descendente del duodeno. 

La apertura del colédoco hacia el conducto pancreático principal está controlada por el esfínter de Boyden. 

El conducto pancreático accesorio desemboca en el duodeno con aberturas separadas ubicadas por encima de la abertura del conducto pancreático principal.


=== Partes ===

La cabeza del páncreas se encuentra dentro de la curvatura del duodeno y envuelve la arteria y la vena mesentérica superior.

A la derecha se encuentra la parte descendente del duodeno, y entre estos discurren las arterias pancreatoduodenales superior e inferior.

Detrás descansa la vena cava inferior y el colédoco.

En frente se encuentra la membrana peritoneal y el colon transverso.

Un pequeño proceso uncinado emerge debajo de la cabeza, situado detrás de la vena mesentérica superior y, a veces, de la arteria. El cuello del páncreas separa la cabeza del páncreas, ubicada en la curvatura del duodeno, del cuerpo.

El cuello mide aproximadamente 2 cm (0,79 pulgadas) de ancho y se encuentra frente a donde se forma la vena porta.

El cuello se encuentra principalmente detrás del píloro del estómago y está cubierto de peritoneo. 

La arteria pancreaticoduodenal anterosuperior viaja por delante del cuello del páncreas. El cuerpo es la parte más grande del páncreas, y en su mayoría se encuentra detrás del estómago, estrechándose a lo largo de su longitud. 

El peritoneo se asienta sobre el cuerpo del páncreas y el colon transverso frente al peritoneo. 

Detrás del páncreas hay varios vasos sanguíneos, incluida la aorta, la vena esplénica y la vena renal izquierda, así como el comienzo de la arteria mesentérica superior. 

Debajo del cuerpo del páncreas se encuentra parte del intestino delgado, específicamente la última parte del duodeno y el yeyuno al que se conecta, así como el ligamento suspensorio del duodeno que se encuentra entre estos dos. 

Delante del páncreas se encuentra el colon transverso. El páncreas se estrecha hacia la cola, que se encuentra cerca del bazo.

Por lo general, mide entre 1,3 y 3,5 cm (0,51 y 1,38 pulgadas) de largo y se encuentra entre las capas del ligamento entre el bazo y el riñón izquierdo.

La arteria y la vena esplénicas, que también pasan por detrás del cuerpo del páncreas, pasan por detrás de la cola del páncreas.


=== Suministro de sangre ===

El páncreas tiene un abundante suministro de sangre, con vasos que se originan como ramas tanto de la arteria celíaca como de la arteria mesentérica superior.

La arteria esplénica corre a lo largo de la parte superior del páncreas e irriga la parte izquierda del cuerpo y la cola del páncreas a través de sus ramas pancreáticas, la más grande de las cuales se llama arteria pancreática mayor.

Las arterias pancreaticoduodenales superior e inferior corren a lo largo de las superficies anterior y posterior de la cabeza del páncreas adyacente al duodeno. 

Estos irrigan la cabeza del páncreas. 

Estos vasos se unen (anastomosis) en el medio. El cuerpo y el cuello del páncreas drenan en la vena esplénica, que se encuentra detrás del páncreas. 

La cabeza drena en las venas porta y mesentérica superior y las envuelve a través de las venas pancreatoduodenales. El páncreas drena en los vasos linfáticos que viajan a lo largo de sus arterias y tiene un suministro linfático abundante. 

Los vasos linfáticos del cuerpo y la cola drenan en los ganglios linfáticos esplénicos y, finalmente, en los ganglios linfáticos que se encuentran frente a la aorta, entre las arterias celíaca y mesentérica superior. 

Los vasos linfáticos de la cabeza y el cuello drenan en los vasos linfáticos intermedios alrededor de las arterias pancreaticoduodenal, mesentérica y hepática, y desde allí hacia los ganglios linfáticos que se encuentran frente a la aorta.


=== Microanatomía ===


El páncreas contiene tejido con una función endocrina y exocrina, y esta división también es visible cuando se observa el páncreas bajo un microscopio. La mayoría del tejido pancreático tiene una función digestiva. 

Las células con esta función forman racimos (latín: acinos) alrededor de pequeños conductos y se disponen en lóbulos que tienen paredes fibrosas delgadas. 

Las células de cada acino secretan enzimas digestivas inactivas llamadas zimógenos en los pequeños conductos intercalados que rodean. 

En cada acino, las células tienen forma de pirámide y están situadas alrededor de los conductos intercalados, con los núcleos descansando sobre la membrana basal, un gran retículo endoplásmico y varios gránulos de zimógeno visibles dentro del citoplasma.

Los conductos intercalados drenan en conductos intralobulillares más grandes dentro del lobulillo y, finalmente, en conductos interlobulillares.

Los conductos están revestidos por una sola capa de células en forma de columna.

Hay más de una capa de células a medida que aumenta el diámetro de los conductos. Los tejidos con una función endocrina dentro del páncreas existen como grupos de células llamados islotes pancreáticos (también llamados islotes de Langerhans) que se distribuyen por todo el páncreas.

Los islotes pancreáticos contienen células alfa, células beta y células delta, cada una de las cuales libera una hormona diferente.

Estas células tienen posiciones características, con células alfa (secretoras de glucagón) que tienden a estar situadas alrededor de la periferia del islote, y células beta (secretoras de insulina) más numerosas y encontradas en todo el islote.

Las células enterocromafines también se encuentran dispersas por los islotes.

Los islotes están compuestos por hasta 3000 células secretoras y contienen varias arteriolas pequeñas para recibir sangre y vénulas que permiten que las hormonas secretadas por las células entren en la circulación sistémica.


=== Variación ===

El tamaño del páncreas varía considerablemente.

Existen varias variaciones anatómicas relacionadas con el desarrollo embriológico de las dos yemas pancreáticas.

El páncreas se desarrolla a partir de estos brotes a ambos lados del duodeno.

La yema ventral gira para quedar junto a la yema dorsal y finalmente se fusiona.

En alrededor del 10% de los adultos, puede haber un conducto pancreático accesorio si el conducto principal de la yema dorsal del páncreas no retrocede; este conducto desemboca en la papila duodenal menor.

Si los dos brotes, cada uno con un conducto, no se fusionan, puede existir un páncreas con dos conductos separados, una condición conocida como páncreas divisum. 

Esta condición no tiene ninguna consecuencia fisiológica. 

Si la yema ventral no rota completamente, puede existir un páncreas anular, donde parte o todo el duodeno está rodeado por el páncreas. 

Esto puede estar asociado con atresia duodenal.


=== Expresión de genes y proteínas ===


En el páncreas humano normal se expresan 10.000 genes que codifican proteínas (50% de todos los genes). 

Menos de 100 de estos genes se expresan específicamente en el páncreas. 

Al igual que las glándulas salivales, la mayoría de los genes específicos del páncreas codifican proteínas secretadas. 

Las proteínas específicas del páncreas correspondientes se expresan en el compartimiento celular exocrino y tienen funciones relacionadas con la digestión o la absorción de alimentos, como las enzimas digestivas quimotripsinógenas y la lipasa pancreática PNLIP, o se expresan en las diversas células de los islotes pancreáticos endocrinos y tienen funciones relacionadas con la secreción de proteínas. hormonas como la insulina, el glucagón, la somatostatina y el polipéptido pancreático.


== Desarrollo ==


El páncreas se forma durante el desarrollo a partir de dos yemas que surgen de la parte duodenal del intestino anterior, un tubo embrionario que es un precursor del tracto gastrointestinal.

Es de origen endodérmico.

El desarrollo pancreático comienza con la formación de una yema pancreática dorsal y ventral.

Cada uno se une con el intestino anterior a través de un conducto.

La yema pancreática dorsal forma el cuello, el cuerpo y la cola del páncreas desarrollado, y la yema pancreática ventral forma la cabeza y el proceso uncinado. El páncreas definitivo resulta de la rotación de la yema ventral y la fusión de las dos yemas.

Durante el desarrollo, el duodeno gira hacia la derecha y la yema ventral gira con él, moviéndose a una posición que se vuelve más dorsal.

Al llegar a su destino final, la yema pancreática ventral se encuentra debajo de la yema dorsal más grande y finalmente se fusiona con ella.

En este punto de fusión, los conductos principales de las yemas pancreáticas ventral y dorsal se fusionan, formando el conducto pancreático principal.

Por lo general, el conducto de la yema dorsal retrocede, dejando el conducto pancreático principal.


=== Desarrollo celular ===

Las células progenitoras pancreáticas son células precursoras que se diferencian en células pancreáticas funcionales, incluidas las células acinares exocrinas, las células de los islotes endocrinos y las células ductales.

Estas células progenitoras se caracterizan por la coexpresión de los factores de transcripción PDX1 y NKX6-1. Las células del páncreas exocrino se diferencian a través de moléculas que inducen la diferenciación, incluidas la folistatina, los factores de crecimiento de fibroblastos y la activación del sistema receptor Notch.

El desarrollo de los acinos exocrinos progresa a través de tres etapas sucesivas.

Estas son las etapas prediferenciada, protodiferenciada y diferenciada, que corresponden a niveles indetectables, bajos y altos de actividad de las enzimas digestivas, respectivamente. ausencia de señalización del receptor notch.

Bajo la dirección de un gen Pax, las células precursoras endocrinas se diferencian para formar células alfa y gamma.

Bajo la dirección de Pax-6, las células precursoras endocrinas se diferencian para formar células beta y delta.

Los islotes pancreáticos se forman a medida que las células endocrinas migran desde el sistema de conductos para formar pequeños grupos alrededor de los capilares.

Esto ocurre alrededor del tercer mes de desarrollo, y la insulina y el glucagón pueden detectarse en la circulación fetal humana hacia el cuarto o quinto mes de desarrollo.


== Función ==

El páncreas participa en el control del azúcar en la sangre y el metabolismo dentro del cuerpo, y también en la secreción de sustancias (colectivamente jugo pancreático) que ayudan a la digestión. 

Estos se dividen en una función "endocrina", relacionada con la secreción de insulina y otras sustancias dentro de los islotes pancreáticos que ayudan a controlar los niveles de azúcar en la sangre y el metabolismo dentro del cuerpo, y una función "exocrina", relacionada con la secreción de enzimas involucradas en la digestión. sustancias en el tubo digestivo.


=== Regulación de glucosa en sangre ===


Las células dentro del páncreas ayudan a mantener los niveles de glucosa en sangre (homeostasis). 

Las células que hacen esto se encuentran dentro de los islotes pancreáticos que están presentes en todo el páncreas. 

Cuando los niveles de glucosa en sangre son bajos, las células alfa secretan glucagón, lo que aumenta los niveles de glucosa en sangre. 

Cuando los niveles de glucosa en la sangre son altos, las células beta secretan insulina para disminuir la glucosa en la sangre. 

Las células delta en el islote también secretan somatostatina que disminuye la liberación de insulina y glucagón. El glucagón actúa para aumentar los niveles de glucosa al promover la creación de glucosa y la descomposición del glucógeno en glucosa en el hígado. 

También disminuye la absorción de glucosa en la grasa y el músculo. 

La liberación de glucagón es estimulada por niveles bajos de glucosa o insulina en la sangre y durante el ejercicio. 

La insulina actúa para disminuir los niveles de glucosa en la sangre al facilitar la absorción por parte de las células (particularmente del músculo esquelético) y promover su uso en la creación de proteínas, grasas y carbohidratos. 

La insulina se crea inicialmente como una forma precursora llamada preproinsulina. 

Esta se convierte en proinsulina y el péptido C la escinde en insulina, que luego se almacena en gránulos en las células beta. 

La glucosa se lleva a las células beta y se degrada. 

El efecto final de esto es causar la despolarización de la membrana celular que estimula la liberación de insulina. El principal factor que influye en la secreción de insulina y glucagón son los niveles de glucosa en el plasma sanguíneo. 

Un nivel bajo de azúcar en la sangre estimula la liberación de glucagón y un nivel alto de azúcar en la sangre estimula la liberación de insulina. 

Otros factores también influyen en la secreción de estas hormonas. 

Algunos aminoácidos, que son subproductos de la digestión de proteínas, estimulan la liberación de insulina y glucagón. 

La somatostatina actúa como inhibidor tanto de la insulina como del glucagón. 

El sistema nervioso autónomo también juega un papel. 

La activación de los receptores Beta-2 del sistema nervioso simpático por las catecolaminas secretadas por los nervios simpáticos estimula la secreción de insulina y glucagón, mientras que la activación de los receptores Alfa-1 inhibe la secreción.

Los receptores M3 del sistema nervioso parasimpático actúan cuando son estimulados por el nervio vago derecho para estimular la liberación de insulina de las células beta.


=== Digestión ===


El páncreas juega un papel vital en el sistema digestivo.

Lo hace secretando un líquido que contiene enzimas digestivas en el duodeno, la primera parte del intestino delgado que recibe alimentos del estómago.

Estas enzimas ayudan a descomponer los carbohidratos, las proteínas y los lípidos (grasas).

Esta función se denomina función "exocrina" del páncreas.

Las células que hacen esto están dispuestas en grupos llamados acinos.

Las secreciones en el medio del ácino se acumulan en los conductos intralobulillares, que drenan al conducto pancreático principal, que drena directamente al duodeno.

Cada día se secretan alrededor de 1,5 a 3 litros de líquido de esta manera. Las células de cada ácino están llenas de gránulos que contienen las enzimas digestivas.

Estos se secretan en una forma inactiva denominada zimógenos o proenzimas.

Cuando se liberan en el duodeno, son activados por la enzima enteroquinasa presente en el revestimiento del duodeno.

Las proenzimas se escinden, creando una cascada de enzimas activadoras.
Las enzimas que descomponen las proteínas comienzan con la activación del tripsinógeno a tripsina.

La tripsina libre luego escinde el resto del tripsinógeno, así como el quimotripsinógeno a su forma activa quimotripsina.
Las enzimas secretadas involucradas en la digestión de grasas incluyen lipasa, fosfolipasa A2, lisofosfolipasa y colesterol esterasa.
Las enzimas que descomponen el almidón y otros carbohidratos incluyen la amilasa. Estas enzimas se secretan en un líquido rico en bicarbonato.

El bicarbonato ayuda a mantener un pH alcalino para el líquido, un pH en el que la mayoría de las enzimas actúan de manera más eficiente y también ayuda a neutralizar los ácidos estomacales que ingresan al duodeno.

La secreción está influenciada por hormonas como la secretina, la colecistoquinina y el VIP, así como por la estimulación de la acetilcolina del nervio vago.

La secretina se libera de las células S que forman parte del revestimiento del duodeno en respuesta a la estimulación del ácido gástrico.

Junto con VIP, aumenta la secreción de enzimas y bicarbonato.

La colecistoquinina se libera de las células Ito del revestimiento del duodeno y el yeyuno, principalmente en respuesta a los ácidos grasos de cadena larga, y aumenta los efectos de la secretina.

A nivel celular, el bicarbonato es secretado por las células acinares a través de un cotransportador de sodio y bicarbonato que actúa por despolarización de la membrana provocada por el regulador de conductancia transmembrana de la fibrosis quística.

La secretina y el VIP actúan para aumentar la apertura del regulador de conductancia transmembrana de la fibrosis quística, lo que conduce a una mayor despolarización de la membrana y a una mayor secreción de bicarbonato. Actúan una variedad de mecanismos para garantizar que la acción digestiva del páncreas no actúe para digerir el tejido pancreático en sí. .

Estos incluyen la secreción de enzimas inactivas (zimógenos), la secreción de la enzima protectora inhibidora de la tripsina, que inactiva la tripsina, los cambios en el pH que ocurren con la secreción de bicarbonato que estimulan la digestión solo cuando se estimula el páncreas, y el hecho de que el nivel bajo de calcio dentro de las células provoca la inactivación de la tripsina.


=== Funciones adicionales ===

El páncreas también secreta péptido intestinal vasoactivo y polipéptido pancreático.

Las células enterocromafines del páncreas secretan las hormonas motilina, serotonina y sustancia P.


== Importancia clínica ==



=== Inflamación ===


La inflamación del páncreas se conoce como pancreatitis.

La pancreatitis se asocia con mayor frecuencia con cálculos biliares recurrentes o consumo crónico de alcohol, con otras causas comunes que incluyen daño traumático, daño después de una CPRE, algunos medicamentos, infecciones como las paperas y niveles muy altos de triglicéridos en la sangre.

Es probable que la pancreatitis aguda cause un dolor intenso en la parte central del abdomen, que a menudo se irradia hacia la espalda y puede estar asociado con náuseas o vómitos.

La pancreatitis grave puede provocar sangrado o perforación del páncreas, lo que puede provocar un shock o un síndrome de respuesta inflamatoria sistémica, hematomas en los flancos o en la región alrededor del ombligo.

Estas complicaciones graves a menudo se manejan en una unidad de cuidados intensivos. En la pancreatitis, las enzimas del páncreas exocrino dañan la estructura y el tejido del páncreas.

La detección de algunas de estas enzimas, como la amilasa y la lipasa en la sangre, junto con los síntomas y hallazgos en imágenes médicas, como una ecografía o una tomografía computarizada, a menudo se usan para indicar que una persona tiene pancreatitis. 

La pancreatitis a menudo se trata médicamente con analgésicos y control para prevenir o controlar el shock y el tratamiento de cualquier causa subyacente identificada. 

Esto puede incluir la extracción de cálculos biliares, la reducción de los niveles de triglicéridos o glucosa en la sangre, el uso de corticosteroides para la pancreatitis autoinmune y el cese de cualquier desencadenante de medicamentos. La pancreatitis crónica se refiere al desarrollo de pancreatitis con el tiempo. 

Comparte muchas causas similares, siendo la más común el consumo crónico de alcohol, con otras causas que incluyen episodios agudos recurrentes y fibrosis quística. 

El dolor abdominal, que se alivia de manera característica al sentarse hacia adelante o al beber alcohol, es el síntoma más común. 

Cuando la función digestiva del páncreas se ve gravemente afectada, esto puede provocar problemas con la digestión de las grasas y el desarrollo de esteatorrea; cuando la función endocrina se ve afectada, esto puede conducir a la diabetes.

La pancreatitis crónica se investiga de manera similar a la pancreatitis aguda. 

Además del control del dolor y las náuseas, y el control de cualquier causa identificada (que puede incluir el abandono del alcohol), debido a la función digestiva del páncreas, puede ser necesario el reemplazo de enzimas para prevenir la malabsorción.


=== Cáncer ===


Los cánceres de páncreas, en particular el tipo más común, el adenocarcinoma de páncreas, siguen siendo muy difíciles de tratar y, en su mayoría, se diagnostican solo en una etapa en la que es demasiado tarde para la cirugía, que es el único tratamiento curativo. 

El cáncer de páncreas es raro en personas menores de 40 años y la edad promedio de diagnóstico es de 71 años. 

Los factores de riesgo incluyen la pancreatitis crónica, la edad avanzada, el tabaquismo, la obesidad, la diabetes y ciertas afecciones genéticas raras, como la neoplasia endocrina múltiple tipo 1, el cáncer de colon hereditario sin poliposis y el síndrome del nevo displásico, entre otros. 

Alrededor del 25 % de los casos se atribuyen al tabaquismo, mientras que del 5 al 10 % de los casos están relacionados con genes hereditarios. El adenocarcinoma pancreático es la forma más común de cáncer de páncreas y es un cáncer que surge de la parte digestiva exocrina del páncreas. 

La mayoría ocurren en la cabeza del páncreas. 

Los síntomas tienden a surgir tarde en el curso del cáncer, cuando causa dolor abdominal, pérdida de peso o coloración amarillenta de la piel (ictericia).

La ictericia ocurre cuando el cáncer bloquea la salida de la bilis.

Otros síntomas menos comunes incluyen náuseas, vómitos, pancreatitis, diabetes o trombosis venosa recurrente.

El cáncer de páncreas generalmente se diagnostica mediante imágenes médicas en forma de ultrasonido o tomografía computarizada con realce de contraste.

Se puede usar una ecografía endoscópica si se considera la extirpación quirúrgica de un tumor, y se puede usar una biopsia guiada por CPRE o una ecografía para confirmar un diagnóstico incierto. Debido al desarrollo tardío de los síntomas, la mayoría de los cánceres se presentan en una etapa avanzada.

Solo del 10 al 15% de los tumores son aptos para la resección quirúrgica.

A partir de 2018, cuando se administra quimioterapia, se ha demostrado que el régimen FOLFIRINOX que contiene fluorouracilo, irinotecán, oxaliplatino y leucovorina prolonga la supervivencia más allá de los regímenes tradicionales de gemcitabina. 

En su mayor parte, el tratamiento es paliativo, se centra en el manejo de los síntomas que se desarrollan. 

Esto puede incluir el manejo de la picazón, una coledocoyeyunostomía o la inserción de stents con CPRE para facilitar el drenaje de la bilis y medicamentos para ayudar a controlar el dolor. 

En los Estados Unidos, el cáncer de páncreas es la cuarta causa más común de muerte por cáncer. 

La enfermedad ocurre con mayor frecuencia en el mundo desarrollado, que tuvo el 68% de los casos nuevos en 2012. 

El adenocarcinoma de páncreas suele tener malos resultados, con un porcentaje medio de vida durante al menos uno y cinco años después del diagnóstico del 25 % y el 5 %, respectivamente. 

En la enfermedad localizada en la que el cáncer es pequeño (< 2 cm), el número de pacientes vivos a los cinco años es de aproximadamente el 20 %. Hay varios tipos de cáncer de páncreas que afectan tanto al tejido endocrino como al exocrino.

Los muchos tipos de tumores endocrinos de páncreas son poco comunes o raros y tienen perspectivas variadas.

Sin embargo, la incidencia de estos cánceres ha aumentado considerablemente; no está claro en qué medida esto refleja una mayor detección, especialmente a través de imágenes médicas, de tumores que se desarrollarían muy lentamente.

Los insulinomas (en su mayoría benignos) y los gastrinomas son los tipos más comunes.

Para aquellos con cánceres neuroendocrinos, el número de personas vivas después de cinco años es mucho mejor, con un 65 %, que varía considerablemente según el tipo. Un tumor pseudopapilar sólido es un tumor maligno de bajo grado del páncreas de arquitectura papilar que generalmente afecta a mujeres jóvenes.


=== Diabetes mellitus ===



==== Diabetes tipo 1 ====

La diabetes mellitus tipo 1 es una enfermedad autoinmune crónica en la que el sistema inmunitario ataca a las células beta del páncreas que secretan insulina. 

La insulina es necesaria para mantener los niveles de azúcar en la sangre dentro de los rangos óptimos, y su falta puede provocar niveles altos de azúcar en la sangre. 

Como condición crónica no tratada, pueden resultar complicaciones que incluyen enfermedad vascular acelerada, retinopatía diabética, enfermedad renal y neuropatía. 

Además, si no hay suficiente insulina para que la glucosa se use dentro de las células, puede producirse una cetoacidosis diabética de emergencia médica, que a menudo es el primer síntoma que puede tener una persona con diabetes tipo 1. 

La diabetes tipo 1 puede desarrollarse a cualquier edad, pero con mayor frecuencia se diagnostica antes de los 40 años. 

Para las personas que viven con diabetes tipo 1, las inyecciones de insulina son fundamentales para la supervivencia. 

Un procedimiento experimental para tratar la diabetes tipo 1 es el trasplante de páncreas o el trasplante aislado de células de los islotes para suministrar a una persona células beta funcionales.


==== Diabetes tipo 2 ====

La diabetes mellitus tipo 2 es la forma más común de diabetes. 

Las causas del nivel alto de azúcar en la sangre en esta forma de diabetes generalmente son una combinación de resistencia a la insulina y secreción deficiente de insulina, con factores tanto genéticos como ambientales que juegan un papel en el desarrollo de la enfermedad. 

Con el tiempo, las células beta del páncreas pueden "agotarse" y volverse menos funcionales. 

El control de la diabetes tipo 2 implica una combinación de medidas de estilo de vida, medicamentos si es necesario y, posiblemente, insulina. 
Con relevancia para el páncreas, varios medicamentos actúan para aumentar la secreción de insulina de las células beta, en particular las sulfonilureas, que actúan directamente sobre las células beta; incretinas que replican la acción de las hormonas péptido 1 similar al glucagón, aumentando la secreción de insulina de las células beta después de las comidas, y son más resistentes a la degradación; e inhibidores de la DPP-4, que retardan la descomposición de las incretinas.


=== Eliminación ===

Es posible que una persona viva sin páncreas, siempre y cuando tome insulina para regular adecuadamente la concentración de glucosa en la sangre y suplementos de enzimas pancreáticas para ayudar a la digestión.


== Historia ==

El páncreas fue identificado por primera vez por Herófilo (335-280 a. C.), un anatomista y cirujano griego. 

Unos cientos de años más tarde, Rufo de Éfeso, otro anatomista griego, le dio su nombre al páncreas. 

Etimológicamente, el término "páncreas", una adaptación latina moderna del griego πάγκρεας, [πᾶν ("todo", "entero") y κρέας ("carne")], originalmente significa mollejas, aunque literalmente significa toda carne, presumiblemente porque de su consistencia carnosa. 

Fue recién en 1889 cuando Oskar Minkowski descubrió que extirparle el páncreas a un perro le provocaba diabetes. 

Posteriormente, la insulina fue aislada de los islotes pancreáticos por Frederick Banting y Charles Herbert Best en 1921. La forma en que se ha visto el tejido del páncreas también ha cambiado. 

Anteriormente, se visualizaba utilizando métodos de tinción simples, como las tinciones H&E. 

Ahora, la inmunohistoquímica se puede utilizar para diferenciar más fácilmente los tipos de células. 

Esto involucra anticuerpos visibles contra los productos de ciertos tipos de células y ayuda a identificar con mayor facilidad tipos de células como las células alfa y beta.


== Otros animales ==

El tejido pancreático está presente en todos los vertebrados, pero su forma y disposición precisas varían ampliamente.

Puede haber hasta tres páncreas separados, dos de los cuales surgen de yemas ventrales y el otro dorsalmente.

En la mayoría de las especies (incluidos los humanos), estos se "fusionan" en el adulto, pero hay varias excepciones.

Incluso cuando hay un solo páncreas, pueden persistir dos o tres conductos pancreáticos, cada uno de los cuales drena por separado en el duodeno (o parte equivalente del intestino anterior).

Las aves, por ejemplo, suelen tener tres de estos conductos. En los peces teleósteos y en algunas otras especies (como los conejos), no hay un páncreas discreto en absoluto, y el tejido pancreático se distribuye de forma difusa a través del mesenterio e incluso dentro de otros órganos cercanos. como el hígado o el bazo.

En algunas especies de teleósteos, el tejido endocrino se ha fusionado para formar una glándula distinta dentro de la cavidad abdominal, pero por lo demás se distribuye entre los componentes exocrinos.

Sin embargo, el arreglo más primitivo parece ser el de las lampreas y los peces pulmonados, en los que el tejido pancreático se encuentra como una serie de nódulos discretos dentro de la pared del intestino mismo, con las porciones exocrinas que difieren poco de otras estructuras glandulares del intestino. .


== Cocina ==

El páncreas de ternera (ris de veau) o cordero (ris d'agneau) y, con menos frecuencia, de ternera o cerdo, se utilizan como alimento bajo el nombre culinario de mollejas.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pancreas

;;;FR;;;



PANCRÉAS


Le pancréas est un organe du système digestif et du système endocrinien des vertébrés. 

Chez l'homme, il est situé dans l'abdomen derrière l'estomac et fonctionne comme une glande.

Le pancréas est une glande mixte ou hétérocrine, c'est-à-dire qu'il a à la fois une fonction endocrine et exocrine digestive. 99% du pancréas est exocrine et 1% est endocrine.

En tant que glande endocrine, elle fonctionne principalement pour réguler la glycémie, sécrétant les hormones insuline, glucagon, somatostatine et polypeptide pancréatique.

En tant que partie du système digestif, il fonctionne comme une glande exocrine sécrétant du suc pancréatique dans le duodénum par le canal pancréatique.

Ce jus contient du bicarbonate, qui neutralise l'acide entrant dans le duodénum par l'estomac ; et les enzymes digestives, qui décomposent les glucides, les protéines et les graisses dans les aliments qui pénètrent dans le duodénum depuis l'estomac.
L'inflammation du pancréas est connue sous le nom de pancréatite, avec des causes courantes telles que la consommation chronique d'alcool et les calculs biliaires. 

En raison de son rôle dans la régulation de la glycémie, le pancréas est également un organe clé dans le diabète sucré. 

Le cancer du pancréas peut survenir à la suite d'une pancréatite chronique ou pour d'autres raisons, et son pronostic est très sombre, car il est souvent identifié lorsqu'il s'est propagé à d'autres parties du corps.
Le mot pancréas vient du grec πᾶν (pân, « tout ») & κρέας (kréas, « chair »). 

La fonction du pancréas dans le diabète est connue depuis au moins 1889, son rôle dans la production d'insuline ayant été identifié en 1921.


== Structure ==


Le pancréas est un organe qui, chez l'homme, se situe dans l'abdomen, s'étendant de derrière l'estomac jusqu'à l'abdomen supérieur gauche près de la rate. 

Chez les adultes, il mesure environ 12 à 15 centimètres (4,7 à 5,9 pouces) de long, est lobulé et d'apparence de couleur saumon. Anatomiquement, le pancréas est divisé en une tête, un cou, un corps et une queue. 

Le pancréas s'étend de la courbure interne du duodénum, ​​où la tête entoure deux vaisseaux sanguins : l'artère mésentérique supérieure et la veine. 

La partie la plus longue du pancréas, le corps, s'étend derrière l'estomac et la queue du pancréas se termine à côté de la rate. Deux canaux, le canal pancréatique principal et un canal pancréatique accessoire plus petit traversent le corps du pancréas. 

Le canal pancréatique principal rejoint le canal cholédoque formant un petit ballonnement appelé ampoule de Vater (ampoule hépatopancréatique). 

Cette ampoule est entourée d'un muscle, le sphincter d'Oddi. 

Cette ampoule débouche dans la partie descendante du duodénum. 

L'ouverture du canal biliaire principal dans le canal pancréatique principal est contrôlée par le sphincter de Boyden. 

Le canal pancréatique accessoire débouche dans le duodénum avec des ouvertures séparées situées au-dessus de l'ouverture du canal pancréatique principal.


=== Pièces ===

La tête du pancréas se trouve dans la courbure du duodénum et s'enroule autour de l'artère et de la veine mésentériques supérieures. 

À droite se trouve la partie descendante du duodénum, ​​et entre celles-ci voyagent les artères pancréatico-duodénales supérieures et inférieures. 

Derrière repose la veine cave inférieure et le canal cholédoque. 

Devant se trouve la membrane péritonéale et le côlon transverse. 

Un petit processus unciforme émerge du dessous de la tête, situé derrière la veine mésentérique supérieure et parfois l'artère. Le col du pancréas sépare la tête du pancréas, située dans la courbure du duodénum, ​​du corps.

Le cou mesure environ 2 cm (0,79 po) de large et se trouve devant l'endroit où se forme la veine porte.

Le cou se trouve principalement derrière le pylore de l'estomac et est recouvert de péritoine.

L'artère pancréaticoduodénale supérieure antérieure se déplace devant le col du pancréas. Le corps est la plus grande partie du pancréas et se trouve principalement derrière l'estomac, se rétrécissant sur sa longueur.

Le péritoine repose sur le corps du pancréas et le côlon transverse devant le péritoine.

Derrière le pancréas se trouvent plusieurs vaisseaux sanguins, dont l'aorte, la veine splénique et la veine rénale gauche, ainsi que le début de l'artère mésentérique supérieure.

Sous le corps du pancréas se trouve une partie de l'intestin grêle, en particulier la dernière partie du duodénum et le jéjunum auquel il se connecte, ainsi que le ligament suspenseur du duodénum qui se situe entre ces deux.

Devant le pancréas se trouve le côlon transverse. Le pancréas se rétrécit vers la queue, qui se trouve près de la rate.

Il mesure généralement entre 1,3 et 3,5 cm (0,51 et 1,38 po) de long et se situe entre les couches du ligament entre la rate et le rein gauche.

L'artère et la veine spléniques, qui passent également derrière le corps du pancréas, passent derrière la queue du pancréas.


=== Approvisionnement en sang ===

Le pancréas est riche en sang, avec des vaisseaux provenant de branches de l'artère cœliaque et de l'artère mésentérique supérieure.

L'artère splénique longe le haut du pancréas et alimente la partie gauche du corps et la queue du pancréas par ses branches pancréatiques, dont la plus grande s'appelle la grande artère pancréatique.

Les artères pancréaticoduodénales supérieure et inférieure courent le long des surfaces arrière et avant de la tête du pancréas adjacentes au duodénum.

Ceux-ci alimentent la tête du pancréas.

Ces vaisseaux se rejoignent (anastamose) au milieu. Le corps et le col du pancréas se drainent dans la veine splénique, qui se trouve derrière le pancréas.

La tête se draine dans les veines mésentériques et portes supérieures et s'enroule autour de celles-ci, via les veines pancréaticoduodénales. Le pancréas se draine dans les vaisseaux lymphatiques qui voyagent le long de ses artères et possède un riche apport lymphatique.

Les vaisseaux lymphatiques du corps et de la queue se drainent dans les ganglions lymphatiques spléniques, et éventuellement dans les ganglions lymphatiques situés devant l'aorte, entre les artères cœliaques et mésentériques supérieures.

Les vaisseaux lymphatiques de la tête et du cou se drainent dans les vaisseaux lymphatiques intermédiaires autour des artères pancréatico-duodénales, mésentériques et hépatiques, et de là dans les ganglions lymphatiques situés devant l'aorte.


=== Microanatomie ===


Le pancréas contient des tissus à rôle endocrinien et exocrine, et cette division est également visible lorsque le pancréas est observé au microscope. La majorité du tissu pancréatique a un rôle digestif.

Les cellules jouant ce rôle forment des amas (latin : acini) autour de petits conduits et sont disposées dans des lobes aux parois fibreuses minces.

Les cellules de chaque acinus sécrètent des enzymes digestives inactives appelées zymogènes dans les petits canaux intercalés qu'elles entourent.

Dans chaque acinus, les cellules sont en forme de pyramide et situées autour des canaux intercalés, les noyaux reposant sur la membrane basale, un grand réticulum endoplasmique et un certain nombre de granules de zymogène visibles dans le cytoplasme.

Les conduits intercalés se drainent dans des conduits intralobulaires plus grands à l'intérieur du lobule, et enfin dans des conduits interlobulaires.

Les conduits sont tapissés d'une seule couche de cellules en forme de colonne. 

Il y a plus d'une couche de cellules à mesure que le diamètre des canaux augmente. Les tissus à rôle endocrinien dans le pancréas existent sous forme d'amas de cellules appelées îlots pancréatiques (également appelés îlots de Langerhans) qui sont répartis dans tout le pancréas. 

Les îlots pancréatiques contiennent des cellules alpha, des cellules bêta et des cellules delta, chacune libérant une hormone différente. 

Ces cellules ont des positions caractéristiques, les cellules alpha (sécrétant du glucagon) ayant tendance à se situer à la périphérie de l'îlot, et les cellules bêta (sécrétant de l'insuline) plus nombreuses et réparties dans tout l'îlot. 

Les cellules d'entérochromaffine sont également dispersées dans les îlots. 

Les îlots sont composés de jusqu'à 3 000 cellules sécrétoires et contiennent plusieurs petites artérioles pour recevoir le sang et des veinules qui permettent aux hormones sécrétées par les cellules d'entrer dans la circulation systémique.


=== Variante ===

La taille du pancréas varie considérablement.

Plusieurs variations anatomiques existent, liées au développement embryologique des deux bourgeons pancréatiques.

Le pancréas se développe à partir de ces bourgeons de part et d'autre du duodénum.

Le bourgeon ventral tourne pour se trouver à côté du bourgeon dorsal, finissant par fusionner.

Chez environ 10 % des adultes, un canal pancréatique accessoire peut être présent si le canal principal du bourgeon dorsal du pancréas ne régresse pas ; ce canal débouche dans la petite papille duodénale.

Si les deux bourgeons eux-mêmes, chacun ayant un canal, ne fusionnent pas, un pancréas peut exister avec deux canaux séparés, une condition connue sous le nom de pancréas divisum.

Cette condition n'a pas de conséquence physiologique.

Si le bourgeon ventral ne tourne pas complètement, un pancréas annulaire peut exister, où une partie ou la totalité du duodénum est encerclée par le pancréas.

Ceci peut être associé à une atrésie duodénale.


=== Expression génique et protéique ===


10 000 gènes codant pour les protéines (50 % de tous les gènes) sont exprimés dans le pancréas humain normal.

Moins de 100 de ces gènes sont spécifiquement exprimés dans le pancréas.

Semblables aux glandes salivaires, la plupart des gènes spécifiques au pancréas codent pour des protéines sécrétées.

Les protéines spécifiques du pancréas correspondantes sont soit exprimées dans le compartiment cellulaire exocrine et ont des fonctions liées à la digestion ou à la prise alimentaire telles que les enzymes chymotrypsinogènes digestives et la lipase pancréatique PNLIP, soit sont exprimées dans les différentes cellules des îlots pancréatiques endocriniens et ont des fonctions liées à la sécrétion hormones telles que l'insuline, le glucagon, la somatostatine et le polypeptide pancréatique.


== Développement ==


Le pancréas se forme au cours du développement à partir de deux bourgeons issus de la partie duodénale de l'intestin antérieur, un tube embryonnaire précurseur du tractus gastro-intestinal. 

Il est d'origine endodermique. 

Le développement pancréatique commence par la formation d'un bourgeon pancréatique dorsal et ventral. 

Chacun se joint à l'intestin antérieur par un conduit. 

Le bourgeon pancréatique dorsal forme le cou, le corps et la queue du pancréas développé, et le bourgeon pancréatique ventral forme la tête et le processus uncinate. Le pancréas définitif résulte de la rotation du bourgeon ventral et de la fusion des deux bourgeons. 

Au cours du développement, le duodénum tourne vers la droite et le bourgeon ventral tourne avec lui, se déplaçant vers une position qui devient plus dorsale. 

Lorsqu'il atteint sa destination finale, le bourgeon pancréatique ventral se trouve sous le plus gros bourgeon dorsal et finit par fusionner avec lui. 

À ce point de fusion, les canaux principaux des bourgeons pancréatiques ventral et dorsal fusionnent, formant le canal pancréatique principal. 

Habituellement, le canal du bourgeon dorsal régresse, laissant le canal pancréatique principal.


=== Développement cellulaire ===

Les cellules progénitrices pancréatiques sont des cellules précurseurs qui se différencient en cellules pancréatiques fonctionnelles, y compris les cellules acineuses exocrines, les cellules endocrines des îlots et les cellules canalaires. 

Ces cellules progénitrices sont caractérisées par la co-expression des facteurs de transcription PDX1 et NKX6-1. Les cellules du pancréas exocrine se différencient par des molécules qui induisent la différenciation dont la follistatine, les facteurs de croissance des fibroblastes et l'activation du système récepteur Notch. 

Le développement des acini exocrines passe par trois stades successifs. 

Ce sont les stades prédifférenciés, protodifférenciés et différenciés, qui correspondent respectivement à des niveaux indétectables, faibles et élevés d'activité enzymatique digestive. absence de signalisation du récepteur notch.

Sous la direction d'un gène Pax, les cellules précurseurs endocriniennes se différencient pour former des cellules alpha et gamma.

Sous la direction de Pax-6, les cellules précurseurs endocriniennes se différencient pour former des cellules bêta et delta.

Les îlots pancréatiques se forment lorsque les cellules endocrines migrent du système de conduits pour former de petits amas autour des capillaires.

Cela se produit vers le troisième mois de développement, et l'insuline et le glucagon peuvent être détectés dans la circulation fœtale humaine vers le quatrième ou le cinquième mois de développement.


== Fonction ==

Le pancréas est impliqué dans le contrôle et le métabolisme de la glycémie dans le corps, ainsi que dans la sécrétion de substances (collectivement le suc pancréatique) qui facilitent la digestion. 

Ceux-ci sont divisés en un rôle "endocrine", lié à la sécrétion d'insuline et d'autres substances dans les îlots pancréatiques qui aident à contrôler la glycémie et le métabolisme dans le corps, et un rôle "exocrine", lié à la sécrétion d'enzymes impliquées dans la digestion. substances dans le tube digestif.


=== Régulation de la glycémie ===


Les cellules du pancréas aident à maintenir la glycémie (homéostasie). 

Les cellules qui font cela sont situées dans les îlots pancréatiques qui sont présents dans tout le pancréas. 

Lorsque la glycémie est basse, les cellules alpha sécrètent du glucagon, qui augmente la glycémie. 

Lorsque la glycémie est élevée, les cellules bêta sécrètent de l'insuline pour diminuer la glycémie. 

Les cellules delta de l'îlot sécrètent également de la somatostatine qui diminue la libération d'insuline et de glucagon. Le glucagon agit pour augmenter les niveaux de glucose en favorisant la création de glucose et la dégradation du glycogène en glucose dans le foie. 

Il diminue également l'absorption du glucose dans les graisses et les muscles. 

La libération de glucagon est stimulée par un faible taux de glucose sanguin ou d'insuline et pendant l'exercice. 

L'insuline agit pour diminuer la glycémie en facilitant l'absorption par les cellules (en particulier les muscles squelettiques) et en favorisant son utilisation dans la création de protéines, de graisses et de glucides. 

L'insuline est initialement créée sous une forme précurseur appelée préproinsuline. 

Celui-ci est converti en proinsuline et clivé par le peptide C en insuline qui est ensuite stockée sous forme de granules dans les cellules bêta. 

Le glucose est pris dans les cellules bêta et dégradé. 

L'effet final de ceci est de provoquer une dépolarisation de la membrane cellulaire qui stimule la libération d'insuline. Le principal facteur influençant la sécrétion d'insuline et de glucagon est le taux de glucose dans le plasma sanguin. 

L'hypoglycémie stimule la libération de glucagon et l'hyperglycémie stimule la libération d'insuline. 

D'autres facteurs influencent également la sécrétion de ces hormones. 

Certains acides aminés, qui sont des sous-produits de la digestion des protéines, stimulent la libération d'insuline et de glucagon. 

La somatostatine agit comme un inhibiteur de l'insuline et du glucagon. 

Le système nerveux autonome joue également un rôle. 

L'activation des récepteurs bêta-2 du système nerveux sympathique par les catécholamines sécrétées par les nerfs sympathiques stimule la sécrétion d'insuline et de glucagon, tandis que l'activation des récepteurs alpha-1 inhibe la sécrétion.

Les récepteurs M3 du système nerveux parasympathique agissent lorsqu'ils sont stimulés par le nerf vague droit pour stimuler la libération d'insuline par les cellules bêta.


=== Digestion ===


Le pancréas joue un rôle vital dans le système digestif.

Pour ce faire, il sécrète un liquide contenant des enzymes digestives dans le duodénum, ​​la première partie de l'intestin grêle qui reçoit la nourriture de l'estomac.

Ces enzymes aident à décomposer les glucides, les protéines et les lipides (graisses).

Ce rôle est appelé le rôle "exocrine" du pancréas.

Les cellules qui le font sont disposées en grappes appelées acini.

Les sécrétions au milieu de l'acinus s'accumulent dans les canaux intralobulaires, qui se drainent vers le canal pancréatique principal, qui se draine directement dans le duodénum. 

Environ 1,5 à 3 litres de liquide sont ainsi sécrétés chaque jour. Les cellules de chaque acinus sont remplies de granules contenant les enzymes digestives. 

Ceux-ci sont sécrétés sous une forme inactive appelée zymogènes ou proenzymes. 

Lorsqu'ils sont libérés dans le duodénum, ​​ils sont activés par l'enzyme entérokinase présente dans la muqueuse du duodénum. 

Les proenzymes sont clivées, créant une cascade d'enzymes activatrices.
Les enzymes qui décomposent les protéines commencent par l'activation du trypsinogène en trypsine. 

La trypsine libre clive ensuite le reste du trypsinogène, ainsi que le chymotrypsinogène en sa forme active, la chymotrypsine.
Les enzymes sécrétées impliquées dans la digestion des graisses comprennent la lipase, la phospholipase A2, la lysophospholipase et la cholestérol estérase.
Les enzymes qui décomposent l'amidon et d'autres glucides comprennent l'amylase. Ces enzymes sont sécrétées dans un liquide riche en bicarbonate.

Le bicarbonate aide à maintenir un pH alcalin pour le liquide, un pH dans lequel la plupart des enzymes agissent le plus efficacement, et aide également à neutraliser les acides gastriques qui pénètrent dans le duodénum.

La sécrétion est influencée par des hormones telles que la sécrétine, la cholécystokinine et le VIP, ainsi que par la stimulation par l'acétylcholine du nerf vague.

La sécrétine est libérée par les cellules S qui font partie de la muqueuse du duodénum en réponse à la stimulation par l'acide gastrique.

Avec le VIP, il augmente la sécrétion d'enzymes et de bicarbonate.

La cholécystokinine est libérée des cellules Ito de la muqueuse du duodénum et du jéjunum principalement en réponse aux acides gras à longue chaîne, et augmente les effets de la sécrétine. 

Au niveau cellulaire, le bicarbonate est sécrété par les cellules acineuses via un cotransporteur de sodium et de bicarbonate qui agit en raison de la dépolarisation membranaire provoquée par le régulateur de la conductance transmembranaire de la fibrose kystique. 

La sécrétine et le VIP agissent pour augmenter l'ouverture du régulateur de la conductance transmembranaire de la fibrose kystique, ce qui entraîne une plus grande dépolarisation de la membrane et une plus grande sécrétion de bicarbonate. Une variété de mécanismes agissent pour garantir que l'action digestive du pancréas n'agit pas pour digérer le tissu pancréatique lui-même . 

Ceux-ci comprennent la sécrétion d'enzymes inactives (zymogènes), la sécrétion de l'enzyme protectrice, l'inhibiteur de la trypsine, qui inactive la trypsine, les changements de pH qui se produisent avec la sécrétion de bicarbonate qui stimulent la digestion uniquement lorsque le pancréas est stimulé, et le fait que la faible teneur en calcium dans les cellules provoque l'inactivation de la trypsine.


=== Fonctions supplémentaires ===

Le pancréas sécrète également un peptide intestinal vasoactif et un polypeptide pancréatique.

Les cellules entérochromaffines du pancréas sécrètent les hormones motiline, sérotonine et substance P.


== Signification clinique ==



=== Inflammations ===


L'inflammation du pancréas est connue sous le nom de pancréatite.

La pancréatite est le plus souvent associée à des calculs biliaires récurrents ou à une consommation chronique d'alcool, avec d'autres causes courantes, notamment des lésions traumatiques, des lésions consécutives à une CPRE, certains médicaments, des infections telles que les oreillons et des taux très élevés de triglycérides sanguins. 

La pancréatite aiguë est susceptible de provoquer une douleur intense au centre de l'abdomen, qui irradie souvent vers le dos et peut être associée à des nausées ou des vomissements. 

Une pancréatite sévère peut entraîner une hémorragie ou une perforation du pancréas entraînant un choc ou un syndrome de réponse inflammatoire systémique, des ecchymoses sur les flancs ou la région autour du nombril. 

Ces complications graves sont souvent prises en charge dans une unité de soins intensifs. Dans la pancréatite, les enzymes du pancréas exocrine endommagent la structure et les tissus du pancréas. 

La détection de certaines de ces enzymes, telles que l'amylase et la lipase dans le sang, ainsi que les symptômes et les résultats d'imagerie médicale tels que l'échographie ou la tomodensitométrie, sont souvent utilisés pour indiquer qu'une personne a une pancréatite. 

La pancréatite est souvent prise en charge médicalement avec des analgésiques et une surveillance pour prévenir ou gérer le choc, et la prise en charge de toute cause sous-jacente identifiée. 

Cela peut inclure l'élimination des calculs biliaires, l'abaissement des taux sanguins de triglycérides ou de glucose, l'utilisation de corticostéroïdes pour la pancréatite auto-immune et l'arrêt de tout déclencheur médicamenteux. La pancréatite chronique fait référence au développement de la pancréatite au fil du temps. 

Il partage de nombreuses causes similaires, la plus courante étant la consommation chronique d'alcool, avec d'autres causes, notamment les épisodes aigus récurrents et la fibrose kystique. 

La douleur abdominale, généralement soulagée en s'asseyant en avant ou en buvant de l'alcool, est le symptôme le plus courant.

Lorsque la fonction digestive du pancréas est sévèrement affectée, cela peut entraîner des problèmes de digestion des graisses et le développement d'une stéatorrhée ; lorsque la fonction endocrinienne est affectée, cela peut conduire au diabète.

La pancréatite chronique est étudiée de la même manière que la pancréatite aiguë.

En plus de la prise en charge de la douleur et des nausées et de la prise en charge de toutes les causes identifiées (qui peuvent inclure l'arrêt de l'alcool), en raison du rôle digestif du pancréas, un remplacement enzymatique peut être nécessaire pour prévenir la malabsorption.


=== Cancer ===


Les cancers du pancréas, en particulier le type le plus fréquent, l'adénocarcinome pancréatique, restent très difficiles à traiter et ne sont le plus souvent diagnostiqués qu'à un stade trop tardif pour la chirurgie, qui est le seul traitement curatif. 

Le cancer du pancréas est rare chez les personnes de moins de 40 ans et l'âge médian du diagnostic est de 71 ans. 

Les facteurs de risque comprennent la pancréatite chronique, l'âge avancé, le tabagisme, l'obésité, le diabète et certaines maladies génétiques rares, notamment la néoplasie endocrinienne multiple de type 1, le cancer du côlon héréditaire sans polypose et le syndrome de naevus dysplasique, entre autres. 

Environ 25 % des cas sont attribuables au tabagisme, tandis que 5 à 10 % des cas sont liés à des gènes héréditaires. L'adénocarcinome pancréatique est la forme la plus courante de cancer du pancréas et est un cancer provenant de la partie digestive exocrine du pancréas. 

La plupart se produisent dans la tête du pancréas. 

Les symptômes ont tendance à apparaître tard dans l'évolution du cancer, lorsqu'il provoque des douleurs abdominales, une perte de poids ou un jaunissement de la peau (jaunisse). 

La jaunisse survient lorsque l'écoulement de la bile est bloqué par le cancer. 

D'autres symptômes moins courants comprennent les nausées, les vomissements, la pancréatite, le diabète ou la thrombose veineuse récurrente. 

Le cancer du pancréas est généralement diagnostiqué par imagerie médicale sous la forme d'une échographie ou d'un scanner avec contraste. 

Une échographie endoscopique peut être utilisée si une tumeur est envisagée pour l'ablation chirurgicale, et une biopsie guidée par CPRE ou échographie peut être utilisée pour confirmer un diagnostic incertain. En raison du développement tardif des symptômes, la plupart des cancers se présentent à un stade avancé. 

Seulement 10 à 15 % des tumeurs se prêtent à une résection chirurgicale. 

Depuis 2018, lorsque la chimiothérapie est administrée, il a été démontré que le régime FOLFIRINOX contenant du fluorouracile, de l'irinotécan, de l'oxaliplatine et de la leucovorine prolonge la survie au-delà des régimes traditionnels de gemcitabine.

Pour la plupart, le traitement est palliatif, axé sur la gestion des symptômes qui se développent.

Cela peut inclure la prise en charge des démangeaisons, une cholédochojéjunostomie ou l'insertion de stents avec CPRE pour faciliter le drainage de la bile et des médicaments pour aider à contrôler la douleur.

Aux États-Unis, le cancer du pancréas est la quatrième cause de décès par cancer.

La maladie survient plus souvent dans le monde développé, qui comptait 68 % des nouveaux cas en 2012.

L'adénocarcinome pancréatique a généralement de mauvais résultats, le pourcentage moyen de personnes en vie pendant au moins un et cinq ans après le diagnostic étant respectivement de 25 % et 5 %.

Dans les maladies localisées où le cancer est petit (< 2 cm), le nombre de survivants à cinq ans est d'environ 20 %. Il existe plusieurs types de cancer du pancréas, impliquant à la fois le tissu endocrinien et exocrine.

Les nombreux types de tumeurs endocrines pancréatiques sont tous rares ou rares, et ont des perspectives variées.

Cependant, l'incidence de ces cancers a fortement augmenté ; on ne sait pas dans quelle mesure cela reflète une détection accrue, notamment par l'imagerie médicale, de tumeurs qui seraient très lentes à se développer.

Les insulinomes (en grande partie bénins) et les gastrinomes sont les types les plus courants.

Pour les personnes atteintes de cancers neuroendocriniens, le nombre de survivants après cinq ans est bien meilleur à 65 %, variant considérablement selon le type. Une tumeur pseudopapillaire solide est une tumeur maligne de bas grade du pancréas à architecture papillaire qui touche généralement les jeunes femmes.


=== Diabète sucré ===



==== Diabète de type 1 ====

Le diabète sucré de type 1 est une maladie auto-immune chronique dans laquelle le système immunitaire attaque les cellules bêta sécrétant de l'insuline du pancréas.

L'insuline est nécessaire pour maintenir la glycémie dans des limites optimales, et son manque peut entraîner une glycémie élevée.

En tant que maladie chronique non traitée, des complications telles qu'une maladie vasculaire accélérée, une rétinopathie diabétique, une maladie rénale et une neuropathie peuvent en résulter.

De plus, s'il n'y a pas assez d'insuline pour que le glucose soit utilisé dans les cellules, l'acidocétose diabétique d'urgence médicale, qui est souvent le premier symptôme qu'une personne atteinte de diabète de type 1 peut avoir, peut en résulter.

Le diabète de type 1 peut se développer à tout âge mais est le plus souvent diagnostiqué avant 40 ans.

Pour les personnes atteintes de diabète de type 1, les injections d'insuline sont essentielles à la survie.

Une procédure expérimentale pour traiter le diabète de type 1 est la transplantation de pancréas ou la transplantation isolée de cellules d'îlots pour fournir à une personne des cellules bêta fonctionnelles.


==== Diabète de type 2 ====

Le diabète sucré de type 2 est la forme la plus courante de diabète. 

Les causes de l'hyperglycémie dans cette forme de diabète sont généralement une combinaison de résistance à l'insuline et de sécrétion d'insuline altérée, des facteurs génétiques et environnementaux jouant un rôle dans le développement de la maladie. 

Au fil du temps, les cellules bêta pancréatiques peuvent devenir "épuisées" et moins fonctionnelles. 

La prise en charge du diabète de type 2 implique une combinaison de mesures hygiéno-diététiques, de médicaments si besoin et éventuellement d'insuline. 
En ce qui concerne le pancréas, plusieurs médicaments agissent pour améliorer la sécrétion d'insuline par les cellules bêta, en particulier les sulfonylurées, qui agissent directement sur les cellules bêta ; les incrétines qui répliquent l'action des hormones glucagon-like peptide 1, augmentent la sécrétion d'insuline par les cellules bêta après les repas, et sont plus résistantes à la dégradation ; et les inhibiteurs de la DPP-4, qui ralentissent la dégradation des incrétines.


=== Suppression ===

Il est possible pour une personne de vivre sans pancréas, à condition qu'elle prenne de l'insuline pour réguler correctement la concentration de glucose dans le sang et des suppléments d'enzymes pancréatiques pour faciliter la digestion.


== Historique ==

Le pancréas a été identifié pour la première fois par Herophilus (335-280 avant JC), un anatomiste et chirurgien grec.

Quelques centaines d'années plus tard, Rufus d'Ephèse, un autre anatomiste grec, a donné son nom au pancréas.

Étymologiquement, le terme "pancréas", une adaptation latine moderne du grec πάγκρεας, [πᾶν ("tout", "entier"), et κρέας ("chair")], signifie à l'origine ris de veau, bien que signifiant littéralement toute chair, vraisemblablement parce que de sa consistance charnue. 

Ce n'est qu'en 1889 qu'Oskar Minkowski découvrit que retirer le pancréas d'un chien le rendait diabétique. 

L'insuline a ensuite été isolée des îlots pancréatiques par Frederick Banting et Charles Herbert Best en 1921. La façon dont le tissu du pancréas a été vu a également changé. 

Auparavant, il était visualisé à l'aide de méthodes de coloration simples telles que les colorations H&E. 

Désormais, l'immunohistochimie peut être utilisée pour différencier plus facilement les types de cellules. 

Cela implique des anticorps visibles dirigés contre les produits de certains types de cellules et permet d'identifier plus facilement des types de cellules telles que les cellules alpha et bêta.


== Autres animaux ==

Le tissu pancréatique est présent chez tous les vertébrés, mais sa forme et sa disposition précises varient considérablement.

Il peut y avoir jusqu'à trois pancréas distincts, dont deux proviennent des bourgeons ventraux et l'autre dorsalement.

Chez la plupart des espèces (y compris l'homme), celles-ci « fusionnent » chez l'adulte, mais il existe plusieurs exceptions.

Même lorsqu'un seul pancréas est présent, deux ou trois canaux pancréatiques peuvent persister, chacun se drainant séparément dans le duodénum (ou une partie équivalente de l'intestin antérieur).

Les oiseaux, par exemple, ont généralement trois canaux de ce type. Chez les poissons téléostéens et quelques autres espèces (telles que les lapins), il n'y a pas de pancréas discret du tout, le tissu pancréatique étant distribué de manière diffuse dans le mésentère et même dans d'autres organes voisins. comme le foie ou la rate. 

Chez quelques espèces de téléostéens, le tissu endocrinien a fusionné pour former une glande distincte dans la cavité abdominale, mais sinon, il est réparti entre les composants exocrines. 

L'arrangement le plus primitif, cependant, semble être celui des lamproies et des dipneustes, dans lequel le tissu pancréatique se présente sous la forme d'un certain nombre de nodules discrets dans la paroi de l'intestin lui-même, les parties exocrines étant peu différentes des autres structures glandulaires de l'intestin. .


== Gastronomie ==

Le pancréas de veau (ris de veau) ou d'agneau (ris d'agneau), et, plus rarement, de bœuf ou de porc, est utilisé comme aliment sous le nom culinaire de ris de veau.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pancréas

;;;PT;;;



PÂNCREAS


O pâncreas é um órgão do sistema digestivo e sistema endócrino dos vertebrados. 

Nos humanos, está localizado no abdômen atrás do estômago e funciona como uma glândula. 

O pâncreas é uma glândula mista ou heterócrina, ou seja, tem função endócrina e digestiva exócrina. 99% do pâncreas é exócrino e 1% é endócrino.

Como uma glândula endócrina, funciona principalmente para regular os níveis de açúcar no sangue, secretando os hormônios insulina, glucagon, somatostatina e polipeptídeo pancreático. 

Como parte do sistema digestivo, funciona como uma glândula exócrina que secreta suco pancreático no duodeno através do ducto pancreático. 

Este suco contém bicarbonato, que neutraliza o ácido que entra no duodeno do estômago; e enzimas digestivas, que quebram carboidratos, proteínas e gorduras nos alimentos que entram no duodeno a partir do estômago.
A inflamação do pâncreas é conhecida como pancreatite, com causas comuns, incluindo uso crônico de álcool e cálculos biliares. 

Devido ao seu papel na regulação do açúcar no sangue, o pâncreas também é um órgão-chave no diabetes mellitus. 

O câncer de pâncreas pode surgir após a pancreatite crônica ou por outros motivos e tem um prognóstico muito ruim, pois é frequentemente identificado quando se espalha para outras áreas do corpo.
A palavra pâncreas vem do grego πᾶν (pân, “todos”) e κρέας (kréas, “carne”). 

A função do pâncreas no diabetes é conhecida desde pelo menos 1889, com seu papel na produção de insulina identificado em 1921.


== Estrutura ==


O pâncreas é um órgão que em humanos fica no abdômen, estendendo-se por trás do estômago até o abdome superior esquerdo, próximo ao baço. 

Em adultos, tem cerca de 12 a 15 centímetros (4,7 a 5,9 pol) de comprimento, lobulado e de aparência cor de salmão. Anatomicamente, o pâncreas é dividido em cabeça, pescoço, corpo e cauda. 

O pâncreas se estende a partir da curvatura interna do duodeno, onde a cabeça envolve dois vasos sanguíneos: a artéria mesentérica superior e a veia. 

A parte mais longa do pâncreas, o corpo, estende-se atrás do estômago, e a cauda do pâncreas termina adjacente ao baço. Dois ductos, o ducto pancreático principal e um ducto pancreático acessório menor percorrem o corpo do pâncreas. 

O ducto pancreático principal se une ao ducto biliar comum formando um pequeno balão chamado ampola de Vater (ampola hepatopancreática). 

Esta ampola é circundada por um músculo, o esfíncter de Oddi. 

Esta ampola se abre na parte descendente do duodeno. 

A abertura do ducto biliar comum no ducto pancreático principal é controlada pelo esfíncter de Boyden. 

O ducto pancreático acessório se abre no duodeno com aberturas separadas localizadas acima da abertura do ducto pancreático principal.


=== Partes ===

A cabeça do pâncreas fica dentro da curvatura do duodeno e envolve a artéria e a veia mesentérica superior. 

À direita fica a parte descendente do duodeno, e entre elas passam as artérias pancreatoduodenais superior e inferior. 

Atrás repousa a veia cava inferior e o ducto biliar comum. 

Na frente fica a membrana peritoneal e o cólon transverso. 

Um pequeno processo uncinado emerge abaixo da cabeça, situado atrás da veia mesentérica superior e às vezes da artéria. O colo do pâncreas separa a cabeça do pâncreas, localizada na curvatura do duodeno, do corpo.

O pescoço tem cerca de 2 cm (0,79 pol) de largura e fica na frente de onde a veia porta é formada.

O pescoço fica principalmente atrás do piloro do estômago e é coberto por peritônio.

A artéria pancreaticoduodenal ântero-superior segue na frente do colo do pâncreas. O corpo é a maior parte do pâncreas e fica principalmente atrás do estômago, afilando ao longo de seu comprimento.

O peritônio fica na parte superior do corpo do pâncreas e o cólon transverso na frente do peritônio.

Atrás do pâncreas estão vários vasos sanguíneos, incluindo a aorta, a veia esplênica e a veia renal esquerda, bem como o início da artéria mesentérica superior. 

Abaixo do corpo do pâncreas fica parte do intestino delgado, especificamente a última parte do duodeno e o jejuno ao qual ele se conecta, bem como o ligamento suspensor do duodeno que fica entre esses dois. 

Na frente do pâncreas fica o cólon transverso. O pâncreas se estreita em direção à cauda, ​​que fica perto do baço. 

Geralmente tem entre 1,3 a 3,5 cm (0,51 a 1,38 pol) de comprimento e fica entre as camadas do ligamento entre o baço e o rim esquerdo. 

A artéria e a veia esplênicas, que também passam atrás do corpo do pâncreas, passam atrás da cauda do pâncreas.


=== Suprimento sanguíneo ===

O pâncreas tem um rico suprimento sanguíneo, com vasos originados como ramos da artéria celíaca e da artéria mesentérica superior.

A artéria esplênica corre ao longo da parte superior do pâncreas e supre a parte esquerda do corpo e a cauda do pâncreas através de seus ramos pancreáticos, o maior dos quais é chamado de artéria pancreática maior.

As artérias pancreatoduodenais superior e inferior correm ao longo das superfícies posterior e frontal da cabeça do pâncreas adjacente ao duodeno.

Estes suprem a cabeça do pâncreas.

Esses vasos se unem (anastamose) no meio. O corpo e o colo do pâncreas drenam para a veia esplênica, que fica atrás do pâncreas.

A cabeça drena e envolve as veias mesentérica superior e porta, através das veias pancreáticoduodenais.

Os vasos linfáticos do corpo e da cauda drenam para os linfonodos esplênicos e, eventualmente, para os linfonodos que ficam na frente da aorta, entre as artérias celíaca e mesentérica superior.

Os vasos linfáticos da cabeça e pescoço drenam para os vasos linfáticos intermediários ao redor das artérias pancreatoduodenal, mesentérica e hepática, e daí para os linfonodos que se encontram na frente da aorta.


=== Microanatomia ===


O pâncreas contém tecido com função endócrina e exócrina, e essa divisão também é visível ao microscópio. A maioria do tecido pancreático tem função digestiva.

As células com essa função formam aglomerados (latim: acini) ao redor de pequenos ductos, e estão dispostas em lobos que possuem paredes fibrosas finas. 

As células de cada ácino secretam enzimas digestivas inativas chamadas zimogênios nos pequenos ductos intercalados que circundam. 

Em cada ácino, as células são em forma de pirâmide e situadas ao redor dos ductos intercalares, com os núcleos apoiados na membrana basal, um grande retículo endoplasmático e vários grânulos de zimogênio visíveis no citoplasma. 

Os ductos intercalados drenam para ductos intralobulares maiores dentro do lóbulo e, finalmente, para ductos interlobulares. 

Os dutos são revestidos por uma única camada de células em forma de coluna. 

Há mais de uma camada de células à medida que o diâmetro dos ductos aumenta. Os tecidos com papel endócrino no pâncreas existem como aglomerados de células chamadas ilhotas pancreáticas (também chamadas ilhotas de Langerhans) que são distribuídas por todo o pâncreas. 

As ilhotas pancreáticas contêm células alfa, células beta e células delta, cada uma das quais libera um hormônio diferente. 

Estas células têm posições características, com as células alfa (secretoras de glucagon) tendendo a situar-se na periferia da ilhota, e as células beta (secretoras de insulina) mais numerosas e encontradas em toda a ilhota. 

As células enterocromafins também estão espalhadas pelas ilhotas. 

As ilhotas são compostas por até 3.000 células secretoras e contêm várias pequenas arteríolas para receber sangue e vênulas que permitem que os hormônios secretados pelas células entrem na circulação sistêmica.


=== Variação ===

O tamanho do pâncreas varia consideravelmente. 

Existem diversas variações anatômicas relacionadas ao desenvolvimento embriológico dos dois brotos pancreáticos. 

O pâncreas se desenvolve a partir desses botões em ambos os lados do duodeno. 

O broto ventral gira para ficar próximo ao broto dorsal, eventualmente se fundindo. 

Em cerca de 10% dos adultos, um ducto pancreático acessório pode estar presente se o ducto principal do broto dorsal do pâncreas não regredir; este ducto abre-se na papila duodenal menor.

Se os dois botões, cada um com um duto, não se fundirem, pode existir um pâncreas com dois dutos separados, uma condição conhecida como pâncreas divisum. 

Esta condição não tem consequências fisiológicas.

Se o broto ventral não girar completamente, pode existir um pâncreas anular, onde parte ou todo o duodeno é circundado pelo pâncreas.

Isso pode estar associado à atresia duodenal.


=== Expressão de genes e proteínas ===


10.000 genes codificadores de proteínas (50% de todos os genes) são expressos no pâncreas humano normal.

Menos de 100 desses genes são expressos especificamente no pâncreas.

Semelhante às glândulas salivares, a maioria dos genes específicos do pâncreas codifica proteínas secretadas.

As proteínas específicas do pâncreas correspondentes são expressas no compartimento celular exócrino e têm funções relacionadas à digestão ou absorção de alimentos, como enzimas digestivas do quimotripsinogênio e lipase pancreática PNLIP, ou são expressas nas várias células das ilhotas pancreáticas endócrinas e têm funções relacionadas à secreção hormônios como insulina, glucagon, somatostatina e polipeptídeo pancreático.


== Desenvolvimento ==


O pâncreas se forma durante o desenvolvimento a partir de dois brotos que surgem da parte duodenal do intestino anterior, um tubo embrionário que é um precursor do trato gastrointestinal.

É de origem endodérmica.

O desenvolvimento pancreático começa com a formação de um broto pancreático dorsal e ventral.

Cada um se une ao intestino anterior através de um duto.

O broto pancreático dorsal forma o pescoço, corpo e cauda do pâncreas desenvolvido, e o broto pancreático ventral forma a cabeça e o processo uncinado. O pâncreas definitivo resulta da rotação do broto ventral e da fusão dos dois brotos. 

Durante o desenvolvimento, o duodeno gira para a direita e o broto ventral gira com ele, movendo-se para uma posição que se torna mais dorsal. 

Ao chegar ao seu destino final, o broto pancreático ventral fica abaixo do broto dorsal maior e eventualmente se funde com ele. 

Nesse ponto de fusão, os ductos principais dos brotos pancreáticos ventral e dorsal se fundem, formando o ducto pancreático principal. 

Normalmente, o ducto do broto dorsal regride, deixando o ducto pancreático principal.


=== Desenvolvimento celular ===

As células progenitoras pancreáticas são células precursoras que se diferenciam em células pancreáticas funcionais, incluindo células acinares exócrinas, células de ilhotas endócrinas e células ductais.

Essas células progenitoras são caracterizadas pela co-expressão dos fatores de transcrição PDX1 e NKX6-1. As células do pâncreas exócrino se diferenciam por meio de moléculas que induzem a diferenciação incluindo folistatina, fatores de crescimento de fibroblastos e ativação do sistema receptor Notch.

O desenvolvimento dos ácinos exócrinos progride através de três estágios sucessivos.

Estes são os estágios pré-diferenciados, protodiferenciados e diferenciados, que correspondem a níveis indetectáveis, baixos e altos de atividade enzimática digestiva, respectivamente. ausência de sinalização do receptor notch. 

Sob a direção de um gene Pax, as células precursoras endócrinas se diferenciam para formar células alfa e gama. 

Sob a direção de Pax-6, as células precursoras endócrinas se diferenciam para formar células beta e delta. 

As ilhotas pancreáticas se formam à medida que as células endócrinas migram do sistema de ductos para formar pequenos aglomerados ao redor dos capilares. 

Isso ocorre por volta do terceiro mês de desenvolvimento, e a insulina e o glucagon podem ser detectados na circulação fetal humana por volta do quarto ou quinto mês de desenvolvimento.


== Função ==

O pâncreas está envolvido no controle do açúcar no sangue e no metabolismo dentro do corpo, e também na secreção de substâncias (coletivamente suco pancreático) que ajudam na digestão. 

Estes são divididos em um papel "endócrino", relacionado à secreção de insulina e outras substâncias dentro das ilhotas pancreáticas que ajudam a controlar os níveis de açúcar no sangue e o metabolismo dentro do corpo, e um papel "exócrino", relacionado à secreção de enzimas envolvidas na digestão. substâncias no trato digestivo.


=== Regulação da glicose no sangue ===


As células do pâncreas ajudam a manter os níveis de glicose no sangue (homeostase). 

As células que fazem isso estão localizadas dentro das ilhotas pancreáticas que estão presentes em todo o pâncreas. 

Quando os níveis de glicose no sangue estão baixos, as células alfa secretam glucagon, que aumenta os níveis de glicose no sangue. 

Quando os níveis de glicose no sangue são elevados, as células beta secretam insulina para diminuir a glicose no sangue.

As células delta na ilhota também secretam somatostatina que diminui a liberação de insulina e glucagon. O glucagon atua para aumentar os níveis de glicose promovendo a criação de glicose e a quebra de glicogênio em glicose no fígado.

Também diminui a absorção de glicose na gordura e no músculo.

A liberação de glucagon é estimulada por níveis baixos de glicose ou insulina no sangue e durante o exercício.

A insulina atua para diminuir os níveis de glicose no sangue, facilitando a captação pelas células (particularmente o músculo esquelético) e promovendo seu uso na criação de proteínas, gorduras e carboidratos.

A insulina é inicialmente criada como uma forma precursora chamada pré-proinsulina.

Esta é convertida em pró-insulina e clivada pelo peptídeo C em insulina, que é então armazenada em grânulos nas células beta.

A glicose é levada para as células beta e degradada.

O efeito final disso é causar a despolarização da membrana celular que estimula a liberação de insulina. O principal fator que influencia a secreção de insulina e glucagon são os níveis de glicose no plasma sanguíneo.

O baixo nível de açúcar no sangue estimula a liberação de glucagon e o alto nível de açúcar no sangue estimula a liberação de insulina.

Outros fatores também influenciam a secreção desses hormônios.

Alguns aminoácidos, que são subprodutos da digestão de proteínas, estimulam a liberação de insulina e glucagon.

A somatostatina atua como um inibidor da insulina e do glucagon.

O sistema nervoso autônomo também desempenha um papel.

A ativação dos receptores beta-2 do sistema nervoso simpático pelas catecolaminas secretadas pelos nervos simpáticos estimula a secreção de insulina e glucagon, enquanto a ativação dos receptores alfa-1 inibe a secreção.

Os receptores M3 do sistema nervoso parassimpático agem quando estimulados pelo nervo vago direito para estimular a liberação de insulina das células beta.


=== Digestão ===


O pâncreas desempenha um papel vital no sistema digestivo.

Ele faz isso secretando um fluido que contém enzimas digestivas no duodeno, a primeira parte do intestino delgado que recebe alimentos do estômago.

Essas enzimas ajudam a quebrar carboidratos, proteínas e lipídios (gorduras).

Esse papel é chamado de papel "exócrino" do pâncreas.

As células que fazem isso são organizadas em aglomerados chamados ácinos.

As secreções no meio do ácino se acumulam nos ductos intralobulares, que drenam para o ducto pancreático principal, que drena diretamente para o duodeno.

Cerca de 1,5 a 3 litros de líquido são secretados dessa maneira todos os dias. As células em cada ácino são preenchidas com grânulos contendo as enzimas digestivas.

Estes são secretados em uma forma inativa denominada zimogênios ou proenzimas.

Quando liberados no duodeno, são ativados pela enzima enteroquinase presente no revestimento do duodeno.

As proenzimas são clivadas, criando uma cascata de enzimas ativadoras.
As enzimas que quebram as proteínas começam com a ativação do tripsinogênio em tripsina.

A tripsina livre então cliva o restante do tripsinogênio, bem como o quimotripsinogênio em sua forma ativa quimotripsina.
As enzimas secretadas envolvidas na digestão de gorduras incluem lipase, fosfolipase A2, lisofosfolipase e colesterol esterase.
As enzimas que quebram o amido e outros carboidratos incluem amilase. Essas enzimas são secretadas em um fluido rico em bicarbonato.

O bicarbonato ajuda a manter um pH alcalino para o fluido, um pH no qual a maioria das enzimas atua de forma mais eficiente, e também ajuda a neutralizar os ácidos estomacais que entram no duodeno.

A secreção é influenciada por hormônios, incluindo secretina, colecistocinina e VIP, bem como a estimulação da acetilcolina do nervo vago.

A secretina é liberada pelas células S que formam parte do revestimento do duodeno em resposta à estimulação pelo ácido gástrico.

Junto com o VIP, aumenta a secreção de enzimas e bicarbonato.

A colecistocinina é liberada pelas células Ito do revestimento do duodeno e jejuno principalmente em resposta aos ácidos graxos de cadeia longa e aumenta os efeitos da secretina. 

No nível celular, o bicarbonato é secretado pelas células acinares através de um cotransportador de sódio e bicarbonato que atua devido à despolarização da membrana causada pelo regulador da condutância transmembrana da fibrose cística. 

A secretina e o VIP atuam para aumentar a abertura do regulador de condutância transmembrana da fibrose cística, o que leva a mais despolarização da membrana e mais secreção de bicarbonato. . 

Estes incluem a secreção de enzimas inativas (zimogênios), a secreção da enzima protetora inibidora da tripsina, que inativa a tripsina, as mudanças de pH que ocorrem com a secreção de bicarbonato que estimulam a digestão apenas quando o pâncreas é estimulado e o fato de que o baixo teor de cálcio dentro das células causa a inativação da tripsina.


=== Funções adicionais ===

O pâncreas também secreta peptídeo intestinal vasoativo e polipeptídeo pancreático.

As células enterocromafins do pâncreas secretam os hormônios motilina, serotonina e substância P.


== Significado clínico ==



=== Inflamação ===


A inflamação do pâncreas é conhecida como pancreatite.

A pancreatite é mais frequentemente associada a cálculos biliares recorrentes ou uso crônico de álcool, com outras causas comuns, incluindo danos traumáticos, danos após uma CPRE, alguns medicamentos, infecções como caxumba e níveis muito altos de triglicerídeos no sangue.

A pancreatite aguda pode causar dor intensa no abdome central, que muitas vezes irradia para as costas e pode estar associada a náuseas ou vômitos.

A pancreatite grave pode levar a sangramento ou perfuração do pâncreas, resultando em choque ou síndrome de resposta inflamatória sistêmica, hematomas nos flancos ou na região ao redor do umbigo.

Essas complicações graves geralmente são tratadas em uma unidade de terapia intensiva. Na pancreatite, as enzimas do pâncreas exócrino danificam a estrutura e o tecido do pâncreas.

A detecção de algumas dessas enzimas, como amilase e lipase no sangue, juntamente com sintomas e achados em imagens médicas, como ultrassonografia ou tomografia computadorizada, são frequentemente usados ​​para indicar que uma pessoa tem pancreatite.

A pancreatite é frequentemente tratada medicamente com alívio da dor e monitoramento para prevenir ou controlar o choque e gerenciamento de quaisquer causas subjacentes identificadas. 

Isso pode incluir a remoção de cálculos biliares, redução dos níveis de triglicerídeos ou glicose no sangue, o uso de corticosteróides para pancreatite autoimune e a interrupção de qualquer medicamento desencadeante. A pancreatite crônica refere-se ao desenvolvimento de pancreatite ao longo do tempo. 

Compartilha muitas causas semelhantes, sendo a mais comum o uso crônico de álcool, com outras causas, incluindo episódios agudos recorrentes e fibrose cística. 

A dor abdominal, caracteristicamente aliviada por sentar-se para frente ou beber álcool, é o sintoma mais comum. 

Quando a função digestiva do pâncreas é gravemente afetada, isso pode levar a problemas de digestão de gorduras e ao desenvolvimento de esteatorreia; quando a função endócrina é afetada, isso pode levar ao diabetes.

A pancreatite crônica é investigada de maneira semelhante à pancreatite aguda. 

Além do tratamento da dor e da náusea e do tratamento de quaisquer causas identificadas (que podem incluir a interrupção do álcool), devido ao papel digestivo do pâncreas, a reposição enzimática pode ser necessária para prevenir a má absorção.


=== Câncer ===


Os cânceres pancreáticos, particularmente o tipo mais comum, o adenocarcinoma pancreático, continuam sendo muito difíceis de tratar e, na maioria das vezes, são diagnosticados apenas em um estágio muito tardio para cirurgia, que é o único tratamento curativo. 

O câncer de pâncreas é raro em pessoas com menos de 40 anos e a idade média do diagnóstico é de 71 anos. 

Os fatores de risco incluem pancreatite crônica, idade avançada, tabagismo, obesidade, diabetes e certas condições genéticas raras, incluindo neoplasia endócrina múltipla tipo 1, câncer de cólon hereditário sem polipose e síndrome do nevo displásico, entre outros. 

Cerca de 25% dos casos são atribuíveis ao tabagismo, enquanto 5-10% dos casos estão ligados a genes herdados. 

A maioria ocorre na cabeça do pâncreas. 

Os sintomas tendem a surgir tardiamente no curso do câncer, quando causa dor abdominal, perda de peso ou amarelecimento da pele (icterícia). 

A icterícia ocorre quando a saída da bile é bloqueada pelo câncer. 

Outros sintomas menos comuns incluem náuseas, vômitos, pancreatite, diabetes ou trombose venosa recorrente. 

O câncer de pâncreas é geralmente diagnosticado por imagem médica na forma de ultra-som ou tomografia computadorizada com realce de contraste.

Uma ultrassonografia endoscópica pode ser usada se um tumor estiver sendo considerado para remoção cirúrgica, e a biópsia guiada por CPRE ou ultrassonografia pode ser usada para confirmar um diagnóstico incerto. Devido ao desenvolvimento tardio dos sintomas, a maioria dos cânceres se apresenta em estágio avançado.

Apenas 10 a 15% dos tumores são adequados para ressecção cirúrgica.

A partir de 2018, quando a quimioterapia é administrada, o regime FOLFIRINOX contendo fluorouracil, irinotecano, oxaliplatina e leucovorina demonstrou estender a sobrevida além dos regimes tradicionais de gencitabina.

Na maioria das vezes, o tratamento é paliativo, concentrando-se no manejo dos sintomas que se desenvolvem.

Isso pode incluir o tratamento da coceira, uma coledocojejunostomia ou a inserção de stents com CPRE para facilitar a drenagem da bile e medicamentos para ajudar a controlar a dor. 

Nos Estados Unidos, o câncer de pâncreas é a quarta causa mais comum de morte por câncer. 

A doença ocorre com mais frequência no mundo desenvolvido, que teve 68% dos novos casos em 2012. 

O adenocarcinoma pancreático geralmente tem resultados ruins, com a porcentagem média viva por pelo menos um e cinco anos após o diagnóstico sendo de 25% e 5%, respectivamente. 

Na doença localizada onde o câncer é pequeno (< 2 cm) o número de vivos em cinco anos é de aproximadamente 20%. Existem vários tipos de câncer pancreático, envolvendo tanto o tecido endócrino quanto o exócrino. 

Os muitos tipos de tumores endócrinos pancreáticos são todos incomuns ou raros e têm perspectivas variadas. 

No entanto, a incidência desses cânceres vem aumentando acentuadamente; não está claro até que ponto isso reflete o aumento da detecção, especialmente por meio de imagens médicas, de tumores que seriam muito lentos para se desenvolver.

Insulinomas (em grande parte benignos) e gastrinomas são os tipos mais comuns.

Para aqueles com câncer neuroendócrino, o número de vivos após cinco anos é muito melhor em 65%, variando consideravelmente com o tipo. Um tumor pseudopapilar sólido é um tumor maligno de baixo grau do pâncreas de arquitetura papilar que normalmente aflige mulheres jovens.


=== Diabetes mellitus ===



==== Diabetes tipo 1 ====

O diabetes mellitus tipo 1 é uma doença autoimune crônica na qual o sistema imunológico ataca as células beta secretoras de insulina do pâncreas.

A insulina é necessária para manter os níveis de açúcar no sangue dentro dos limites ideais, e sua falta pode levar a níveis elevados de açúcar no sangue.

Como uma condição crônica não tratada, podem resultar complicações, incluindo doença vascular acelerada, retinopatia diabética, doença renal e neuropatia.

Além disso, se não houver insulina suficiente para que a glicose seja usada dentro das células, pode ocorrer a cetoacidose diabética de emergência médica, que geralmente é o primeiro sintoma que uma pessoa com diabetes tipo 1 pode ter.

O diabetes tipo 1 pode se desenvolver em qualquer idade, mas é mais frequentemente diagnosticado antes dos 40 anos.

Para pessoas que vivem com diabetes tipo 1, as injeções de insulina são críticas para a sobrevivência.

Um procedimento experimental para tratar o diabetes tipo 1 é o transplante de pâncreas ou transplante isolado de células de ilhotas para fornecer a uma pessoa células beta funcionais.


==== Diabetes tipo 2 ====

Diabetes mellitus tipo 2 é a forma mais comum de diabetes.

As causas para o alto nível de açúcar no sangue nesta forma de diabetes geralmente são uma combinação de resistência à insulina e secreção deficiente de insulina, com fatores genéticos e ambientais desempenhando um papel no desenvolvimento da doença.

Com o tempo, as células beta pancreáticas podem ficar "exaustas" e menos funcionais.

O manejo do diabetes tipo 2 envolve uma combinação de medidas de estilo de vida, medicamentos, se necessário, e potencialmente insulina.
Com relevância para o pâncreas, diversos medicamentos atuam no aumento da secreção de insulina das células beta, principalmente as sulfonilureias, que atuam diretamente nas células beta; incretinas que replicam a ação dos hormônios glucagon-like peptide 1, aumentando a secreção de insulina das células beta após as refeições, e são mais resistentes à degradação; e inibidores de DPP-4, que retardam a quebra de incretinas.


=== Remoção ===

É possível que uma pessoa viva sem pâncreas, desde que a pessoa tome insulina para a regulação adequada da concentração de glicose no sangue e suplementos de enzimas pancreáticas para ajudar na digestão.


== História ==

O pâncreas foi identificado pela primeira vez por Herófilo (335-280 aC), um anatomista e cirurgião grego. 

Algumas centenas de anos depois, Rufo de Éfeso, outro anatomista grego, deu nome ao pâncreas. 

Etimologicamente, o termo "pâncreas", uma adaptação latina moderna do grego πάγκρεας, [πᾶν ("todo", "todo") e κρέας ("carne")], originalmente significa pão doce, embora literalmente signifique toda a carne, presumivelmente porque de sua consistência carnuda. 

Foi somente em 1889 que Oskar Minkowski descobriu que a remoção do pâncreas de um cão o tornava diabético. 

A insulina foi posteriormente isolada das ilhotas pancreáticas por Frederick Banting e Charles Herbert Best em 1921. A forma como o tecido do pâncreas era visto também mudou.

Anteriormente, era visto usando métodos de coloração simples, como H&E.

Agora, a imuno-histoquímica pode ser usada para diferenciar mais facilmente os tipos de células.

Isso envolve anticorpos visíveis para os produtos de certos tipos de células e ajuda a identificar com maior facilidade tipos de células, como células alfa e beta.


== Outros animais ==

O tecido pancreático está presente em todos os vertebrados, mas sua forma e disposição precisas variam muito.

Pode haver até três pâncreas separados, dois dos quais surgem de brotos ventrais e o outro dorsalmente.

Na maioria das espécies (incluindo humanos), estes "fundem" no adulto, mas existem várias exceções.

Mesmo quando um único pâncreas está presente, dois ou três ductos pancreáticos podem persistir, cada um drenando separadamente para o duodeno (ou parte equivalente do intestino anterior).

As aves, por exemplo, normalmente têm três desses dutos. Em peixes teleósteos e em algumas outras espécies (como coelhos), não há pâncreas distinto, com tecido pancreático sendo distribuído difusamente pelo mesentério e até mesmo dentro de outros órgãos próximos, como o fígado ou o baço.

Em algumas espécies de teleósteos, o tecido endócrino se fundiu para formar uma glândula distinta dentro da cavidade abdominal, mas por outro lado está distribuído entre os componentes exócrinos.

O arranjo mais primitivo, no entanto, parece ser o de lampreias e peixes pulmonados, nos quais o tecido pancreático é encontrado como uma série de nódulos discretos dentro da própria parede do intestino, com as porções exócrinas sendo pouco diferentes de outras estruturas glandulares do intestino. .


== Cozinha ==

O pâncreas de bezerro (ris de veau) ou cordeiro (ris d'agneau) e, menos comumente, de carne bovina ou suína, são usados ​​como alimento sob o nome culinário de pão doce.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pancreas
