

SPINAL CORD


The spinal cord is a long, thin, tubular structure made up of nervous tissue, which extends from the medulla oblongata in the brainstem to the lumbar region of the vertebral column. 

It encloses the central canal of the spinal cord, which contains cerebrospinal fluid. 

The brain and spinal cord together make up the central nervous system (CNS). 

In humans, the spinal cord begins at the occipital bone, passing through the foramen magnum and entering the spinal canal at the beginning of the cervical vertebrae. 

The spinal cord extends down to between the first and second lumbar vertebrae, where it ends. 

The enclosing bony vertebral column protects the relatively shorter spinal cord. 

It is around 45 cm (18 in) long in adult men and around 43 cm (17 in) long in adult women. 

The diameter of the spinal cord ranges from 13 mm (1⁄2 in) in the cervical and lumbar regions to 6.4 mm (1⁄4 in) in the thoracic area.

The spinal cord functions primarily in the transmission of nerve signals from the motor cortex to the body, and from the afferent fibers of the sensory neurons to the sensory cortex. 

It is also a center for coordinating many reflexes and contains reflex arcs that can independently control reflexes. 

It is also the location of groups of spinal interneurons that make up the neural circuits known as central pattern generators. 

These circuits are responsible for controlling motor instructions for rhythmic movements such as walking.


== Structure ==


The spinal cord is the main pathway for information connecting the brain and peripheral nervous system. 

Much shorter than its protecting spinal column, the human spinal cord originates in the brainstem, passes through the foramen magnum, and continues through to the conus medullaris near the second lumbar vertebra before terminating in a fibrous extension known as the filum terminale.

It is about 45 cm (18 in) long in men and about 43 cm (17 in) in women, ovoid-shaped, and is enlarged in the cervical and lumbar regions. 

The cervical enlargement, stretching from the C5 to T1 vertebrae, is where sensory input comes from and motor output goes to the arms and trunk. 

The lumbar enlargement, located between L1 and S3, handles sensory input and motor output coming from and going to the legs.

The spinal cord is continuous with the caudal portion of the medulla, running from the base of the skull to the body of the first lumbar vertebra. 

It does not run the full length of the vertebral column in adults. 

It is made of 31 segments from which branch one pair of sensory nerve roots and one pair of motor nerve roots. 

The nerve roots then merge into bilaterally symmetrical pairs of spinal nerves. 

The peripheral nervous system is made up of these spinal roots, nerves, and ganglia.

The dorsal roots are afferent fascicles, receiving sensory information from the skin, muscles, and visceral organs to be relayed to the brain. 

The roots terminate in dorsal root ganglia, which are composed of the cell bodies of the corresponding neurons. 

Ventral roots consist of efferent fibers that arise from motor neurons whose cell bodies are found in the ventral (or anterior) gray horns of the spinal cord.

The spinal cord (and brain) are protected by three layers of tissue or membranes called meninges, that surround the canal. 

The dura mater is the outermost layer, and it forms a tough protective coating. 

Between the dura mater and the surrounding bone of the vertebrae is a space called the epidural space. 

The epidural space is filled with adipose tissue, and it contains a network of blood vessels. 

The arachnoid mater, the middle protective layer, is named for its open, spiderweb-like appearance. 

The space between the arachnoid and the underlying pia mater is called the subarachnoid space. 

The subarachnoid space contains cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), which can be sampled with a lumbar puncture, or "spinal tap" procedure. 

The delicate pia mater, the innermost protective layer, is tightly associated with the surface of the spinal cord. 

The cord is stabilized within the dura mater by the connecting denticulate ligaments, which extend from the enveloping pia mater laterally between the dorsal and ventral roots. 

The dural sac ends at the vertebral level of the second sacral vertebra.

In cross-section, the peripheral region of the cord contains neuronal white matter tracts containing sensory and motor axons. 

Internal to this peripheral region is the grey matter, which contains the nerve cell bodies arranged in the three grey columns that give the region its butterfly-shape. 

This central region surrounds the central canal, which is an extension of the fourth ventricle and contains cerebrospinal fluid.
The spinal cord is elliptical in cross section, being compressed dorsolaterally. 

Two prominent grooves, or sulci, run along its length. 

The posterior median sulcus is the groove in the dorsal side, and the anterior median fissure is the groove in the ventral side.


=== Segments ===


The human spinal cord is divided into segments where pairs of spinal nerves (mixed; sensory and motor) form. 

Six to eight motor nerve rootlets branch out of right and left ventralateral sulci in a very orderly manner. 

Nerve rootlets combine to form nerve roots. 

Likewise, sensory nerve rootlets form off right and left dorsal lateral sulci and form sensory nerve roots. 

The ventral (motor) and dorsal (sensory) roots combine to form spinal nerves (mixed; motor and sensory), one on each side of the spinal cord. 

Spinal nerves, with the exception of C1 and C2, form inside the intervertebral foramen (IVF). 

These rootlets form the demarcation between the central and peripheral nervous systems.

The grey column, (as three regions of grey columns) in the center of the cord, is shaped like a butterfly and consists of cell bodies of interneurons, motor neurons, neuroglia cells and unmyelinated axons. 

The anterior and posterior grey column present as projections of the grey matter and are also known as the horns of the spinal cord. 

Together, the grey columns and the gray commissure form the "grey H."
The white matter is located outside of the grey matter and consists almost totally of myelinated motor and sensory axons. 

"Columns" of white matter carry information either up or down the spinal cord.

The spinal cord proper terminates in a region called the conus medullaris, while the pia mater continues as an extension called the filum terminale, which anchors the spinal cord to the coccyx. 

The cauda equina ("horse's tail") is a collection of nerves inferior to the conus medullaris that continue to travel through the vertebral column to the coccyx. 

The cauda equina forms because the spinal cord stops growing in length at about age four, even though the vertebral column continues to lengthen until adulthood. 

This results in sacral spinal nerves originating in the upper lumbar region. 

For that reason, the spinal cord occupies only two-thirds of the vertebral canal. 

The inferior part of the vertebral canal is filled with cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and the space is called the lumbar cistern.

Within the Central Nervous System (CNS), nerve cell bodies are generally organized into functional clusters, called nuclei. 

Axons within the CNS are grouped into tracts.
There are 31 spinal cord nerve segments in a human spinal cord:

8 cervical segments forming 8 pairs of cervical nerves (C1 spinal nerves exit the spinal column between the foramen magnum and the C1 vertebra; C2 nerves exit between the posterior arch of the C1 vertebra and the lamina of C2; C3–C8 spinal nerves pass through the IVF above their corresponding cervical vertebrae, with the exception of the C8 pair which exit between the C7 and T1 vertebrae).

12 thoracic segments forming 12 pairs of thoracic nerves
5 lumbar segments forming 5 pairs of lumbar nerves
5 sacral segments forming 5 pairs of sacral nerves
1 coccygeal segmentIn the fetus, vertebral segments correspond with spinal cord segments. 

However, because the vertebral column grows longer than the spinal cord, spinal cord segments do not correspond to vertebral segments in the adult, particularly in the lower spinal cord. 

For example, lumbar and sacral spinal cord segments are found between vertebral levels T9 and L2, and the spinal cord ends around the L1/L2 vertebral level, forming a structure known as the conus medullaris.

Although the spinal cord cell bodies end around the L1/L2 vertebral level, the spinal nerves for each segment exit at the level of the corresponding vertebra. 

For the nerves of the lower spinal cord, this means that they exit the vertebral column much lower (more caudally) than their roots. 

As these nerves travel from their respective roots to their point of exit from the vertebral column, the nerves of the lower spinal segments form a bundle called the cauda equina.

There are two regions where the spinal cord enlarges:

Cervical enlargement – corresponds roughly to the brachial plexus nerves, which innervate the upper limb. 

It includes spinal cord segments from about C4 to T1. 

The vertebral levels of the enlargement are roughly the same (C4 to T1).
Lumbar enlargement – corresponds to the lumbosacral plexus nerves, which innervate the lower limb. 

It comprises the spinal cord segments from L2 to S3 and is found about the vertebral levels of T9 to T12.


=== Development ===


The spinal cord is made from part of the neural tube during development. 

There are four stages of the spinal cord that arises from the neural tube: The neural plate, neural fold, neural tube, and the spinal cord. 

Neural differentiation occurs within the spinal cord portion of the tube. 

As the neural tube begins to develop, the notochord begins to secrete a factor known as Sonic hedgehog or SHH. 

As a result, the floor plate then also begins to secrete SHH, and this will induce the basal plate to develop motor neurons. 

During the maturation of the neural tube, its lateral walls thicken and form a longitudinal groove called the sulcus limitans. 

This extends the length of the spinal cord into dorsal and ventral portions as well. 

Meanwhile, the overlying ectoderm secretes bone morphogenetic protein (BMP). 

This induces the roof plate to begin to secrete BMP, which will induce the alar plate to develop sensory neurons. 

Opposing gradients of such morphogens as BMP and SHH form different domains of dividing cells along the dorsal ventral axis. 

Dorsal root ganglion neurons differentiate from neural crest progenitors. 

As the dorsal and ventral column cells proliferate, the lumen of the neural tube narrows to form the small central canal of the spinal cord. 

The alar plate and the basal plate are separated by the sulcus limitans. 
Additionally, the floor plate also secretes netrins. 

The netrins act as chemoattractants to decussation of pain and temperature sensory neurons in the alar plate across the anterior white commissure, where they then ascend towards the thalamus. 

Following the closure of the caudal neuropore and formation of the brain's ventricles that contain the choroid plexus tissue, the central canal of the caudal spinal cord is filled with cerebrospinal fluid.

Earlier findings by Viktor Hamburger and Rita Levi-Montalcini in the chick embryo have been confirmed by more recent studies which have demonstrated that the elimination of neuronal cells by programmed cell death (PCD) is necessary for the correct assembly of the nervous system.

Overall, spontaneous embryonic activity has been shown to play a role in neuron and muscle development but is probably not involved in the initial formation of connections between spinal neurons.


=== Blood supply ===

The spinal cord is supplied with blood by three arteries that run along its length starting in the brain, and many arteries that approach it through the sides of the spinal column. 

The three longitudinal arteries are the anterior spinal artery, and the right and left posterior spinal arteries. 

These travel in the subarachnoid space and send branches into the spinal cord. 

They form anastamoses (connections) via the anterior and posterior segmental medullary arteries, which enter the spinal cord at various points along its length. 

The actual blood flow caudally through these arteries, derived from the posterior cerebral circulation, is inadequate to maintain the spinal cord beyond the cervical segments.

The major contribution to the arterial blood supply of the spinal cord below the cervical region comes from the radially arranged posterior and anterior radicular arteries, which run into the spinal cord alongside the dorsal and ventral nerve roots, but with one exception do not connect directly with any of the three longitudinal arteries. 

These intercostal and lumbar radicular arteries arise from the aorta, provide major anastomoses and supplement the blood flow to the spinal cord. 

In humans the largest of the anterior radicular arteries is known as the artery of Adamkiewicz, or anterior radicularis magna (ARM) artery, which usually arises between L1 and L2, but can arise anywhere from T9 to L5. 

Impaired blood flow through these critical radicular arteries, especially during surgical procedures that involve abrupt disruption of blood flow through the aorta for example during aortic aneurysm repair, can result in spinal cord infarction and paraplegia.


== Function ==



=== Somatosensory organization ===


In the dorsal column-medial leminiscus tract, a primary neuron's axon enters the spinal cord and then enters the dorsal column.

Here the dorsal column connects to the axon of the nerve cell. 

If the primary axon enters below spinal level T6, the axon travels in the fasciculus gracilis, the medial part of the column. 

If the axon enters above level T6, then it travels in the fasciculus cuneatus, which is lateral to the fasciculus gracilis. 

Either way, the primary axon ascends to the lower medulla, where it leaves its fasciculus and synapses with a secondary neuron in one of the dorsal column nuclei: either the nucleus gracilis or the nucleus cuneatus, depending on the pathway it took. 

At this point, the secondary axon leaves its nucleus and passes anteriorly and medially. 

The collection of secondary axons that do this are known as internal arcuate fibers. 

The internal arcuate fibers decussate and continue ascending as the contralateral medial lemniscus. 

Secondary axons from the medial lemniscus finally terminate in the ventral posterolateral nucleus (VPLN) of the thalamus, where they synapse with tertiary neurons. 

From there, tertiary neurons ascend via the posterior limb of the internal capsule and end in the primary sensory cortex.

The proprioception of the lower limbs differs from the upper limbs and upper trunk. 

There is a four-neuron pathway for lower limb proprioception. 

This pathway initially follows the dorsal spino-cerebellar pathway. 

It is arranged as follows: 
    proprioceptive receptors of lower limb → peripheral process → dorsal root ganglion → central process → Clarke's column → 2nd order neuron → medulla oblongata (Caudate nucleus) → 3rd order neuron → VPLN of thalamus → 4th order neuron → posterior limb of internal capsule → corona radiata → sensory area of cerebrum.

The anterolateral system works somewhat differently. 

Its primary neurons axons enter the spinal cord and then ascend one to two levels before synapsing in the substantia gelatinosa. 

The tract that ascends before synapsing is known as Lissauer's tract. 

After synapsing, secondary axons decussate and ascend in the anterior lateral portion of the spinal cord as the spinothalamic tract. 

This tract ascends all the way to the VPLN, where it synapses on tertiary neurons. 

Tertiary neuronal axons then travel to the primary sensory cortex via the posterior limb of the internal capsule.

Some of the "pain fibers" in the ALS deviate from their pathway towards the VPLN. 

In one such deviation, axons travel towards the reticular formation in the midbrain. 

The reticular formation then projects to a number of places including the hippocampus (to create memories about the pain), the centromedian nucleus (to cause diffuse, non-specific pain) and various parts of the cortex. 

Additionally, some ALS axons project to the periaqueductal gray in the pons, and the axons forming the periaqueductal gray then project to the nucleus raphes magnus, which projects back down to where the pain signal is coming from and inhibits it. 

This helps control the sensation of pain to some degree.


=== Motor organization ===


The corticospinal tract serves as the motor pathway for upper motor neuronal signals coming from the cerebral cortex and from primitive brainstem motor nuclei.

Cortical upper motor neurons originate from Brodmann areas 1, 2, 3, 4, and 6 and then descend in the posterior limb of the internal capsule, through the crus cerebri, down through the pons, and to the medullary pyramids, where about 90% of the axons cross to the contralateral side at the decussation of the pyramids. 

They then descend as the lateral corticospinal tract. 

These axons synapse with lower motor neurons in the ventral horns of all levels of the spinal cord. 

The remaining 10% of axons descend on the ipsilateral side as the ventral corticospinal tract. 

These axons also synapse with lower motor neurons in the ventral horns. 

Most of them will cross to the contralateral side of the cord (via the anterior white commissure) right before synapsing.

The midbrain nuclei include four motor tracts that send upper motor neuronal axons down the spinal cord to lower motor neurons. 

These are the rubrospinal tract, the vestibulospinal tract, the tectospinal tract and the reticulospinal tract. 

The rubrospinal tract descends with the lateral corticospinal tract, and the remaining three descend with the anterior corticospinal tract.

The function of lower motor neurons can be divided into two different groups: the lateral corticospinal tract and the anterior cortical spinal tract. 

The lateral tract contains upper motor neuronal axons which synapse on dorsal lateral (DL) lower motor neurons. 

The DL neurons are involved in distal limb control. 

Therefore, these DL neurons are found specifically only in the cervical and lumbosacral enlargements within the spinal cord. 

There is no decussation in the lateral corticospinal tract after the decussation at the medullary pyramids.

The anterior corticospinal tract descends ipsilaterally in the anterior column, where the axons emerge and either synapse on lower ventromedial (VM) motor neurons in the ventral horn ipsilaterally or descussate at the anterior white commissure where they synapse on VM lower motor neurons contralaterally . 

The tectospinal, vestibulospinal and reticulospinal descend ipsilaterally in the anterior column but do not synapse across the anterior white commissure. 

Rather, they only synapse on VM lower motor neurons ipsilaterally. 

The VM lower motor neurons control the large, postural muscles of the axial skeleton. 

These lower motor neurons, unlike those of the DL, are located in the ventral horn all the way throughout the spinal cord.


=== Spinocerebellar tracts ===

Proprioceptive information in the body travels up the spinal cord via three tracks. 

Below L2, the proprioceptive information travels up the spinal cord in the ventral spinocerebellar tract. 

Also known as the anterior spinocerebellar tract, sensory receptors take in the information and travel into the spinal cord. 

The cell bodies of these primary neurons are located in the dorsal root ganglia. 

In the spinal cord, the axons synapse and the secondary neuronal axons decussates and then travel up to the superior cerebellar peduncle where they decussate again. 

From here, the information is brought to deep nuclei of the cerebellum including the fastigial and interposed nuclei.

From the levels of L2 to T1, proprioceptive information enters the spinal cord and ascends ipsilaterally, where it synapses in Clarke's nucleus. 

The secondary neuronal axons continue to ascend ipsilaterally and then pass into the cerebellum via the inferior cerebellar peduncle. 

This tract is known as the dorsal spinocerebellar tract.
From above T1, proprioceptive primary axons enter the spinal cord and ascend ipsilaterally until reaching the accessory cuneate nucleus, where they synapse. 

The secondary axons pass into the cerebellum via the inferior cerebellar peduncle where again, these axons synapse on cerebellar deep nuclei. 

This tract is known as the cuneocerebellar tract.
Motor information travels from the brain down the spinal cord via descending spinal cord tracts. 

Descending tracts involve two neurons: the upper motor neuron (UMN) and lower motor neuron (LMN). 

A nerve signal travels down the upper motor neuron until it synapses with the lower motor neuron in the spinal cord. 

Then, the lower motor neuron conducts the nerve signal to the spinal root where efferent nerve fibers carry the motor signal toward the target muscle. 

The descending tracts are composed of white matter. 

There are several descending tracts serving different functions. 

The corticospinal tracts (lateral and anterior) are responsible for coordinated limb movements.


== Clinical significance ==

A congenital disorder is diastematomyelia in which part of the spinal cord is split usually at the level of the upper lumbar vertebrae. 

Sometimes the split can be along the length of the spinal cord.


=== Injury ===


Spinal cord injuries can be caused by trauma to the spinal column (stretching, bruising, applying pressure, severing, laceration, etc.). 

The vertebral bones or intervertebral disks can shatter, causing the spinal cord to be punctured by a sharp fragment of bone. 

Usually, victims of spinal cord injuries will suffer loss of feeling in certain parts of their body. 

In milder cases, a victim might only suffer loss of hand or foot function. 

More severe injuries may result in paraplegia, tetraplegia (also known as quadriplegia), or full body paralysis below the site of injury to the spinal cord.

Damage to upper motor neuron axons in the spinal cord results in a characteristic pattern of ipsilateral deficits. 

These include hyperreflexia, hypertonia and muscle weakness. 

Lower motor neuronal damage results in its own characteristic pattern of deficits. 

Rather than an entire side of deficits, there is a pattern relating to the myotome affected by the damage. 

Additionally, lower motor neurons are characterized by muscle weakness, hypotonia, hyporeflexia and muscle atrophy.

Spinal shock and neurogenic shock can occur from a spinal injury. 

Spinal shock is usually temporary, lasting only for 24–48 hours, and is a temporary absence of sensory and motor functions. 

Neurogenic shock lasts for weeks and can lead to a loss of muscle tone due to disuse of the muscles below the injured site.

The two areas of the spinal cord most commonly injured are the cervical spine (C1–C7) and the lumbar spine (L1–L5). 

(The notation C1, C7, L1, L5 refer to the location of a specific vertebra in either the cervical, thoracic, or lumbar region of the spine.) 

Spinal cord injury can also be non-traumatic and caused by disease (transverse myelitis, polio, spina bifida, Friedreich's ataxia, spinal cord tumor, spinal stenosis etc.)In the U.S., 10,000–12,000 people become paralyzed annually as a result of various injuries to the spinal cord.


=== Treatment ===

Real or suspected spinal cord injuries need immediate immobilisation including that of the head. 

Scans will be needed to assess the injury. 

A steroid, methylprednisolone, can be of help as can physical therapy and possibly antioxidants. 

Treatments need to focus on limiting post-injury cell death, promoting cell regeneration, and replacing lost cells. 

Regeneration is facilitated by maintaining electric transmission in neural elements.


=== Lumbar puncture ===

The spinal cord ends at the level of vertebrae L1–L2, while the subarachnoid space —the compartment that contains cerebrospinal fluid— extends down to the lower border of S2. 

Lumbar punctures in adults are usually performed between L3–L5 (cauda equina level) in order to avoid damage to the spinal cord. 

In the fetus, the spinal cord extends the full length of the spine and regresses as the body grows.


=== Tumours ===

Spinal tumours can occur in the spinal cord and these can be either inside (intradural) or outside (extradural) the dura mater.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spinal_cord
;;;ES;;;



MÉDULA ESPINAL


La médula espinal es una estructura tubular larga y delgada formada por tejido nervioso, que se extiende desde el bulbo raquídeo en el tronco del encéfalo hasta la región lumbar de la columna vertebral.

Encierra el canal central de la médula espinal, que contiene líquido cefalorraquídeo.

El cerebro y la médula espinal juntos forman el sistema nervioso central (SNC).

En los seres humanos, la médula espinal comienza en el hueso occipital, pasa por el agujero magno y entra en el canal espinal al comienzo de las vértebras cervicales.

La médula espinal se extiende hasta entre la primera y la segunda vértebra lumbar, donde termina.

La columna vertebral ósea envolvente protege la médula espinal relativamente más corta.

Mide alrededor de 45 cm (18 pulgadas) de largo en hombres adultos y alrededor de 43 cm (17 pulgadas) de largo en mujeres adultas.

El diámetro de la médula espinal varía de 13 mm (1⁄2 pulgada) en las regiones cervical y lumbar a 6,4 mm (1⁄4 pulgada) en el área torácica.

La médula espinal funciona principalmente en la transmisión de señales nerviosas desde la corteza motora al cuerpo, y desde las fibras aferentes de las neuronas sensoriales a la corteza sensorial.

También es un centro para coordinar muchos reflejos y contiene arcos reflejos que pueden controlar los reflejos de forma independiente. 

También es la ubicación de grupos de interneuronas espinales que forman los circuitos neuronales conocidos como generadores de patrones centrales. 

Estos circuitos se encargan de controlar las instrucciones motoras para movimientos rítmicos como caminar.


== Estructura ==


La médula espinal es la vía principal de información que conecta el cerebro y el sistema nervioso periférico. 

Mucho más corta que su columna vertebral protectora, la médula espinal humana se origina en el tronco encefálico, pasa a través del agujero magno y continúa hasta el cono medular cerca de la segunda vértebra lumbar antes de terminar en una extensión fibrosa conocida como filum terminale.

Mide unos 45 cm (18 pulgadas) de largo en los hombres y unos 43 cm (17 pulgadas) en las mujeres, tiene forma ovoide y está agrandado en las regiones cervical y lumbar. 

El agrandamiento cervical, que se extiende desde la vértebra C5 hasta la T1, es de donde proviene la entrada sensorial y la salida motora va a los brazos y el tronco. 

El agrandamiento lumbar, ubicado entre L1 y S3, maneja la entrada sensorial y la salida motora que viene y va a las piernas.

La médula espinal se continúa con la porción caudal del bulbo raquídeo, desde la base del cráneo hasta el cuerpo de la primera vértebra lumbar. 

No recorre toda la longitud de la columna vertebral en adultos. 

Está hecho de 31 segmentos de los cuales se ramifican un par de raíces nerviosas sensoriales y un par de raíces nerviosas motoras. 

Las raíces nerviosas luego se fusionan en pares bilateralmente simétricos de nervios espinales. 

El sistema nervioso periférico está formado por estas raíces espinales, nervios y ganglios.

Las raíces dorsales son fascículos aferentes que reciben información sensorial de la piel, los músculos y los órganos viscerales para transmitirla al cerebro. 

Las raíces terminan en los ganglios de la raíz dorsal, que están compuestos por los cuerpos celulares de las neuronas correspondientes. 

Las raíces ventrales consisten en fibras eferentes que surgen de las neuronas motoras cuyos cuerpos celulares se encuentran en los cuernos grises ventrales (o anteriores) de la médula espinal.

La médula espinal (y el cerebro) están protegidos por tres capas de tejido o membranas llamadas meninges, que rodean el canal. 

La duramadre es la capa más externa y forma una capa protectora resistente. 

Entre la duramadre y el hueso circundante de las vértebras hay un espacio llamado espacio epidural. 

El espacio epidural está lleno de tejido adiposo y contiene una red de vasos sanguíneos. 

La aracnoides, la capa protectora intermedia, recibe su nombre por su apariencia abierta similar a una telaraña. 

El espacio entre la aracnoides y la piamadre subyacente se denomina espacio subaracnoideo. 

El espacio subaracnoideo contiene líquido cefalorraquídeo (LCR), que se puede extraer con una punción lumbar o un procedimiento de "punción espinal". 

La delicada piamadre, la capa protectora más interna, está estrechamente asociada con la superficie de la médula espinal. 

El cordón está estabilizado dentro de la duramadre por los ligamentos dentados de conexión, que se extienden desde la piamadre envolvente lateralmente entre las raíces dorsal y ventral. 

El saco dural termina en el nivel vertebral de la segunda vértebra sacra.

En corte transversal, la región periférica del cordón contiene tractos de sustancia blanca neuronal que contienen axones sensoriales y motores.

En el interior de esta región periférica se encuentra la materia gris, que contiene los cuerpos de las células nerviosas dispuestas en las tres columnas grises que dan a la región su forma de mariposa.

Esta región central rodea el canal central, que es una extensión del cuarto ventrículo y contiene líquido cefalorraquídeo.
La médula espinal tiene una sección transversal elíptica y está comprimida dorsolateralmente.

Dos surcos prominentes, o surcos, corren a lo largo de su longitud.

El surco mediano posterior es el surco en el lado dorsal, y la fisura mediana anterior es el surco en el lado ventral.


=== Segmentos ===


La médula espinal humana se divide en segmentos donde se forman pares de nervios espinales (mixtos; sensoriales y motores).

Seis a ocho raicillas nerviosas motoras se ramifican de los surcos ventrales laterales derecho e izquierdo de una manera muy ordenada.

Las raicillas nerviosas se combinan para formar raíces nerviosas.

Del mismo modo, las raicillas nerviosas sensoriales se forman a partir de los surcos laterales dorsales derecho e izquierdo y forman raíces nerviosas sensoriales.

Las raíces ventral (motora) y dorsal (sensorial) se combinan para formar nervios espinales (mixtos; motores y sensoriales), uno a cada lado de la médula espinal.

Los nervios espinales, con la excepción de C1 y C2, se forman dentro del agujero intervertebral (FIV).

Estas raicillas forman la demarcación entre los sistemas nerviosos central y periférico.

La columna gris, (como tres regiones de columnas grises) en el centro de la médula, tiene forma de mariposa y consta de cuerpos celulares de interneuronas, neuronas motoras, células de neuroglia y axones no mielinizados.

La columna gris anterior y posterior se presentan como proyecciones de la sustancia gris y también se conocen como los cuernos de la médula espinal.

Juntas, las columnas grises y la comisura gris forman la "H gris".
La sustancia blanca se encuentra fuera de la sustancia gris y consiste casi en su totalidad en axones motores y sensoriales mielinizados.

Las "columnas" de sustancia blanca transportan información hacia arriba o hacia abajo de la médula espinal.

La médula espinal termina en una región llamada conus medullaris, mientras que la piamadre continúa como una extensión llamada filum terminale, que ancla la médula espinal al cóccix.

La cauda equina ("cola de caballo") es una colección de nervios inferiores al conus medullaris que continúan viajando a través de la columna vertebral hasta el cóccix.

La cauda equina se forma porque la médula espinal deja de crecer en longitud alrededor de los cuatro años, aunque la columna vertebral continúa alargándose hasta la edad adulta.

Esto da como resultado que los nervios espinales sacros se originen en la región lumbar superior.

Por esa razón, la médula espinal ocupa solo dos tercios del canal vertebral.

La parte inferior del canal vertebral está llena de líquido cefalorraquídeo (LCR) y el espacio se denomina cisterna lumbar.

Dentro del Sistema Nervioso Central (SNC), los cuerpos de las células nerviosas generalmente se organizan en grupos funcionales, llamados núcleos.

Los axones dentro del SNC se agrupan en tractos.
Hay 31 segmentos de nervios de la médula espinal en una médula espinal humana:

8 segmentos cervicales que forman 8 pares de nervios cervicales (los nervios espinales C1 salen de la columna vertebral entre el agujero magno y la vértebra C1; los nervios C2 salen entre el arco posterior de la vértebra C1 y la lámina de C2; ​​los nervios espinales C3-C8 pasan a través la FIV por encima de sus vértebras cervicales correspondientes, a excepción del par C8 que sale entre las vértebras C7 y T1).

12 segmentos torácicos que forman 12 pares de nervios torácicos
5 segmentos lumbares que forman 5 pares de nervios lumbares
5 segmentos sacros que forman 5 pares de nervios sacros
1 segmento coccígeo En el feto, los segmentos vertebrales se corresponden con los segmentos de la médula espinal.

Sin embargo, debido a que la columna vertebral crece más que la médula espinal, los segmentos de la médula espinal no se corresponden con los segmentos vertebrales del adulto, particularmente en la parte inferior de la médula espinal.

Por ejemplo, los segmentos de la médula espinal lumbar y sacra se encuentran entre los niveles vertebrales T9 y L2, y la médula espinal termina alrededor del nivel vertebral L1/L2, formando una estructura conocida como conus medullaris.

Aunque los cuerpos celulares de la médula espinal terminan alrededor del nivel vertebral L1/L2, los nervios espinales de cada segmento salen al nivel de la vértebra correspondiente. 

Para los nervios de la parte inferior de la médula espinal, esto significa que salen de la columna vertebral mucho más abajo (más caudalmente) que sus raíces. 

A medida que estos nervios viajan desde sus respectivas raíces hasta su punto de salida de la columna vertebral, los nervios de los segmentos espinales inferiores forman un haz llamado cauda equina.

Hay dos regiones donde la médula espinal se agranda:

Agrandamiento cervical: corresponde aproximadamente a los nervios del plexo braquial, que inervan la extremidad superior. 

Incluye segmentos de la médula espinal desde aproximadamente C4 hasta T1.

Los niveles vertebrales del agrandamiento son aproximadamente los mismos (C4 a T1).
Agrandamiento lumbar: corresponde a los nervios del plexo lumbosacro, que inervan el miembro inferior.

Comprende los segmentos de la médula espinal de L2 a S3 y se encuentra sobre los niveles vertebrales de T9 a T12.


=== Desarrollo ===


La médula espinal está formada por parte del tubo neural durante el desarrollo.

Hay cuatro etapas de la médula espinal que surge del tubo neural: la placa neural, el pliegue neural, el tubo neural y la médula espinal.

La diferenciación neural ocurre dentro de la porción de la médula espinal del tubo.

A medida que el tubo neural comienza a desarrollarse, la notocorda comienza a secretar un factor conocido como Sonic hedgehog o SHH.

Como resultado, la placa del suelo también comienza a secretar SHH, y esto inducirá a la placa basal a desarrollar neuronas motoras. 

Durante la maduración del tubo neural, sus paredes laterales se engrosan y forman un surco longitudinal llamado surco limitante. 

Esto extiende la longitud de la médula espinal en porciones dorsal y ventral también. 

Mientras tanto, el ectodermo suprayacente secreta proteína morfogenética ósea (BMP). 

Esto induce a la placa del techo a comenzar a secretar BMP, lo que inducirá a la placa alar a desarrollar neuronas sensoriales. 

Gradientes opuestos de morfógenos como BMP y SHH forman diferentes dominios de células en división a lo largo del eje ventral dorsal. 

Las neuronas del ganglio de la raíz dorsal se diferencian de los progenitores de la cresta neural. 

A medida que proliferan las células de las columnas dorsal y ventral, la luz del tubo neural se estrecha para formar el pequeño canal central de la médula espinal. 

La placa alar y la placa basal están separadas por el surco limitante. 
Además, la placa del suelo también segrega netrinas. 

Las netrinas actúan como quimioatrayentes para la decusación de las neuronas sensoriales del dolor y la temperatura en la placa alar a través de la comisura blanca anterior, donde luego ascienden hacia el tálamo. 

Tras el cierre del neuroporo caudal y la formación de los ventrículos del cerebro que contienen el tejido del plexo coroideo, el canal central de la médula espinal caudal se llena de líquido cefalorraquídeo.

Hallazgos anteriores de Viktor Hamburger y Rita Levi-Montalcini en embrión de pollo han sido confirmados por estudios más recientes que han demostrado que la eliminación de células neuronales por muerte celular programada (PCD) es necesaria para el correcto ensamblaje del sistema nervioso.

En general, se ha demostrado que la actividad embrionaria espontánea desempeña un papel en el desarrollo de las neuronas y los músculos, pero probablemente no esté involucrada en la formación inicial de conexiones entre las neuronas espinales.


=== Suministro de sangre ===

La médula espinal recibe sangre de tres arterias que recorren toda su longitud comenzando en el cerebro y de muchas arterias que se acercan a ella a través de los lados de la columna vertebral. 

Las tres arterias longitudinales son la arteria espinal anterior y las arterias espinales posteriores derecha e izquierda. 

Estos viajan en el espacio subaracnoideo y envían ramas a la médula espinal. 

Forman anastomosis (conexiones) a través de las arterias medulares segmentarias anterior y posterior, que entran en la médula espinal en varios puntos a lo largo de su longitud. 

El flujo sanguíneo real caudalmente a través de estas arterias, derivado de la circulación cerebral posterior, es inadecuado para mantener la médula espinal más allá de los segmentos cervicales.

La principal contribución al suministro de sangre arterial de la médula espinal por debajo de la región cervical proviene de las arterias radiculares anterior y posterior dispuestas radialmente, que discurren hacia la médula espinal junto con las raíces nerviosas dorsal y ventral, pero con una excepción no se conectan directamente con cualquiera de las tres arterias longitudinales. 

Estas arterias radiculares intercostales y lumbares surgen de la aorta, proporcionan anastomosis importantes y complementan el flujo sanguíneo a la médula espinal.

En los humanos, la mayor de las arterias radiculares anteriores se conoce como arteria de Adamkiewicz, o arteria radicular anterior magna (ARM), que generalmente surge entre L1 y L2, pero puede surgir en cualquier lugar entre T9 y L5.

El flujo sanguíneo deteriorado a través de estas arterias radiculares críticas, especialmente durante procedimientos quirúrgicos que implican una interrupción abrupta del flujo sanguíneo a través de la aorta, por ejemplo, durante la reparación de un aneurisma aórtico, puede provocar un infarto de la médula espinal y paraplejía.


== Función ==



=== Organización somatosensorial ===


En el tracto de la columna dorsal-leminiscus medial, el axón de una neurona primaria ingresa a la médula espinal y luego ingresa a la columna dorsal.

Aquí la columna dorsal se conecta con el axón de la célula nerviosa.

Si el axón primario entra por debajo del nivel espinal T6, el axón viaja en el fascículo gracilis, la parte medial de la columna.

Si el axón entra por encima del nivel T6, viaja en el fascículo cuneatus, que es lateral al fascículo gracilis.

De cualquier manera, el axón primario asciende a la parte inferior del bulbo raquídeo, donde deja su fascículo y hace sinapsis con una neurona secundaria en uno de los núcleos de la columna dorsal: ya sea el núcleo gracilis o el núcleo cuneatus, dependiendo de la vía que tomó.

En este punto, el axón secundario sale de su núcleo y pasa anterior y medialmente.

El conjunto de axones secundarios que hacen esto se conoce como fibras arqueadas internas.

Las fibras arqueadas internas se decusan y continúan ascendiendo como el lemnisco medial contralateral.

Los axones secundarios del lemnisco medial finalmente terminan en el núcleo posterolateral ventral (VPLN) del tálamo, donde hacen sinapsis con las neuronas terciarias. 

Desde allí, las neuronas terciarias ascienden por el brazo posterior de la cápsula interna y terminan en la corteza sensorial primaria.

La propiocepción de los miembros inferiores difiere de la de los miembros superiores y del tronco superior. 

Hay una vía de cuatro neuronas para la propiocepción de las extremidades inferiores. 

Esta vía sigue inicialmente la vía espinocerebelosa dorsal. 

Está dispuesto de la siguiente manera: 
 receptores propioceptivos del miembro inferior → proceso periférico → ganglio de la raíz dorsal → proceso central → columna de Clarke → neurona de segundo orden → bulbo raquídeo (núcleo caudado) → neurona de tercer orden → VPLN del tálamo → neurona de cuarto orden → rama posterior de la cápsula interna → corona radiada → área sensorial del cerebro.

El sistema anterolateral funciona de manera algo diferente.

Los axones de sus neuronas primarias ingresan a la médula espinal y luego ascienden uno o dos niveles antes de hacer sinapsis en la sustancia gelatinosa.

El tracto que asciende antes de la sinapsis se conoce como tracto de Lissauer.

Después de la sinapsis, los axones secundarios se decusan y ascienden en la porción lateral anterior de la médula espinal como el tracto espinotalámico.

Este tracto asciende hasta el VPLN, donde hace sinapsis con las neuronas terciarias.

Los axones neuronales terciarios luego viajan a la corteza sensorial primaria a través de la rama posterior de la cápsula interna.

Algunas de las "fibras del dolor" en la ALS se desvían de su camino hacia la VPLN.

En una de esas desviaciones, los axones viajan hacia la formación reticular en el mesencéfalo.

Luego, la formación reticular se proyecta a varios lugares, incluido el hipocampo (para crear recuerdos sobre el dolor), el núcleo centromediano (para causar un dolor difuso e inespecífico) y varias partes de la corteza.

Además, algunos axones de ALS se proyectan hacia la sustancia gris periacueductal en la protuberancia, y los axones que forman la sustancia gris periacueductal luego se proyectan hacia el núcleo del rafe mayor, que se proyecta de regreso hacia donde proviene la señal de dolor y la inhibe.

Esto ayuda a controlar la sensación de dolor hasta cierto punto.


=== Organización motora ===


El tracto corticoespinal sirve como vía motora para las señales neuronales motoras superiores que provienen de la corteza cerebral y de los núcleos motores primitivos del tronco encefálico.

Las neuronas motoras superiores corticales se originan en las áreas de Brodmann 1, 2, 3, 4 y 6 y luego descienden en el brazo posterior de la cápsula interna, a través de la crus cerebri, a través de la protuberancia y a las pirámides medulares, donde aproximadamente el 90% de los axones cruzan al lado contralateral en la decusación de las pirámides. 

Luego descienden como el tracto corticoespinal lateral. 

Estos axones hacen sinapsis con las neuronas motoras inferiores en los cuernos ventrales de todos los niveles de la médula espinal. 

El 10% restante de los axones desciende en el lado ipsilateral como el tracto corticoespinal ventral. 

Estos axones también hacen sinapsis con las neuronas motoras inferiores en los cuernos ventrales. 

La mayoría de ellos cruzarán al lado contralateral del cordón (a través de la comisura blanca anterior) justo antes de hacer sinapsis.

Los núcleos del mesencéfalo incluyen cuatro tractos motores que envían axones de las neuronas motoras superiores a lo largo de la médula espinal hasta las neuronas motoras inferiores.

Estos son el tracto rubroespinal, el tracto vestibuloespinal, el tracto tectoespinal y el tracto reticuloespinal.

El tracto rubroespinal desciende con el tracto corticoespinal lateral y los tres restantes descienden con el tracto corticoespinal anterior.

La función de las neuronas motoras inferiores se puede dividir en dos grupos diferentes: el tracto corticoespinal lateral y el tracto espinal cortical anterior.

El tracto lateral contiene axones de neuronas motoras superiores que hacen sinapsis con neuronas motoras inferiores dorsales laterales (DL).

Las neuronas DL están implicadas en el control de las extremidades distales.

Por lo tanto, estas neuronas DL se encuentran específicamente solo en los agrandamientos cervical y lumbosacro dentro de la médula espinal.

No hay decusación en el tracto corticoespinal lateral después de la decusación en las pirámides medulares.

El tracto corticoespinal anterior desciende ipsilateralmente en la columna anterior, donde emergen los axones y hacen sinapsis con las neuronas motoras ventromediales inferiores (VM) en el asta ventral ipsilateralmente o se descusan en la comisura blanca anterior donde hacen sinapsis con las neuronas motoras inferiores VM contralateralmente.

El tectoespinal, el vestibuloespinal y el reticuloespinal descienden ipsilateralmente en la columna anterior pero no hacen sinapsis a través de la comisura blanca anterior.

Más bien, solo hacen sinapsis en las neuronas motoras inferiores de VM ipsilateralmente.

Las neuronas motoras inferiores del VM controlan los grandes músculos posturales del esqueleto axial.

Estas neuronas motoras inferiores, a diferencia de las del DL, están ubicadas en el asta ventral a lo largo de toda la médula espinal.


=== Tractos espinocerebelosos ===

La información propioceptiva en el cuerpo viaja por la médula espinal a través de tres vías. 

Por debajo de L2, la información propioceptiva viaja por la médula espinal en el tracto espinocerebeloso ventral. 

También conocido como el tracto espinocerebeloso anterior, los receptores sensoriales toman la información y viajan a la médula espinal. 

Los cuerpos celulares de estas neuronas primarias se encuentran en los ganglios de la raíz dorsal. 

En la médula espinal, los axones hacen sinapsis y los axones neuronales secundarios se decusan y luego viajan hasta el pedúnculo cerebeloso superior donde se decusan nuevamente. 

Desde aquí, la información se lleva a los núcleos profundos del cerebelo, incluidos los núcleos fastigiales e interpuestos.

Desde los niveles de L2 a T1, la información propioceptiva ingresa a la médula espinal y asciende ipsilateralmente, donde hace sinapsis en el núcleo de Clarke. 

Los axones neuronales secundarios continúan ascendiendo ipsilateralmente y luego pasan al cerebelo a través del pedúnculo cerebeloso inferior.

Este tracto se conoce como el tracto espinocerebeloso dorsal.
Desde arriba de T1, los axones primarios propioceptivos ingresan a la médula espinal y ascienden ipsilateralmente hasta alcanzar el núcleo cuneiforme accesorio, donde hacen sinapsis.

Los axones secundarios pasan al cerebelo a través del pedúnculo cerebeloso inferior donde, nuevamente, estos axones hacen sinapsis en los núcleos profundos del cerebelo.

Este tracto se conoce como el tracto cuneocerebeloso.
La información motora viaja desde el cerebro por la médula espinal a través de los tractos descendentes de la médula espinal.

Los tractos descendentes involucran dos neuronas: la neurona motora superior (UMN) y la neurona motora inferior (LMN).

Una señal nerviosa viaja por la neurona motora superior hasta que hace sinapsis con la neurona motora inferior en la médula espinal.

Luego, la neurona motora inferior conduce la señal nerviosa a la raíz espinal donde las fibras nerviosas eferentes llevan la señal motora hacia el músculo objetivo. 

Los tractos descendentes están compuestos de sustancia blanca. 

Hay varios tractos descendentes que cumplen diferentes funciones. 

Los tractos corticoespinales (lateral y anterior) son responsables de los movimientos coordinados de las extremidades.


== Importancia clínica ==

Un trastorno congénito es la diastematomielia en la que parte de la médula espinal se divide generalmente al nivel de las vértebras lumbares superiores. 

A veces, la división puede ser a lo largo de la médula espinal.


=== Lesión ===


Las lesiones de la médula espinal pueden ser causadas por un traumatismo en la columna vertebral (estiramiento, hematomas, aplicación de presión, corte, laceración, etc.). 

Los huesos vertebrales o los discos intervertebrales pueden romperse, lo que hace que la médula espinal sea perforada por un fragmento afilado de hueso.

Por lo general, las víctimas de lesiones de la médula espinal sufrirán pérdida de sensibilidad en ciertas partes del cuerpo.

En los casos más leves, la víctima solo puede sufrir la pérdida de la función de la mano o el pie.

Las lesiones más graves pueden provocar paraplejía, tetraplejía (también conocida como cuadriplejía) o parálisis de todo el cuerpo debajo del sitio de la lesión en la médula espinal.

El daño a los axones de las neuronas motoras superiores en la médula espinal da como resultado un patrón característico de déficits ipsolaterales.

Estos incluyen hiperreflexia, hipertonía y debilidad muscular.

El daño de las neuronas motoras inferiores da como resultado su propio patrón característico de déficits.

En lugar de un lado completo de los déficits, existe un patrón relacionado con el miotoma afectado por el daño.

Además, las neuronas motoras inferiores se caracterizan por debilidad muscular, hipotonía, hiporreflexia y atrofia muscular.

El shock espinal y el shock neurogénico pueden ocurrir a partir de una lesión espinal. 

El shock espinal suele ser temporal, dura solo de 24 a 48 horas y es una ausencia temporal de las funciones sensoriales y motoras. 

El shock neurogénico dura semanas y puede conducir a una pérdida de tono muscular debido al desuso de los músculos debajo del sitio lesionado.

Las dos áreas de la médula espinal que se lesionan con mayor frecuencia son la columna cervical (C1-C7) y la columna lumbar (L1-L5). 

(La notación C1, C7, L1, L5 se refieren a la ubicación de una vértebra específica en la región cervical, torácica o lumbar de la columna). 

La lesión de la médula espinal también puede ser no traumática y estar causada por una enfermedad (mielitis transversa, poliomielitis, espina bífida, ataxia de Friedreich, tumor de la médula espinal, estenosis espinal, etc.). En los EE. lesiones en la médula espinal.


=== Tratamiento ===

Las lesiones medulares reales o sospechadas requieren inmovilización inmediata, incluida la de la cabeza. 

Se necesitarán exploraciones para evaluar la lesión. 

Un esteroide, la metilprednisolona, ​​puede ser de ayuda al igual que la fisioterapia y posiblemente los antioxidantes. 

Los tratamientos deben centrarse en limitar la muerte celular posterior a la lesión, promover la regeneración celular y reemplazar las células perdidas. 

La regeneración se facilita manteniendo la transmisión eléctrica en los elementos neurales.


=== Punción lumbar ===

La médula espinal termina a nivel de las vértebras L1-L2, mientras que el espacio subaracnoideo —el compartimento que contiene el líquido cefalorraquídeo— se extiende hasta el borde inferior de S2.

Las punciones lumbares en adultos se suelen realizar entre L3-L5 (nivel de cauda equina) para evitar daños en la médula espinal.

En el feto, la médula espinal se extiende por toda la longitud de la columna y retrocede a medida que el cuerpo crece.


=== Tumores ===

Los tumores espinales pueden ocurrir en la médula espinal y pueden estar dentro (intradurales) o fuera (extradurales) de la duramadre.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spinal_cord

;;;FR;;;



MOELLE ÉPINIÈRE


La moelle épinière est une structure tubulaire longue et mince composée de tissu nerveux, qui s'étend de la moelle allongée du tronc cérébral à la région lombaire de la colonne vertébrale. 

Il renferme le canal central de la moelle épinière, qui contient le liquide céphalo-rachidien. 

Le cerveau et la moelle épinière forment ensemble le système nerveux central (SNC). 

Chez l'homme, la moelle épinière commence au niveau de l'os occipital, traverse le foramen magnum et pénètre dans le canal rachidien au début des vertèbres cervicales.

La moelle épinière s'étend jusqu'entre les première et deuxième vertèbres lombaires, où elle se termine.

La colonne vertébrale osseuse enveloppante protège la moelle épinière relativement plus courte.

Il mesure environ 45 cm (18 po) de long chez les hommes adultes et environ 43 cm (17 po) de long chez les femmes adultes.

Le diamètre de la moelle épinière varie de 13 mm (1⁄2 po) dans les régions cervicale et lombaire à 6,4 mm (1⁄4 po) dans la région thoracique.

La moelle épinière fonctionne principalement dans la transmission des signaux nerveux du cortex moteur au corps, et des fibres afférentes des neurones sensoriels au cortex sensoriel.

C'est également un centre de coordination de nombreux réflexes et contient des arcs réflexes qui peuvent contrôler indépendamment les réflexes.

C'est également l'emplacement de groupes d'interneurones spinaux qui composent les circuits neuronaux appelés générateurs de motifs centraux.

Ces circuits sont chargés de contrôler les instructions motrices pour les mouvements rythmiques tels que la marche.


== Structure ==


La moelle épinière est la principale voie d'information reliant le cerveau et le système nerveux périphérique.

Beaucoup plus courte que sa colonne vertébrale protectrice, la moelle épinière humaine prend naissance dans le tronc cérébral, traverse le foramen magnum et se poursuit jusqu'au cône médullaire près de la deuxième vertèbre lombaire avant de se terminer par une extension fibreuse appelée filum terminale.

Il mesure environ 45 cm (18 po) de long chez les hommes et environ 43 cm (17 po) chez les femmes, de forme ovoïde, et est élargi dans les régions cervicale et lombaire. 

L'élargissement cervical, qui s'étend des vertèbres C5 aux vertèbres T1, est l'endroit d'où provient l'entrée sensorielle et où la sortie motrice va aux bras et au tronc. 

L'élargissement lombaire, situé entre L1 et S3, gère les entrées sensorielles et les sorties motrices provenant et allant vers les jambes.

La moelle épinière est continue avec la partie caudale de la moelle, allant de la base du crâne au corps de la première vertèbre lombaire. 

Il ne s'étend pas sur toute la longueur de la colonne vertébrale chez l'adulte. 

Il est composé de 31 segments à partir desquels se ramifient une paire de racines nerveuses sensorielles et une paire de racines nerveuses motrices. 

Les racines nerveuses fusionnent ensuite en paires bilatéralement symétriques de nerfs rachidiens. 

Le système nerveux périphérique est composé de ces racines vertébrales, de ces nerfs et de ces ganglions.

Les racines dorsales sont des fascicules afférents, recevant des informations sensorielles de la peau, des muscles et des organes viscéraux pour être relayées au cerveau. 

Les racines se terminent par des ganglions de la racine dorsale, qui sont composés des corps cellulaires des neurones correspondants. 

Les racines ventrales sont constituées de fibres efférentes issues des motoneurones dont les corps cellulaires se trouvent dans les cornes grises ventrales (ou antérieures) de la moelle épinière.

La moelle épinière (et le cerveau) sont protégés par trois couches de tissus ou membranes appelées méninges, qui entourent le canal. 

La dure-mère est la couche la plus externe et forme un revêtement protecteur résistant. 

Entre la dure-mère et l'os environnant des vertèbres se trouve un espace appelé espace épidural. 

L'espace épidural est rempli de tissu adipeux et contient un réseau de vaisseaux sanguins. 

L'arachnoïde, la couche protectrice médiane, doit son nom à son aspect ouvert, semblable à une toile d'araignée. 

L'espace entre l'arachnoïde et la pie-mère sous-jacente est appelé l'espace sous-arachnoïdien. 

L'espace sous-arachnoïdien contient du liquide céphalo-rachidien (LCR), qui peut être prélevé avec une ponction lombaire ou une procédure de « ponction lombaire ». 

La délicate pie-mère, la couche protectrice la plus interne, est étroitement associée à la surface de la moelle épinière. 

Le cordon est stabilisé dans la dure-mère par les ligaments denticulés de connexion, qui s'étendent de la pie-mère enveloppante latéralement entre les racines dorsale et ventrale. 

Le sac dural se termine au niveau vertébral de la deuxième vertèbre sacrée.

En coupe transversale, la région périphérique du cordon contient des faisceaux de substance blanche neuronale contenant des axones sensoriels et moteurs.

À l'intérieur de cette région périphérique se trouve la matière grise, qui contient les corps des cellules nerveuses disposés dans les trois colonnes grises qui donnent à la région sa forme de papillon.

Cette région centrale entoure le canal central, qui est une extension du quatrième ventricule et contient du liquide céphalo-rachidien.
La moelle épinière est elliptique en coupe transversale, étant comprimée dorsolatéralement.

Deux rainures proéminentes, ou sulci, courent sur sa longueur.

Le sillon médian postérieur est la rainure de la face dorsale et la fissure médiane antérieure est la rainure de la face ventrale.


=== Segments ===


La moelle épinière humaine est divisée en segments où se forment des paires de nerfs rachidiens (mixtes, sensitifs et moteurs).

Six à huit radicelles nerveuses motrices se ramifient à partir des sillons ventralatéraux droit et gauche de manière très ordonnée. 

Les radicelles nerveuses se combinent pour former des racines nerveuses. 

De même, des radicelles nerveuses sensorielles se forment à partir des sillons latéraux dorsaux droit et gauche et forment des racines nerveuses sensorielles. 

Les racines ventrales (motrices) et dorsales (sensorielles) se combinent pour former des nerfs rachidiens (mixtes; moteurs et sensitifs), un de chaque côté de la moelle épinière. 

Les nerfs rachidiens, à l'exception de C1 et C2, se forment à l'intérieur du foramen intervertébral (FIV). 

Ces radicelles forment la démarcation entre les systèmes nerveux central et périphérique.

La colonne grise, (comme trois régions de colonnes grises) au centre du cordon, a la forme d'un papillon et se compose de corps cellulaires d'interneurones, de motoneurones, de cellules de la névroglie et d'axones non myélinisés. 

Les colonnes grises antérieure et postérieure se présentent comme des projections de la matière grise et sont également connues sous le nom de cornes de la moelle épinière.

Ensemble, les colonnes grises et la commissure grise forment le "H gris".
La substance blanche est située à l'extérieur de la substance grise et est constituée presque totalement d'axones moteurs et sensoriels myélinisés.

Des "colonnes" de substance blanche transportent des informations vers le haut ou vers le bas de la moelle épinière.

La moelle épinière proprement dite se termine dans une région appelée cône médullaire, tandis que la pie-mère continue comme une extension appelée filum terminale, qui ancre la moelle épinière au coccyx.

La queue de cheval ("queue de cheval") est une collection de nerfs inférieurs au cône médullaire qui continuent à voyager à travers la colonne vertébrale jusqu'au coccyx.

La queue de cheval se forme parce que la moelle épinière cesse de croître en longueur vers l'âge de quatre ans, même si la colonne vertébrale continue de s'allonger jusqu'à l'âge adulte. 

Il en résulte des nerfs rachidiens sacrés originaires de la région lombaire supérieure. 

Pour cette raison, la moelle épinière n'occupe que les deux tiers du canal vertébral. 

La partie inférieure du canal vertébral est remplie de liquide céphalo-rachidien (LCR) et l'espace s'appelle la citerne lombaire.

Au sein du système nerveux central (SNC), les corps des cellules nerveuses sont généralement organisés en grappes fonctionnelles, appelées noyaux. 

Les axones du SNC sont regroupés en faisceaux.
Il y a 31 segments nerveux de la moelle épinière dans une moelle épinière humaine :

8 segments cervicaux formant 8 paires de nerfs cervicaux (les nerfs rachidiens C1 sortent de la colonne vertébrale entre le foramen magnum et la vertèbre C1 ; les nerfs C2 sortent entre l'arc postérieur de la vertèbre C1 et la lame de C2 ; les nerfs rachidiens C3-C8 traversent la FIV au-dessus de leurs vertèbres cervicales correspondantes, à l'exception de la paire C8 qui sort entre les vertèbres C7 et T1).

12 segments thoraciques formant 12 paires de nerfs thoraciques
5 segments lombaires formant 5 paires de nerfs lombaires
5 segments sacrés formant 5 paires de nerfs sacrés
1 segment coccygienChez le fœtus, les segments vertébraux correspondent aux segments de la moelle épinière. 

Cependant, comme la colonne vertébrale s'allonge plus que la moelle épinière, les segments de la moelle épinière ne correspondent pas aux segments vertébraux chez l'adulte, en particulier dans la partie inférieure de la moelle épinière. 

Par exemple, les segments de la moelle épinière lombaire et sacrée se trouvent entre les niveaux vertébraux T9 et L2, et la moelle épinière se termine autour du niveau vertébral L1/L2, formant une structure connue sous le nom de cône médullaire.

Bien que les corps cellulaires de la moelle épinière se terminent autour du niveau vertébral L1/L2, les nerfs spinaux de chaque segment sortent au niveau de la vertèbre correspondante. 

Pour les nerfs de la moelle épinière inférieure, cela signifie qu'ils sortent de la colonne vertébrale beaucoup plus bas (plus caudalement) que leurs racines. 

Au fur et à mesure que ces nerfs voyagent de leurs racines respectives à leur point de sortie de la colonne vertébrale, les nerfs des segments inférieurs de la colonne vertébrale forment un faisceau appelé queue de cheval.

Il y a deux régions où la moelle épinière grossit :

L'élargissement du col utérin - correspond à peu près aux nerfs du plexus brachial, qui innervent le membre supérieur. 

Il comprend des segments de la moelle épinière d'environ C4 à T1. 

Les niveaux vertébraux du renflement sont sensiblement les mêmes (C4 à T1).
L'élargissement lombaire - correspond aux nerfs du plexus lombo-sacré, qui innervent le membre inférieur. 

Il comprend les segments de la moelle épinière de L2 à S3 et se trouve sur les niveaux vertébraux de T9 à T12.


=== Développement ===


La moelle épinière est constituée d'une partie du tube neural au cours du développement. 

Il y a quatre étapes de la moelle épinière qui proviennent du tube neural : la plaque neurale, le pli neural, le tube neural et la moelle épinière. 

La différenciation neurale se produit dans la partie de la moelle épinière du tube. 

Lorsque le tube neural commence à se développer, la notochorde commence à sécréter un facteur connu sous le nom de Sonic hedgehog ou SHH. 

En conséquence, la plaque de sol commence alors également à sécréter SHH, ce qui incite la plaque basale à développer des motoneurones. 

Lors de la maturation du tube neural, ses parois latérales s'épaississent et forment un sillon longitudinal appelé sulcus limitans. 

Cela étend également la longueur de la moelle épinière dans les parties dorsale et ventrale. 

Pendant ce temps, l'ectoderme sus-jacent sécrète la protéine morphogénétique osseuse (BMP). 

Cela induit la plaque de toit à commencer à sécréter du BMP, ce qui incitera la plaque alaire à développer des neurones sensoriels. 

Des gradients opposés de morphogènes tels que BMP et SHH forment différents domaines de cellules en division le long de l'axe ventral dorsal. 

Les neurones du ganglion de la racine dorsale se différencient des progéniteurs de la crête neurale. 

Au fur et à mesure que les cellules des colonnes dorsale et ventrale prolifèrent, la lumière du tube neural se rétrécit pour former le petit canal central de la moelle épinière.

La plaque alaire et la plaque basale sont séparées par le sulcus limitans.
De plus, la plaque de sol sécrète également des nétrines.

Les nétrines agissent comme chimioattractants pour la décussation des neurones sensoriels de la douleur et de la température dans la plaque alaire à travers la commissure blanche antérieure, où ils montent ensuite vers le thalamus.

Suite à la fermeture du neuropore caudal et à la formation des ventricules cérébraux qui contiennent le tissu du plexus choroïde, le canal central de la moelle épinière caudale est rempli de liquide céphalo-rachidien.

Les découvertes antérieures de Viktor Hamburger et Rita Levi-Montalcini sur l'embryon de poulet ont été confirmées par des études plus récentes qui ont démontré que l'élimination des cellules neuronales par mort cellulaire programmée (PCD) est nécessaire au bon assemblage du système nerveux.

Dans l'ensemble, il a été démontré que l'activité embryonnaire spontanée joue un rôle dans le développement des neurones et des muscles, mais n'est probablement pas impliquée dans la formation initiale des connexions entre les neurones spinaux.


=== Approvisionnement en sang ===

La moelle épinière est alimentée en sang par trois artères qui parcourent sa longueur à partir du cerveau, et de nombreuses artères qui s'en approchent par les côtés de la colonne vertébrale.

Les trois artères longitudinales sont l'artère spinale antérieure et les artères spinales postérieures droite et gauche.

Ceux-ci voyagent dans l'espace sous-arachnoïdien et envoient des branches dans la moelle épinière. 

Ils forment des anastamoses (connexions) via les artères médullaires segmentaires antérieures et postérieures, qui pénètrent dans la moelle épinière en divers points sur sa longueur. 

Le flux sanguin réel caudalement à travers ces artères, dérivé de la circulation cérébrale postérieure, est insuffisant pour maintenir la moelle épinière au-delà des segments cervicaux.

La contribution majeure à l'apport sanguin artériel de la moelle épinière sous la région cervicale provient des artères radiculaires postérieures et antérieures disposées radialement, qui se jettent dans la moelle épinière le long des racines nerveuses dorsales et ventrales, mais à une exception près ne se connectent pas directement avec l'une des trois artères longitudinales. 

Ces artères radiculaires intercostales et lombaires proviennent de l'aorte, fournissent des anastomoses majeures et complètent le flux sanguin vers la moelle épinière. 

Chez l'homme, la plus grande des artères radiculaires antérieures est connue sous le nom d'artère d'Adamkiewicz, ou artère radiculaire antérieure magna (ARM), qui survient généralement entre L1 et L2, mais peut survenir n'importe où de T9 à L5. 

Une circulation sanguine altérée dans ces artères radiculaires critiques, en particulier lors d'interventions chirurgicales impliquant une interruption brutale du flux sanguin dans l'aorte, par exemple lors de la réparation d'un anévrisme aortique, peut entraîner un infarctus de la moelle épinière et une paraplégie.


== Fonction ==



=== Organisation somatosensorielle ===


Dans le tractus dorsal colonne-léminisque médial, l'axone d'un neurone primaire pénètre dans la moelle épinière, puis pénètre dans la colonne dorsale.

Ici, la colonne dorsale se connecte à l'axone de la cellule nerveuse.

Si l'axone primaire entre en dessous du niveau spinal T6, l'axone se déplace dans le fasciculus gracilis, la partie médiale de la colonne.

Si l'axone pénètre au-dessus du niveau T6, il se déplace dans le fasciculus cunéatus, qui est latéral au fasciculus gracilis.

Dans les deux cas, l'axone primaire monte vers la moelle inférieure, où il quitte son faisceau et synapse avec un neurone secondaire dans l'un des noyaux de la colonne dorsale : soit le noyau gracilis, soit le noyau cunéadien, selon la voie qu'il a empruntée.

À ce stade, l'axone secondaire quitte son noyau et passe en avant et en dedans.

La collection d'axones secondaires qui font cela est connue sous le nom de fibres arquées internes.

Les fibres arquées internes décussent et continuent à monter comme le lemnisque médial controlatéral.

Les axones secondaires du lemnisque médial se terminent finalement dans le noyau postéro-ventral (VPLN) du thalamus, où ils synapsent avec les neurones tertiaires.

De là, les neurones tertiaires montent via le membre postérieur de la capsule interne et se terminent dans le cortex sensoriel primaire.

La proprioception des membres inférieurs diffère de celle des membres supérieurs et de la partie supérieure du tronc.

Il existe une voie à quatre neurones pour la proprioception des membres inférieurs.

Cette voie suit initialement la voie spino-cérébelleuse dorsale.

Il est agencé comme suit :
récepteurs proprioceptifs du membre inférieur → processus périphérique → ganglion de la racine dorsale → processus central → colonne de Clarke → neurone de 2e ordre → medulla oblongata (noyau caudé) → neurone de 3e ordre → VPLN du thalamus → neurone de 4e ordre → membre postérieur de la capsule interne → corona radiata → aire sensorielle du cerveau.

Le système antérolatéral fonctionne un peu différemment.

Ses axones de neurones primaires pénètrent dans la moelle épinière, puis montent d'un à deux niveaux avant de se synapser dans la substantia gelatinosa.

Le tractus qui monte avant la synapse est connu sous le nom de tractus de Lissauer.

Après la synapse, les axones secondaires décussent et montent dans la partie latérale antérieure de la moelle épinière en tant que tractus spinothalamique.

Ce tractus monte jusqu'au VPLN, où il se synapse sur les neurones tertiaires.

Les axones neuronaux tertiaires voyagent ensuite vers le cortex sensoriel primaire via le membre postérieur de la capsule interne.

Certaines des «fibres douloureuses» de la SLA dévient de leur chemin vers le VPLN.

Dans une de ces déviations, les axones se déplacent vers la formation réticulaire du mésencéphale.

La formation réticulaire se projette ensuite vers un certain nombre d'endroits, notamment l'hippocampe (pour créer des souvenirs de la douleur), le noyau centromédian (pour provoquer une douleur diffuse et non spécifique) et diverses parties du cortex. 

De plus, certains axones de la SLA se projettent vers le gris périaqueducal dans le pont, et les axones formant le gris périaqueducal se projettent ensuite vers le noyau raphes magnus, qui se projette vers l'endroit d'où provient le signal de douleur et l'inhibe. 

Cela aide à contrôler la sensation de douleur dans une certaine mesure.


=== Organisation motrice ===


Le tractus corticospinal sert de voie motrice pour les signaux des neurones moteurs supérieurs provenant du cortex cérébral et des noyaux moteurs primitifs du tronc cérébral.

Les motoneurones corticaux supérieurs proviennent des zones de Brodmann 1, 2, 3, 4 et 6, puis descendent dans le membre postérieur de la capsule interne, à travers la crus cerebri, à travers le pont et jusqu'aux pyramides médullaires, où environ 90 % des axones se croisent du côté controlatéral lors de la décussation des pyramides. 

Ils descendent ensuite comme le tractus corticospinal latéral. 

Ces axones font synapse avec les neurones moteurs inférieurs dans les cornes ventrales de tous les niveaux de la moelle épinière. 

Les 10% restants des axones descendent du côté ipsilatéral en tant que tractus corticospinal ventral. 

Ces axones font également synapse avec les motoneurones inférieurs dans les cornes ventrales. 

La plupart d'entre eux traverseront le côté controlatéral du cordon (via la commissure blanche antérieure) juste avant la synapse.

Les noyaux du mésencéphale comprennent quatre voies motrices qui envoient les axones des motoneurones supérieurs dans la moelle épinière vers les motoneurones inférieurs.

Ce sont le tractus rubrospinal, le tractus vestibulospinal, le tractus tectospinal et le tractus réticulo-spinal.

Le tractus rubrospinal descend avec le tractus corticospinal latéral, et les trois autres descendent avec le tractus corticospinal antérieur.

La fonction des neurones moteurs inférieurs peut être divisée en deux groupes différents : le tractus corticospinal latéral et le tractus spinal cortical antérieur.

Le tractus latéral contient des axones des motoneurones supérieurs qui synapsent sur les motoneurones inférieurs latéraux dorsaux (DL).

Les neurones DL sont impliqués dans le contrôle du membre distal.

Par conséquent, ces neurones DL ne se trouvent spécifiquement que dans les élargissements cervicaux et lombo-sacrés de la moelle épinière.

Il n'y a pas de décussation dans le tractus corticospinal latéral après la décussation au niveau des pyramides médullaires.

Le tractus corticospinal antérieur descend ipsilatéralement dans la colonne antérieure, où les axones émergent et se synapsent sur les motoneurones ventromédiaux inférieurs (VM) de la corne ventrale ipsilatéralement ou décussent au niveau de la commissure blanche antérieure où ils se synapsent sur les motoneurones inférieurs VM controlatéralement. 

Le tectospinal, le vestibulospinal et le réticulospinal descendent ipsilatéralement dans la colonne antérieure mais ne font pas de synapse à travers la commissure blanche antérieure. 

Au contraire, ils synapsent uniquement sur les motoneurones inférieurs VM de manière ipsilatérale. 

Les motoneurones inférieurs VM contrôlent les grands muscles posturaux du squelette axial. 

Ces motoneurones inférieurs, contrairement à ceux du DL, sont situés dans la corne ventrale tout au long de la moelle épinière.


=== Voies spinocérébelleuses ===

Les informations proprioceptives dans le corps remontent la moelle épinière via trois voies.

En dessous de L2, les informations proprioceptives remontent la moelle épinière dans le tractus spinocérébelleux ventral.

Aussi connus sous le nom de tractus spinocérébelleux antérieur, les récepteurs sensoriels captent les informations et se déplacent dans la moelle épinière.

Les corps cellulaires de ces neurones primaires sont situés dans les ganglions de la racine dorsale.

Dans la moelle épinière, les axones se synapsent et les axones neuronaux secondaires décussent puis remontent jusqu'au pédoncule cérébelleux supérieur où ils décussent à nouveau.

De là, l'information est amenée aux noyaux profonds du cervelet incluant les noyaux fastigiaux et interposés.

Des niveaux L2 à T1, les informations proprioceptives pénètrent dans la moelle épinière et montent ipsilatéralement, où elles se synapsent dans le noyau de Clarke.

Les axones neuronaux secondaires continuent leur ascension homolatérale puis passent dans le cervelet via le pédoncule cérébelleux inférieur.

Ce tractus est connu sous le nom de tractus spinocérébelleux dorsal.
Au-dessus de T1, les axones primaires proprioceptifs pénètrent dans la moelle épinière et montent ipsilatéralement jusqu'à atteindre le noyau cunéiforme accessoire, où ils se synapsent.

Les axones secondaires passent dans le cervelet via le pédoncule cérébelleux inférieur où encore une fois, ces axones se synapsent sur les noyaux cérébelleux profonds.

Ce tractus est connu sous le nom de tractus cunéo-cérébelleux.
Les informations motrices voyagent du cerveau vers la moelle épinière via les voies descendantes de la moelle épinière.

Les voies descendantes impliquent deux neurones : le motoneurone supérieur (UMN) et le motoneurone inférieur (LMN).

Un signal nerveux parcourt le motoneurone supérieur jusqu'à ce qu'il se synapse avec le motoneurone inférieur de la moelle épinière.

Ensuite, le neurone moteur inférieur conduit le signal nerveux vers la racine vertébrale où les fibres nerveuses efférentes transportent le signal moteur vers le muscle cible. 

Les voies descendantes sont composées de matière blanche. 

Il existe plusieurs voies descendantes remplissant différentes fonctions. 

Les faisceaux corticospinaux (latéral et antérieur) sont responsables des mouvements coordonnés des membres.


== Signification clinique ==

Une maladie congénitale est la diastématomyélie dans laquelle une partie de la moelle épinière est fendue généralement au niveau des vertèbres lombaires supérieures. 

Parfois, la scission peut être le long de la moelle épinière.


=== Blessure ===


Les lésions de la moelle épinière peuvent être causées par un traumatisme de la colonne vertébrale (étirement, ecchymose, pression, coupure, lacération, etc.). 

Les os vertébraux ou les disques intervertébraux peuvent se briser, provoquant la perforation de la moelle épinière par un fragment d'os pointu.

Habituellement, les victimes de lésions de la moelle épinière souffrent d'une perte de sensation dans certaines parties de leur corps.

Dans les cas moins graves, une victime peut ne subir qu'une perte de fonction de la main ou du pied.

Des blessures plus graves peuvent entraîner une paraplégie, une tétraplégie (également appelée quadriplégie) ou une paralysie complète du corps sous le site de la lésion de la moelle épinière.

Les dommages aux axones des motoneurones supérieurs dans la moelle épinière entraînent un schéma caractéristique de déficits ipsilatéraux.

Ceux-ci comprennent l'hyperréflexie, l'hypertonie et la faiblesse musculaire.

Les dommages aux motoneurones inférieurs entraînent leur propre schéma caractéristique de déficits.

Plutôt qu'un côté entier des déficits, il existe un schéma relatif au myotome affecté par les dommages.

De plus, les neurones moteurs inférieurs sont caractérisés par une faiblesse musculaire, une hypotonie, une hyporéflexie et une atrophie musculaire.

Un choc spinal et un choc neurogène peuvent survenir à la suite d'une blessure à la colonne vertébrale. 

Le choc spinal est généralement temporaire, ne dure que 24 à 48 heures et correspond à une absence temporaire des fonctions sensorielles et motrices. 

Le choc neurogène dure des semaines et peut entraîner une perte de tonus musculaire due à une inutilisation des muscles sous le site lésé.

Les deux zones de la moelle épinière les plus fréquemment lésées sont le rachis cervical (C1-C7) et le rachis lombaire (L1-L5). 

(La notation C1, C7, L1, L5 fait référence à l'emplacement d'une vertèbre spécifique dans la région cervicale, thoracique ou lombaire de la colonne vertébrale.) 

Les lésions de la moelle épinière peuvent également être non traumatiques et causées par une maladie (myélite transverse, poliomyélite, spina bifida, ataxie de Friedreich, tumeur de la moelle épinière, sténose spinale, etc.) Aux États-Unis, 10 000 à 12 000 personnes sont paralysées chaque année à la suite de diverses blessures à la moelle épinière.


=== Traitement ===

Les lésions réelles ou suspectées de la moelle épinière nécessitent une immobilisation immédiate, y compris celle de la tête.

Des scanners seront nécessaires pour évaluer la blessure.

Un stéroïde, la méthylprednisolone, peut être utile, tout comme la physiothérapie et éventuellement les antioxydants.

Les traitements doivent se concentrer sur la limitation de la mort cellulaire post-lésionnelle, la promotion de la régénération cellulaire et le remplacement des cellules perdues.

La régénération est facilitée par le maintien de la transmission électrique dans les éléments neuronaux.


=== Ponction lombaire ===

La moelle épinière se termine au niveau des vertèbres L1-L2, tandis que l'espace sous-arachnoïdien - le compartiment qui contient le liquide céphalo-rachidien - s'étend jusqu'au bord inférieur de S2. 

Les ponctions lombaires chez les adultes sont généralement effectuées entre L3 et L5 (niveau de la queue de cheval) afin d'éviter d'endommager la moelle épinière. 

Chez le fœtus, la moelle épinière s'étend sur toute la longueur de la colonne vertébrale et régresse à mesure que le corps grandit.


=== Tumeurs ===

Les tumeurs vertébrales peuvent se produire dans la moelle épinière et elles peuvent être soit à l'intérieur (intradurale) ou à l'extérieur (extradurale) de la dure-mère.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spinal_cord

;;;PT;;;



MEDULA ESPINHAL


A medula espinhal é uma estrutura tubular longa e fina composta de tecido nervoso, que se estende desde a medula oblonga no tronco encefálico até a região lombar da coluna vertebral.

Ele envolve o canal central da medula espinhal, que contém o líquido cefalorraquidiano.

O cérebro e a medula espinhal juntos formam o sistema nervoso central (SNC).

Em humanos, a medula espinhal começa no osso occipital, passando pelo forame magno e entrando no canal espinhal no início das vértebras cervicais. 

A medula espinhal se estende até entre a primeira e a segunda vértebras lombares, onde termina. 

A coluna vertebral óssea envolvente protege a medula espinhal relativamente mais curta. 

Tem cerca de 45 cm (18 pol) de comprimento em homens adultos e cerca de 43 cm (17 pol) de comprimento em mulheres adultas. 

O diâmetro da medula espinhal varia de 13 mm (1⁄2 in) nas regiões cervical e lombar a 6,4 mm (1⁄4 in) na área torácica.

A medula espinhal funciona principalmente na transmissão de sinais nervosos do córtex motor para o corpo e das fibras aferentes dos neurônios sensoriais para o córtex sensorial. 

É também um centro para coordenar muitos reflexos e contém arcos reflexos que podem controlar os reflexos de forma independente.

É também a localização de grupos de interneurônios espinhais que compõem os circuitos neurais conhecidos como geradores de padrões centrais.

Esses circuitos são responsáveis ​​por controlar as instruções motoras para movimentos rítmicos, como caminhar.


== Estrutura ==


A medula espinhal é a principal via de informação que conecta o cérebro e o sistema nervoso periférico.

Muito mais curta do que sua coluna vertebral protetora, a medula espinhal humana se origina no tronco encefálico, passa pelo forame magno e continua até o cone medular próximo à segunda vértebra lombar antes de terminar em uma extensão fibrosa conhecida como filum terminale.

Tem cerca de 45 cm (18 pol) de comprimento nos homens e cerca de 43 cm (17 pol) nas mulheres, tem formato ovóide e é aumentado nas regiões cervical e lombar. 

O alargamento cervical, estendendo-se das vértebras C5 a T1, é de onde vem a entrada sensorial e a saída motora vai para os braços e tronco. 

A ampliação lombar, localizada entre L1 e S3, lida com a entrada sensorial e a saída motora que vem e vai para as pernas.

A medula espinhal é contínua com a porção caudal da medula, indo da base do crânio ao corpo da primeira vértebra lombar. 

Não percorre todo o comprimento da coluna vertebral em adultos. 

É formado por 31 segmentos dos quais se ramificam um par de raízes nervosas sensoriais e um par de raízes nervosas motoras. 

As raízes nervosas então se fundem em pares bilateralmente simétricos de nervos espinhais. 

O sistema nervoso periférico é composto por essas raízes espinhais, nervos e gânglios.

As raízes dorsais são fascículos aferentes, recebendo informações sensoriais da pele, músculos e órgãos viscerais para serem retransmitidas ao cérebro. 

As raízes terminam nos gânglios da raiz dorsal, que são compostos pelos corpos celulares dos neurônios correspondentes. 

As raízes ventrais consistem em fibras eferentes que se originam de neurônios motores cujos corpos celulares são encontrados nos cornos cinzentos ventrais (ou anteriores) da medula espinhal.

A medula espinhal (e o cérebro) são protegidos por três camadas de tecido ou membranas chamadas meninges, que circundam o canal. 

A dura-máter é a camada mais externa e forma um revestimento protetor resistente. 

Entre a dura-máter e o osso circundante das vértebras existe um espaço chamado espaço epidural. 

O espaço epidural é preenchido com tecido adiposo e contém uma rede de vasos sanguíneos. 

A aracnóide, a camada protetora intermediária, é assim chamada por sua aparência aberta, semelhante a uma teia de aranha. 

O espaço entre a aracnóide e a pia-máter subjacente é chamado de espaço subaracnóideo. 

O espaço subaracnóideo contém líquido cefalorraquidiano (LCR), que pode ser amostrado com uma punção lombar ou procedimento de "punção espinhal". 

A delicada pia-máter, a camada protetora mais interna, está intimamente associada à superfície da medula espinhal. 

O cordão é estabilizado dentro da dura-máter pelos ligamentos denticulados de conexão, que se estendem da pia-máter envolvente lateralmente entre as raízes dorsal e ventral. 

O saco dural termina no nível vertebral da segunda vértebra sacral.

Em corte transversal, a região periférica da medula contém tratos neuronais de substância branca contendo axônios sensoriais e motores.

Internamente a essa região periférica está a substância cinzenta, que contém os corpos das células nervosas dispostos nas três colunas cinzentas que dão à região sua forma de borboleta.

Essa região central circunda o canal central, que é uma extensão do quarto ventrículo e contém o líquido cefalorraquidiano.
A medula espinhal é elíptica em corte transversal, sendo comprimida dorsolateralmente.

Dois sulcos proeminentes, ou sulcos, correm ao longo de seu comprimento.

O sulco mediano posterior é o sulco no lado dorsal, e a fissura mediana anterior é o sulco no lado ventral.


=== Segmentos ===


A medula espinhal humana é dividida em segmentos onde se formam pares de nervos espinhais (misto; sensorial e motor).

Seis a oito radículas nervosas motoras se ramificam dos sulcos ventralaterais direito e esquerdo de maneira muito ordenada. 

As radículas nervosas se combinam para formar raízes nervosas. 

Da mesma forma, radículas nervosas sensoriais se formam a partir dos sulcos laterais dorsais direito e esquerdo e formam raízes nervosas sensoriais. 

As raízes ventrais (motoras) e dorsais (sensoriais) se combinam para formar os nervos espinhais (misto; motor e sensorial), um de cada lado da medula espinhal. 

Os nervos espinhais, com exceção de C1 e C2, formam-se dentro do forame intervertebral (FIV). 

Essas radículas formam a demarcação entre o sistema nervoso central e periférico.

A coluna cinzenta, (como três regiões de colunas cinzentas) no centro da medula, tem a forma de uma borboleta e consiste em corpos celulares de interneurônios, neurônios motores, células da neuroglia e axônios não mielinizados. 

A coluna cinzenta anterior e posterior apresentam-se como projeções da substância cinzenta e também são conhecidas como cornos da medula espinhal.

Juntas, as colunas cinzentas e a comissura cinzenta formam o "H cinzento."
A substância branca está localizada fora da substância cinzenta e consiste quase totalmente em axônios motores e sensoriais mielinizados.

"Colunas" de substância branca carregam informações para cima ou para baixo na medula espinhal.

A medula espinhal propriamente dita termina em uma região chamada cone medular, enquanto a pia-máter continua como uma extensão chamada filum terminale, que ancora a medula espinhal ao cóccix.

A cauda equina ("rabo de cavalo") é uma coleção de nervos inferiores ao cone medular que continuam a viajar através da coluna vertebral até o cóccix.

A cauda equina se forma porque a medula espinhal para de crescer em comprimento por volta dos quatro anos de idade, embora a coluna vertebral continue a se alongar até a idade adulta. 

Isso resulta em nervos espinhais sacrais originados na região lombar superior. 

Por essa razão, a medula espinhal ocupa apenas dois terços do canal vertebral. 

A parte inferior do canal vertebral é preenchida com líquido cefalorraquidiano (LCR) e o espaço é chamado de cisterna lombar.

Dentro do Sistema Nervoso Central (SNC), os corpos das células nervosas são geralmente organizados em grupos funcionais, chamados núcleos. 

Os axônios dentro do SNC são agrupados em tratos.
Existem 31 segmentos nervosos da medula espinhal em uma medula espinhal humana:

8 segmentos cervicais formando 8 pares de nervos cervicais (os nervos espinhais C1 saem da coluna vertebral entre o forame magno e a vértebra C1; os nervos C2 saem entre o arco posterior da vértebra C1 e a lâmina de C2; ​​os nervos espinhais C3-C8 passam através a FIV acima de suas vértebras cervicais correspondentes, com exceção do par C8 que sai entre as vértebras C7 e T1).

12 segmentos torácicos formando 12 pares de nervos torácicos
5 segmentos lombares formando 5 pares de nervos lombares
5 segmentos sacrais formando 5 pares de nervos sacrais
1 segmento coccígeoNo feto, os segmentos vertebrais correspondem aos segmentos da medula espinhal.

No entanto, como a coluna vertebral cresce mais do que a medula espinhal, os segmentos da medula espinhal não correspondem aos segmentos vertebrais no adulto, particularmente na medula espinhal inferior.

Por exemplo, segmentos da medula espinhal lombar e sacral são encontrados entre os níveis vertebrais T9 e L2, e a medula espinhal termina ao redor do nível vertebral L1/L2, formando uma estrutura conhecida como cone medular.

Embora os corpos celulares da medula espinhal terminem em torno do nível vertebral L1/L2, os nervos espinhais para cada segmento saem no nível da vértebra correspondente.

Para os nervos da medula espinhal inferior, isso significa que eles saem da coluna vertebral muito mais baixo (mais caudalmente) do que suas raízes.

À medida que esses nervos viajam de suas respectivas raízes até o ponto de saída da coluna vertebral, os nervos dos segmentos espinhais inferiores formam um feixe chamado cauda equina.

Existem duas regiões onde a medula espinhal aumenta:

Aumento cervical – corresponde aproximadamente aos nervos do plexo braquial, que inervam o membro superior.

Inclui segmentos da medula espinhal de cerca de C4 a T1.

Os níveis vertebrais do aumento são aproximadamente os mesmos (C4 a T1).
Aumento lombar – corresponde aos nervos do plexo lombossacral, que inervam o membro inferior.

Compreende os segmentos da medula espinhal de L2 a S3 e é encontrado nos níveis vertebrais de T9 a T12.


=== Desenvolvimento ===


A medula espinhal é feita de parte do tubo neural durante o desenvolvimento.

Existem quatro estágios da medula espinhal que se originam do tubo neural: a placa neural, a prega neural, o tubo neural e a medula espinhal.

A diferenciação neural ocorre dentro da porção da medula espinhal do tubo.

À medida que o tubo neural começa a se desenvolver, a notocorda começa a secretar um fator conhecido como Sonic hedgehog ou SHH.

Como resultado, a placa do assoalho também começa a secretar SHH, e isso induzirá a placa basal a desenvolver neurônios motores. 

Durante a maturação do tubo neural, suas paredes laterais engrossam e formam um sulco longitudinal denominado sulco limitante. 

Isso estende o comprimento da medula espinhal nas porções dorsal e ventral também. 

Enquanto isso, o ectoderma sobrejacente secreta proteína morfogenética óssea (BMP). 

Isso induz a placa do teto a começar a secretar BMP, que induzirá a placa alar a desenvolver neurônios sensoriais. 

Gradientes opostos de morfogênios como BMP e SHH formam diferentes domínios de células em divisão ao longo do eixo dorsal ventral. 

Os neurônios do gânglio da raiz dorsal diferenciam-se dos progenitores da crista neural. 

À medida que as células da coluna dorsal e ventral proliferam, o lúmen do tubo neural se estreita para formar o pequeno canal central da medula espinhal. 

A placa alar e a placa basal são separadas pelo sulco limitante. 
Além disso, a placa de piso também secreta netrinas. 

As netrinas agem como quimioatraentes para a decussação dos neurônios sensoriais de dor e temperatura na placa alar através da comissura branca anterior, onde então ascendem em direção ao tálamo. 

Após o fechamento do neuróporo caudal e a formação dos ventrículos do cérebro que contêm o tecido do plexo coróide, o canal central da medula espinhal caudal é preenchido com líquido cefalorraquidiano.

Descobertas anteriores de Viktor Hamburger e Rita Levi-Montalcini no embrião de galinha foram confirmadas por estudos mais recentes que demonstraram que a eliminação de células neuronais por morte celular programada (PCD) é necessária para a montagem correta do sistema nervoso.

Em geral, a atividade embrionária espontânea demonstrou desempenhar um papel no desenvolvimento de neurônios e músculos, mas provavelmente não está envolvida na formação inicial de conexões entre neurônios espinhais.


=== Suprimento sanguíneo ===

A medula espinhal é suprida com sangue por três artérias que correm ao longo de seu comprimento, começando no cérebro, e muitas artérias que se aproximam dela pelas laterais da coluna vertebral.

As três artérias longitudinais são a artéria espinhal anterior e as artérias espinhais posteriores direita e esquerda.

Estes viajam no espaço subaracnóideo e enviam ramos para a medula espinhal.

Eles formam anastamoses (conexões) através das artérias medulares segmentares anterior e posterior, que entram na medula espinhal em vários pontos ao longo de seu comprimento.

O fluxo sanguíneo real caudalmente através dessas artérias, derivado da circulação cerebral posterior, é inadequado para manter a medula espinhal além dos segmentos cervicais.

A maior contribuição para o suprimento sanguíneo arterial da medula espinhal abaixo da região cervical vem das artérias radiculares anteriores e posteriores dispostas radialmente, que correm para a medula espinhal ao longo das raízes nervosas dorsais e ventrais, mas com uma exceção não se conectam diretamente com a medula espinhal. qualquer uma das três artérias longitudinais.

Essas artérias radiculares intercostais e lombares originam-se da aorta, fornecem grandes anastomoses e complementam o fluxo sanguíneo para a medula espinhal. 

Em humanos, a maior das artérias radiculares anteriores é conhecida como artéria de Adamkiewicz, ou artéria radicular anterior magna (ARM), que geralmente surge entre L1 e L2, mas pode surgir em qualquer lugar de T9 a L5. 

O fluxo sanguíneo prejudicado através dessas artérias radiculares críticas, especialmente durante procedimentos cirúrgicos que envolvem interrupção abrupta do fluxo sanguíneo através da aorta, por exemplo, durante o reparo de aneurisma da aorta, pode resultar em infarto da medula espinhal e paraplegia.


== Função ==



=== Organização somatossensorial ===


Na coluna dorsal-trato medial do leminisco, o axônio de um neurônio primário entra na medula espinhal e depois entra na coluna dorsal.

Aqui a coluna dorsal se conecta ao axônio da célula nervosa.

Se o axônio primário entra abaixo do nível espinhal T6, o axônio viaja no fascículo grácil, a parte medial da coluna.

Se o axônio entra acima do nível T6, então ele viaja no fascículo cuneatus, que é lateral ao fascículo grácil.

De qualquer forma, o axônio primário ascende para a medula inferior, onde deixa seu fascículo e faz sinapse com um neurônio secundário em um dos núcleos da coluna dorsal: o núcleo grácil ou o núcleo cuneatus, dependendo do caminho que tomou.

Nesse ponto, o axônio secundário deixa seu núcleo e passa anterior e medialmente.

A coleção de axônios secundários que fazem isso são conhecidas como fibras arqueadas internas.

As fibras arqueadas internas decussam e continuam ascendendo como o lemnisco medial contralateral.

Os axônios secundários do lemnisco medial finalmente terminam no núcleo posterolateral ventral (VPLN) do tálamo, onde fazem sinapse com os neurônios terciários.

A partir daí, os neurônios terciários ascendem pelo ramo posterior da cápsula interna e terminam no córtex sensorial primário.

A propriocepção dos membros inferiores difere dos membros superiores e tronco superior.

Existe uma via de quatro neurônios para a propriocepção dos membros inferiores.

Esta via segue inicialmente a via espinocerebelar dorsal.

Está organizado da seguinte forma:
receptores proprioceptivos do membro inferior → processo periférico → gânglio da raiz dorsal → processo central → coluna de Clarke → neurônio de 2ª ordem → medula oblonga (núcleo caudado) → neurônio de 3ª ordem → NPLN do tálamo → neurônio de 4ª ordem → membro posterior da cápsula interna → corona radiata → área sensorial do cérebro.

O sistema anterolateral funciona de maneira um pouco diferente.

Seus axônios de neurônios primários entram na medula espinhal e então ascendem de um a dois níveis antes de fazer sinapse na substância gelatinosa.

O trato que ascende antes da sinapse é conhecido como trato de Lissauer.

Após a sinapse, os axônios secundários decussam e ascendem na porção ântero-lateral da medula espinhal como trato espinotalâmico.

Este trato ascende até o VPLN, onde faz sinapses com neurônios terciários.

Os axônios neuronais terciários então viajam para o córtex sensorial primário através do ramo posterior da cápsula interna.

Algumas das "fibras de dor" na ELA se desviam de seu caminho em direção ao VPLN.

Em um desses desvios, os axônios viajam em direção à formação reticular no mesencéfalo.

A formação reticular então se projeta para vários lugares, incluindo o hipocampo (para criar memórias sobre a dor), o núcleo centromediano (para causar dor difusa e inespecífica) e várias partes do córtex.

Além disso, alguns axônios da ELA se projetam para a substância cinzenta periaquedutal na ponte, e os axônios que formam a substância cinzenta periaquedutal projetam-se para o núcleo magno da rafe, que se projeta de volta para onde o sinal de dor está vindo e o inibe.

Isso ajuda a controlar a sensação de dor até certo ponto.


=== Organização motora ===


O trato corticoespinhal serve como via motora para sinais neuronais motores superiores provenientes do córtex cerebral e de núcleos motores primitivos do tronco cerebral.

Neurônios motores superiores corticais originam-se das áreas 1, 2, 3, 4 e 6 de Brodmann e então descem no ramo posterior da cápsula interna, através do crus cerebri, descendo pela ponte e até as pirâmides medulares, onde cerca de 90% dos axônios cruzam para o lado contralateral na decussação das pirâmides.

Eles então descem como o trato corticoespinal lateral.

Esses axônios fazem sinapse com neurônios motores inferiores nos cornos ventrais de todos os níveis da medula espinhal.

Os 10% restantes de axônios descem no lado ipsilateral como trato corticoespinhal ventral.

Esses axônios também fazem sinapse com neurônios motores inferiores nos cornos ventrais.

A maioria deles cruzará para o lado contralateral da medula (através da comissura branca anterior) logo antes da sinapse.

Os núcleos do mesencéfalo incluem quatro tratos motores que enviam axônios dos neurônios motores superiores pela medula espinhal para os neurônios motores inferiores. 

Estes são o trato rubroespinhal, o trato vestibuloespinhal, o trato tectospinal e o trato reticuloespinhal. 

O trato rubroespinhal desce com o trato corticoespinhal lateral e os três restantes descem com o trato corticoespinhal anterior.

A função dos neurônios motores inferiores pode ser dividida em dois grupos diferentes: o trato corticoespinhal lateral e o trato espinal cortical anterior. 

O trato lateral contém axônios dos neurônios motores superiores que fazem sinapse nos neurônios motores inferiores dorsais laterais (DL). 

Os neurônios DL estão envolvidos no controle distal do membro. 

Portanto, esses neurônios DL são encontrados especificamente apenas nas dilatações cervicais e lombossacrais dentro da medula espinhal. 

Não há decussação no trato corticoespinhal lateral após a decussação nas pirâmides medulares.

O trato corticoespinhal anterior desce ipsilateralmente na coluna anterior, onde os axônios emergem e fazem sinapse nos neurônios motores ventromediais inferiores (VM) no corno ventral ipsilateralmente ou descussam na comissura branca anterior, onde fazem sinapse nos neurônios motores inferiores do VM contralateralmente.

O tectospinal, vestibulospinal e reticulospinal descem ipsilateralmente na coluna anterior, mas não fazem sinapse através da comissura branca anterior.

Em vez disso, eles apenas fazem sinapse nos neurônios motores inferiores da VM ipsilateralmente.

Os neurônios motores inferiores VM controlam os grandes músculos posturais do esqueleto axial.

Esses neurônios motores inferiores, ao contrário dos do DL, estão localizados no corno ventral por toda a medula espinhal.


=== Tratos espinocerebelares ===

As informações proprioceptivas no corpo percorrem a medula espinhal através de três faixas.

Abaixo de L2, a informação proprioceptiva percorre a medula espinhal no trato espinocerebelar ventral.

Também conhecido como trato espinocerebelar anterior, os receptores sensoriais recebem as informações e viajam para a medula espinhal.

Os corpos celulares desses neurônios primários estão localizados nos gânglios da raiz dorsal.

Na medula espinhal, os axônios fazem sinapse e os axônios neuronais secundários decussam e então viajam até o pedúnculo cerebelar superior, onde decussam novamente.

A partir daqui, a informação é trazida para os núcleos profundos do cerebelo, incluindo os núcleos fastigial e interposto.

Dos níveis de L2 a T1, a informação proprioceptiva entra na medula espinhal e ascende ipsilateralmente, onde faz sinapse no núcleo de Clarke.

Os axônios neuronais secundários continuam a ascender ipsilateralmente e então passam para o cerebelo através do pedúnculo cerebelar inferior.

Este trato é conhecido como trato espinocerebelar dorsal.
Acima de T1, os axônios primários proprioceptivos entram na medula espinhal e ascendem ipsilateralmente até alcançar o núcleo cuneiforme acessório, onde fazem sinapse.

Os axônios secundários passam para o cerebelo através do pedúnculo cerebelar inferior, onde, novamente, esses axônios fazem sinapse nos núcleos profundos do cerebelo.

Este trato é conhecido como trato cuneocerebelar.
A informação motora viaja do cérebro para a medula espinhal através dos tratos descendentes da medula espinhal.

Os tratos descendentes envolvem dois neurônios: o neurônio motor superior (UMN) e o neurônio motor inferior (LMN).

Um sinal nervoso percorre o neurônio motor superior até fazer sinapse com o neurônio motor inferior na medula espinhal.

Em seguida, o neurônio motor inferior conduz o sinal nervoso para a raiz espinhal, onde as fibras nervosas eferentes carregam o sinal motor em direção ao músculo alvo. 

Os tratos descendentes são compostos de substância branca. 

Existem vários tratos descendentes servindo a diferentes funções. 

Os tratos corticospinais (lateral e anterior) são responsáveis ​​pelos movimentos coordenados dos membros.


== Significado clínico ==

Um distúrbio congênito é a diastematomielia na qual parte da medula espinhal é dividida geralmente no nível das vértebras lombares superiores. 

Às vezes, a divisão pode ser ao longo do comprimento da medula espinhal.


=== Lesão ===


As lesões da medula espinhal podem ser causadas por trauma na coluna vertebral (alongamento, contusão, aplicação de pressão, corte, laceração, etc.). 

Os ossos vertebrais ou discos intervertebrais podem quebrar, fazendo com que a medula espinhal seja perfurada por um fragmento afiado de osso. 

Normalmente, as vítimas de lesões na medula espinhal sofrem perda de sensibilidade em certas partes do corpo. 

Em casos mais leves, a vítima pode sofrer apenas a perda da função da mão ou do pé. 

Lesões mais graves podem resultar em paraplegia, tetraplegia (também conhecida como tetraplegia) ou paralisia de corpo inteiro abaixo do local da lesão na medula espinhal.

Danos aos axônios do neurônio motor superior na medula espinhal resultam em um padrão característico de déficits ipsilaterais. 

Estes incluem hiperreflexia, hipertonia e fraqueza muscular. 

O dano neuronal motor inferior resulta em seu próprio padrão característico de déficits. 

Em vez de um lado inteiro dos déficits, há um padrão relacionado ao miótomo afetado pelo dano. 

Além disso, os neurônios motores inferiores são caracterizados por fraqueza muscular, hipotonia, hiporreflexia e atrofia muscular.

Choque espinhal e choque neurogênico podem ocorrer a partir de uma lesão espinhal.

O choque espinhal geralmente é temporário, durando apenas 24 a 48 horas, e é uma ausência temporária das funções sensoriais e motoras.

O choque neurogênico dura semanas e pode levar à perda do tônus ​​muscular devido ao desuso dos músculos abaixo do local lesionado.

As duas áreas da medula espinhal mais comumente lesionadas são a coluna cervical (C1-C7) e a coluna lombar (L1-L5).

(As notações C1, C7, L1, L5 referem-se à localização de uma vértebra específica na região cervical, torácica ou lombar da coluna.)

A lesão da medula espinhal também pode ser não traumática e causada por doenças (mielite transversa, poliomielite, espinha bífida, ataxia de Friedreich, tumor da medula espinhal, estenose espinhal etc.) Nos EUA, 10.000–12.000 pessoas ficam paralisadas anualmente como resultado de vários lesões na medula espinhal.


=== Tratamento ===

Lesões reais ou suspeitas da medula espinhal precisam de imobilização imediata, incluindo a da cabeça. 

Exames serão necessários para avaliar a lesão. 

Um esteróide, metilprednisolona, ​​pode ser útil, assim como fisioterapia e possivelmente antioxidantes. 

Os tratamentos precisam se concentrar em limitar a morte celular pós-lesão, promover a regeneração celular e substituir as células perdidas. 

A regeneração é facilitada pela manutenção da transmissão elétrica nos elementos neurais.


=== Punção lombar ===

A medula espinhal termina no nível das vértebras L1-L2, enquanto o espaço subaracnóideo – o compartimento que contém o líquido cefalorraquidiano – se estende até a borda inferior de S2.

As punções lombares em adultos geralmente são realizadas entre L3-L5 (nível da cauda equina) para evitar danos à medula espinhal.

No feto, a medula espinhal se estende por todo o comprimento da coluna e regride à medida que o corpo cresce.


=== Tumores ===

Os tumores espinhais podem ocorrer na medula espinhal e podem estar dentro (intradural) ou fora (extradural) da dura-máter.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spinal_cord
