

SUPRARENAL GLAND/ADRENAL GLAND


The suprarenal glands (also known as adrenal glands) are endocrine glands that produce a variety of hormones including suprarenaline and the steroids aldosterone and cortisol. 

They are found above the kidneys. 

Each gland has an outer cortex which produces steroid hormones and an inner medulla. 

The suprarenal cortex itself is divided into three main zones: the zona glomerulosa, the zona fasciculata and the zona reticularis.

The suprarenal cortex produces three main types of steroid hormones: mineralocorticoids, glucocorticoids, and androgens. 

Mineralocorticoids (such as aldosterone) produced in the zona glomerulosa help in the regulation of blood pressure and electrolyte balance. 

The glucocorticoids cortisol and cortisone are synthesized in the zona fasciculata; their functions include the regulation of metabolism and immune system suppression. 

The innermost layer of the cortex, the zona reticularis, produces androgens that are converted to fully functional sex hormones in the gonads and other target organs. 

The production of steroid hormones is called steroidogenesis, and involves a number of reactions and processes that take place in cortical cells. 

The medulla produces the catecholamines, which function to produce a rapid response throughout the body in stress situations.

A number of endocrine diseases involve dysfunctions of the suprarenal gland. 

Overproduction of cortisol leads to Cushing's syndrome, whereas insufficient production is associated with Addison's disease. 

Congenital suprarenal hyperplasia is a genetic disease produced by dysregulation of endocrine control mechanisms. 

A variety of tumors can arise from suprarenal tissue and are commonly found in medical imaging when searching for other diseases.


== Structure ==


The suprarenal glands are located on both sides of the body in the retroperitoneum, above and slightly medial to the kidneys. 

In humans, the right suprarenal gland is pyramidal in shape, whereas the left is semilunar or crescent shaped and somewhat larger. 

The suprarenal glands measure approximately 3 cm in width, 5.0 cm in length, and up to 1.0 cm in thickness. 

Their combined weight in an adult human ranges from 7 to 10 grams. 

The glands are yellowish in colour.

The suprarenal glands are surrounded by a fatty capsule and lie within the renal fascia, which also surrounds the kidneys. 

A weak septum (wall) of connective tissue separates the glands from the kidneys. 

The suprarenal glands are directly below the diaphragm, and are attached to the crura of the diaphragm by the renal fascia.

Each suprarenal gland has two distinct parts, each with a unique function, the outer suprarenal cortex and the inner medulla, both of which produce hormones.


=== suprarenal cortex ===


The suprarenal cortex is the outer region and also the largest part of an suprarenal gland. 

It is divided into three separate zones: zona glomerulosa, zona fasciculata and zona reticularis. 

Each zone is responsible for producing specific hormones.
The suprarenal cortex is the outermost layer of the suprarenal gland. 

Within the cortex are three layers, called "zones". 

When viewed under a microscope each layer has a distinct appearance, and each has a different function. 

The suprarenal cortex is devoted to production of hormones, namely aldosterone, cortisol, and androgens.


==== Zona glomerulosa ====
The outermost zone of the suprarenal cortex is the zona glomerulosa. 

It lies immediately under the fibrous capsule of the gland. 

Cells in this layer form oval groups, separated by thin strands of connective tissue from the fibrous capsule of the gland and carry wide capillaries.

This layer is the main site for production of aldosterone, a mineralocorticoid, by the action of the enzyme aldosterone synthase. 

Aldosterone plays an important role in the long-term regulation of blood pressure.


==== Zona fasciculata ====
The zona fasciculata is situated between the zona glomerulosa and zona reticularis. 

Cells in this layer are responsible for producing glucocorticoids such as cortisol. 

It is the largest of the three layers, accounting for nearly 80% of the volume of the cortex. 

In the zona fasciculata, cells are arranged in columns radially oriented towards the medulla. 

Cells contain numerous lipid droplets, abundant mitochondria and a complex smooth endoplasmic reticulum.


==== Zona reticularis ====
The innermost cortical layer, the zona reticularis, lies directly adjacent to the medulla. 

It produces androgens, mainly dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA), DHEA sulfate (DHEA-S), and androstenedione (the precursor to testosterone) in humans. 

Its small cells form irregular cords and clusters, separated by capillaries and connective tissue. 

The cells contain relatively small quantities of cytoplasm and lipid droplets, and sometimes display brown lipofuscin pigment.


=== Medulla ===


The suprarenal medulla is at the centre of each suprarenal gland, and is surrounded by the suprarenal cortex. 

The chromaffin cells of the medulla are the body's main source of the catecholamines, such as suprarenaline and norsuprarenaline, released by the medulla. 

Approximately 20% norsuprarenaline (norepinephrine) and 80% suprarenaline (epinephrine) are secreted here.

The suprarenal medulla is driven by the sympathetic nervous system via preganglionic fibers originating in the thoracic spinal cord, from vertebrae T5–T11. 

Because it is innervated by preganglionic nerve fibers, the suprarenal medulla can be considered as a specialized sympathetic ganglion. 

Unlike other sympathetic ganglia, however, the suprarenal medulla lacks distinct synapses and releases its secretions directly into the blood.


=== Blood supply ===

The suprarenal glands have one of the greatest blood supply rates per gram of tissue of any organ: up to 60 small arteries may enter each gland. 

Three arteries usually supply each suprarenal gland:
The superior suprarenal artery, a branch of the inferior phrenic artery
-The middle suprarenal artery, a direct branch of the abdominal aorta
-The inferior suprarenal artery, a branch of the renal arteryThese blood vessels supply a network of small arteries within the capsule of the suprarenal glands. 

Thin strands of the capsule enter the glands, carrying blood to them.

Venous blood is drained from the glands by the suprarenal veins, usually one for each gland:
-The right suprarenal vein drains into the inferior vena cava
-The left suprarenal vein drains into the left renal vein or the left inferior phrenic vein.The central adrenomedullary vein, in the suprarenal medulla, is an unusual type of blood vessel. 

Its structure is different from the other veins in that the smooth muscle in its tunica media (the middle layer of the vessel) is arranged in conspicuous, longitudinally oriented bundles.


=== Variability ===

The suprarenal glands may not develop at all, or may be fused in the midline behind the aorta. 

These are associated with other congenital abnormalities, such as failure of the kidneys to develop, or fused kidneys. 

The gland may develop with a partial or complete absence of the cortex, or may develop in an unusual location.


== Function ==


The suprarenal gland secretes a number of different hormones which are metabolised by enzymes either within the gland or in other parts of the body. 

These hormones are involved in a number of essential biological functions.


=== Corticosteroids ===

Corticosteroids are a group of steroid hormones produced from the cortex of the suprarenal gland, from which they are named.
Mineralocorticoids such as aldosterone regulate salt ("mineral") balance and blood volume.

Glucocorticoids such as cortisol influence metabolism rates of proteins, fats and sugars ("glucose").

Androgens such as dehydroepiandrosterone.MineralocorticoidsThe suprarenal gland produces aldosterone, a mineralocorticoid, which is important in the regulation of salt ("mineral") balance and blood volume. 

In the kidneys, aldosterone acts on the distal convoluted tubules and the collecting ducts by increasing the reabsorption of sodium and the excretion of both potassium and hydrogen ions. 

Aldosterone is responsible for the reabsorption of about 2% of filtered glomerular filtrate. 

Sodium retention is also a response of the distal colon and sweat glands to aldosterone receptor stimulation. 

Angiotensin II and extracellular potassium are the two main regulators of aldosterone production. 

The amount of sodium present in the body affects the extracellular volume, which in turn influences blood pressure. 

Therefore, the effects of aldosterone in sodium retention are important for the regulation of blood pressure.

GlucocorticoidsCortisol is the main glucocorticoid in humans. 

In species that do not create cortisol, this role is played by corticosterone instead. 

Glucocorticoids have many effects on metabolism. 

As their name suggests, they increase the circulating level of glucose. 

This is the result of an increase in the mobilization of amino acids from protein and the stimulation of synthesis of glucose from these amino acids in the liver. 

In addition, they increase the levels of free fatty acids, which cells can use as an alternative to glucose to obtain energy. 

Glucocorticoids also have effects unrelated to the regulation of blood sugar levels, including the suppression of the immune system and a potent anti-inflammatory effect. 

Cortisol reduces the capacity of osteoblasts to produce new bone tissue and decreases the absorption of calcium in the gastrointestinal tract.The suprarenal gland secretes a basal level of cortisol but can also produce bursts of the hormone in response to adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) from the anterior pituitary. 

Cortisol is not evenly released during the day – its concentrations in the blood are highest in the early morning and lowest in the evening as a result of the circadian rhythm of ACTH secretion. 

Cortisone is an inactive product of the action of the enzyme 11β-HSD on cortisol. 

The reaction catalyzed by 11β-HSD is reversible, which means that it can turn administered cortisone into cortisol, the biologically active hormone.

Formation

All corticosteroid hormones share cholesterol as a common precursor. 

Therefore, the first step in steroidogenesis is cholesterol uptake or synthesis. 

Cells that produce steroid hormones can acquire cholesterol through two paths. 

The main source is through dietary cholesterol transported via the blood as cholesterol esters within low density lipoproteins (LDL). 

LDL enters the cells through receptor-mediated endocytosis. 

The other source of cholesterol is synthesis in the cell's endoplasmic reticulum. 

Synthesis can compensate when LDL levels are abnormally low. 

In the lysosome, cholesterol esters are converted to free cholesterol, which is then used for steroidogenesis or stored in the cell.

The initial part of conversion of cholesterol into steroid hormones involves a number of enzymes of the cytochrome P450 family that are located in the inner membrane of mitochondria. 

Transport of cholesterol from the outer to the inner membrane is facilitated by steroidogenic acute regulatory protein and is the rate-limiting step of steroid synthesis.

The layers of the suprarenal gland differ by function, with each layer having distinct enzymes that produce different hormones from a common precursor. 

The first enzymatic step in the production of all steroid hormones is cleavage of the cholesterol side chain, a reaction that forms pregnenolone as a product and is catalyzed by the enzyme P450scc, also known as cholesterol desmolase. 

After the production of pregnenolone, specific enzymes of each cortical layer further modify it. 

Enzymes involved in this process include both mitochondrial and microsomal P450s and hydroxysteroid dehydrogenases. 

Usually a number of intermediate steps in which pregnenolone is modified several times are required to form the functional hormones. 

Enzymes that catalyze reactions in these metabolic pathways are involved in a number of endocrine diseases. 

For example, the most common form of congenital suprarenal hyperplasia develops as a result of deficiency of 21-hydroxylase, an enzyme involved in an intermediate step of cortisol production.

Regulation

Glucocorticoids are under the regulatory influence of the hypothalamus-pituitary-suprarenal (HPA) axis. 

Glucocorticoid synthesis is stimulated by adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), a hormone released into the bloodstream by the anterior pituitary. 

In turn, production of ACTH is stimulated by the presence of corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH), which is released by neurons of the hypothalamus. 

ACTH acts on the suprarenal cells first by increasing the levels of StAR within the cells, and then of all steroidogenic P450 enzymes. 

The HPA axis is an example of a negative feedback system, in which cortisol itself acts as a direct inhibitor of both CRH and ACTH synthesis. 

The HPA axis also interacts with the immune system through increased secretion of ACTH at the presence of certain molecules of the inflammatory response.Mineralocorticoid secretion is regulated mainly by the renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system (RAAS), the concentration of potassium, and to a lesser extent the concentration of ACTH. 

Sensors of blood pressure in the juxtaglomerular apparatus of the kidneys release the enzyme renin into the blood, which starts a cascade of reactions that lead to formation of angiotensin II. 

Angiotensin receptors in cells of the zona glomerulosa recognize the substance, and upon binding they stimulate the release of aldosterone.


=== Androgens ===

Cells in zona reticularis of the suprarenal glands produce male sex hormones, or androgens, the most important of which is DHEA. 

In general, these hormones do not have an overall effect in the male body, and are converted to more potent androgens such as testosterone and DHT or to estrogens (female sex hormones) in the gonads, acting in this way as a metabolic intermediate.


=== Catecholamines ===

Primarily referred to in the United States as epinephrine and norepinephrine, suprarenaline and norsuprarenaline are catecholamines, water-soluble compounds that have a structure made of a catechol group and an amine group. 

The suprarenal glands are responsible for most of the suprarenaline that circulates in the body, but only for a small amount of circulating norsuprarenaline. 

These hormones are released by the suprarenal medulla, which contains a dense network of blood vessels. 

suprarenaline and norsuprarenaline act at adrenoreceptors throughout the body, with effects that include an increase in blood pressure and heart rate. 

Actions of suprarenaline and norsuprarenaline are responsible for the fight or flight response, characterised by a quickening of breathing and heart rate, an increase in blood pressure, and constriction of blood vessels in many parts of the body.

FormationCatecholamines are produced in chromaffin cells in the medulla of the suprarenal gland, from tyrosine, a non-essential amino acid derived from food or produced from phenylalanine in the liver. 

The enzyme tyrosine hydroxylase converts tyrosine to L-DOPA in the first step of catecholamine synthesis. 

L-DOPA is then converted to dopamine before it can be turned into norsuprarenaline. 

In the cytosol, norsuprarenaline is converted to epinephrine by the enzyme phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase (PNMT) and stored in granules. 

Glucocorticoids produced in the suprarenal cortex stimulate the synthesis of catecholamines by increasing the levels of tyrosine hydroxylase and PNMT.Catecholamine release is stimulated by the activation of the sympathetic nervous system. 

Splanchnic nerves of the sympathetic nervous system innervate the medulla of the suprarenal gland. 

When activated, it evokes the release of catecholamines from the storage granules by stimulating the opening of calcium channels in the cell membrane.


== Gene and protein expression ==


The human genome includes approximately 20,000 protein coding genes and 70% of these genes are expressed in the normal adult suprarenal glands. 

Only some 250 genes are more specifically expressed in the suprarenal glands compared to other organs and tissues. 

The suprarenal-gland-specific genes with the highest level of expression include members of the cytochrome P450 superfamily of enzymes. 

Corresponding proteins are expressed in the different compartments of the suprarenal gland, such as CYP11A1, HSD3B2 and FDX1 involved in steroid hormone synthesis and expressed in cortical cell layers, and PNMT and DBH involved in norsuprarenaline and suprarenaline synthesis and expressed in the medulla.


== Development ==

The suprarenal glands are composed of two heterogenous types of tissue. 

In the center is the suprarenal medulla, which produces suprarenaline and norsuprarenaline and releases them into the bloodstream, as part of the sympathetic nervous system. 

Surrounding the medulla is the cortex, which produces a variety of steroid hormones. 

These tissues come from different embryological precursors and have distinct prenatal development paths. 

The cortex of the suprarenal gland is derived from mesoderm, whereas the medulla is derived from the neural crest, which is of ectodermal origin.

The suprarenal glands in a newborn baby are much larger as a proportion of the body size than in an adult. 

For example, at age three months the glands are four times the size of the kidneys. 

The size of the glands decreases relatively after birth, mainly because of shrinkage of the cortex. 

The cortex, which almost completely disappears by age 1, develops again from age 4–5. 

The glands weigh about 1 g at birth and develop to an adult weight of about 4 grams each. 

In a fetus the glands are first detectable after the sixth week of development.


=== Cortex ===

suprarenal cortex tissue is derived from the intermediate mesoderm. 

It first appears 33 days after fertilisation, shows steroid hormone production capabilities by the eighth week and undergoes rapid growth during the first trimester of pregnancy. 

The fetal suprarenal cortex is different from its adult counterpart, as it is composed of two distinct zones: the inner "fetal" zone, which carries most of the hormone-producing activity, and the outer "definitive" zone, which is in a proliferative phase. 

The fetal zone produces large amounts of suprarenal androgens (male sex hormones) that are used by the placenta for estrogen biosynthesis. 

Cortical development of the suprarenal gland is regulated mostly by ACTH, a hormone produced by the pituitary gland that stimulates cortisol synthesis. 

During midgestation, the fetal zone occupies most of the cortical volume and produces 100–200 mg/day of DHEA-S, an androgen and precursor of both androgens and estrogens (female sex hormones). 

suprarenal hormones, especially glucocorticoids such as cortisol, are essential for prenatal development of organs, particularly for the maturation of the lungs. 

The suprarenal gland decreases in size after birth because of the rapid disappearance of the fetal zone, with a corresponding decrease in androgen secretion.


==== Adrenarche ====

During early childhood androgen synthesis and secretion remain low, but several years before puberty (from 6–8 years of age) changes occur in both anatomical and functional aspects of cortical androgen production that lead to increased secretion of the steroids DHEA and DHEA-S. 

These changes are part of a process called adrenarche, which has only been described in humans and some other primates. 

Adrenarche is independent of ACTH or gonadotropins and correlates with a progressive thickening of the zona reticularis layer of the cortex. 

Functionally, adrenarche provides a source of androgens for the development of axillary and pubic hair before the beginning of puberty.


=== Medulla ===

The suprarenal medulla is derived from neural crest cells, which come from the ectoderm layer of the embryo. 

These cells migrate from their initial position and aggregate in the vicinity of the dorsal aorta, a primitive blood vessel, which activates the differentiation of these cells through the release of proteins known as BMPs. 

These cells then undergo a second migration from the dorsal aorta to form the suprarenal medulla and other organs of the sympathetic nervous system. 

Cells of the suprarenal medulla are called chromaffin cells because they contain granules that stain with chromium salts, a characteristic not present in all sympathetic organs. 

Glucocorticoids produced in the suprarenal cortex were once thought to be responsible for the differentiation of chromaffin cells. 

More recent research suggests that BMP-4 secreted in suprarenal tissue is the main responsible for this, and that glucocorticoids only play a role in the subsequent development of the cells.


== Clinical significance ==


The normal function of the suprarenal gland may be impaired by conditions such as infections, tumors, genetic disorders and autoimmune diseases, or as a side effect of medical therapy. 

These disorders affect the gland either directly (as with infections or autoimmune diseases) or as a result of the dysregulation of hormone production (as in some types of Cushing's syndrome) leading to an excess or insufficiency of suprarenal hormones and the related symptoms.


=== Corticosteroid overproduction ===



==== Cushing's syndrome ====
Cushing's syndrome is the manifestation of glucocorticoid excess. 

It can be the result of a prolonged treatment with glucocorticoids or be caused by an underlying disease which produces alterations in the HPA axis or the production of cortisol. 

Causes can be further classified into ACTH-dependent or ACTH-independent. 

The most common cause of endogenous Cushing's syndrome is a pituitary adenoma which causes an excessive production of ACTH. 

The disease produces a wide variety of signs and symptoms which include obesity, diabetes, increased blood pressure, excessive body hair (hirsutism), osteoporosis, depression, and most distinctively, stretch marks in the skin, caused by its progressive thinning.


==== Primary aldosteronism ====

When the zona glomerulosa produces excess aldosterone, the result is primary aldosteronism. 

Causes for this condition are bilateral hyperplasia (excessive tissue growth) of the glands, or aldosterone-producing adenomas (a condition called Conn's syndrome). 

Primary aldosteronism produces hypertension and electrolyte imbalance, increasing potassium depletion sodium retention.


=== suprarenal insufficiency ===

suprarenal insufficiency (the deficiency of glucocorticoids) occurs in about 5 in 10,000 in the general population. 

Diseases classified as primary suprarenal insufficiency (including Addison's disease and genetic causes) directly affect the suprarenal cortex. 

If a problem that affects the hypothalamic-pituitary-suprarenal axis arises outside the gland, it is a secondary suprarenal insufficiency.


==== Addison's disease ====

Addison's disease refers to primary hyposuprarenalism, which is a deficiency in glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid production by the suprarenal gland. 

In the Western world, Addison's disease is most commonly an autoimmune condition, in which the body produces antibodies against cells of the suprarenal cortex. 

Worldwide, the disease is more frequently caused by infection, especially from tuberculosis. 

A distinctive feature of Addison's disease is hyperpigmentation of the skin, which presents with other nonspecific symptoms such as fatigue.

A complication seen in untreated Addison's disease and other types of primary suprarenal insufficiency is the suprarenal crisis, a medical emergency in which low glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid levels result in hypovolemic shock and symptoms such as vomiting and fever. 

An suprarenal crisis can progressively lead to stupor and coma. 

The management of suprarenal crises includes the application of hydrocortisone injections.


==== Secondary suprarenal insufficiency ====

In secondary suprarenal insufficiency, a dysfunction of the hypothalamic-pituitary-suprarenal axis leads to decreased stimulation of the suprarenal cortex. 

Apart from suppression of the axis by glucocorticoid therapy, the most common cause of secondary suprarenal insufficiency are tumors that affect the production of adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) by the pituitary gland. 

This type of suprarenal insufficiency usually does not affect the production of mineralocorticoids, which are under regulation of the renin–angiotensin system instead.


==== Congenital suprarenal hyperplasia ====

Congenital suprarenal hyperplasia is a congenital disease in which mutations of enzymes that produce steroid hormones result in a glucocorticoid deficiency and malfunction of the negative feedback loop of the HPA axis. 

In the HPA axis, cortisol (a glucocorticoid) inhibits the release of CRH and ACTH, hormones that in turn stimulate corticosteroid synthesis. 

As cortisol cannot be synthesized, these hormones are released in high quantities and stimulate production of other suprarenal steroids instead. 

The most common form of congenital suprarenal hyperplasia is due to 21-hydroxylase deficiency. 21-hydroxylase is necessary for production of both mineralocorticoids and glucocorticoids, but not androgens. 

Therefore, ACTH stimulation of the suprarenal cortex induces the release of excessive amounts of suprarenal androgens, which can lead to the development of ambiguous genitalia and secondary sex characteristics.


=== suprarenal tumors ===


suprarenal tumors are commonly found as incidentalomas, unexpected asymptomatic tumors found during medical imaging. 

They are seen in around 3.4% of CT scans, and in most cases they are benign adenomas. 

suprarenal carcinomas are very rare, with an incidence of 1 case per million per year.Pheochromocytomas are tumors of the suprarenal medulla that arise from chromaffin cells. 

They can produce a variety of nonspecific symptoms, which include headaches, sweating, anxiety and palpitations. 

Common signs include hypertension and tachycardia. 

Surgery, especially suprarenal laparoscopy, is the most common treatment for small pheochromocytomas.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/suprarenal_gland
;;;ES;;;



GLÁNDULA SUPRARRENAL/GLÁNDULA SUPRARRENAL


Las glándulas suprarrenales (también conocidas como glándulas suprarrenales) son glándulas endocrinas que producen una variedad de hormonas que incluyen suprarenalina y los esteroides aldosterona y cortisol. 

Se encuentran por encima de los riñones. 

Cada glándula tiene una corteza externa que produce hormonas esteroides y una médula interna. 

La corteza suprarrenal en sí misma se divide en tres zonas principales: la zona glomerulosa, la zona fasciculada y la zona reticularis.

La corteza suprarrenal produce tres tipos principales de hormonas esteroides: mineralocorticoides, glucocorticoides y andrógenos. 

Los mineralocorticoides (como la aldosterona) producidos en la zona glomerulosa ayudan en la regulación de la presión arterial y el equilibrio electrolítico. 

Los glucocorticoides cortisol y cortisona se sintetizan en la zona fasciculada; sus funciones incluyen la regulación del metabolismo y la supresión del sistema inmunológico.

La capa más interna de la corteza, la zona reticularis, produce andrógenos que se convierten en hormonas sexuales totalmente funcionales en las gónadas y otros órganos diana.

La producción de hormonas esteroides se denomina esteroidogénesis e implica una serie de reacciones y procesos que tienen lugar en las células corticales.

La médula produce las catecolaminas, que funcionan para producir una respuesta rápida en todo el cuerpo en situaciones de estrés.

Varias enfermedades endocrinas implican disfunciones de la glándula suprarrenal.

La sobreproducción de cortisol conduce al síndrome de Cushing, mientras que la producción insuficiente se asocia con la enfermedad de Addison.

La hiperplasia suprarrenal congénita es una enfermedad genética producida por la desregulación de los mecanismos de control endocrino.

Una variedad de tumores pueden surgir del tejido suprarrenal y se encuentran comúnmente en imágenes médicas cuando se buscan otras enfermedades.


== Estructura ==


Las glándulas suprarrenales están ubicadas a ambos lados del cuerpo en el retroperitoneo, arriba y ligeramente medial a los riñones. 

En los humanos, la glándula suprarrenal derecha tiene forma piramidal, mientras que la izquierda tiene forma semilunar o de media luna y algo más grande. 

Las glándulas suprarrenales miden aproximadamente 3 cm de ancho, 5,0 cm de largo y hasta 1,0 cm de grosor. 

Su peso combinado en un ser humano adulto oscila entre 7 y 10 gramos. 

Las glándulas son de color amarillento.

Las glándulas suprarrenales están rodeadas por una cápsula grasa y se encuentran dentro de la fascia renal, que también rodea los riñones. 

Un tabique (pared) débil de tejido conectivo separa las glándulas de los riñones. 

Las glándulas suprarrenales están directamente debajo del diafragma y están unidas a los pilares del diafragma por la fascia renal.

Cada glándula suprarrenal tiene dos partes distintas, cada una con una función única, la corteza suprarrenal externa y la médula interna, las cuales producen hormonas.


=== corteza suprarrenal ===


La corteza suprarrenal es la región externa y también la parte más grande de una glándula suprarrenal. 

Se divide en tres zonas separadas: zona glomerulosa, zona fasciculada y zona reticularis. 

Cada zona es responsable de producir hormonas específicas.
La corteza suprarrenal es la capa más externa de la glándula suprarrenal. 

Dentro de la corteza hay tres capas, llamadas "zonas". 

Cuando se observa bajo un microscopio, cada capa tiene una apariencia distinta y cada una tiene una función diferente. 

La corteza suprarrenal se dedica a la producción de hormonas, a saber, aldosterona, cortisol y andrógenos.


==== Zona glomerulosa ====
La zona más externa de la corteza suprarrenal es la zona glomerulosa.

Se encuentra inmediatamente debajo de la cápsula fibrosa de la glándula.

Las células de esta capa forman grupos ovalados, separados por finas hebras de tejido conjuntivo de la cápsula fibrosa de la glándula y portan capilares anchos.

Esta capa es el sitio principal para la producción de aldosterona, un mineralocorticoide, por la acción de la enzima aldosterona sintasa.

La aldosterona juega un papel importante en la regulación a largo plazo de la presión arterial.


==== Zona fasciculada ====
La zona fasciculada está situada entre la zona glomerulosa y la zona reticularis.

Las células de esta capa son responsables de producir glucocorticoides como el cortisol.

Es la más grande de las tres capas y representa casi el 80% del volumen de la corteza.

En la zona fasciculada, las células están dispuestas en columnas orientadas radialmente hacia la médula.

Las células contienen numerosas gotitas de lípidos, abundantes mitocondrias y un retículo endoplásmico liso complejo.


==== Zona reticular ====
La capa cortical más interna, la zona reticularis, se encuentra directamente adyacente a la médula.

Produce andrógenos, principalmente dehidroepiandrosterona (DHEA), sulfato de DHEA (DHEA-S) y androstenediona (el precursor de la testosterona) en humanos.

Sus pequeñas células forman cordones y racimos irregulares, separados por capilares y tejido conjuntivo.

Las células contienen cantidades relativamente pequeñas de citoplasma y gotitas de lípidos y, a veces, muestran pigmento de lipofuscina marrón.


=== Médula ===


La médula suprarrenal está en el centro de cada glándula suprarrenal y está rodeada por la corteza suprarrenal. 

Las células cromafines de la médula son la principal fuente del cuerpo de catecolaminas, como suprarenalina y norsuprarenalina, liberadas por la médula. 

Aproximadamente el 20% de norsuprarenalina (norepinefrina) y el 80% de suprarenalina (epinefrina) se secretan aquí.

La médula suprarrenal es impulsada por el sistema nervioso simpático a través de fibras preganglionares que se originan en la médula espinal torácica, desde las vértebras T5-T11. 

Debido a que está inervada por fibras nerviosas preganglionares, la médula suprarrenal puede considerarse como un ganglio simpático especializado. 

Sin embargo, a diferencia de otros ganglios simpáticos, la médula suprarrenal carece de sinapsis definidas y libera sus secreciones directamente a la sangre.


=== Suministro de sangre ===

Las glándulas suprarrenales tienen una de las mayores tasas de suministro de sangre por gramo de tejido de cualquier órgano: hasta 60 arterias pequeñas pueden entrar en cada glándula.

Tres arterias suelen irrigar cada glándula suprarrenal:
La arteria suprarrenal superior, una rama de la arteria frénica inferior
-La arteria suprarrenal media, rama directa de la aorta abdominal.
-La arteria suprarrenal inferior, una rama de la arteria renal. Estos vasos sanguíneos irrigan una red de pequeñas arterias dentro de la cápsula de las glándulas suprarrenales.

Los hilos delgados de la cápsula ingresan a las glándulas y les llevan sangre.

La sangre venosa es drenada de las glándulas por las venas suprarrenales, generalmente una para cada glándula:
-La vena suprarrenal derecha desemboca en la vena cava inferior.
-La vena suprarrenal izquierda drena en la vena renal izquierda o en la vena frénica inferior izquierda. La vena adrenomedular central, en la médula suprarrenal, es un tipo inusual de vaso sanguíneo. 

Su estructura es diferente de las otras venas en que el músculo liso en su túnica media (la capa media del vaso) está dispuesto en haces conspicuos orientados longitudinalmente.


=== Variabilidad ===

Las glándulas suprarrenales pueden no desarrollarse en absoluto o pueden fusionarse en la línea media detrás de la aorta. 

Estos están asociados con otras anomalías congénitas, como la falta de desarrollo de los riñones o los riñones fusionados. 

La glándula puede desarrollarse con una ausencia parcial o completa de la corteza, o puede desarrollarse en una ubicación inusual.


== Función ==


La glándula suprarrenal secreta varias hormonas diferentes que son metabolizadas por enzimas dentro de la glándula o en otras partes del cuerpo.

Estas hormonas están implicadas en una serie de funciones biológicas esenciales.


=== Corticoides ===

Los corticosteroides son un grupo de hormonas esteroides producidas a partir de la corteza de la glándula suprarrenal, de donde reciben su nombre.
Los mineralocorticoides como la aldosterona regulan el equilibrio salino ("mineral") y el volumen sanguíneo.

Los glucocorticoides como el cortisol influyen en las tasas de metabolismo de proteínas, grasas y azúcares ("glucosa").

Andrógenos como la dehidroepiandrosterona. Mineralocorticoides La glándula suprarrenal produce aldosterona, un mineralocorticoide, que es importante en la regulación del equilibrio salino ("mineral") y el volumen sanguíneo.

En los riñones, la aldosterona actúa sobre los túbulos contorneados distales y los conductos colectores aumentando la reabsorción de sodio y la excreción de iones de potasio e hidrógeno. 

La aldosterona es responsable de la reabsorción de alrededor del 2% del filtrado glomerular filtrado. 

La retención de sodio también es una respuesta del colon distal y las glándulas sudoríparas a la estimulación del receptor de aldosterona. 

La angiotensina II y el potasio extracelular son los dos principales reguladores de la producción de aldosterona. 

La cantidad de sodio presente en el cuerpo afecta el volumen extracelular, que a su vez influye en la presión arterial. 

Por lo tanto, los efectos de la aldosterona en la retención de sodio son importantes para la regulación de la presión arterial.

Glucocorticoides El cortisol es el principal glucocorticoide en humanos. 

En las especies que no crean cortisol, este papel lo desempeña la corticosterona. 

Los glucocorticoides tienen muchos efectos sobre el metabolismo. 

Como su nombre indica, aumentan el nivel circulante de glucosa. 

Este es el resultado de un aumento en la movilización de aminoácidos de las proteínas y la estimulación de la síntesis de glucosa a partir de estos aminoácidos en el hígado. 

Además, aumentan los niveles de ácidos grasos libres, que las células pueden utilizar como alternativa a la glucosa para obtener energía. 

Los glucocorticoides también tienen efectos no relacionados con la regulación de los niveles de azúcar en la sangre, incluida la supresión del sistema inmunitario y un potente efecto antiinflamatorio. 

El cortisol reduce la capacidad de los osteoblastos para producir tejido óseo nuevo y disminuye la absorción de calcio en el tracto gastrointestinal. La glándula suprarrenal secreta un nivel basal de cortisol, pero también puede producir ráfagas de la hormona en respuesta a la hormona adrenocorticotrópica (ACTH) de la glándula anterior. pituitaria. 

El cortisol no se libera uniformemente durante el día: sus concentraciones en la sangre son más altas temprano en la mañana y más bajas en la noche como resultado del ritmo circadiano de la secreción de ACTH. 

La cortisona es un producto inactivo de la acción de la enzima 11β-HSD sobre el cortisol. 

La reacción catalizada por la 11β-HSD es reversible, lo que significa que puede convertir la cortisona administrada en cortisol, la hormona biológicamente activa.

Formación

Todas las hormonas corticosteroides comparten el colesterol como precursor común. 

Por lo tanto, el primer paso en la esteroidogénesis es la captación o síntesis de colesterol. 

Las células que producen hormonas esteroides pueden adquirir colesterol a través de dos vías. 

La fuente principal es el colesterol dietético transportado a través de la sangre como ésteres de colesterol dentro de las lipoproteínas de baja densidad (LDL). 

LDL ingresa a las células a través de endocitosis mediada por receptor. 

La otra fuente de colesterol es la síntesis en el retículo endoplásmico de la célula. 

La síntesis puede compensar cuando los niveles de LDL son anormalmente bajos. 

En el lisosoma, los ésteres de colesterol se convierten en colesterol libre, que luego se utiliza para la esteroidogénesis o se almacena en la célula.

La parte inicial de la conversión del colesterol en hormonas esteroides implica una serie de enzimas de la familia del citocromo P450 que se encuentran en la membrana interna de las mitocondrias. 

El transporte de colesterol desde la membrana externa a la interna es facilitado por la proteína reguladora aguda esteroidogénica y es el paso limitante de la velocidad de síntesis de esteroides.

Las capas de la glándula suprarrenal difieren según su función, y cada capa tiene enzimas distintas que producen diferentes hormonas a partir de un precursor común.

El primer paso enzimático en la producción de todas las hormonas esteroides es la ruptura de la cadena lateral del colesterol, una reacción que da lugar a la pregnenolona como producto y es catalizada por la enzima P450scc, también conocida como colesterol desmolasa.

Después de la producción de pregnenolona, ​​las enzimas específicas de cada capa cortical la modifican aún más.

Las enzimas involucradas en este proceso incluyen P450 mitocondriales y microsomales e hidroxiesteroide deshidrogenasas.

Por lo general, se requieren varios pasos intermedios en los que la pregnenolona se modifica varias veces para formar las hormonas funcionales.

Las enzimas que catalizan reacciones en estas vías metabólicas están implicadas en varias enfermedades endocrinas.

Por ejemplo, la forma más común de hiperplasia suprarrenal congénita se desarrolla como resultado de la deficiencia de 21-hidroxilasa, una enzima involucrada en un paso intermedio de la producción de cortisol.

Regulación

Los glucocorticoides están bajo la influencia reguladora del eje hipotálamo-pituitario-suprarrenal (HPA).

La síntesis de glucocorticoides es estimulada por la hormona adrenocorticotrópica (ACTH), una hormona liberada en el torrente sanguíneo por la hipófisis anterior.

A su vez, la producción de ACTH es estimulada por la presencia de la hormona liberadora de corticotropina (CRH), que es liberada por las neuronas del hipotálamo.

La ACTH actúa primero sobre las células suprarrenales aumentando los niveles de StAR dentro de las células y luego de todas las enzimas esteroidogénicas P450.

El eje HPA es un ejemplo de un sistema de retroalimentación negativa, en el que el propio cortisol actúa como un inhibidor directo de la síntesis de CRH y ACTH.

El eje HPA también interactúa con el sistema inmunitario a través del aumento de la secreción de ACTH en presencia de ciertas moléculas de la respuesta inflamatoria. La secreción de mineralocorticoides está regulada principalmente por el sistema renina-angiotensina-aldosterona (SRAA), la concentración de potasio y en menor medida la concentración de ACTH.

Los sensores de presión arterial en el aparato yuxtaglomerular de los riñones liberan la enzima renina en la sangre, lo que inicia una cascada de reacciones que conducen a la formación de angiotensina II.

Los receptores de angiotensina en las células de la zona glomerulosa reconocen la sustancia y, al unirse, estimulan la liberación de aldosterona.


=== Andrógenos ===

Las células de la zona reticular de las glándulas suprarrenales producen hormonas sexuales masculinas o andrógenos, de los cuales el más importante es la DHEA. 

En general, estas hormonas no tienen un efecto global en el cuerpo masculino y se convierten en andrógenos más potentes como la testosterona y la DHT o en estrógenos (hormonas sexuales femeninas) en las gónadas, actuando así como un intermediario metabólico.


=== Catecolaminas ===

Principalmente denominadas en los Estados Unidos como epinefrina y norepinefrina, la suprarenalina y la norsuprarenalina son catecolaminas, compuestos solubles en agua que tienen una estructura formada por un grupo catecol y un grupo amina. 

Las glándulas suprarrenales son responsables de la mayor parte de la suprarrenalina que circula en el cuerpo, pero solo de una pequeña cantidad de norsuprarenalina circulante. 

Estas hormonas son liberadas por la médula suprarrenal, que contiene una densa red de vasos sanguíneos. 

La suprarenalina y la norsuprarenalina actúan en los receptores adrenérgicos de todo el cuerpo, con efectos que incluyen un aumento de la presión arterial y la frecuencia cardíaca. 

Las acciones de la suprarenalina y la norsuprarenalina son responsables de la respuesta de lucha o huida, caracterizada por una aceleración de la respiración y el ritmo cardíaco, un aumento de la presión arterial y la constricción de los vasos sanguíneos en muchas partes del cuerpo.

Formación Las catecolaminas se producen en las células cromafines de la médula de la glándula suprarrenal a partir de la tirosina, un aminoácido no esencial derivado de los alimentos o producido a partir de la fenilalanina en el hígado.

La enzima tirosina hidroxilasa convierte la tirosina en L-DOPA en el primer paso de la síntesis de catecolaminas.

Luego, la L-DOPA se convierte en dopamina antes de que pueda convertirse en norsuprarenalina.

En el citosol, la norsuprarenalina se convierte en epinefrina por la enzima feniletanolamina N-metiltransferasa (PNMT) y se almacena en gránulos.

Los glucocorticoides producidos en la corteza suprarrenal estimulan la síntesis de catecolaminas al aumentar los niveles de tirosina hidroxilasa y PNMT. La liberación de catecolaminas es estimulada por la activación del sistema nervioso simpático.

Los nervios esplácnicos del sistema nervioso simpático inervan la médula de la glándula suprarrenal. 

Cuando se activa, provoca la liberación de catecolaminas de los gránulos de almacenamiento al estimular la apertura de los canales de calcio en la membrana celular.


== Expresión de genes y proteínas ==


El genoma humano incluye aproximadamente 20.000 genes que codifican proteínas y el 70% de estos genes se expresan en las glándulas suprarrenales adultas normales. 

Solo unos 250 genes se expresan más específicamente en las glándulas suprarrenales en comparación con otros órganos y tejidos. 

Los genes específicos de las glándulas suprarrenales con el mayor nivel de expresión incluyen miembros de la superfamilia de enzimas citocromo P450. 

Las proteínas correspondientes se expresan en los diferentes compartimentos de la glándula suprarrenal, como CYP11A1, HSD3B2 y FDX1 involucradas en la síntesis de hormonas esteroides y expresadas en capas de células corticales, y PNMT y DBH involucradas en la síntesis de norsuprarenalina y suprarrenal y expresadas en la médula.


== Desarrollo ==

Las glándulas suprarrenales están compuestas por dos tipos heterogéneos de tejido. 

En el centro está la médula suprarrenal, que produce suprarenalina y norsuprarenalina y las libera al torrente sanguíneo, como parte del sistema nervioso simpático. 

Alrededor de la médula se encuentra la corteza, que produce una variedad de hormonas esteroides. 

Estos tejidos provienen de diferentes precursores embriológicos y tienen distintas vías de desarrollo prenatal. 

La corteza de la glándula suprarrenal se deriva del mesodermo, mientras que la médula se deriva de la cresta neural, que es de origen ectodérmico.

Las glándulas suprarrenales en un bebé recién nacido son mucho más grandes en proporción al tamaño del cuerpo que en un adulto. 

Por ejemplo, a la edad de tres meses las glándulas son cuatro veces más grandes que los riñones. 

El tamaño de las glándulas disminuye relativamente después del nacimiento, principalmente debido a la contracción de la corteza. 

La corteza, que desaparece casi por completo al año de edad, se desarrolla de nuevo entre los 4 y los 5 años. 

Las glándulas pesan aproximadamente 1 g al nacer y se desarrollan hasta alcanzar un peso adulto de aproximadamente 4 gramos cada una. 

En un feto, las glándulas se detectan por primera vez después de la sexta semana de desarrollo.


=== Corteza ===

El tejido de la corteza suprarrenal se deriva del mesodermo intermedio. 

Aparece por primera vez 33 días después de la fertilización, muestra capacidades de producción de hormonas esteroides en la octava semana y experimenta un rápido crecimiento durante el primer trimestre del embarazo.

La corteza suprarrenal fetal es diferente de su contraparte adulta, ya que se compone de dos zonas distintas: la zona "fetal" interna, que lleva la mayor parte de la actividad productora de hormonas, y la zona "definitiva" externa, que se encuentra en un estado proliferativo. fase.

La zona fetal produce grandes cantidades de andrógenos suprarrenales (hormonas sexuales masculinas) que la placenta utiliza para la biosíntesis de estrógenos.

El desarrollo cortical de la glándula suprarrenal está regulado principalmente por ACTH, una hormona producida por la glándula pituitaria que estimula la síntesis de cortisol.

Durante la mitad de la gestación, la zona fetal ocupa la mayor parte del volumen cortical y produce de 100 a 200 mg/día de DHEA-S, un andrógeno y precursor de andrógenos y estrógenos (hormonas sexuales femeninas).

Las hormonas suprarrenales, especialmente los glucocorticoides como el cortisol, son esenciales para el desarrollo prenatal de los órganos, en particular para la maduración de los pulmones.

La glándula suprarrenal disminuye de tamaño después del nacimiento debido a la rápida desaparición de la zona fetal, con la correspondiente disminución de la secreción de andrógenos.


==== Adrenarca ====

Durante la primera infancia, la síntesis y secreción de andrógenos sigue siendo baja, pero varios años antes de la pubertad (entre los 6 y los 8 años de edad) se producen cambios tanto en los aspectos anatómicos como funcionales de la producción de andrógenos corticales que conducen a una mayor secreción de los esteroides DHEA y DHEA-S.

Estos cambios son parte de un proceso llamado adrenarquia, que solo se ha descrito en humanos y algunos otros primates.

La adrenarquia es independiente de la ACTH o las gonadotropinas y se correlaciona con un engrosamiento progresivo de la capa de la zona reticular de la corteza.

Funcionalmente, la adrenarquia proporciona una fuente de andrógenos para el desarrollo del vello axilar y púbico antes del comienzo de la pubertad.


=== Médula ===

La médula suprarrenal se deriva de las células de la cresta neural, que provienen de la capa ectodérmica del embrión.

Estas células migran desde su posición inicial y se agregan en las proximidades de la aorta dorsal, un vaso sanguíneo primitivo, lo que activa la diferenciación de estas células mediante la liberación de proteínas conocidas como BMP.

Luego, estas células experimentan una segunda migración desde la aorta dorsal para formar la médula suprarrenal y otros órganos del sistema nervioso simpático. 

Las células de la médula suprarrenal se llaman células cromafines porque contienen gránulos que se tiñen con sales de cromo, una característica que no está presente en todos los órganos simpáticos. 

Alguna vez se pensó que los glucocorticoides producidos en la corteza suprarrenal eran los responsables de la diferenciación de las células cromafines. 

Investigaciones más recientes sugieren que la BMP-4 secretada en el tejido suprarrenal es la principal responsable de esto, y que los glucocorticoides solo juegan un papel en el desarrollo posterior de las células.


== Importancia clínica ==


La función normal de la glándula suprarrenal puede verse afectada por afecciones tales como infecciones, tumores, trastornos genéticos y enfermedades autoinmunes, o como efecto secundario de la terapia médica. 

Estos trastornos afectan a la glándula ya sea directamente (como en el caso de infecciones o enfermedades autoinmunes) o como resultado de la desregulación de la producción hormonal (como en algunos tipos de síndrome de Cushing) que conduce a un exceso o insuficiencia de hormonas suprarrenales y los síntomas relacionados.


=== Sobreproducción de corticosteroides ===



==== Síndrome de Cushing ====
El síndrome de Cushing es la manifestación del exceso de glucocorticoides.

Puede ser el resultado de un tratamiento prolongado con glucocorticoides o estar causado por una enfermedad de base que produzca alteraciones en el eje HPA o en la producción de cortisol.

Las causas se pueden clasificar además en dependientes de ACTH o independientes de ACTH.

La causa más común del síndrome de Cushing endógeno es un adenoma hipofisario que provoca una producción excesiva de ACTH.

La enfermedad produce una amplia variedad de signos y síntomas que incluyen obesidad, diabetes, aumento de la presión arterial, vello corporal excesivo (hirsutismo), osteoporosis, depresión y, de manera más particular, estrías en la piel, causadas por su adelgazamiento progresivo.


==== Aldosteronismo primario ====

Cuando la zona glomerulosa produce un exceso de aldosterona, el resultado es aldosteronismo primario.

Las causas de esta afección son la hiperplasia bilateral (crecimiento excesivo de tejido) de las glándulas o los adenomas productores de aldosterona (una afección llamada síndrome de Conn).

El aldosteronismo primario produce hipertensión y desequilibrio electrolítico, aumentando la depleción de potasio y la retención de sodio.


=== insuficiencia suprarrenal ===

la insuficiencia suprarrenal (la deficiencia de glucocorticoides) ocurre en aproximadamente 5 de cada 10 000 personas en la población general.

Las enfermedades clasificadas como insuficiencia suprarrenal primaria (incluida la enfermedad de Addison y las causas genéticas) afectan directamente a la corteza suprarrenal.

Si un problema que afecta al eje hipotálamo-pituitario-suprarrenal surge fuera de la glándula, se trata de una insuficiencia suprarrenal secundaria.


==== Enfermedad de Addison ====

La enfermedad de Addison se refiere al hiposuprarrenalismo primario, que es una deficiencia en la producción de glucocorticoides y mineralocorticoides por parte de la glándula suprarrenal.

En el mundo occidental, la enfermedad de Addison es más comúnmente una condición autoinmune, en la que el cuerpo produce anticuerpos contra las células de la corteza suprarrenal.

En todo el mundo, la enfermedad es causada con mayor frecuencia por infección, especialmente por tuberculosis.

Una característica distintiva de la enfermedad de Addison es la hiperpigmentación de la piel, que se presenta con otros síntomas inespecíficos como la fatiga.

Una complicación que se observa en la enfermedad de Addison no tratada y otros tipos de insuficiencia suprarrenal primaria es la crisis suprarrenal, una emergencia médica en la que los niveles bajos de glucocorticoides y mineralocorticoides provocan un shock hipovolémico y síntomas como vómitos y fiebre. 

Una crisis suprarrenal puede conducir progresivamente al estupor y al coma. 

El manejo de las crisis suprarrenales incluye la aplicación de inyecciones de hidrocortisona.


==== Insuficiencia suprarrenal secundaria ====

En la insuficiencia suprarrenal secundaria, una disfunción del eje hipotálamo-pituitario-suprarrenal conduce a una disminución de la estimulación de la corteza suprarrenal. 

Además de la supresión del eje por la terapia con glucocorticoides, la causa más común de insuficiencia suprarrenal secundaria son los tumores que afectan la producción de hormona adrenocorticotrópica (ACTH) por la glándula pituitaria.

Este tipo de insuficiencia suprarrenal por lo general no afecta la producción de mineralocorticoides, que en su lugar están regulados por el sistema renina-angiotensina.


==== Hiperplasia suprarrenal congénita ====

La hiperplasia suprarrenal congénita es una enfermedad congénita en la que las mutaciones de las enzimas que producen hormonas esteroides dan como resultado una deficiencia de glucocorticoides y un mal funcionamiento del circuito de retroalimentación negativa del eje HPA.

En el eje HPA, el cortisol (un glucocorticoide) inhibe la liberación de CRH y ACTH, hormonas que a su vez estimulan la síntesis de corticosteroides.

Como el cortisol no se puede sintetizar, estas hormonas se liberan en grandes cantidades y, en su lugar, estimulan la producción de otros esteroides suprarrenales.

La forma más común de hiperplasia suprarrenal congénita se debe a la deficiencia de 21-hidroxilasa. La 21-hidroxilasa es necesaria para la producción de mineralocorticoides y glucocorticoides, pero no de andrógenos.

Por lo tanto, la estimulación con ACTH de la corteza suprarrenal induce la liberación de cantidades excesivas de andrógenos suprarrenales, lo que puede conducir al desarrollo de genitales ambiguos y características sexuales secundarias.


=== tumores suprarrenales ===


Los tumores suprarrenales se encuentran comúnmente como incidentalomas, tumores asintomáticos inesperados que se encuentran durante las imágenes médicas.

Se ven en alrededor del 3,4% de las tomografías computarizadas, y en la mayoría de los casos son adenomas benignos.

Los carcinomas suprarrenales son muy raros, con una incidencia de 1 caso por millón por año. Los feocromocitomas son tumores de la médula suprarrenal que surgen de las células cromafines. 

Pueden producir una variedad de síntomas inespecíficos, que incluyen dolores de cabeza, sudoración, ansiedad y palpitaciones. 

Los signos comunes incluyen hipertensión y taquicardia. 

La cirugía, especialmente la laparoscopia suprarrenal, es el tratamiento más común para los feocromocitomas pequeños.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/suprarenal_gland

;;;FR;;;



GLANDE SURRÉNALE/GLANDE SURRÉNALE


Les glandes surrénales (également appelées glandes surrénales) sont des glandes endocrines qui produisent diverses hormones, notamment la suprarénaline et les stéroïdes aldostérone et cortisol.

Ils se trouvent au-dessus des reins.

Chaque glande a un cortex externe qui produit des hormones stéroïdes et une moelle interne.

Le cortex surrénal lui-même est divisé en trois zones principales : la zone glomérulée, la zone fasciculée et la zone réticulaire.

Le cortex surrénal produit trois principaux types d'hormones stéroïdes : les minéralocorticoïdes, les glucocorticoïdes et les androgènes.

Les minéralocorticoïdes (tels que l'aldostérone) produits dans la zone glomérulée aident à réguler la pression artérielle et l'équilibre électrolytique.

Les glucocorticoïdes cortisol et cortisone sont synthétisés dans la zone fasciculée ; leurs fonctions comprennent la régulation du métabolisme et la suppression du système immunitaire.

La couche la plus interne du cortex, la zone réticulaire, produit des androgènes qui sont convertis en hormones sexuelles entièrement fonctionnelles dans les gonades et d'autres organes cibles. 

La production d'hormones stéroïdiennes est appelée stéroïdogenèse et implique un certain nombre de réactions et de processus qui se déroulent dans les cellules corticales. 

La moelle produit les catécholamines, qui fonctionnent pour produire une réponse rapide dans tout le corps dans des situations de stress.

Un certain nombre de maladies endocriniennes impliquent des dysfonctionnements de la glande surrénale. 

La surproduction de cortisol conduit au syndrome de Cushing, alors qu'une production insuffisante est associée à la maladie d'Addison. 

L'hyperplasie surrénale congénitale est une maladie génétique produite par un dérèglement des mécanismes de contrôle endocrinien. 

Diverses tumeurs peuvent provenir du tissu surrénal et sont couramment trouvées en imagerie médicale lors de la recherche d'autres maladies.


== Structure ==


Les glandes surrénales sont situées des deux côtés du corps dans le rétropéritoine, au-dessus et légèrement en dedans des reins.

Chez l'homme, la glande surrénale droite est de forme pyramidale, tandis que la gauche est semi-lunaire ou en forme de croissant et un peu plus grande.

Les glandes surrénales mesurent environ 3 cm de largeur, 5,0 cm de longueur et jusqu'à 1,0 cm d'épaisseur.

Leur poids combiné chez un humain adulte varie de 7 à 10 grammes.

Les glandes sont de couleur jaunâtre.

Les glandes surrénales sont entourées d'une capsule graisseuse et se trouvent dans le fascia rénal, qui entoure également les reins.

Un septum faible (paroi) de tissu conjonctif sépare les glandes des reins.

Les glandes surrénales sont situées directement sous le diaphragme et sont attachées aux piliers du diaphragme par le fascia rénal.

Chaque glande surrénale a deux parties distinctes, chacune avec une fonction unique, le cortex surrénal externe et la moelle interne, qui produisent toutes deux des hormones.


=== cortex surrénal ===


Le cortex surrénal est la région externe et aussi la plus grande partie d'une glande surrénale.

Elle est divisée en trois zones distinctes : la zone glomérulée, la zone fasciculée et la zone réticulée.

Chaque zone est responsable de la production d'hormones spécifiques.
Le cortex surrénal est la couche la plus externe de la glande surrénale.

Dans le cortex se trouvent trois couches, appelées "zones".

Lorsqu'elles sont vues au microscope, chaque couche a une apparence distincte et chacune a une fonction différente.

Le cortex surrénal est consacré à la production d'hormones, à savoir l'aldostérone, le cortisol et les androgènes.


==== Zone glomérulée ====
La zone la plus externe du cortex surrénal est la zone glomérulée. 

Il se trouve immédiatement sous la capsule fibreuse de la glande. 

Les cellules de cette couche forment des groupes ovales, séparés par de minces brins de tissu conjonctif de la capsule fibreuse de la glande et portent de larges capillaires.

Cette couche est le principal site de production d'aldostérone, un minéralocorticoïde, par l'action de l'enzyme aldostérone synthase. 

L'aldostérone joue un rôle important dans la régulation à long terme de la pression artérielle.


==== Zone fasciculée ====
La zona fasciculata est située entre la zona glomerulosa et la zona reticularis. 

Les cellules de cette couche sont responsables de la production de glucocorticoïdes tels que le cortisol. 

C'est la plus grande des trois couches, représentant près de 80% du volume du cortex. 

Dans la zone fasciculée, les cellules sont disposées en colonnes orientées radialement vers la moelle. 

Les cellules contiennent de nombreuses gouttelettes lipidiques, des mitochondries abondantes et un réticulum endoplasmique lisse complexe.


==== Zone réticulaire ====
La couche corticale la plus interne, la zone réticulaire, est directement adjacente à la moelle. 

Il produit des androgènes, principalement la déhydroépiandrostérone (DHEA), le sulfate de DHEA (DHEA-S) et l'androstènedione (le précurseur de la testostérone) chez l'homme. 

Ses petites cellules forment des cordons et des amas irréguliers, séparés par des capillaires et du tissu conjonctif. 

Les cellules contiennent des quantités relativement faibles de cytoplasme et de gouttelettes lipidiques, et présentent parfois un pigment brun de lipofuscine.


=== Médulle ===


La moelle surrénale est au centre de chaque glande surrénale et est entourée par le cortex surrénal.

Les cellules chromaffines de la moelle sont la principale source corporelle des catécholamines, telles que la suprarénaline et la norsuprarénaline, libérées par la moelle.

Environ 20 % de norsuprénaline (norépinéphrine) et 80 % de suprarénaline (épinéphrine) sont sécrétés ici.

La moelle surrénale est entraînée par le système nerveux sympathique via des fibres préganglionnaires provenant de la moelle épinière thoracique, des vertèbres T5 à T11.

Parce qu'elle est innervée par des fibres nerveuses préganglionnaires, la moelle surrénale peut être considérée comme un ganglion sympathique spécialisé.

Contrairement aux autres ganglions sympathiques, cependant, la moelle suprarénale est dépourvue de synapses distinctes et libère ses sécrétions directement dans le sang.


=== Approvisionnement en sang ===

Les glandes surrénales ont l'un des taux d'apport sanguin les plus élevés par gramme de tissu de tous les organes : jusqu'à 60 petites artères peuvent pénétrer dans chaque glande.

Trois artères alimentent généralement chaque glande surrénale :
L'artère surrénale supérieure, une branche de l'artère phrénique inférieure
-L'artère surrénale moyenne, branche directe de l'aorte abdominale
-L'artère surrénale inférieure, une branche de l'artère rénaleCes vaisseaux sanguins alimentent un réseau de petites artères à l'intérieur de la capsule des glandes surrénales.

De minces brins de la capsule pénètrent dans les glandes et y transportent du sang.

Le sang veineux est drainé des glandes par les veines surrénales, généralement une pour chaque glande :
- La veine surrénale droite se draine dans la veine cave inférieure
-La veine surrénale gauche se draine dans la veine rénale gauche ou la veine phrénique inférieure gauche. La veine surrénalienne centrale, dans la moelle surrénale, est un type inhabituel de vaisseau sanguin. 

Sa structure est différente des autres veines en ce que le muscle lisse de sa tunique médiane (la couche médiane du vaisseau) est disposé en faisceaux bien visibles et orientés longitudinalement.


=== Variabilité ===

Les glandes surrénales peuvent ne pas se développer du tout ou peuvent être fusionnées sur la ligne médiane derrière l'aorte. 

Ceux-ci sont associés à d'autres anomalies congénitales, telles que l'échec du développement des reins ou des reins fusionnés. 

La glande peut se développer avec une absence partielle ou complète du cortex, ou peut se développer dans un endroit inhabituel.


== Fonction ==


La glande surrénale sécrète un certain nombre d'hormones différentes qui sont métabolisées par des enzymes soit dans la glande, soit dans d'autres parties du corps.

Ces hormones sont impliquées dans un certain nombre de fonctions biologiques essentielles.


=== Corticostéroïdes ===

Les corticostéroïdes sont un groupe d'hormones stéroïdes produites à partir du cortex de la glande surrénale, d'où leur nom.
Les minéralocorticoïdes tels que l'aldostérone régulent l'équilibre salin («minéral») et le volume sanguin.

Les glucocorticoïdes tels que le cortisol influencent les taux de métabolisme des protéines, des graisses et des sucres ("glucose").

Androgènes tels que la déhydroépiandrostérone.MinéralocorticoïdesLa glande surrénale produit de l'aldostérone, un minéralocorticoïde, qui est important dans la régulation de l'équilibre salin ("minéral") et du volume sanguin.

Dans les reins, l'aldostérone agit sur les tubules contournés distaux et les canaux collecteurs en augmentant la réabsorption du sodium et l'excrétion des ions potassium et hydrogène.

L'aldostérone est responsable de la réabsorption d'environ 2 % du filtrat glomérulaire filtré.

La rétention de sodium est également une réponse du côlon distal et des glandes sudoripares à la stimulation des récepteurs de l'aldostérone.

L'angiotensine II et le potassium extracellulaire sont les deux principaux régulateurs de la production d'aldostérone.

La quantité de sodium présente dans le corps affecte le volume extracellulaire, qui à son tour influence la pression artérielle.

Par conséquent, les effets de l'aldostérone sur la rétention de sodium sont importants pour la régulation de la pression artérielle.

GlucocorticoïdesLe cortisol est le principal glucocorticoïde chez l'homme.

Chez les espèces qui ne créent pas de cortisol, ce rôle est plutôt joué par la corticostérone.

Les glucocorticoïdes ont de nombreux effets sur le métabolisme.

Comme leur nom l'indique, ils augmentent le taux circulant de glucose.

Ceci est le résultat d'une augmentation de la mobilisation des acides aminés à partir des protéines et de la stimulation de la synthèse du glucose à partir de ces acides aminés dans le foie.

De plus, ils augmentent les niveaux d'acides gras libres, que les cellules peuvent utiliser comme alternative au glucose pour obtenir de l'énergie.

Les glucocorticoïdes ont également des effets non liés à la régulation de la glycémie, notamment la suppression du système immunitaire et un puissant effet anti-inflammatoire.

Le cortisol réduit la capacité des ostéoblastes à produire du nouveau tissu osseux et diminue l'absorption du calcium dans le tractus gastro-intestinal. La glande surrénale sécrète un niveau basal de cortisol mais peut également produire des poussées de l'hormone en réponse à l'hormone corticotrope (ACTH) de la partie antérieure pituitaire.

Le cortisol n'est pas libéré de manière uniforme pendant la journée - ses concentrations dans le sang sont les plus élevées tôt le matin et les plus basses le soir en raison du rythme circadien de la sécrétion d'ACTH.

La cortisone est un produit inactif de l'action de l'enzyme 11β-HSD sur le cortisol.

La réaction catalysée par la 11β-HSD est réversible, ce qui signifie qu'elle peut transformer la cortisone administrée en cortisol, l'hormone biologiquement active.

Formation

Toutes les hormones corticostéroïdes partagent le cholestérol comme précurseur commun.

Par conséquent, la première étape de la stéroïdogenèse est l'absorption ou la synthèse du cholestérol. 

Les cellules qui produisent des hormones stéroïdes peuvent acquérir du cholestérol par deux voies. 

La principale source est le cholestérol alimentaire transporté par le sang sous forme d'esters de cholestérol dans les lipoprotéines de basse densité (LDL). 

Les LDL pénètrent dans les cellules par endocytose médiée par les récepteurs. 

L'autre source de cholestérol est la synthèse dans le réticulum endoplasmique de la cellule. 

La synthèse peut compenser lorsque les niveaux de LDL sont anormalement bas. 

Dans le lysosome, les esters de cholestérol sont convertis en cholestérol libre, qui est ensuite utilisé pour la stéroïdogenèse ou stocké dans la cellule.

La première partie de la conversion du cholestérol en hormones stéroïdes implique un certain nombre d'enzymes de la famille des cytochromes P450 qui sont situées dans la membrane interne des mitochondries. 

Le transport du cholestérol de la membrane externe à la membrane interne est facilité par la protéine régulatrice aiguë stéroïdogène et constitue l'étape limitant la vitesse de synthèse des stéroïdes.

Les couches de la glande surrénale diffèrent par leur fonction, chaque couche ayant des enzymes distinctes qui produisent différentes hormones à partir d'un précurseur commun.

La première étape enzymatique dans la production de toutes les hormones stéroïdes est le clivage de la chaîne latérale du cholestérol, une réaction qui forme la prégnénolone en tant que produit et est catalysée par l'enzyme P450scc, également connue sous le nom de cholestérol desmolase.

Après la production de prégnénolone, des enzymes spécifiques de chaque couche corticale la modifient davantage.

Les enzymes impliquées dans ce processus comprennent à la fois les P450 mitochondriales et microsomales et les hydroxystéroïdes déshydrogénases.

Habituellement, un certain nombre d'étapes intermédiaires au cours desquelles la prégnénolone est modifiée plusieurs fois sont nécessaires pour former les hormones fonctionnelles. 

Les enzymes qui catalysent les réactions dans ces voies métaboliques sont impliquées dans un certain nombre de maladies endocriniennes. 

Par exemple, la forme la plus courante d'hyperplasie surrénale congénitale se développe à la suite d'un déficit en 21-hydroxylase, une enzyme impliquée dans une étape intermédiaire de la production de cortisol.

Régulation

Les glucocorticoïdes sont sous l'influence régulatrice de l'axe hypothalamo-hypophyso-suprénal (HPA). 

La synthèse des glucocorticoïdes est stimulée par l'hormone adrénocorticotrope (ACTH), une hormone libérée dans la circulation sanguine par l'hypophyse antérieure. 

À son tour, la production d'ACTH est stimulée par la présence de l'hormone de libération de la corticotropine (CRH), qui est libérée par les neurones de l'hypothalamus. 

L'ACTH agit d'abord sur les cellules surrénales en augmentant les niveaux de StAR dans les cellules, puis de toutes les enzymes P450 stéroïdogènes.

L'axe HPA est un exemple de système de rétroaction négative, dans lequel le cortisol lui-même agit comme un inhibiteur direct de la synthèse de CRH et d'ACTH.

L'axe HPA interagit également avec le système immunitaire par une sécrétion accrue d'ACTH en présence de certaines molécules de la réponse inflammatoire. La sécrétion de minéralocorticoïdes est régulée principalement par le système rénine-angiotensine-aldostérone (RAAS), la concentration de potassium, dans une moindre mesure la concentration d'ACTH.

Des capteurs de pression artérielle dans l'appareil juxtaglomérulaire des reins libèrent l'enzyme rénine dans le sang, ce qui déclenche une cascade de réactions qui conduisent à la formation d'angiotensine II.

Les récepteurs de l'angiotensine dans les cellules de la zone glomérulée reconnaissent la substance et, lors de la liaison, ils stimulent la libération d'aldostérone.


=== Androgènes ===

Les cellules de la zone réticulaire des glandes surrénales produisent des hormones sexuelles mâles, ou androgènes, dont la plus importante est la DHEA. 

En général, ces hormones n'ont pas d'effet global dans le corps masculin et sont converties en androgènes plus puissants tels que la testostérone et la DHT ou en œstrogènes (hormones sexuelles féminines) dans les gonades, agissant ainsi comme intermédiaire métabolique.


=== Catécholamines ===

Aux États-Unis, principalement appelées épinéphrine et norépinéphrine, la suprarénaline et la norsuprarénaline sont des catécholamines, des composés hydrosolubles qui ont une structure constituée d'un groupe catéchol et d'un groupe amine. 

Les glandes surrénales sont responsables de la majeure partie de la suprarénaline qui circule dans le corps, mais seulement d'une petite quantité de norsuprarénaline circulante. 

Ces hormones sont libérées par la moelle surrénale, qui contient un réseau dense de vaisseaux sanguins. 

la suprarénaline et la norsuprarénaline agissent sur les récepteurs adrénergiques dans tout le corps, avec des effets qui incluent une augmentation de la pression artérielle et de la fréquence cardiaque. 

Les actions de la suprarénaline et de la norsuprarénaline sont responsables de la réaction de combat ou de fuite, caractérisée par une accélération de la respiration et du rythme cardiaque, une augmentation de la pression artérielle et une constriction des vaisseaux sanguins dans de nombreuses parties du corps.

FormationLes catécholamines sont produites dans les cellules chromaffines de la moelle de la glande surrénale, à partir de la tyrosine, un acide aminé non essentiel dérivé de l'alimentation ou produit à partir de la phénylalanine dans le foie.

L'enzyme tyrosine hydroxylase convertit la tyrosine en L-DOPA dans la première étape de la synthèse des catécholamines.

La L-DOPA est ensuite convertie en dopamine avant de pouvoir être transformée en norsuprarénaline.

Dans le cytosol, la norsuprarénaline est convertie en épinéphrine par l'enzyme phényléthanolamine N-méthyltransférase (PNMT) et stockée dans des granules.

Les glucocorticoïdes produits dans le cortex surrénal stimulent la synthèse des catécholamines en augmentant les taux de tyrosine hydroxylase et de PNMT. La libération de catécholamines est stimulée par l'activation du système nerveux sympathique.

Les nerfs splanchniques du système nerveux sympathique innervent la moelle de la glande surrénale. 

Lorsqu'il est activé, il évoque la libération de catécholamines des granules de stockage en stimulant l'ouverture des canaux calciques dans la membrane cellulaire.


== Expression des gènes et des protéines ==


Le génome humain comprend environ 20 000 gènes codant pour des protéines et 70 % de ces gènes sont exprimés dans les glandes surrénales adultes normales. 

Seuls quelque 250 gènes sont plus spécifiquement exprimés dans les glandes surrénales par rapport aux autres organes et tissus. 

Les gènes spécifiques de la glande surrénale avec le niveau d'expression le plus élevé comprennent des membres de la superfamille d'enzymes du cytochrome P450. 

Les protéines correspondantes sont exprimées dans les différents compartiments de la glande surrénale, telles que CYP11A1, HSD3B2 et FDX1 impliquées dans la synthèse des hormones stéroïdes et exprimées dans les couches cellulaires corticales, et PNMT et DBH impliquées dans la synthèse de la norsuprarénaline et de la suprarénaline et exprimées dans la moelle.


== Développement ==

Les glandes surrénales sont composées de deux types de tissus hétérogènes.

Au centre se trouve la moelle suprarénale, qui produit la suprarénaline et la norsuprarénaline et les libère dans la circulation sanguine, dans le cadre du système nerveux sympathique.

Autour de la moelle se trouve le cortex, qui produit une variété d'hormones stéroïdes.

Ces tissus proviennent de différents précurseurs embryologiques et ont des voies de développement prénatal distinctes.

Le cortex de la glande surrénale est dérivé du mésoderme, tandis que la moelle est dérivée de la crête neurale, qui est d'origine ectodermique.

Les glandes surrénales chez un nouveau-né sont beaucoup plus grandes en proportion de la taille du corps que chez un adulte. 

Par exemple, à l'âge de trois mois, les glandes font quatre fois la taille des reins. 

La taille des glandes diminue relativement après la naissance, principalement à cause du rétrécissement du cortex. 

Le cortex, qui disparaît presque complètement à l'âge de 1 an, se développe à nouveau à partir de 4-5 ans. 

Les glandes pèsent environ 1 g à la naissance et atteignent un poids adulte d'environ 4 grammes chacune. 

Chez un fœtus, les glandes sont d'abord détectables après la sixième semaine de développement.


=== Cortex ===

le tissu du cortex suprarénal est dérivé du mésoderme intermédiaire. 

Il apparaît pour la première fois 33 jours après la fécondation, montre des capacités de production d'hormones stéroïdes à la huitième semaine et subit une croissance rapide au cours du premier trimestre de la grossesse.

Le cortex surrénal fœtal est différent de son homologue adulte, car il est composé de deux zones distinctes : la zone « fœtale » interne, qui porte la majeure partie de l'activité productrice d'hormones, et la zone « définitive » externe, qui est en phase proliférative. phase.

La zone fœtale produit de grandes quantités d'androgènes suprarénaux (hormones sexuelles mâles) qui sont utilisées par le placenta pour la biosynthèse des œstrogènes.

Le développement cortical de la glande surrénale est principalement régulé par l'ACTH, une hormone produite par l'hypophyse qui stimule la synthèse du cortisol.

Au milieu de la gestation, la zone fœtale occupe la majeure partie du volume cortical et produit 100 à 200 mg/jour de DHEA-S, un androgène et précurseur des androgènes et des œstrogènes (hormones sexuelles féminines).

les hormones surrénales, notamment les glucocorticoïdes comme le cortisol, sont indispensables au développement prénatal des organes, notamment à la maturation des poumons.

La glande surrénale diminue de taille après la naissance en raison de la disparition rapide de la zone fœtale, avec une diminution correspondante de la sécrétion d'androgènes.


==== Adrénarche ====

Au cours de la petite enfance, la synthèse et la sécrétion d'androgènes restent faibles, mais plusieurs années avant la puberté (de 6 à 8 ans), des changements se produisent dans les aspects anatomiques et fonctionnels de la production corticale d'androgènes qui conduisent à une sécrétion accrue des stéroïdes DHEA et DHEA-S.

Ces changements font partie d'un processus appelé adrénarche, qui n'a été décrit que chez l'homme et certains autres primates. 

L'adrénarche est indépendante de l'ACTH ou des gonadotrophines et est corrélée à un épaississement progressif de la couche de la zone réticulaire du cortex. 

Fonctionnellement, l'adrénarche fournit une source d'androgènes pour le développement des poils axillaires et pubiens avant le début de la puberté.


=== Médulle ===

La moelle surrénale est dérivée des cellules de la crête neurale, qui proviennent de la couche d'ectoderme de l'embryon. 

Ces cellules migrent de leur position initiale et s'agrègent au voisinage de l'aorte dorsale, un vaisseau sanguin primitif, qui active la différenciation de ces cellules par la libération de protéines appelées BMP. 

Ces cellules subissent ensuite une seconde migration à partir de l'aorte dorsale pour former la moelle surrénale et d'autres organes du système nerveux sympathique. 

Les cellules de la moelle surrénale sont appelées cellules chromaffines car elles contiennent des granules qui se colorent avec des sels de chrome, une caractéristique qui n'est pas présente dans tous les organes sympathiques. 

On pensait autrefois que les glucocorticoïdes produits dans le cortex suprarénal étaient responsables de la différenciation des cellules chromaffines. 

Des recherches plus récentes suggèrent que la BMP-4 sécrétée dans le tissu surrénal en est la principale responsable, et que les glucocorticoïdes ne jouent un rôle que dans le développement ultérieur des cellules.


== Signification clinique ==


La fonction normale de la glande surrénale peut être altérée par des conditions telles que des infections, des tumeurs, des troubles génétiques et des maladies auto-immunes, ou par un effet secondaire d'un traitement médical. 

Ces troubles affectent la glande soit directement (comme dans les infections ou les maladies auto-immunes) soit à la suite d'un dérèglement de la production hormonale (comme dans certains types de syndrome de Cushing) entraînant un excès ou une insuffisance d'hormones surrénales et les symptômes associés.


=== Surproduction de corticostéroïdes ===



==== Syndrome de Cushing ====
Le syndrome de Cushing est la manifestation d'un excès de glucocorticoïdes. 

Elle peut être le résultat d'un traitement prolongé avec des glucocorticoïdes ou être causée par une maladie sous-jacente qui produit des altérations de l'axe HPA ou la production de cortisol. 

Les causes peuvent être classées en ACTH-dépendantes ou ACTH-indépendantes. 

La cause la plus fréquente du syndrome de Cushing endogène est un adénome hypophysaire qui provoque une production excessive d'ACTH. 

La maladie produit une grande variété de signes et de symptômes, notamment l'obésité, le diabète, l'augmentation de la pression artérielle, la pilosité excessive (hirsutisme), l'ostéoporose, la dépression et, plus particulièrement, les vergetures de la peau, causées par son amincissement progressif.


==== Aldostéronisme primaire ====

Lorsque la zone glomérulée produit un excès d'aldostérone, il en résulte un aldostéronisme primaire. 

Les causes de cette affection sont une hyperplasie bilatérale (croissance excessive des tissus) des glandes ou des adénomes producteurs d'aldostérone (une affection appelée syndrome de Conn). 

L'aldostéronisme primaire produit une hypertension et un déséquilibre électrolytique, augmentant la déplétion potassique et la rétention de sodium.


=== insuffisance surrénale ===

l'insuffisance surrénale (la carence en glucocorticoïdes) survient chez environ 5 personnes sur 10 000 dans la population générale. 

Les maladies classées comme insuffisance surrénale primaire (y compris la maladie d'Addison et les causes génétiques) affectent directement le cortex surrénal.

Si un problème affectant l'axe hypothalamo-hypophyso-surrénal survient en dehors de la glande, il s'agit d'une insuffisance surrénale secondaire.


==== La maladie d'Addison ====

La maladie d'Addison fait référence à l'hyposuprénalisme primaire, qui est une déficience de la production de glucocorticoïdes et de minéralocorticoïdes par la glande surrénale.

Dans le monde occidental, la maladie d'Addison est le plus souvent une maladie auto-immune, dans laquelle le corps produit des anticorps contre les cellules du cortex surrénal.

Dans le monde, la maladie est plus fréquemment causée par une infection, en particulier par la tuberculose.

Une caractéristique distinctive de la maladie d'Addison est l'hyperpigmentation de la peau, qui s'accompagne d'autres symptômes non spécifiques tels que la fatigue.

Une complication observée dans la maladie d'Addison non traitée et d'autres types d'insuffisance surrénale primaire est la crise surrénale, une urgence médicale dans laquelle de faibles niveaux de glucocorticoïdes et de minéralocorticoïdes entraînent un choc hypovolémique et des symptômes tels que des vomissements et de la fièvre. 

Une crise surrénale peut progressivement conduire à la stupeur et au coma. 

La prise en charge des crises surrénales comprend l'application d'injections d'hydrocortisone.


==== Insuffisance surrénale secondaire ====

Dans l'insuffisance surrénale secondaire, un dysfonctionnement de l'axe hypothalamo-hypophyso-surrénal entraîne une diminution de la stimulation du cortex surrénal. 

Outre la suppression de l'axe par la corticothérapie, la cause la plus fréquente d'insuffisance surrénale secondaire sont les tumeurs qui affectent la production de l'hormone adrénocorticotrope (ACTH) par l'hypophyse. 

Ce type d'insuffisance surrénale n'affecte généralement pas la production de minéralocorticoïdes, qui sont plutôt régulés par le système rénine-angiotensine.


==== Hyperplasie surrénale congénitale ====

L'hyperplasie surrénale congénitale est une maladie congénitale dans laquelle des mutations d'enzymes qui produisent des hormones stéroïdiennes entraînent un déficit en glucocorticoïdes et un dysfonctionnement de la boucle de rétroaction négative de l'axe HPA. 

Dans l'axe HPA, le cortisol (un glucocorticoïde) inhibe la libération de CRH et d'ACTH, des hormones qui stimulent à leur tour la synthèse des corticostéroïdes. 

Comme le cortisol ne peut pas être synthétisé, ces hormones sont libérées en grande quantité et stimulent à la place la production d'autres stéroïdes surrénaux. 

La forme la plus courante d'hyperplasie surrénale congénitale est due à un déficit en 21-hydroxylase. La 21-hydroxylase est nécessaire à la production de minéralocorticoïdes et de glucocorticoïdes, mais pas d'androgènes.

Par conséquent, la stimulation par l'ACTH du cortex suprarénal induit la libération de quantités excessives d'androgènes suprarénaux, ce qui peut conduire au développement d'organes génitaux ambigus et de caractéristiques sexuelles secondaires.


=== tumeurs surrénales ===


les tumeurs surrénales se présentent couramment sous forme d'incidentalomes, des tumeurs asymptomatiques inattendues découvertes lors de l'imagerie médicale. 

Ils sont observés dans environ 3,4 % des tomodensitogrammes et, dans la plupart des cas, il s'agit d'adénomes bénins. 

les carcinomes surrénaux sont très rares, avec une incidence de 1 cas par million par an. Les phéochromocytomes sont des tumeurs de la moelle surrénale qui proviennent des cellules chromaffines.

Ils peuvent produire une variété de symptômes non spécifiques, notamment des maux de tête, de la transpiration, de l'anxiété et des palpitations.

Les signes communs incluent l'hypertension et la tachycardie.

La chirurgie, en particulier la laparoscopie suprarénale, est le traitement le plus courant des petits phéochromocytomes.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/suprarenal_gland

;;;PT;;;



GLÂNDULA SUPRA-RENAL/GLÂNDULA ADRENAL


As glândulas supra-renais (também conhecidas como glândulas supra-renais) são glândulas endócrinas que produzem uma variedade de hormônios, incluindo supra-renal e os esteróides aldosterona e cortisol. 

Eles são encontrados acima dos rins. 

Cada glândula tem um córtex externo que produz hormônios esteróides e uma medula interna. 

O próprio córtex suprarrenal é dividido em três zonas principais: a zona glomerulosa, a zona fasciculada e a zona reticular.

O córtex suprarrenal produz três tipos principais de hormônios esteróides: mineralocorticóides, glicocorticóides e andrógenos. 

Os mineralocorticóides (como a aldosterona) produzidos na zona glomerulosa ajudam na regulação da pressão arterial e no equilíbrio eletrolítico. 

Os glicocorticóides cortisol e cortisona são sintetizados na zona fasciculada; suas funções incluem a regulação do metabolismo e a supressão do sistema imunológico.

A camada mais interna do córtex, a zona reticular, produz andrógenos que são convertidos em hormônios sexuais totalmente funcionais nas gônadas e em outros órgãos-alvo. 

A produção de hormônios esteróides é chamada de esteroidogênese e envolve uma série de reações e processos que ocorrem nas células corticais. 

A medula produz as catecolaminas, que funcionam para produzir uma resposta rápida em todo o corpo em situações de estresse.

Várias doenças endócrinas envolvem disfunções da glândula supra-renal. 

A superprodução de cortisol leva à síndrome de Cushing, enquanto a produção insuficiente está associada à doença de Addison. 

A hiperplasia suprarrenal congênita é uma doença genética produzida pela desregulação dos mecanismos de controle endócrino. 

Uma variedade de tumores pode surgir do tecido suprarrenal e são comumente encontrados em imagens médicas na busca de outras doenças.


== Estrutura ==


As glândulas suprarrenais estão localizadas em ambos os lados do corpo no retroperitônio, acima e ligeiramente medial aos rins.

Nos humanos, a glândula supra-renal direita tem forma piramidal, enquanto a esquerda é semilunar ou crescente e um pouco maior.

As glândulas suprarrenais medem aproximadamente 3 cm de largura, 5,0 cm de comprimento e até 1,0 cm de espessura.

Seu peso combinado em um humano adulto varia de 7 a 10 gramas.

As glândulas são de cor amarelada.

As glândulas suprarrenais são circundadas por uma cápsula gordurosa e situam-se dentro da fáscia renal, que também circunda os rins.

Um septo (parede) fraco de tecido conjuntivo separa as glândulas dos rins.

As glândulas suprarrenais estão diretamente abaixo do diafragma e estão presas aos pilares do diafragma pela fáscia renal.

Cada glândula suprarrenal tem duas partes distintas, cada uma com uma função única, o córtex suprarrenal externo e a medula interna, ambas produtoras de hormônios.


=== córtex suprarrenal ===


O córtex suprarrenal é a região externa e também a maior parte de uma glândula suprarrenal.

É dividida em três zonas distintas: zona glomerulosa, zona fasciculada e zona reticular.

Cada zona é responsável pela produção de hormônios específicos.
O córtex suprarrenal é a camada mais externa da glândula suprarrenal.

Dentro do córtex existem três camadas, chamadas "zonas".

Quando vista ao microscópio, cada camada tem uma aparência distinta e cada uma tem uma função diferente.

O córtex suprarrenal é dedicado à produção de hormônios, como aldosterona, cortisol e andrógenos.


==== Zona glomerulosa ====
A zona mais externa do córtex suprarrenal é a zona glomerulosa. 

Encontra-se imediatamente sob a cápsula fibrosa da glândula. 

As células desta camada formam grupos ovais, separados por finos fios de tecido conjuntivo da cápsula fibrosa da glândula e transportam capilares largos.

Essa camada é o principal local de produção de aldosterona, um mineralocorticóide, pela ação da enzima aldosterona sintase. 

A aldosterona desempenha um papel importante na regulação a longo prazo da pressão arterial.


==== Zona fasciculada ====
A zona fasciculada está situada entre a zona glomerulosa e a zona reticular. 

As células dessa camada são responsáveis ​​pela produção de glicocorticóides, como o cortisol. 

É a maior das três camadas, representando quase 80% do volume do córtex.

Na zona fasciculada, as células estão dispostas em colunas radialmente orientadas em direção à medula.

As células contêm numerosas gotículas lipídicas, mitocôndrias abundantes e um retículo endoplasmático liso complexo.


==== Zona reticular ====
A camada cortical mais interna, a zona reticular, situa-se diretamente adjacente à medula.

Produz andrógenos, principalmente dehidroepiandrosterona (DHEA), sulfato de DHEA (DHEA-S) e androstenediona (o precursor da testosterona) em humanos.

Suas pequenas células formam cordões e aglomerados irregulares, separados por capilares e tecido conjuntivo.

As células contêm quantidades relativamente pequenas de citoplasma e gotículas lipídicas e, às vezes, exibem pigmento de lipofuscina marrom.


=== Medula ===


A medula suprarrenal está no centro de cada glândula suprarrenal e é circundada pelo córtex suprarrenal. 

As células cromafins da medula são a principal fonte do corpo de catecolaminas, como suprarenalina e norsuprarenalina, liberadas pela medula. 

Aproximadamente 20% de norsuprarenalina (norepinefrina) e 80% de suprarenalina (epinefrina) são secretados aqui.

A medula suprarrenal é conduzida pelo sistema nervoso simpático através de fibras pré-ganglionares originadas na medula espinhal torácica, das vértebras T5-T11. 

Por ser inervada por fibras nervosas pré-ganglionares, a medula suprarrenal pode ser considerada um gânglio simpático especializado. 

Ao contrário de outros gânglios simpáticos, no entanto, a medula suprarrenal carece de sinapses distintas e libera suas secreções diretamente no sangue.


=== Suprimento sanguíneo ===

As glândulas suprarrenais têm uma das maiores taxas de suprimento sanguíneo por grama de tecido de qualquer órgão: até 60 pequenas artérias podem entrar em cada glândula. 

Três artérias geralmente suprem cada glândula supra-renal:
A artéria suprarrenal superior, um ramo da artéria frênica inferior
-A artéria suprarrenal média, um ramo direto da aorta abdominal
-A artéria suprarrenal inferior, um ramo da artéria renal Esses vasos sanguíneos suprem uma rede de pequenas artérias dentro da cápsula das glândulas suprarrenais. 

Fios finos da cápsula entram nas glândulas, levando sangue para elas.

O sangue venoso é drenado das glândulas pelas veias suprarrenais, geralmente uma para cada glândula:
- A veia suprarrenal direita drena para a veia cava inferior
- A veia suprarrenal esquerda drena na veia renal esquerda ou na veia frênica inferior esquerda. A veia suprarrenal central, na medula suprarrenal, é um tipo incomum de vaso sanguíneo.

Sua estrutura é diferente das outras veias, pois o músculo liso em sua túnica média (a camada média do vaso) está disposto em feixes conspícuos orientados longitudinalmente.


=== Variabilidade ===

As glândulas suprarrenais podem não se desenvolver ou podem estar fundidas na linha média atrás da aorta.

Estes estão associados a outras anormalidades congênitas, como falha no desenvolvimento dos rins ou rins fundidos.

A glândula pode se desenvolver com ausência parcial ou completa do córtex, ou pode se desenvolver em um local incomum.


== Função ==


A glândula suprarrenal secreta vários hormônios diferentes que são metabolizados por enzimas dentro da glândula ou em outras partes do corpo. 

Esses hormônios estão envolvidos em várias funções biológicas essenciais.


=== Corticosteróides ===

Os corticosteróides são um grupo de hormônios esteróides produzidos a partir do córtex da glândula supra-renal, de onde são nomeados.
Os mineralocorticóides, como a aldosterona, regulam o equilíbrio de sal ("mineral") e o volume sanguíneo.

Os glicocorticóides, como o cortisol, influenciam as taxas de metabolismo de proteínas, gorduras e açúcares ("glicose").

Andrógenos como dehidroepiandrosterona.MineralocorticóidesA glândula supra-renal produz aldosterona, um mineralocorticóide, que é importante na regulação do equilíbrio de sal ("mineral") e do volume sanguíneo. 

Nos rins, a aldosterona atua nos túbulos contorcidos distais e nos ductos coletores, aumentando a reabsorção de sódio e a excreção de íons potássio e hidrogênio.

A aldosterona é responsável pela reabsorção de cerca de 2% do filtrado glomerular filtrado.

A retenção de sódio também é uma resposta do cólon distal e das glândulas sudoríparas à estimulação do receptor de aldosterona.

A angiotensina II e o potássio extracelular são os dois principais reguladores da produção de aldosterona.

A quantidade de sódio presente no corpo afeta o volume extracelular, que por sua vez influencia a pressão arterial.

Portanto, os efeitos da aldosterona na retenção de sódio são importantes para a regulação da pressão arterial.

GlicocorticóidesCortisol é o principal glicocorticóide em humanos.

Nas espécies que não produzem cortisol, esse papel é desempenhado pela corticosterona.

Os glicocorticóides têm muitos efeitos no metabolismo.

Como o próprio nome sugere, eles aumentam o nível circulante de glicose.

Este é o resultado de um aumento na mobilização de aminoácidos da proteína e da estimulação da síntese de glicose a partir desses aminoácidos no fígado.

Além disso, aumentam os níveis de ácidos graxos livres, que as células podem utilizar como alternativa à glicose para obter energia.

Os glicocorticóides também têm efeitos não relacionados à regulação dos níveis de açúcar no sangue, incluindo a supressão do sistema imunológico e um potente efeito anti-inflamatório.

O cortisol reduz a capacidade dos osteoblastos de produzir novo tecido ósseo e diminui a absorção de cálcio no trato gastrointestinal. pituitária.

O cortisol não é liberado uniformemente durante o dia – suas concentrações no sangue são mais altas no início da manhã e mais baixas à noite, como resultado do ritmo circadiano da secreção de ACTH.

A cortisona é um produto inativo da ação da enzima 11β-HSD sobre o cortisol.

A reação catalisada pelo 11β-HSD é reversível, o que significa que pode transformar a cortisona administrada em cortisol, o hormônio biologicamente ativo.

Formação

Todos os hormônios corticosteróides compartilham o colesterol como um precursor comum.

Portanto, o primeiro passo na esteroidogênese é a captação ou síntese do colesterol.

As células que produzem hormônios esteróides podem adquirir colesterol através de dois caminhos.

A principal fonte é através do colesterol dietético transportado pelo sangue como ésteres de colesterol dentro das lipoproteínas de baixa densidade (LDL).

O LDL entra nas células por endocitose mediada por receptor.

A outra fonte de colesterol é a síntese no retículo endoplasmático da célula.

A síntese pode compensar quando os níveis de LDL são anormalmente baixos.

No lisossomo, os ésteres de colesterol são convertidos em colesterol livre, que é então usado para esteroidogênese ou armazenado na célula.

A parte inicial da conversão do colesterol em hormônios esteróides envolve uma série de enzimas da família do citocromo P450 que estão localizadas na membrana interna das mitocôndrias.

O transporte de colesterol da membrana externa para a interna é facilitado pela proteína reguladora aguda esteroidogênica e é a etapa limitante da síntese de esteroides.

As camadas da glândula suprarrenal diferem por função, com cada camada tendo enzimas distintas que produzem diferentes hormônios a partir de um precursor comum.

A primeira etapa enzimática na produção de todos os hormônios esteróides é a clivagem da cadeia lateral do colesterol, reação que forma a pregnenolona como produto e é catalisada pela enzima P450scc, também conhecida como colesterol desmolase.

Após a produção de pregnenolona, ​​enzimas específicas de cada camada cortical a modificam ainda mais.

As enzimas envolvidas neste processo incluem P450s mitocondriais e microssomais e desidrogenases hidroxiesteróides.

Normalmente, são necessárias várias etapas intermediárias nas quais a pregnenolona é modificada várias vezes para formar os hormônios funcionais. 

Enzimas que catalisam reações nessas vias metabólicas estão envolvidas em várias doenças endócrinas. 

Por exemplo, a forma mais comum de hiperplasia suprarrenal congênita se desenvolve como resultado da deficiência de 21-hidroxilase, uma enzima envolvida em uma etapa intermediária da produção de cortisol.

Regulamento

Os glicocorticóides estão sob a influência regulatória do eixo hipotálamo-hipófise-suprarenal (HPA). 

A síntese de glicocorticóides é estimulada pelo hormônio adrenocorticotrófico (ACTH), um hormônio liberado na corrente sanguínea pela hipófise anterior. 

Por sua vez, a produção de ACTH é estimulada pela presença do hormônio liberador de corticotropina (CRH), que é liberado pelos neurônios do hipotálamo. 

O ACTH atua nas células suprarrenais primeiro aumentando os níveis de StAR dentro das células e depois de todas as enzimas P450 esteroidogênicas.

O eixo HPA é um exemplo de sistema de feedback negativo, no qual o próprio cortisol atua como um inibidor direto da síntese de CRH e ACTH.

O eixo HPA também interage com o sistema imunológico através do aumento da secreção de ACTH na presença de certas moléculas da resposta inflamatória. em menor grau a concentração de ACTH.

Sensores de pressão arterial no aparelho justaglomerular dos rins liberam a enzima renina no sangue, que inicia uma cascata de reações que levam à formação de angiotensina II.

Os receptores de angiotensina nas células da zona glomerulosa reconhecem a substância e, ao se ligarem, estimulam a liberação de aldosterona.


=== Andrógenos ===

As células na zona reticular das glândulas suprarrenais produzem hormônios sexuais masculinos, ou andrógenos, sendo o mais importante o DHEA. 

Em geral, esses hormônios não têm um efeito global no corpo masculino, e são convertidos em andrógenos mais potentes como testosterona e DHT ou em estrogênios (hormônios sexuais femininos) nas gônadas, agindo dessa forma como intermediário metabólico.


=== Catecolaminas ===

Principalmente referido nos Estados Unidos como epinefrina e norepinefrina, suprarenalina e norsuprarenalina são catecolaminas, compostos solúveis em água que têm uma estrutura feita de um grupo catecol e um grupo amina. 

As glândulas suprarrenais são responsáveis ​​pela maior parte da suprarrenalina que circula no corpo, mas apenas por uma pequena quantidade de norsuprarenalina circulante.

Esses hormônios são liberados pela medula suprarrenal, que contém uma densa rede de vasos sanguíneos.

suprarenalina e norsuprarenalina atuam nos adrenorreceptores em todo o corpo, com efeitos que incluem aumento da pressão arterial e da frequência cardíaca.

As ações da suprarenalina e da norsuprarenalina são responsáveis ​​pela resposta de luta ou fuga, caracterizada por aceleração da respiração e da frequência cardíaca, aumento da pressão arterial e constrição dos vasos sanguíneos em muitas partes do corpo.

Formação As catecolaminas são produzidas nas células cromafins da medula da glândula suprarrenal, a partir da tirosina, um aminoácido não essencial derivado da alimentação ou produzido a partir da fenilalanina no fígado.

A enzima tirosina hidroxilase converte a tirosina em L-DOPA na primeira etapa da síntese de catecolaminas.

A L-DOPA é então convertida em dopamina antes que possa ser transformada em norsuprarenalina.

No citosol, a norsuprarenalina é convertida em epinefrina pela enzima feniletanolamina N-metiltransferase (PNMT) e armazenada em grânulos.

Os glicocorticóides produzidos no córtex suprarrenal estimulam a síntese de catecolaminas aumentando os níveis de tirosina hidroxilase e PNMT. A liberação de catecolaminas é estimulada pela ativação do sistema nervoso simpático.

Os nervos esplâncnicos do sistema nervoso simpático inervam a medula da glândula suprarrenal.

Quando ativado, evoca a liberação de catecolaminas dos grânulos de armazenamento, estimulando a abertura de canais de cálcio na membrana celular.


== Expressão de genes e proteínas ==


O genoma humano inclui aproximadamente 20.000 genes codificadores de proteínas e 70% desses genes são expressos nas glândulas suprarrenais adultas normais.

Apenas cerca de 250 genes são expressos mais especificamente nas glândulas suprarrenais em comparação com outros órgãos e tecidos.

Os genes específicos da glândula suprarrenal com o nível mais alto de expressão incluem membros da superfamília de enzimas do citocromo P450.

Proteínas correspondentes são expressas nos diferentes compartimentos da glândula suprarrenal, como CYP11A1, HSD3B2 e FDX1 envolvidas na síntese de hormônios esteroides e expressas nas camadas de células corticais, e PNMT e DBH envolvidas na síntese de norsuprarenalina e suprarrenal e expressas na medula.


== Desenvolvimento ==

As glândulas suprarrenais são compostas por dois tipos heterogêneos de tecido.

No centro está a medula suprarrenal, que produz suprarrenalina e norsuprarenalina e as libera na corrente sanguínea, como parte do sistema nervoso simpático.

Ao redor da medula está o córtex, que produz uma variedade de hormônios esteróides.

Esses tecidos provêm de diferentes precursores embriológicos e possuem distintas trajetórias de desenvolvimento pré-natal.

O córtex da glândula suprarrenal é derivado do mesoderma, enquanto a medula é derivada da crista neural, que é de origem ectodérmica.

As glândulas suprarrenais em um recém-nascido são muito maiores em proporção ao tamanho do corpo do que em um adulto.

Por exemplo, aos três meses de idade, as glândulas têm quatro vezes o tamanho dos rins.

O tamanho das glândulas diminui relativamente após o nascimento, principalmente devido ao encolhimento do córtex.

O córtex, que desaparece quase completamente por volta de 1 ano de idade, se desenvolve novamente a partir dos 4-5 anos.

As glândulas pesam cerca de 1 g ao nascer e se desenvolvem até um peso adulto de cerca de 4 gramas cada.

Em um feto, as glândulas são detectadas pela primeira vez após a sexta semana de desenvolvimento.


=== Cortex ===

o tecido do córtex suprarrenal é derivado do mesoderma intermediário.

Aparece pela primeira vez 33 dias após a fertilização, mostra as capacidades de produção de hormônios esteróides na oitava semana e sofre um rápido crescimento durante o primeiro trimestre da gravidez. 

O córtex suprarrenal fetal é diferente de seu homólogo adulto, pois é composto por duas zonas distintas: a zona "fetal" interna, que carrega a maior parte da atividade produtora de hormônios, e a zona "definitiva" externa, que está em um processo proliferativo. Estágio. 

A zona fetal produz grandes quantidades de andrógenos suprarrenais (hormônios sexuais masculinos) que são usados ​​pela placenta para a biossíntese de estrogênio. 

O desenvolvimento cortical da glândula suprarrenal é regulado principalmente pelo ACTH, um hormônio produzido pela glândula pituitária que estimula a síntese de cortisol. 

Durante a metade da gestação, a zona fetal ocupa a maior parte do volume cortical e produz 100-200 mg/dia de DHEA-S, um andrógeno e precursor de andrógenos e estrogênios (hormônios sexuais femininos). 

Os hormônios suprarrenais, especialmente os glicocorticóides, como o cortisol, são essenciais para o desenvolvimento pré-natal dos órgãos, principalmente para a maturação dos pulmões. 

A glândula suprarrenal diminui de tamanho após o nascimento devido ao rápido desaparecimento da zona fetal, com uma diminuição correspondente na secreção de andrógenos.


==== Adrenarca ====

Durante a primeira infância, a síntese e a secreção de andrógenos permanecem baixas, mas vários anos antes da puberdade (dos 6 aos 8 anos de idade) ocorrem alterações nos aspectos anatômicos e funcionais da produção cortical de andrógenos que levam ao aumento da secreção dos esteróides DHEA e DHEA-S. 

Essas mudanças fazem parte de um processo chamado adrenarca, que só foi descrito em humanos e alguns outros primatas.

A adrenarca é independente de ACTH ou gonadotrofinas e se correlaciona com um espessamento progressivo da camada da zona reticular do córtex.

Funcionalmente, a adrenarca fornece uma fonte de andrógenos para o desenvolvimento de pelos axilares e pubianos antes do início da puberdade.


=== Medula ===

A medula suprarrenal é derivada das células da crista neural, que vêm da camada ectodérmica do embrião.

Essas células migram de sua posição inicial e se agregam nas proximidades da aorta dorsal, um vaso sanguíneo primitivo, que ativa a diferenciação dessas células por meio da liberação de proteínas conhecidas como BMPs.

Essas células passam então por uma segunda migração da aorta dorsal para formar a medula suprarrenal e outros órgãos do sistema nervoso simpático. 

As células da medula suprarrenal são chamadas de células cromafins porque contêm grânulos que se coram com sais de cromo, característica que não está presente em todos os órgãos simpáticos. 

Os glicocorticóides produzidos no córtex suprarrenal já foram considerados responsáveis ​​pela diferenciação das células cromafins. 

Pesquisas mais recentes sugerem que a BMP-4 secretada no tecido suprarrenal é a principal responsável por isso, e que os glicocorticóides desempenham apenas um papel no desenvolvimento subsequente das células.


== Significado clínico ==


A função normal da glândula suprarrenal pode ser prejudicada por condições como infecções, tumores, distúrbios genéticos e doenças autoimunes, ou como efeito colateral da terapia médica. 

Esses distúrbios afetam a glândula diretamente (como em infecções ou doenças autoimunes) ou como resultado da desregulação da produção hormonal (como em alguns tipos de síndrome de Cushing), levando a um excesso ou insuficiência de hormônios suprarrenais e os sintomas relacionados.


=== Superprodução de corticosteróides ===



==== Síndrome de Cushing ====
A síndrome de Cushing é a manifestação do excesso de glicocorticóides. 

Pode ser resultado de um tratamento prolongado com glicocorticóides ou ser causado por uma doença de base que produza alterações no eixo HPA ou na produção de cortisol. 

As causas podem ainda ser classificadas em ACTH-dependentes ou ACTH-independentes. 

A causa mais comum da síndrome de Cushing endógena é um adenoma hipofisário que causa uma produção excessiva de ACTH. 

A doença produz uma grande variedade de sinais e sintomas que incluem obesidade, diabetes, aumento da pressão arterial, pêlos excessivos no corpo (hirsutismo), osteoporose, depressão e, principalmente, estrias na pele, causadas pelo seu afinamento progressivo.


==== Aldosteronismo primário ====

Quando a zona glomerulosa produz aldosterona em excesso, o resultado é aldosteronismo primário.

As causas para esta condição são hiperplasia bilateral (crescimento excessivo de tecido) das glândulas ou adenomas produtores de aldosterona (uma condição chamada síndrome de Conn).

O aldosteronismo primário produz hipertensão e desequilíbrio eletrolítico, aumentando a retenção de sódio por depleção de potássio.


=== insuficiência suprarrenal ===

insuficiência supra-renal (a deficiência de glicocorticóides) ocorre em cerca de 5 em 10.000 na população geral.

Doenças classificadas como insuficiência suprarrenal primária (incluindo doença de Addison e causas genéticas) afetam diretamente o córtex suprarrenal. 

Se um problema que afeta o eixo hipotálamo-hipófise-suprarrenal surge fora da glândula, é uma insuficiência suprarrenal secundária.


==== Doença de Addison ====

A doença de Addison refere-se ao hipossuprarenalismo primário, que é uma deficiência na produção de glicocorticóides e mineralocorticóides pela glândula supra-renal. 

No mundo ocidental, a doença de Addison é mais comumente uma condição autoimune, na qual o corpo produz anticorpos contra células do córtex suprarrenal. 

Em todo o mundo, a doença é mais frequentemente causada por infecção, principalmente por tuberculose. 

Uma característica distintiva da doença de Addison é a hiperpigmentação da pele, que se apresenta com outros sintomas inespecíficos, como fadiga.

Uma complicação observada na doença de Addison não tratada e em outros tipos de insuficiência suprarrenal primária é a crise suprarrenal, uma emergência médica na qual níveis baixos de glicocorticóides e mineralocorticóides resultam em choque hipovolêmico e sintomas como vômitos e febre. 

Uma crise suprarrenal pode levar progressivamente ao estupor e ao coma. 

O manejo das crises suprarrenais inclui a aplicação de injeções de hidrocortisona.


==== Insuficiência suprarrenal secundária ====

Na insuficiência suprarrenal secundária, uma disfunção do eixo hipotálamo-hipófise-suprarrenal leva à diminuição da estimulação do córtex suprarrenal. 

Além da supressão do eixo pela terapia com glicocorticóides, a causa mais comum de insuficiência suprarrenal secundária são os tumores que afetam a produção do hormônio adrenocorticotrófico (ACTH) pela hipófise.

Esse tipo de insuficiência suprarrenal geralmente não afeta a produção de mineralocorticóides, que estão sob regulação do sistema renina-angiotensina.


==== Hiperplasia suprarrenal congênita ====

A hiperplasia suprarrenal congênita é uma doença congênita na qual mutações de enzimas que produzem hormônios esteróides resultam em deficiência de glicocorticóides e mau funcionamento da alça de retroalimentação negativa do eixo HPA.

No eixo HPA, o cortisol (um glicocorticóide) inibe a liberação de CRH e ACTH, hormônios que, por sua vez, estimulam a síntese de corticosteróides.

Como o cortisol não pode ser sintetizado, esses hormônios são liberados em grandes quantidades e estimulam a produção de outros esteróides suprarrenais.

A forma mais comum de hiperplasia suprarrenal congênita é devido à deficiência de 21-hidroxilase. A 21-hidroxilase é necessária para a produção de mineralocorticóides e glicocorticóides, mas não de andrógenos.

Portanto, a estimulação do córtex suprarrenal com ACTH induz a liberação de quantidades excessivas de andrógenos suprarrenais, o que pode levar ao desenvolvimento de genitália ambígua e características sexuais secundárias.


=== tumores suprarrenais ===


Tumores suprarrenais são comumente encontrados como incidentalomas, tumores assintomáticos inesperados encontrados durante exames de imagem.

Eles são vistos em cerca de 3,4% dos exames de TC e, na maioria dos casos, são adenomas benignos.

os carcinomas suprarrenais são muito raros, com incidência de 1 caso por milhão por ano. Os feocromocitomas são tumores da medula suprarrenal que se originam de células cromafins.

Eles podem produzir uma variedade de sintomas inespecíficos, que incluem dores de cabeça, sudorese, ansiedade e palpitações.

Os sinais comuns incluem hipertensão e taquicardia.

A cirurgia, especialmente a laparoscopia suprarrenal, é o tratamento mais comum para pequenos feocromocitomas.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/suprarenal_gland
