

TONGUE


The tongue is a muscular organ in the mouth of a typical vertebrate. 

It manipulates food for mastication and swallowing as part of the digestive process, and is the primary organ of taste. 

The tongue's upper surface (dorsum) is covered by taste buds housed in numerous lingual papillae. 

It is sensitive and kept moist by saliva and is richly supplied with nerves and blood vessels. 

The tongue also serves as a natural means of cleaning the teeth. 

A major function of the tongue is the enabling of speech in humans and vocalization in other animals.

The human tongue is divided into two parts, an oral part at the front and a pharyngeal part at the back. 

The left and right sides are also separated along most of its length by a vertical section of fibrous tissue (the lingual septum) that results in a groove, the median sulcus, on the tongue's surface.
There are two groups of muscles of the tongue. 

The four intrinsic muscles alter the shape of the tongue and are not attached to bone. 

The four paired extrinsic muscles change the position of the tongue and are anchored to bone.


== Etymology ==

The word tongue derives from the Old English tunge, which comes from Proto-Germanic *tungōn. 

It has cognates in other Germanic languages—for example tonge in West Frisian, tong in Dutch and Afrikaans, Zunge in German, tunge in Danish and Norwegian, and tunga in Icelandic, Faroese and Swedish. 

The ue ending of the word seems to be a fourteenth-century attempt to show "proper pronunciation", but it is "neither etymological nor phonetic". 

Some used the spelling tunge and tonge as late as the sixteenth century.


== In humans ==


=== Structure ===


The tongue is a muscular hydrostat that forms part of the floor of the oral cavity. 

The left and right sides of the tongue are separated by a vertical section of fibrous tissue known as the lingual septum. 

This division is along the length of the tongue save for the very back of the pharyngeal part and is visible as a groove called the median sulcus. 

The human tongue is divided into anterior and posterior parts by the terminal sulcus which is a V-shaped groove. 

The apex of the terminal sulcus is marked by a blind foramen, the foramen cecum, which is a remnant of the median thyroid diverticulum in early embryonic development. 

The anterior oral part is the visible part situated at the front and makes up roughly two-thirds the length of the tongue. 

The posterior pharyngeal part is the part closest to the throat, roughly one-third of its length. 

These parts differ in terms of their embryological development and nerve supply.
The anterior tongue is, at its apex, thin and narrow. 

It is directed forward against the lingual surfaces of the lower incisor teeth. 

The posterior part is, at its root, directed backward, and connected with the hyoid bone by the hyoglossi and genioglossi muscles and the hyoglossal membrane, with the epiglottis by three glossoepiglottic folds of mucous membrane, with the soft palate by the glossopalatine arches, and with the pharynx by the superior pharyngeal constrictor muscle and the mucous membrane. 

It also forms the anterior wall of the oropharynx.
The average length of the human tongue from the oropharynx to the tip is 10 cm. 

The average weight of the human tongue from adult males is 70g and for adult females 60g.In phonetics and phonology, a distinction is made between the tip of the tongue and the blade (the portion just behind the tip). 

Sounds made with the tongue tip are said to be apical, while those made with the tongue blade are said to be laminal.


==== Upper surface of the tongue ====

The upper surface of the tongue is called the dorsum, and is divided by a groove into symmetrical halves by the median sulcus. 

The foramen cecum marks the end of this division (at about 2.5 cm from the root of the tongue) and the beginning of the terminal sulcus. 

The foramen cecum is also the point of attachment of the thyroglossal duct and is formed during the descent of the thyroid diverticulum in embryonic development.

The terminal sulcus is a shallow groove that runs forward as a shallow groove in a V shape from the foramen cecum, forwards and outwards to the margins (borders) of the tongue. 

The terminal sulcus divides the tongue into a posterior pharyngeal part and an anterior oral part. 

The pharyngeal part is supplied by the glossopharyngeal nerve and the oral part is supplied by the lingual nerve (a branch of the mandibular branch (V3) of the trigeminal nerve) for somatosensory perception and by the chorda tympani (a branch of the facial nerve) for taste perception.

Both parts of the tongue develop from different pharyngeal arches.


==== Undersurface of the tongue ====

On the undersurface of the tongue is a fold of mucous membrane called the frenulum that tethers the tongue at the midline to the floor of the mouth. 

On either side of the frenulum are small prominences called sublingual caruncles that the major salivary submandibular glands drain into.


==== Muscles ====

The eight muscles of the human tongue are classified as either intrinsic or extrinsic. 

The four intrinsic muscles act to change the shape of the tongue, and are not attached to any bone. 

The four extrinsic muscles act to change the position of the tongue, and are anchored to bone.


===== Extrinsic =====

The four extrinsic muscles originate from bone and extend to the tongue. 

They are the genioglossus, the hyoglossus (often including the chondroglossus) the styloglossus, and the palatoglossus. 

Their main functions are altering the tongue's position allowing for protrusion, retraction, and side-to-side movement.The genioglossus arises from the mandible and protrudes the tongue. 

It is also known as the tongue's "safety muscle" since it is the only muscle that propels the tongue forward.

The hyoglossus, arises from the hyoid bone and retracts and depresses the tongue. 

The chondroglossus is often included with this muscle.

The styloglossus arises from the styloid process of the temporal bone and draws the sides of the tongue up to create a trough for swallowing.

The palatoglossus arises from the palatine aponeurosis, and depresses the soft palate, moves the palatoglossal fold towards the midline, and elevates the back of the tongue during swallowing.


===== Intrinsic =====

Four paired intrinsic muscles of the tongue originate and insert within the tongue, running along its length. 

They are the superior longitudinal muscle, the inferior longitudinal muscle, the vertical muscle, and the transverse muscle. 

These muscles alter the shape of the tongue by lengthening and shortening it, curling and uncurling its apex and edges as in tongue rolling, and flattening and rounding its surface. 

This provides shape and helps facilitate speech, swallowing, and eating.The superior longitudinal muscle runs along the upper surface of the tongue under the mucous membrane, and elevates, assists in retraction of, or deviates the tip of the tongue. 

It originates near the epiglottis, at the hyoid bone, from the median fibrous septum.

The inferior longitudinal muscle lines the sides of the tongue, and is joined to the styloglossus muscle.

The vertical muscle is located in the middle of the tongue, and joins the superior and inferior longitudinal muscles.

The transverse muscle divides the tongue at the middle, and is attached to the mucous membranes that run along the sides.


==== Blood supply ====

The tongue receives its blood supply primarily from the lingual artery, a branch of the external carotid artery. 

The lingual veins drain into the internal jugular vein. 

The floor of the mouth also receives its blood supply from the lingual artery. 

There is also a secondary blood supply to the root of tongue from the tonsillar branch of the facial artery and the ascending pharyngeal artery.

An area in the neck sometimes called the Pirogov triangle is formed by the intermediate tendon of the digastric muscle, the posterior border of the mylohyoid muscle, and the hypoglossal nerve. 

The lingual artery is a good place to stop severe hemorrhage from the tongue.


==== Nerve supply ====

Innervation of the tongue consists of motor fibers, special sensory fibers for taste, and general sensory fibers for sensation.

Motor supply for all intrinsic and extrinsic muscles of the tongue is supplied by efferent motor nerve fibers from the hypoglossal nerve (CN XII), with the exception of the palatoglossus, which is innervated by the vagus nerve (CN X).Innervation of taste and sensation is different for the anterior and posterior part of the tongue because they are derived from different embryological structures (pharyngeal arch 1 and pharyngeal arches 3 and 4, respectively).

-Anterior two-thirds of tongue (anterior to the vallate papillae):

Taste: chorda tympani branch of the facial nerve (CN VII) via special visceral afferent fibers

Sensation: lingual branch of the mandibular (V3) division of the trigeminal nerve (CN V) via general visceral afferent fibers

-Posterior one third of tongue:

Taste and sensation: glossopharyngeal nerve (CN IX) via a mixture of special and general visceral afferent fibers
Base of tongue

Taste and sensation: internal branch of the superior laryngeal nerve (itself a branch of the vagus nerve, CN X)


==== Lymphatic drainage ====

The tip of tongue drains to the submental nodes. 

The left and right halves of the anterior two-thirds of the tongue drains to submandibular lymph nodes, while the posterior one-third of the tongue drains to the jugulo-omohyoid nodes.


==== Microanatomy ====

The upper surface of the tongue is covered in masticatory mucosa, a type of oral mucosa which is of keratinized stratified squamous epithelium. 

Embedded in this are numerous papillae, some of which house the taste buds and their taste receptors. 

The lingual papillae consist of filiform, fungiform, vallate and foliate papillae, and only the filiform papillae are not associated with any taste buds.

The tongue can divide itself in dorsal and ventral surface. 

The dorsal surface is a stratified squamous keratinized epithelium which is characterized by numerous mucosal projections called papillae. 

The lingual papillae covers the dorsal side of the tongue towards the front of the terminal groove. 

The ventral surface is stratified squamous non-keratinized epithelium which is smooth.


=== Development ===


The tongue begins to develop in the fourth week of embryonic development from a median swelling – the median tongue bud (tuberculum impar) of the first pharyngeal arch.In the fifth week a pair of lateral lingual swellings, one on the right side and one on the left, form on the first pharyngeal arch. 

These lingual swellings quickly expand and cover the median tongue bud. 

They form the anterior part of the tongue that makes up two-thirds of the length of the tongue, and continue to develop through prenatal development. 

The line of their fusion is marked by the median sulcus.In the fourth week a swelling appears from the second pharyngeal arch, in the midline, called the copula. 

During the fifth and sixth weeks the copula is overgrown by a swelling from the third and fourth arches (mainly from the third arch) called the hypopharyngeal eminence, and this develops into the posterior part of the tongue (the other third). 

The hypopharyngeal eminence develops mainly by the growth of endoderm from the third pharyngeal arch. 

The boundary between the two parts of the tongue, the anterior from the first arch and the posterior from the third arch is marked by the terminal sulcus. 

The terminal sulcus is shaped like a V with the tip of the V situated posteriorly. 

At the tip of the terminal sulcus is the foramen cecum, which is the point of attachment of the thyroglossal duct where the embryonic thyroid begins to descend.


=== Function ===


==== Taste ====

Chemicals that stimulate taste receptor cells are known as tastants. 

Once a tastant is dissolved in saliva, it can make contact with the plasma membrane of the gustatory hairs, which are the sites of taste transduction.

The tongue is equipped with many taste buds on its dorsal surface, and each taste bud is equipped with taste receptor cells that can sense particular classes of tastes. 

Distinct types of taste receptor cells respectively detect substances that are sweet, bitter, salty, sour, spicy, or taste of umami. 

Umami receptor cells are the least understood and accordingly are the type most intensively under research.


==== Mastication ====
The tongue is an important accessory organ in the digestive system. 

The tongue is used for crushing food against the hard palate, during mastication and manipulation of food for softening prior to swallowing. 

The epithelium on the tongue's upper, or dorsal surface is keratinised. 

Consequently, the tongue can grind against the hard palate without being itself damaged or irritated.


==== Speech ====

The intrinsic muscles of the tongue enable the shaping of the tongue which facilitates speech.


==== Intimacy ====

The tongue plays a role in physical intimacy and sexuality. 

The tongue is part of the erogenous zone of the mouth and can be used in intimate contact, as in the French kiss and in oral sex. 

The tongue can be used for stimulating the clitoris and other areas of the vulva.


=== Clinical significance ===


==== Disease ====

A congenital disorder of the tongue is that of ankyloglossia also known as tongue-tie. 

The tongue is tied to the floor of the mouth by a very short and thickened frenulum and this affects speech, eating, and swallowing.

The tongue is prone to several pathologies including glossitis and other inflammations such as geographic tongue, and median rhomboid glossitis; burning mouth syndrome, oral hairy leukoplakia, oral candidiasis (thrush), black hairy tongue and fissured tongue.

There are several types of oral cancer that mainly affect the tongue. 

Mostly these are squamous cell carcinomas.Food debris, desquamated epithelial cells and bacteria often form a visible tongue coating. 

This coating has been identified as a major factor contributing to bad breath (halitosis), which can be managed by using a tongue cleaner.


==== Medication delivery ====

The sublingual region underneath the front of the tongue is an ideal location for the administration of certain medications into the body. 

The oral mucosa is very thin underneath the tongue, and is underlain by a plexus of veins. 

The sublingual route takes advantage of the highly vascular quality of the oral cavity, and allows for the speedy application of medication into the cardiovascular system, bypassing the gastrointestinal tract. 

This is the only convenient and efficacious route of administration (apart from Intravenous therapy) of nitroglycerin to a patient suffering chest pain from angina pectoris.


== Other animals ==


The muscles of the tongue evolved in amphibians from occipital somites. 

Most amphibians show a proper tongue after their metamorphosis. 

As a consequence most vertebrate animals—amphibians, reptiles, birds, and mammals—have tongues (the frog family of pipids lack tongue). 

In mammals such as dogs and cats, the tongue is often used to clean the fur and body by licking. 

The tongues of these species have a very rough texture which allows them to remove oils and parasites. 

Some dogs have a tendency to consistently lick a part of their foreleg which can result in a skin condition known as a lick granuloma. 

A dog's tongue also acts as a heat regulator. 

As a dog increases its exercise the tongue will increase in size due to greater blood flow. 

The tongue hangs out of the dog's mouth and the moisture on the tongue will work to cool the bloodflow.Some animals have tongues that are specially adapted for catching prey. 

For example, chameleons, frogs, pangolins and anteaters have prehensile tongues.

Other animals may have organs that are analogous to tongues, such as a butterfly's proboscis or a radula on a mollusc, but these are not homologous with the tongues found in vertebrates and often have little resemblance in function. 

For example, butterflies do not lick with their proboscides; they suck through them, and the proboscis is not a single organ, but two jaws held together to form a tube. 

Many species of fish have small folds at the base of their mouths that might informally be called tongues, but they lack a muscular structure like the true tongues found in most tetrapods.


== Society and culture ==


=== Figures of speech ===

The tongue can be used as a metonym for language. 

For example, the New Testament of the Bible, in the Book of Acts of the Apostles, Jesus' disciples on the Day of Pentecost received a type of spiritual gift: "there appeared unto them cloven tongues like as of fire, and it sat upon each of them. 

And they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to speak with other tongues ....", which amazed the crowd of Jewish people in Jerusalem, who were from various parts of the Roman Empire but could now understand what was being preached. 

The phrase mother tongue is used as a child's first language. 

Many languages have the same word for "tongue" and "language".
A common temporary failure in word retrieval from memory is referred to as the tip-of-the-tongue phenomenon. 

The expression tongue in cheek refers to a statement that is not to be taken entirely seriously – something said or done with subtle ironic or sarcastic humour. 

A tongue twister is a phrase made specifically to be very difficult to pronounce. 

Aside from being a medical condition, "tongue-tied" means being unable to say what you want due to confusion or restriction. 

The phrase "cat got your tongue" refers to when a person is speechless. 

To "bite one's tongue" is a phrase which describes holding back an opinion to avoid causing offence. 

A "slip of the tongue" refers to an unintentional utterance, such as a Freudian slip. 

The "gift of tongues" refers to when one is uncommonly gifted to be able to speak in a foreign language, often as a type of spiritual gift. 

Speaking in tongues is a common phrase used to describe glossolalia, which is to make smooth, language-resembling sounds that is no true spoken language itself. 

A deceptive person is said to have a forked tongue, and a smooth-talking person said to have a silver tongue.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tongue
;;;ES;;;



LENGUA


La lengua es un órgano muscular en la boca de un vertebrado típico.

Manipula los alimentos para la masticación y la deglución como parte del proceso digestivo, y es el principal órgano del gusto.

La superficie superior de la lengua (dorso) está cubierta por papilas gustativas alojadas en numerosas papilas linguales.

Es sensible y se mantiene húmedo por la saliva y está ricamente provisto de nervios y vasos sanguíneos. 

La lengua también sirve como un medio natural para limpiar los dientes. 

Una función importante de la lengua es permitir el habla en humanos y la vocalización en otros animales.

La lengua humana se divide en dos partes, una parte oral en la parte delantera y una parte faríngea en la parte posterior. 

Los lados izquierdo y derecho también están separados en la mayor parte de su longitud por una sección vertical de tejido fibroso (el tabique lingual) que da como resultado un surco, el surco medio, en la superficie de la lengua.
Hay dos grupos de músculos de la lengua. 

Los cuatro músculos intrínsecos alteran la forma de la lengua y no están unidos al hueso. 

Los cuatro músculos extrínsecos emparejados cambian la posición de la lengua y están anclados al hueso.


== Etimología ==

La palabra lengua deriva del inglés antiguo tunge, que proviene del protogermánico *tungōn. 

Tiene cognados en otros idiomas germánicos, por ejemplo, tonge en frisón occidental, tong en holandés y afrikáans, zunge en alemán, tunge en danés y noruego, y tunga en islandés, feroés y sueco. 

La terminación ue de la palabra parece ser un intento del siglo XIV de mostrar una "pronunciación adecuada", pero "no es ni etimológica ni fonética". 

Algunos usaron la ortografía tunge y tonge hasta el siglo XVI.


== En humanos ==


=== Estructura ===


La lengua es un hidrostato muscular que forma parte del suelo de la cavidad oral. 

Los lados izquierdo y derecho de la lengua están separados por una sección vertical de tejido fibroso conocida como tabique lingual. 

Esta división se encuentra a lo largo de la lengua, excepto en la parte posterior de la parte faríngea, y es visible como un surco llamado surco medio.

La lengua humana está dividida en partes anterior y posterior por el surco terminal, que es un surco en forma de V.

El vértice del surco terminal está marcado por un agujero ciego, el agujero ciego, que es un remanente del divertículo tiroideo mediano en el desarrollo embrionario temprano.

La parte oral anterior es la parte visible situada en la parte delantera y constituye aproximadamente dos tercios de la longitud de la lengua.

La parte faríngea posterior es la parte más cercana a la garganta, aproximadamente un tercio de su longitud.

Estas partes difieren en cuanto a su desarrollo embriológico y suministro de nervios.
La lengua anterior es, en su vértice, delgada y estrecha.

Se dirige hacia adelante contra las superficies linguales de los dientes incisivos inferiores. 

La parte posterior está, en su raíz, dirigida hacia atrás y conectada con el hueso hioides por los músculos hioglosos y genioglosos y la membrana hioglosa, con la epiglotis por tres pliegues glosoepiglóticos de la membrana mucosa, con el paladar blando por los arcos glosopalatinos, y con la faringe por el músculo constrictor faríngeo superior y la membrana mucosa. 

También forma la pared anterior de la orofaringe.
La longitud media de la lengua humana desde la orofaringe hasta la punta es de 10 cm. 

El peso medio de la lengua humana de los machos adultos es de 70 g y el de las hembras adultas de 60 g. En fonética y fonología, se hace una distinción entre la punta de la lengua y la lámina (la parte justo detrás de la punta). 

Se dice que los sonidos que se hacen con la punta de la lengua son apicales, mientras que los que se hacen con el abatelenguas se dice que son laminales.


==== Superficie superior de la lengua ====

La superficie superior de la lengua se llama dorso y está dividida por un surco en mitades simétricas por el surco medio.

El agujero ciego marca el final de esta división (a unos 2,5 cm de la raíz de la lengua) y el comienzo del surco terminal.

El agujero ciego es también el punto de unión del conducto tirogloso y se forma durante el descenso del divertículo tiroideo en el desarrollo embrionario.

El surco terminal es un surco poco profundo que corre hacia adelante como un surco poco profundo en forma de V desde el agujero ciego, hacia adelante y hacia afuera hasta los márgenes (bordes) de la lengua.

El surco terminal divide la lengua en una parte faríngea posterior y una parte oral anterior.

La parte faríngea está inervada por el nervio glosofaríngeo y la parte oral está inervada por el nervio lingual (una rama de la rama mandibular (V3) del nervio trigémino) para la percepción somatosensorial y por la cuerda del tímpano (una rama del nervio facial) para la percepción del gusto.

Ambas partes de la lengua se desarrollan a partir de diferentes arcos faríngeos.


==== Superficie inferior de la lengua ====

En la superficie inferior de la lengua hay un pliegue de membrana mucosa llamado frenillo que une la lengua en la línea media al piso de la boca. 

A cada lado del frenillo hay pequeñas prominencias llamadas carúnculas sublinguales en las que drenan las principales glándulas salivales submandibulares.


==== Músculos ====

Los ocho músculos de la lengua humana se clasifican como intrínsecos o extrínsecos. 

Los cuatro músculos intrínsecos actúan para cambiar la forma de la lengua y no están unidos a ningún hueso. 

Los cuatro músculos extrínsecos actúan para cambiar la posición de la lengua y están anclados al hueso.


===== Extrínseco =====

Los cuatro músculos extrínsecos se originan en el hueso y se extienden hasta la lengua. 

Son el geniogloso, el hiogloso (que a menudo incluye el condrogloso), el estilogloso y el palatogloso. 

Sus funciones principales son alterar la posición de la lengua, lo que permite la protrusión, la retracción y el movimiento de lado a lado. El geniogloso surge de la mandíbula y sobresale la lengua. 

También se le conoce como el "músculo de seguridad" de la lengua, ya que es el único músculo que impulsa la lengua hacia adelante.

El hiogloso surge del hueso hioides y retrae y deprime la lengua. 

El condrogloso a menudo se incluye con este músculo.

El estilogloso surge del proceso estiloides del hueso temporal y levanta los lados de la lengua para crear un canal para tragar.

El palatogloso surge de la aponeurosis palatina y deprime el paladar blando, mueve el pliegue palatogloso hacia la línea media y eleva la parte posterior de la lengua durante la deglución.


===== Intrínseco =====

Cuatro músculos intrínsecos emparejados de la lengua se originan y se insertan dentro de la lengua, a lo largo de su longitud.

Son el músculo longitudinal superior, el músculo longitudinal inferior, el músculo vertical y el músculo transverso.

Estos músculos alteran la forma de la lengua alargándola y acortándola, enroscando y desenroscando su ápice y bordes como en la lengua rodando, y aplanando y redondeando su superficie.

Esto proporciona forma y ayuda a facilitar el habla, la deglución y la alimentación. El músculo longitudinal superior corre a lo largo de la superficie superior de la lengua debajo de la membrana mucosa y eleva, ayuda a retraer o desvía la punta de la lengua.

Se origina cerca de la epiglotis, en el hueso hioides, del tabique fibroso medio.

El músculo longitudinal inferior recubre los lados de la lengua y se une al músculo estilogloso.

El músculo vertical se encuentra en el centro de la lengua y une los músculos longitudinales superior e inferior.

El músculo transverso divide la lengua por la mitad y está unido a las membranas mucosas que recorren los costados.


==== Suministro de sangre ====

La lengua recibe su riego sanguíneo principalmente de la arteria lingual, una rama de la arteria carótida externa.

Las venas linguales desembocan en la vena yugular interna.

El piso de la boca también recibe su suministro de sangre de la arteria lingual.

También hay un suministro de sangre secundario a la raíz de la lengua desde la rama amigdalina de la arteria facial y la arteria faríngea ascendente.

Un área en el cuello a veces llamada triángulo de Pirogov está formada por el tendón intermedio del músculo digástrico, el borde posterior del músculo milohioideo y el nervio hipogloso.

La arteria lingual es un buen lugar para detener una hemorragia grave de la lengua.


==== Suministro nervioso ====

La inervación de la lengua consta de fibras motoras, fibras sensoriales especiales para el gusto y fibras sensoriales generales para la sensación.

La inervación motora de todos los músculos intrínsecos y extrínsecos de la lengua proviene de fibras nerviosas motoras eferentes del nervio hipogloso (NC XII), con la excepción del palatogloso, que está inervado por el nervio vago (NC X). Inervación del gusto y la sensación es diferente para la parte anterior y posterior de la lengua porque se derivan de diferentes estructuras embriológicas (arco faríngeo 1 y arcos faríngeos 3 y 4, respectivamente).

-Dos tercios anteriores de la lengua (anterior a las papilas valladas):

Gusto: rama de la cuerda del tímpano del nervio facial (NC VII) a través de fibras aferentes viscerales especiales

Sensación: rama lingual de la división mandibular (V3) del nervio trigémino (CN V) a través de fibras aferentes viscerales generales

- Tercio posterior de la lengua:

Gusto y sensación: nervio glosofaríngeo (CN IX) a través de una mezcla de fibras aferentes viscerales especiales y generales
base de la lengua

Gusto y sensación: rama interna del nervio laríngeo superior (en sí mismo una rama del nervio vago, CN X)


==== Drenaje linfático ====

La punta de la lengua drena a los ganglios submentonianos.

Las mitades izquierda y derecha de los dos tercios anteriores de la lengua drenan en los ganglios linfáticos submandibulares, mientras que el tercio posterior de la lengua drena en los ganglios yuguloomohioideos.


==== Microanatomía ====

La superficie superior de la lengua está cubierta de mucosa masticatoria, un tipo de mucosa oral que es de epitelio escamoso estratificado queratinizado.

Incrustadas en esto hay numerosas papilas, algunas de las cuales albergan las papilas gustativas y sus receptores gustativos.

Las papilas linguales consisten en papilas filiformes, fungiformes, valladas y foliadas, y solo las papilas filiformes no están asociadas con papilas gustativas.

La lengua puede dividirse en superficie dorsal y ventral.

La superficie dorsal es un epitelio queratinizado escamoso estratificado que se caracteriza por numerosas proyecciones mucosas llamadas papilas.

Las papilas linguales cubren el lado dorsal de la lengua hacia el frente del surco terminal.

La superficie ventral es un epitelio escamoso estratificado no queratinizado que es liso.


=== Desarrollo ===


La lengua comienza a desarrollarse en la cuarta semana del desarrollo embrionario a partir de una inflamación mediana: el brote de la lengua mediana (tuberculum impar) del primer arco faríngeo. En la quinta semana, un par de inflamaciones linguales laterales, una en el lado derecho y otra en la izquierda, forma sobre el primer arco faríngeo.

Estas inflamaciones linguales se expanden rápidamente y cubren la yema media de la lengua. 

Forman la parte anterior de la lengua que constituye dos tercios de la longitud de la lengua y continúan desarrollándose durante el desarrollo prenatal. 

La línea de su fusión está marcada por el surco medio. En la cuarta semana aparece una tumefacción a partir del segundo arco faríngeo, en la línea media, denominada cópula. 

Durante la quinta y la sexta semana, la cópula se cubre de una hinchazón del tercer y cuarto arco (principalmente del tercer arco) llamada eminencia hipofaríngea, y esto se desarrolla en la parte posterior de la lengua (el otro tercio). 

La eminencia hipofaríngea se desarrolla principalmente por el crecimiento del endodermo del tercer arco faríngeo. 

El límite entre las dos partes de la lengua, la anterior del primer arco y la posterior del tercer arco está marcada por el surco terminal. 

El surco terminal tiene forma de V con la punta de la V situada en la parte posterior. 

En la punta del surco terminal se encuentra el agujero ciego, que es el punto de unión del conducto tirogloso donde la tiroides embrionaria comienza a descender.


=== Función ===


==== Sabor ====

Los productos químicos que estimulan las células receptoras del gusto se conocen como saborizantes. 

Una vez que un saborizante se disuelve en la saliva, puede entrar en contacto con la membrana plasmática de los pelos gustativos, que son los sitios de transducción del gusto.

La lengua está equipada con muchas papilas gustativas en su superficie dorsal, y cada papila gustativa está equipada con células receptoras del gusto que pueden detectar clases particulares de sabores. 

Distintos tipos de células receptoras del gusto detectan respectivamente sustancias que son dulces, amargas, saladas, ácidas, picantes o con sabor a umami.

Las células del receptor Umami son las menos comprendidas y, en consecuencia, son el tipo que se investiga más intensamente.


==== Masticación ====
La lengua es un órgano accesorio importante en el sistema digestivo.

La lengua se utiliza para aplastar los alimentos contra el paladar duro, durante la masticación y la manipulación de los alimentos para ablandarlos antes de tragarlos.

El epitelio de la superficie superior o dorsal de la lengua está queratinizado.

En consecuencia, la lengua puede rozar contra el paladar duro sin dañarse o irritarse.


==== Discurso ====

Los músculos intrínsecos de la lengua permiten la formación de la lengua que facilita el habla.


==== Intimidad ====

La lengua juega un papel en la intimidad física y la sexualidad.

La lengua forma parte de la zona erógena de la boca y se puede utilizar en el contacto íntimo, como en el beso francés y en el sexo oral. 

La lengua se puede usar para estimular el clítoris y otras áreas de la vulva.


=== Importancia clínica ===


==== Enfermedad ====

Un trastorno congénito de la lengua es el de la anquiloglosia, también conocida como lengua atada. 

La lengua está unida al piso de la boca por un frenillo muy corto y engrosado y esto afecta el habla, la alimentación y la deglución.

La lengua es propensa a varias patologías, incluida la glositis y otras inflamaciones, como la lengua geográfica y la glositis romboidal mediana; síndrome de boca ardiente, leucoplasia oral vellosa, candidiasis oral (aftas), lengua negra vellosa y lengua fisurada.

Hay varios tipos de cáncer oral que afectan principalmente a la lengua. 

En su mayoría, estos son carcinomas de células escamosas. Los restos de comida, las células epiteliales descamadas y las bacterias a menudo forman una cubierta visible en la lengua. 

Este revestimiento se ha identificado como un factor importante que contribuye al mal aliento (halitosis), que se puede controlar con un limpiador de lengua.


==== Entrega de medicamentos ====

La región sublingual debajo de la parte delantera de la lengua es un lugar ideal para la administración de ciertos medicamentos en el cuerpo. 

La mucosa oral es muy delgada debajo de la lengua y está sustentada por un plexo de venas. 

La ruta sublingual aprovecha la calidad altamente vascular de la cavidad oral y permite la aplicación rápida de medicamentos en el sistema cardiovascular, sin pasar por el tracto gastrointestinal. 

Esta es la única vía de administración conveniente y eficaz (aparte de la terapia intravenosa) de nitroglicerina a un paciente que sufre dolor de pecho por angina de pecho.


== Otros animales ==


Los músculos de la lengua evolucionaron en los anfibios a partir de los somitas occipitales. 

La mayoría de los anfibios muestran una lengua adecuada después de su metamorfosis. 

Como consecuencia, la mayoría de los animales vertebrados (anfibios, reptiles, aves y mamíferos) tienen lenguas (la familia de las ranas de los pipidos carece de lengua). 

En mamíferos como perros y gatos, la lengua se usa a menudo para limpiar el pelaje y el cuerpo lamiendo. 

Las lenguas de estas especies tienen una textura muy rugosa que les permite eliminar aceites y parásitos. 

Algunos perros tienden a lamerse constantemente una parte de la pata delantera, lo que puede provocar una afección cutánea conocida como granuloma por lamido. 

La lengua de un perro también actúa como un regulador de calor. 

A medida que un perro aumenta su ejercicio, la lengua aumentará de tamaño debido al mayor flujo sanguíneo.

La lengua cuelga fuera de la boca del perro y la humedad en la lengua funcionará para enfriar el flujo de sangre. Algunos animales tienen lenguas que están especialmente adaptadas para atrapar presas.

Por ejemplo, los camaleones, las ranas, los pangolines y los osos hormigueros tienen lenguas prensiles.

Otros animales pueden tener órganos que son análogos a las lenguas, como la probóscide de una mariposa o una rádula en un molusco, pero estos no son homólogos con las lenguas que se encuentran en los vertebrados y, a menudo, tienen poca semejanza en función.

Por ejemplo, las mariposas no se lamen con sus probóscides; chupan a través de ellos, y la probóscide no es un solo órgano, sino dos mandíbulas unidas para formar un tubo.

Muchas especies de peces tienen pequeños pliegues en la base de la boca que informalmente podrían llamarse lenguas, pero carecen de una estructura muscular como las verdaderas lenguas que se encuentran en la mayoría de los tetrápodos.


== Sociedad y cultura ==


=== Figuras del lenguaje ===

La lengua se puede utilizar como metonimia de lenguaje. 

Por ejemplo, el Nuevo Testamento de la Biblia, en el Libro de los Hechos de los Apóstoles, los discípulos de Jesús en el Día de Pentecostés recibieron una especie de don espiritual: “se les aparecieron lenguas repartidas como de fuego, y se asentaron sobre cada uno de ellos. 

Y fueron todos llenos del Espíritu Santo, y comenzaron a hablar en otras lenguas...", lo que asombró a la multitud de judíos en Jerusalén, que eran de varias partes del Imperio Romano pero que ahora podían entender lo que se predicaba. . 

La frase lengua materna se usa como el primer idioma de un niño. 

Muchos idiomas tienen la misma palabra para "lengua" y "idioma".
Una falla temporal común en la recuperación de palabras de la memoria se conoce como el fenómeno de la punta de la lengua.

La expresión irónica se refiere a una declaración que no debe tomarse del todo en serio, algo dicho o hecho con un sutil humor irónico o sarcástico.

Un trabalenguas es una frase hecha específicamente para que sea muy difícil de pronunciar.

Aparte de ser una condición médica, "lengua trabada" significa no poder decir lo que quieres debido a la confusión o la restricción.

La frase "el gato te comió la lengua" se refiere a cuando una persona se queda sin palabras.

Morderse la lengua es una frase que describe reprimir una opinión para evitar ofender.

Un "lapsus de lengua" se refiere a una expresión no intencional, como un desliz freudiano. 

El "don de lenguas" se refiere a cuando uno tiene un don poco común para poder hablar en un idioma extranjero, a menudo como un tipo de don espiritual. 

Hablar en lenguas es una frase común que se usa para describir la glosolalia, que consiste en producir sonidos suaves que se asemejan a un lenguaje que no es un verdadero lenguaje hablado en sí mismo. 

Se dice que una persona engañosa tiene una lengua bífida, y una persona que habla con suavidad se dice que tiene una lengua plateada.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lengua

;;;FR;;;



LANGUE


La langue est un organe musculaire dans la bouche d'un vertébré typique. 

Il manipule les aliments pour la mastication et la déglutition dans le cadre du processus digestif et est le principal organe du goût. 

La surface supérieure de la langue (dorsum) est recouverte de papilles gustatives logées dans de nombreuses papilles linguales. 

Il est sensible et maintenu humide par la salive et est richement alimenté en nerfs et en vaisseaux sanguins.

La langue sert également de moyen naturel de nettoyage des dents.

Une fonction majeure de la langue est de permettre la parole chez l'homme et la vocalisation chez les autres animaux.

La langue humaine est divisée en deux parties, une partie orale à l'avant et une partie pharyngienne à l'arrière.

Les côtés gauche et droit sont également séparés sur la majeure partie de sa longueur par une section verticale de tissu fibreux (le septum lingual) qui se traduit par une rainure, le sillon médian, à la surface de la langue.
Il existe deux groupes de muscles de la langue.

Les quatre muscles intrinsèques modifient la forme de la langue et ne sont pas attachés à l'os.

Les quatre muscles extrinsèques appariés modifient la position de la langue et sont ancrés à l'os.


== Étymologie ==

Le mot langue dérive du vieil anglais tunge, qui vient du proto-germanique *tungōn.

Il a des mots apparentés dans d'autres langues germaniques - par exemple le tonge en frison occidental , le tong en néerlandais et en afrikaans , le zunge en allemand , le tunge en danois et en norvégien et le tunga en islandais , féroïen et suédois .

La terminaison ue du mot semble être une tentative du XIVe siècle pour montrer une "prononciation correcte", mais elle n'est "ni étymologique ni phonétique".

Certains ont utilisé l'orthographe tunge et tonge jusqu'au XVIe siècle.


== Chez l'homme ==


=== Structure ===


La langue est un hydrostat musculaire qui fait partie du plancher de la cavité buccale.

Les côtés gauche et droit de la langue sont séparés par une section verticale de tissu fibreux appelée septum lingual.

Cette division s'étend sur toute la longueur de la langue, à l'exception de l'arrière de la partie pharyngienne et est visible sous la forme d'un sillon appelé sillon médian. 

La langue humaine est divisée en parties antérieure et postérieure par le sillon terminal qui est une rainure en forme de V. 

L'apex du sillon terminal est marqué par un foramen aveugle, le foramen caecum, qui est un vestige du diverticule thyroïdien médian au début du développement embryonnaire. 

La partie buccale antérieure est la partie visible située à l'avant et représente environ les deux tiers de la longueur de la langue. 

La partie pharyngée postérieure est la partie la plus proche de la gorge, environ un tiers de sa longueur. 

Ces parties diffèrent en termes de développement embryonnaire et d'innervation.
La langue antérieure est, à son sommet, fine et étroite. 

Il est dirigé vers l'avant contre les surfaces linguales des incisives inférieures. 

La partie postérieure est, à sa racine, dirigée vers l'arrière, et reliée à l'os hyoïde par les muscles hyoglosse et génioglosse et la membrane hyoglosse, à l'épiglotte par trois plis glossoépiglottiques de la muqueuse, au palais mou par les arcs glossopalatins, et avec le pharynx par le muscle constricteur supérieur du pharynx et la membrane muqueuse. 

Il forme également la paroi antérieure de l'oropharynx.
La longueur moyenne de la langue humaine de l'oropharynx à la pointe est de 10 cm. 

Le poids moyen de la langue humaine chez les hommes adultes est de 70g et chez les femmes adultes de 60g. En phonétique et phonologie, on distingue le bout de la langue et le limbe (la partie juste derrière le bout). 

Les sons émis avec le bout de la langue sont dits apicaux, tandis que ceux émis avec le limbe de la langue sont dits laminaux.


==== Surface supérieure de la langue ====

La surface supérieure de la langue s'appelle le dos et est divisée par une rainure en moitiés symétriques par le sillon médian.

Le foramen caecum marque la fin de cette division (à environ 2,5 cm de la racine de la langue) et le début du sillon terminal.

Le foramen caecum est également le point d'attache du canal thyréoglosse et se forme lors de la descente du diverticule thyroïdien au cours du développement embryonnaire.

Le sillon terminal est une rainure peu profonde qui s'étend vers l'avant sous la forme d'une rainure peu profonde en forme de V à partir du foramen caecum, vers l'avant et vers l'extérieur jusqu'aux marges (bords) de la langue.

Le sillon terminal divise la langue en une partie pharyngée postérieure et une partie buccale antérieure.

La partie pharyngée est alimentée par le nerf glossopharyngé et la partie orale est alimentée par le nerf lingual (une branche de la branche mandibulaire (V3) du nerf trijumeau) pour la perception somatosensorielle et par la corde du tympan (une branche du nerf facial) pour la perception gustative.

Les deux parties de la langue se développent à partir d'arcs pharyngés différents.


==== Face inférieure de la langue ====

Sur la surface inférieure de la langue se trouve un pli de membrane muqueuse appelé le frein qui attache la langue sur la ligne médiane au plancher de la bouche.

De chaque côté du frein se trouvent de petites proéminences appelées caroncules sublinguales dans lesquelles se drainent les principales glandes salivaires sous-maxillaires.


==== Muscles ====

Les huit muscles de la langue humaine sont classés comme intrinsèques ou extrinsèques.

Les quatre muscles intrinsèques agissent pour modifier la forme de la langue et ne sont attachés à aucun os.

Les quatre muscles extrinsèques agissent pour modifier la position de la langue et sont ancrés à l'os.


===== Extrinsèque =====

Les quatre muscles extrinsèques proviennent de l'os et s'étendent jusqu'à la langue.

Ce sont le génioglosse, l'hyoglosse (incluant souvent le chondroglosse), le styloglosse et le palatoglosse.

Leurs principales fonctions sont de modifier la position de la langue permettant la protrusion, la rétraction et le mouvement latéral. Le génioglosse provient de la mandibule et fait saillie de la langue.

Il est également connu sous le nom de "muscle de sécurité" de la langue car c'est le seul muscle qui propulse la langue vers l'avant.

L'hyoglosse, issu de l'os hyoïde, se rétracte et abaisse la langue.

Le chondroglossus est souvent inclus avec ce muscle.

Le styloglosse provient du processus styloïde de l'os temporal et tire les côtés de la langue vers le haut pour créer un creux pour la déglutition.

Le palatoglosse provient de l'aponévrose palatine et déprime le palais mou, déplace le pli palatoglosse vers la ligne médiane et élève l'arrière de la langue pendant la déglutition.


===== Intrinsèque =====

Quatre muscles intrinsèques appariés de la langue prennent naissance et s'insèrent dans la langue, s'étendant sur toute sa longueur.

Ce sont le muscle longitudinal supérieur, le muscle longitudinal inférieur, le muscle vertical et le muscle transverse.

Ces muscles modifient la forme de la langue en l'allongeant et en la raccourcissant, en enroulant et en déroulant son sommet et ses bords comme dans le roulement de la langue, et en aplatissant et en arrondissant sa surface.

Cela donne une forme et aide à faciliter la parole, la déglutition et l'alimentation. Le muscle longitudinal supérieur court le long de la surface supérieure de la langue sous la membrane muqueuse et élève, aide à la rétraction ou dévie la pointe de la langue. 

Il prend naissance près de l'épiglotte, au niveau de l'os hyoïde, du septum fibreux médian.

Le muscle longitudinal inférieur tapisse les côtés de la langue et est relié au muscle styloglosse.

Le muscle vertical est situé au milieu de la langue et rejoint les muscles longitudinaux supérieurs et inférieurs.

Le muscle transverse divise la langue au milieu et est attaché aux muqueuses qui courent le long des côtés.


==== Approvisionnement en sang ====

La langue reçoit son apport sanguin principalement de l'artère linguale, une branche de l'artère carotide externe. 

Les veines linguales se drainent dans la veine jugulaire interne.

Le plancher de la bouche reçoit également son apport sanguin de l'artère linguale.

Il existe également un apport sanguin secondaire à la racine de la langue à partir de la branche amygdalienne de l'artère faciale et de l'artère pharyngienne ascendante.

Une zone du cou parfois appelée triangle de Pirogov est formée par le tendon intermédiaire du muscle digastrique, le bord postérieur du muscle mylohyoïdien et le nerf hypoglosse.

L'artère linguale est un bon endroit pour arrêter une hémorragie grave de la langue.


==== Innervation ====

L'innervation de la langue se compose de fibres motrices, de fibres sensorielles spéciales pour le goût et de fibres sensorielles générales pour la sensation.

L'alimentation motrice de tous les muscles intrinsèques et extrinsèques de la langue est assurée par des fibres nerveuses motrices efférentes du nerf hypoglosse (CN XII), à l'exception du palatoglosse, qui est innervé par le nerf vague (CN X). Innervation du goût et la sensation est différente pour la partie antérieure et postérieure de la langue car elles sont issues de structures embryologiques différentes (arc pharyngé 1 et arcs pharyngés 3 et 4, respectivement).

-Deux tiers antérieurs de la langue (en avant des papilles vallées) :

Goût: branche de la corde tympanique du nerf facial (CN VII) via des fibres afférentes viscérales spéciales

Sensation : branche linguale de la mandibulaire (V3) division du nerf trijumeau (CN V) via les fibres afférentes viscérales générales

- Un tiers postérieur de la langue :

Goût et sensation : nerf glossopharyngien (CN IX) via un mélange de fibres afférentes viscérales spéciales et générales
Base de la langue

Goût et sensation : branche interne du nerf laryngé supérieur (lui-même une branche du nerf vague, CN X)


==== Drainage lymphatique ====

Le bout de la langue se draine vers les nœuds sous-mentaux.

Les moitiés gauche et droite des deux tiers antérieurs de la langue se drainent vers les ganglions lymphatiques sous-maxillaires, tandis que le tiers postérieur de la langue se draine vers les ganglions jugulo-omohyoïdiens.


==== Microanatomie ====

La surface supérieure de la langue est recouverte de muqueuse masticatrice, un type de muqueuse buccale constituée d'épithélium pavimenteux stratifié kératinisé.

De nombreuses papilles y sont intégrées, dont certaines abritent les papilles gustatives et leurs récepteurs gustatifs.

Les papilles linguales sont constituées de papilles filiformes, fongiformes, vallées et foliées, et seules les papilles filiformes ne sont associées à aucune papille gustative.

La langue peut se diviser en surface dorsale et ventrale. 

La surface dorsale est un épithélium squameux kératinisé stratifié qui se caractérise par de nombreuses projections muqueuses appelées papilles. 

Les papilles linguales recouvrent la face dorsale de la langue vers l'avant du sillon terminal. 

La surface ventrale est un épithélium squameux non kératinisé stratifié qui est lisse.


=== Développement ===


La langue commence à se développer au cours de la quatrième semaine de développement embryonnaire à partir d'un gonflement médian - le bourgeon lingual médian (tuberculum impar) du premier arc pharyngé. Au cours de la cinquième semaine, une paire de gonflements linguaux latéraux, un sur le côté droit et un sur la gauche, forme sur le premier arc pharyngien. 

Ces tuméfactions linguales se dilatent rapidement et recouvrent le bourgeon médian de la langue. 

Ils forment la partie antérieure de la langue qui représente les deux tiers de la longueur de la langue et continuent de se développer tout au long du développement prénatal. 

La ligne de leur fusion est marquée par le sillon médian. Au cours de la quatrième semaine, un gonflement apparaît à partir du deuxième arc pharyngé, sur la ligne médiane, appelé copule. 

Au cours des cinquième et sixième semaines, la copule est envahie par un gonflement des troisième et quatrième arcs (principalement du troisième arc) appelé éminence hypopharyngée, et cela se développe dans la partie postérieure de la langue (l'autre tiers). 

L'éminence hypopharyngée se développe principalement par la croissance de l'endoderme à partir du troisième arc pharyngé. 

La limite entre les deux parties de la langue, la partie antérieure du premier arc et la partie postérieure du troisième arc est marquée par le sillon terminal. 

Le sillon terminal a la forme d'un V avec la pointe du V située en arrière. 

À l'extrémité du sulcus terminal se trouve le foramen caecum, qui est le point d'attache du canal thyréoglosse où la thyroïde embryonnaire commence à descendre.


=== Fonction ===


==== Goût ====

Les produits chimiques qui stimulent les cellules réceptrices du goût sont connus sous le nom de dégustateurs. 

Une fois qu'un dégustant est dissous dans la salive, il peut entrer en contact avec la membrane plasmique des poils gustatifs, qui sont les sites de transduction du goût.

La langue est équipée de nombreuses papilles gustatives sur sa surface dorsale, et chaque papille gustative est équipée de cellules réceptrices du goût qui peuvent détecter des classes particulières de goûts. 

Des types distincts de cellules réceptrices du goût détectent respectivement les substances qui sont sucrées, amères, salées, acides, épicées ou au goût d'umami. 

Les cellules réceptrices Umami sont les moins comprises et sont donc le type le plus intensivement étudié.


==== Mastication ====
La langue est un organe accessoire important du système digestif. 

La langue est utilisée pour écraser les aliments contre le palais dur, lors de la mastication et de la manipulation des aliments pour les ramollir avant de les avaler. 

L'épithélium de la face supérieure ou dorsale de la langue est kératinisé. 

Par conséquent, la langue peut frotter contre le palais dur sans être elle-même endommagée ou irritée.


==== Discours ====

Les muscles intrinsèques de la langue permettent la mise en forme de la langue qui facilite la parole.


==== Intimité ====

La langue joue un rôle dans l'intimité physique et la sexualité. 

La langue fait partie de la zone érogène de la bouche et peut être utilisée en contact intime, comme dans le baiser français et dans le sexe oral.

La langue peut être utilisée pour stimuler le clitoris et d'autres zones de la vulve.


=== Signification clinique ===


==== Maladie ====

Une maladie congénitale de la langue est celle de l'ankyloglossie également appelée langue-cravate.

La langue est liée au plancher de la bouche par un frein très court et épaissi, ce qui affecte la parole, l'alimentation et la déglutition.

La langue est sujette à plusieurs pathologies dont la glossite et autres inflammations telles que la langue géographique, et la glossite rhomboïde médiane ; syndrome de la bouche brûlante, leucoplasie buccale poilue, candidose buccale (muguet), langue poilue noire et langue fissurée.

Il existe plusieurs types de cancer de la bouche qui touchent principalement la langue.

Il s'agit principalement de carcinomes épidermoïdes. Les débris alimentaires, les cellules épithéliales desquamées et les bactéries forment souvent un revêtement lingual visible. 

Ce revêtement a été identifié comme un facteur majeur contribuant à la mauvaise haleine (halitose), qui peut être gérée en utilisant un gratte-langue.


==== Livraison de médicaments ====

La région sublinguale sous l'avant de la langue est un endroit idéal pour l'administration de certains médicaments dans le corps. 

La muqueuse buccale est très fine sous la langue et repose sur un plexus de veines. 

La voie sublinguale tire parti de la qualité hautement vasculaire de la cavité buccale et permet l'application rapide de médicaments dans le système cardiovasculaire, en contournant le tractus gastro-intestinal. 

Il s'agit de la seule voie d'administration pratique et efficace (en dehors de la thérapie intraveineuse) de nitroglycérine chez un patient souffrant de douleurs thoraciques dues à une angine de poitrine.


== Autres animaux ==


Les muscles de la langue ont évolué chez les amphibiens à partir des somites occipitaux. 

La plupart des amphibiens présentent une langue appropriée après leur métamorphose. 

En conséquence, la plupart des animaux vertébrés - amphibiens, reptiles, oiseaux et mammifères - ont des langues (la famille des grenouilles des pipidés n'a pas de langue). 

Chez les mammifères tels que les chiens et les chats, la langue est souvent utilisée pour nettoyer la fourrure et le corps en léchant. 

Les langues de ces espèces ont une texture très rugueuse qui leur permet d'éliminer les huiles et les parasites. 

Certains chiens ont tendance à lécher constamment une partie de leur patte avant, ce qui peut entraîner une affection cutanée connue sous le nom de granulome de léchage. 

La langue d'un chien agit également comme un régulateur de chaleur. 

Au fur et à mesure qu'un chien augmente son exercice, la taille de la langue augmente en raison de l'augmentation du flux sanguin. 

La langue sort de la bouche du chien et l'humidité sur la langue contribuera à refroidir le flux sanguin. Certains animaux ont des langues spécialement adaptées pour attraper des proies. 

Par exemple, les caméléons, les grenouilles, les pangolins et les fourmiliers ont des langues préhensiles.

D'autres animaux peuvent avoir des organes analogues aux langues, comme la trompe d'un papillon ou une radula sur un mollusque, mais ceux-ci ne sont pas homologues aux langues trouvées chez les vertébrés et ont souvent peu de ressemblance dans leur fonction. 

Par exemple, les papillons ne se lèchent pas avec leurs proboscides ; ils aspirent à travers eux, et la trompe n'est pas un organe unique, mais deux mâchoires maintenues ensemble pour former un tube.

De nombreuses espèces de poissons ont de petits plis à la base de la bouche que l'on pourrait appeler de manière informelle des langues, mais ils n'ont pas de structure musculaire comme les vraies langues que l'on trouve chez la plupart des tétrapodes.


== Société et culture ==


=== Figures de style ===

La langue peut être utilisée comme métonyme du langage. 

Par exemple, le Nouveau Testament de la Bible, dans le livre des Actes des Apôtres, les disciples de Jésus le jour de la Pentecôte ont reçu un type de don spirituel : "il leur apparut des langues fourchues comme du feu, et elle était assise sur chacun d'eux. 

Et ils furent tous remplis du Saint-Esprit et commencèrent à parler d'autres langues....", ce qui étonna la foule de Juifs à Jérusalem, qui venaient de diverses parties de l'Empire romain mais pouvaient maintenant comprendre ce qui était prêché. . 

L'expression langue maternelle est utilisée comme première langue d'un enfant. 

De nombreuses langues ont le même mot pour "langue" et "langue".
Un échec temporaire courant dans la récupération de mots à partir de la mémoire est appelé le phénomène de la pointe de la langue. 

L'expression ironique fait référence à une déclaration qui ne doit pas être prise entièrement au sérieux - quelque chose dit ou fait avec un humour ironique ou sarcastique subtil. 

Un virelangue est une phrase spécialement conçue pour être très difficile à prononcer. 

En plus d'être une condition médicale, le "muet" signifie être incapable de dire ce que vous voulez en raison d'une confusion ou d'une restriction. 

L'expression "le chat a ta langue" fait référence au moment où une personne est sans voix. 

"Se mordre la langue" est une expression qui décrit le fait de retenir une opinion pour éviter d'offenser. 

Un « lapsus » fait référence à un énoncé involontaire, tel qu'un lapsus freudien. 

Le "don des langues" fait référence au moment où l'on est exceptionnellement doué pour pouvoir parler dans une langue étrangère, souvent comme un type de don spirituel. 

Parler en langues est une expression courante utilisée pour décrire la glossolalie, qui consiste à produire des sons lisses et ressemblant à une langue qui ne sont pas une véritable langue parlée elle-même. 

On dit qu'une personne trompeuse a une langue fourchue et qu'une personne qui parle doucement a une langue d'argent.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tongue

;;;PT;;;



LÍNGUA


A língua é um órgão muscular na boca de um vertebrado típico. 

Ele manipula os alimentos para mastigação e deglutição como parte do processo digestivo e é o principal órgão do paladar. 

A superfície superior da língua (dorso) é coberta por papilas gustativas alojadas em numerosas papilas linguais. 

É sensível e mantido úmido pela saliva e é ricamente suprido por nervos e vasos sanguíneos.

A língua também serve como um meio natural de limpeza dos dentes.

Uma função importante da língua é permitir a fala em humanos e a vocalização em outros animais.

A língua humana é dividida em duas partes, uma parte oral na frente e uma parte faríngea atrás.

Os lados esquerdo e direito também são separados ao longo da maior parte de seu comprimento por uma seção vertical de tecido fibroso (o septo lingual) que resulta em um sulco, o sulco mediano, na superfície da língua.
Existem dois grupos de músculos da língua.

Os quatro músculos intrínsecos alteram a forma da língua e não estão presos ao osso.

Os quatro músculos extrínsecos pareados mudam a posição da língua e são ancorados ao osso.


== Etimologia ==

A palavra língua deriva do inglês antigo tunge, que vem do proto-germânico *tungōn.

Tem cognatos em outras línguas germânicas - por exemplo, tonge em frísio ocidental, tong em holandês e africâner, Zunge em alemão, tunge em dinamarquês e norueguês e tunga em islandês, faroês e sueco.

A terminação ue da palavra parece ser uma tentativa do século XIV de mostrar "pronúncia adequada", mas não é "nem etimológica nem fonética".

Alguns usavam a ortografia tunge e tonge até o século XVI.


== Em humanos ==


=== Estrutura ===


A língua é um hidrostato muscular que faz parte do assoalho da cavidade oral.

Os lados esquerdo e direito da língua são separados por uma seção vertical de tecido fibroso conhecido como septo lingual.

Essa divisão é ao longo do comprimento da língua, exceto na parte posterior da parte faríngea, e é visível como um sulco chamado sulco mediano.

A língua humana é dividida em partes anterior e posterior pelo sulco terminal que é um sulco em forma de V.

O ápice do sulco terminal é marcado por um forame cego, o forame ceco, que é um remanescente do divertículo mediano da tireoide no início do desenvolvimento embrionário.

A parte oral anterior é a parte visível situada na frente e representa cerca de dois terços do comprimento da língua.

A parte posterior da faringe é a parte mais próxima da garganta, aproximadamente um terço do seu comprimento.

Essas partes diferem em termos de desenvolvimento embriológico e suprimento nervoso.
A língua anterior é, em seu ápice, fina e estreita.

Ele é direcionado para frente contra as superfícies linguais dos dentes incisivos inferiores. 

A parte posterior é, em sua raiz, direcionada para trás e conectada ao osso hióide pelos músculos hioglosso e genioglosso e à membrana hioglosso, com a epiglote por três pregas glossoepiglóticas da membrana mucosa, com o palato mole pelos arcos glossopalatinos e com a faringe pelo músculo constritor superior da faringe e pela membrana mucosa. 

Também forma a parede anterior da orofaringe.
O comprimento médio da língua humana da orofaringe até a ponta é de 10 cm. 

O peso médio da língua humana de machos adultos é de 70g e de fêmeas adultas de 60g. Em fonética e fonologia, é feita uma distinção entre a ponta da língua e a lâmina (a porção logo atrás da ponta). 

Os sons feitos com a ponta da língua são ditos apicais, enquanto aqueles feitos com a lâmina da língua são ditos laminais.


==== Superfície superior da língua ====

A superfície superior da língua é chamada de dorso e é dividida por um sulco em metades simétricas pelo sulco mediano.

O forame ceco marca o final dessa divisão (a cerca de 2,5 cm da raiz da língua) e o início do sulco terminal.

O forame ceco também é o ponto de fixação do ducto tireoglosso e é formado durante a descida do divertículo da tireoide no desenvolvimento embrionário.

O sulco terminal é um sulco raso que corre para frente como um sulco raso em forma de V do forame ceco, para frente e para fora até as margens (bordas) da língua.

O sulco terminal divide a língua em uma parte faríngea posterior e uma parte oral anterior.

A parte faríngea é suprida pelo nervo glossofaríngeo e a parte oral é suprida pelo nervo lingual (um ramo do ramo mandibular (V3) do nervo trigêmeo) para percepção somatossensorial e pela corda do tímpano (um ramo do nervo facial) para a percepção do paladar.

Ambas as partes da língua se desenvolvem a partir de diferentes arcos faríngeos.


==== Superfície inferior da língua ====

Na superfície inferior da língua há uma prega de membrana mucosa chamada frênulo que amarra a língua na linha média ao assoalho da boca. 

Em ambos os lados do frênulo existem pequenas proeminências chamadas carúnculas sublinguais para as quais as glândulas submandibulares salivares maiores drenam.


==== Músculos ====

Os oito músculos da língua humana são classificados como intrínsecos ou extrínsecos. 

Os quatro músculos intrínsecos agem para mudar a forma da língua e não estão presos a nenhum osso. 

Os quatro músculos extrínsecos agem para mudar a posição da língua e estão ancorados no osso.


===== Extrínseco =====

Os quatro músculos extrínsecos se originam do osso e se estendem até a língua. 

Eles são o genioglosso, o hioglosso (muitas vezes incluindo o condroglosso), o estiloglosso e o palatoglosso. 

Suas principais funções são alterar a posição da língua permitindo a protrusão, retração e movimento lateral. O genioglosso surge da mandíbula e projeta a língua. 

Também é conhecido como o "músculo de segurança" da língua, pois é o único músculo que impulsiona a língua para a frente.

O hioglosso, origina-se do osso hióide e retrai e deprime a língua. 

O condroglosso é frequentemente incluído neste músculo.

O estiloglosso surge do processo estilóide do osso temporal e puxa os lados da língua para cima para criar uma calha para a deglutição.

O palatoglosso surge da aponeurose palatina e deprime o palato mole, move a prega palatoglosso em direção à linha média e eleva o dorso da língua durante a deglutição.


===== Intrínseco =====

Quatro pares de músculos intrínsecos da língua originam-se e inserem-se dentro da língua, correndo ao longo de seu comprimento. 

Eles são o músculo longitudinal superior, o músculo longitudinal inferior, o músculo vertical e o músculo transverso. 

Esses músculos alteram a forma da língua alongando-a e encurtando-a, enrolando e desenrolando seu ápice e bordas, como no enrolamento da língua, e achatando e arredondando sua superfície. 

Isso proporciona forma e ajuda a facilitar a fala, a deglutição e a alimentação. O músculo longitudinal superior corre ao longo da superfície superior da língua sob a membrana mucosa e eleva, auxilia na retração ou desvia a ponta da língua.

Origina-se próximo à epiglote, no osso hióide, a partir do septo fibroso mediano.

O músculo longitudinal inferior reveste os lados da língua e se une ao músculo estiloglosso.

O músculo vertical está localizado no meio da língua e une os músculos longitudinais superior e inferior.

O músculo transverso divide a língua no meio e está ligado às membranas mucosas que correm ao longo dos lados.


==== Suprimento sanguíneo ====

A língua recebe seu suprimento sanguíneo principalmente da artéria lingual, um ramo da artéria carótida externa.

As veias linguais drenam para a veia jugular interna.

O assoalho da boca também recebe seu suprimento sanguíneo da artéria lingual.

Há também um suprimento sanguíneo secundário para a raiz da língua do ramo tonsilar da artéria facial e da artéria faríngea ascendente.

Uma área no pescoço às vezes chamada de triângulo de Pirogov é formada pelo tendão intermediário do músculo digástrico, a borda posterior do músculo milo-hióideo e o nervo hipoglosso.

A artéria lingual é um bom lugar para parar uma hemorragia grave da língua.


==== Suprimento nervoso ====

A inervação da língua consiste em fibras motoras, fibras sensoriais especiais para paladar e fibras sensoriais gerais para sensação.

A inervação motora para todos os músculos intrínsecos e extrínsecos da língua é fornecida por fibras nervosas motoras eferentes do nervo hipoglosso (NC XII), com exceção do palatoglosso, que é inervado pelo nervo vago (NC X). a sensação é diferente para a parte anterior e posterior da língua porque são derivadas de diferentes estruturas embriológicas (arco faríngeo 1 e arco faríngeo 3 e 4, respectivamente).

- Dois terços anteriores da língua (anteriores às papilas valadas):

Paladar: ramo corda do tímpano do nervo facial (NC VII) via fibras aferentes viscerais especiais

Sensação: ramo lingual da divisão mandibular (V3) do nervo trigêmeo (NC V) via fibras aferentes viscerais gerais

-Um terço posterior da língua:

Gosto e sensação: nervo glossofaríngeo (NC IX) através de uma mistura de fibras aferentes viscerais especiais e gerais
Base da lingua

Gosto e sensação: ramo interno do nervo laríngeo superior (ele próprio um ramo do nervo vago, NC X)


==== Drenagem linfática ====

A ponta da língua drena para os linfonodos submentuais.

As metades esquerda e direita dos dois terços anteriores da língua drenam para os linfonodos submandibulares, enquanto o terço posterior da língua drena para os linfonodos jugulo-omo-hióideos.


==== Microanatomia ====

A superfície superior da língua é coberta por mucosa mastigatória, um tipo de mucosa oral que é de epitélio escamoso estratificado queratinizado.

Embutidas nisso estão numerosas papilas, algumas das quais abrigam as papilas gustativas e seus receptores gustativos.

As papilas linguais consistem em papilas filiformes, fungiformes, valadas e foliadas, e apenas as papilas filiformes não estão associadas a nenhum botão gustativo.

A língua pode se dividir em superfície dorsal e ventral.

A superfície dorsal é um epitélio escamoso estratificado queratinizado que é caracterizado por numerosas projeções mucosas chamadas papilas.

As papilas linguais cobrem o lado dorsal da língua em direção à frente do sulco terminal.

A superfície ventral é epitélio escamoso estratificado não queratinizado que é liso.


=== Desenvolvimento ===


A língua começa a se desenvolver na quarta semana de desenvolvimento embrionário a partir de um inchaço mediano – o broto mediano da língua (tuberculum impar) do primeiro arco faríngeo. à esquerda, formam-se no primeiro arco faríngeo.

Esses inchaços linguais rapidamente se expandem e cobrem o broto mediano da língua. 

Eles formam a parte anterior da língua que compõe dois terços do comprimento da língua e continuam a se desenvolver durante o desenvolvimento pré-natal. 

A linha de sua fusão é marcada pelo sulco mediano. Na quarta semana surge uma tumefação a partir do segundo arco faríngeo, na linha média, denominada cópula. 

Durante a quinta e sexta semanas, a cópula é coberta por um inchaço do terceiro e quarto arcos (principalmente do terceiro arco) chamado eminência hipofaríngea, e isso se desenvolve na parte posterior da língua (o outro terço). 

A eminência hipofaríngea desenvolve-se principalmente pelo crescimento do endoderma a partir do terceiro arco faríngeo. 

A fronteira entre as duas partes da língua, a anterior do primeiro arco e a posterior do terceiro arco é marcada pelo sulco terminal.

O sulco terminal tem a forma de um V com a ponta do V situada posteriormente.

Na ponta do sulco terminal está o forame ceco, que é o ponto de fixação do ducto tireoglosso, onde a tireóide embrionária começa a descer.


=== Função ===


==== Gosto ====

Os produtos químicos que estimulam as células receptoras do paladar são conhecidos como gustativos.

Uma vez que o saborizante é dissolvido na saliva, ele pode entrar em contato com a membrana plasmática dos pelos gustativos, que são os locais de transdução do sabor.

A língua é equipada com muitas papilas gustativas em sua superfície dorsal, e cada papila gustativa é equipada com células receptoras gustativas que podem sentir classes particulares de sabores.

Tipos distintos de células receptoras de sabor detectam, respectivamente, substâncias que são doces, amargas, salgadas, azedas, picantes ou com sabor umami. 

As células receptoras umami são as menos compreendidas e, portanto, são o tipo mais intensamente sob pesquisa.


==== Mastigação ====
A língua é um órgão acessório importante no sistema digestivo. 

A língua é utilizada para esmagar o alimento contra o palato duro, durante a mastigação e manipulação do alimento para amolecimento antes da deglutição. 

O epitélio na superfície superior ou dorsal da língua é queratinizado. 

Consequentemente, a língua pode moer contra o palato duro sem ser danificada ou irritada.


==== Fala ====

Os músculos intrínsecos da língua permitem a modelagem da língua, o que facilita a fala.


==== Intimidade ====

A língua desempenha um papel na intimidade física e na sexualidade. 

A língua faz parte da zona erógena da boca e pode ser usada no contato íntimo, como no beijo francês e no sexo oral.

A língua pode ser usada para estimular o clitóris e outras áreas da vulva.


=== Significado clínico ===


==== Doença ====

Um distúrbio congênito da língua é a anquiloglossia, também conhecida como língua presa.

A língua está presa ao assoalho da boca por um frênulo muito curto e espesso e isso afeta a fala, a alimentação e a deglutição.

A língua é propensa a várias patologias, incluindo glossite e outras inflamações, como língua geográfica e glossite rombóide mediana; síndrome da boca ardente, leucoplasia pilosa oral, candidíase oral (aftas), língua pilosa negra e língua fissurada.

Existem vários tipos de câncer bucal que afetam principalmente a língua.

Principalmente estes são carcinomas de células escamosas. Restos de alimentos, células epiteliais descamadas e bactérias muitas vezes formam uma saburra visível na língua. 

Este revestimento foi identificado como um dos principais fatores que contribuem para o mau hálito (halitose), que pode ser controlado usando um limpador de língua.


==== Entrega de medicamentos ====

A região sublingual abaixo da frente da língua é um local ideal para a administração de certos medicamentos no corpo. 

A mucosa oral é muito fina sob a língua e é sustentada por um plexo de veias. 

A via sublingual aproveita a qualidade altamente vascular da cavidade oral e permite a rápida aplicação de medicamentos no sistema cardiovascular, contornando o trato gastrointestinal. 

Esta é a única via conveniente e eficaz de administração (além da terapia intravenosa) de nitroglicerina a um paciente que sofre de dor torácica de angina pectoris.


== Outros animais ==


Os músculos da língua evoluíram em anfíbios de somitos occipitais. 

A maioria dos anfíbios mostra uma língua adequada após sua metamorfose. 

Como consequência, a maioria dos animais vertebrados — anfíbios, répteis, pássaros e mamíferos — têm línguas (a família dos sapos dos pipids não tem língua). 

Em mamíferos como cães e gatos, a língua é frequentemente usada para limpar a pele e o corpo por lambidas. 

As línguas destas espécies têm uma textura muito rugosa que lhes permite remover óleos e parasitas. 

Alguns cães têm a tendência de lamber consistentemente uma parte da pata dianteira, o que pode resultar em uma condição de pele conhecida como granuloma de lambida. 

A língua de um cão também atua como um regulador de calor. 

À medida que um cão aumenta seu exercício, a língua aumentará de tamanho devido ao maior fluxo sanguíneo.

A língua fica pendurada para fora da boca do cão e a umidade na língua irá resfriar o fluxo sanguíneo. Alguns animais têm línguas especialmente adaptadas para capturar presas.

Por exemplo, camaleões, sapos, pangolins e tamanduás têm línguas preênseis.

Outros animais podem ter órgãos que são análogos às línguas, como a probóscide de uma borboleta ou uma rádula em um molusco, mas estes não são homólogos às línguas encontradas em vertebrados e muitas vezes têm pouca semelhança em função.

Por exemplo, as borboletas não lambem com suas probóscidas; eles sugam através deles, e a probóscide não é um órgão único, mas duas mandíbulas unidas para formar um tubo.

Muitas espécies de peixes têm pequenas dobras na base da boca que podem informalmente ser chamadas de línguas, mas não possuem uma estrutura muscular como as verdadeiras línguas encontradas na maioria dos tetrápodes.


== Sociedade e cultura ==


=== Figuras de linguagem ===

A língua pode ser usada como uma metonímia para a linguagem. 

Por exemplo, no Novo Testamento da Bíblia, no Livro dos Atos dos Apóstolos, os discípulos de Jesus no Dia de Pentecostes receberam uma espécie de dom espiritual: "Apareceram-lhes línguas partidas como de fogo, e assentaram-se sobre cada um deles. 

E todos ficaram cheios do Espírito Santo, e começaram a falar em outras línguas ...", o que surpreendeu a multidão de judeus em Jerusalém, que eram de várias partes do Império Romano, mas agora podiam entender o que estava sendo pregado . 

A frase língua materna é usada como primeira língua da criança. 

Muitas línguas têm a mesma palavra para "língua" e "língua".
Uma falha temporária comum na recuperação de palavras da memória é chamada de fenômeno da ponta da língua.

A expressão irônica refere-se a uma afirmação que não deve ser levada totalmente a sério – algo dito ou feito com sutil humor irônico ou sarcástico.

Um trava-línguas é uma frase feita especificamente para ser muito difícil de pronunciar.

Além de ser uma condição médica, "língua presa" significa ser incapaz de dizer o que você quer devido a confusão ou restrição.

A frase "gato comeu sua língua" refere-se a quando uma pessoa está sem palavras.

"Mordar a língua" é uma frase que descreve reter uma opinião para evitar ofender.

Um "deslizamento da língua" refere-se a um enunciado não intencional, como um lapso freudiano.

O "dom de línguas" refere-se a quando alguém tem um dom incomum para falar em uma língua estrangeira, muitas vezes como um tipo de dom espiritual.

Falar em línguas é uma frase comum usada para descrever a glossolalia, que é fazer sons suaves e semelhantes a línguas que não são uma verdadeira língua falada em si.

Diz-se que uma pessoa enganadora tem uma língua bifurcada, e uma pessoa de fala mansa tem uma língua prateada.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tongue
