

BLOOD


Blood is a body fluid in the circulatory system of humans and other vertebrates that delivers necessary substances such as nutrients and oxygen to the cells and transports metabolic waste products away from those same cells.Blood is composed of blood cells suspended in blood plasma. 

Plasma, which constitutes 55% of blood fluid, is mostly water (92% by volume), and contains proteins, glucose, mineral ions, hormones, carbon dioxide (plasma being the main medium for excretory product transportation), and blood cells themselves. 

Albumin is the main protein in plasma, and it functions to regulate the colloidal osmotic pressure of blood. 

The blood cells are mainly red blood cells (also called RBCs or erythrocytes), white blood cells (also called WBCs or leukocytes) and platelets (also called thrombocytes). 

The most abundant cells in vertebrate blood are red blood cells. 

These contain hemoglobin, an iron-containing protein, which facilitates oxygen transport by reversibly binding to this respiratory gas and greatly increasing its solubility in blood. 

In contrast, carbon dioxide is mostly transported extracellularly as bicarbonate ion transported in plasma.
Vertebrate blood is bright red when its hemoglobin is oxygenated and dark red when it is deoxygenated. 

Some animals, such as crustaceans and mollusks, use hemocyanin to carry oxygen, instead of hemoglobin. 

Insects and some mollusks use a fluid called hemolymph instead of blood, the difference being that hemolymph is not contained in a closed circulatory system. 

In most insects, this "blood" does not contain oxygen-carrying molecules such as hemoglobin because their bodies are small enough for their tracheal system to suffice for supplying oxygen.
Jawed vertebrates have an adaptive immune system, based largely on white blood cells. 

White blood cells help to resist infections and parasites. 

Platelets are important in the clotting of blood. 

Arthropods, using hemolymph, have hemocytes as part of their immune system.
Blood is circulated around the body through blood vessels by the pumping action of the heart. 

In animals with lungs, arterial blood carries oxygen from inhaled air to the tissues of the body, and venous blood carries carbon dioxide, a waste product of metabolism produced by cells, from the tissues to the lungs to be exhaled.
Medical terms related to blood often begin with hemo- or hemato- (also spelled haemo- and haemato-) from the Greek word αἷμα (haima) for "blood". 

In terms of anatomy and histology, blood is considered a specialized form of connective tissue, given its origin in the bones and the presence of potential molecular fibers in the form of fibrinogen.


== Functions ==


Blood performs many important functions within the body, including:

Supply of oxygen to tissues (bound to hemoglobin, which is carried in red cells)
Supply of nutrients such as glucose, amino acids, and fatty acids (dissolved in the blood or bound to plasma proteins (e.g., blood lipids))
Removal of waste such as carbon dioxide, urea, and lactic acid
Immunological functions, including circulation of white blood cells, and detection of foreign material by antibodies
Coagulation, the response to a broken blood vessel, the conversion of blood from a liquid to a semisolid gel to stop bleeding
Messenger functions, including the transport of hormones and the signaling of tissue damage
Regulation of core body temperature
Hydraulic functions


== Constituents ==



=== In mammals ===


Blood accounts for 7% of the human body weight, with an average density around 1060 kg/m3, very close to pure water's density of 1000 kg/m3. 

The average adult has a blood volume of roughly 5 litres (11 US pt) or 1.3 gallons, which is composed of plasma and formed elements. 

The formed elements are the two types of blood cell or corpuscle – the red blood cells, (erythrocytes) and white blood cells (leukocytes), and the cell fragments called platelets that are involved in clotting. 

By volume, the red blood cells constitute about 45% of whole blood, the plasma about 54.3%, and white cells about 0.7%.
Whole blood (plasma and cells) exhibits non-Newtonian fluid dynamics.

		
		
		


==== Cells ====

One microliter of blood contains:

4.7 to 6.1 million (male), 4.2 to 5.4 million (female) erythrocytes: Red blood cells contain the blood's hemoglobin and distribute oxygen. 

Mature red blood cells lack a nucleus and organelles in mammals. 

The red blood cells (together with endothelial vessel cells and other cells) are also marked by glycoproteins that define the different blood types. 

The proportion of blood occupied by red blood cells is referred to as the hematocrit, and is normally about 45%. 

The combined surface area of all red blood cells of the human body would be roughly 2,000 times as great as the body's exterior surface.
4,000–11,000 leukocytes: White blood cells are part of the body's immune system; they destroy and remove old or aberrant cells and cellular debris, as well as attack infectious agents (pathogens) and foreign substances. 

The cancer of leukocytes is called leukemia.
200,000–500,000 thrombocytes: Also called platelets, they take part in blood clotting (coagulation). 

Fibrin from the coagulation cascade creates a mesh over the platelet plug.


==== Plasma ====

About 55% of blood is blood plasma, a fluid that is the blood's liquid medium, which by itself is straw-yellow in color. 

The blood plasma volume totals of 2.7–3.0 liters (2.8–3.2 quarts) in an average human. 

It is essentially an aqueous solution containing 92% water, 8% blood plasma proteins, and trace amounts of other materials. 

Plasma circulates dissolved nutrients, such as glucose, amino acids, and fatty acids (dissolved in the blood or bound to plasma proteins), and removes waste products, such as carbon dioxide, urea, and lactic acid.
Other important components include:

Serum albumin
Blood-clotting factors (to facilitate coagulation)
Immunoglobulins (antibodies)
lipoprotein particles
Various other proteins
Various electrolytes (mainly sodium and chloride)The term serum refers to plasma from which the clotting proteins have been removed. 

Most of the proteins remaining are albumin and immunoglobulins.


==== pH values ====

Blood pH is regulated to stay within the narrow range of 7.35 to 7.45, making it slightly basic (compensation). 

Extra-cellular fluid in blood that has a pH below 7.35 is too acidic, whereas blood pH above 7.45 is too basic. 

A pH below 6.9 or above 7.8 is usually lethal. 

Blood pH, partial pressure of oxygen (pO2), partial pressure of carbon dioxide (pCO2), and bicarbonate (HCO3−) are carefully regulated by a number of homeostatic mechanisms, which exert their influence principally through the respiratory system and the urinary system to control the acid–base balance and respiration, which is called compensation.An arterial blood gas test measures these. 

Plasma also circulates hormones transmitting their messages to various tissues. 

The list of normal reference ranges for various blood electrolytes is extensive.


=== In non-mammalian vertebrates ===


Human blood is typical of that of mammals, although the precise details concerning cell numbers, size, protein structure, and so on, vary somewhat between species. 

In non-mammalian vertebrates, however, there are some key differences:
Red blood cells of non-mammalian vertebrates are flattened and ovoid in form, and retain their cell nuclei.
There is considerable variation in the types and proportions of white blood cells; for example, acidophils are generally more common than in humans.
Platelets are unique to mammals; in other vertebrates, small nucleated, spindle cells called thrombocytes are responsible for blood clotting instead.


== Physiology ==



=== Circulatory system ===


Blood is circulated around the body through blood vessels by the pumping action of the heart. 

In humans, blood is pumped from the strong left ventricle of the heart through arteries to peripheral tissues and returns to the right atrium of the heart through veins. 

It then enters the right ventricle and is pumped through the pulmonary artery to the lungs and returns to the left atrium through the pulmonary veins. 

Blood then enters the left ventricle to be circulated again. 

Arterial blood carries oxygen from inhaled air to all of the cells of the body, and venous blood carries carbon dioxide, a waste product of metabolism by cells, to the lungs to be exhaled. 

However, one exception includes pulmonary arteries, which contain the most deoxygenated blood in the body, while the pulmonary veins contain oxygenated blood.
Additional return flow may be generated by the movement of skeletal muscles, which can compress veins and push blood through the valves in veins toward the right atrium.
The blood circulation was famously described by William Harvey in 1628.


=== Cell production and degradation ===

In vertebrates, the various cells of blood are made in the bone marrow in a process called hematopoiesis, which includes erythropoiesis, the production of red blood cells; and myelopoiesis, the production of white blood cells and platelets. 

During childhood, almost every human bone produces red blood cells; as adults, red blood cell production is limited to the larger bones: the bodies of the vertebrae, the breastbone (sternum), the ribcage, the pelvic bones, and the bones of the upper arms and legs. 

In addition, during childhood, the thymus gland, found in the mediastinum, is an important source of T lymphocytes.
The proteinaceous component of blood (including clotting proteins) is produced predominantly by the liver, while hormones are produced by the endocrine glands and the watery fraction is regulated by the hypothalamus and maintained by the kidney.
Healthy erythrocytes have a plasma life of about 120 days before they are degraded by the spleen, and the Kupffer cells in the liver. 

The liver also clears some proteins, lipids, and amino acids. 

The kidney actively secretes waste products into the urine.


=== Oxygen transport ===


About 98.5% of the oxygen in a sample of arterial blood in a healthy human breathing air at sea-level pressure is chemically combined with the hemoglobin. 

About 1.5% is physically dissolved in the other blood liquids and not connected to hemoglobin. 

The hemoglobin molecule is the primary transporter of oxygen in mammals and many other species (for exceptions, see below). 

Hemoglobin has an oxygen binding capacity between 1.36 and 1.40 ml O2 per gram hemoglobin, which increases the total blood oxygen capacity seventyfold, compared to if oxygen solely were carried by its solubility of 0.03 ml O2 per liter blood per mm Hg partial pressure of oxygen (about 100 mm Hg in arteries).With the exception of pulmonary and umbilical arteries and their corresponding veins, arteries carry oxygenated blood away from the heart and deliver it to the body via arterioles and capillaries, where the oxygen is consumed; afterwards, venules and veins carry deoxygenated blood back to the heart.
Under normal conditions in adult humans at rest, hemoglobin in blood leaving the lungs is about 98–99% saturated with oxygen, achieving an oxygen delivery between 950 and 1150 ml/min to the body. 

In a healthy adult at rest, oxygen consumption is approximately 200–250 ml/min, and deoxygenated blood returning to the lungs is still roughly 75% (70 to 78%) saturated. 

Increased oxygen consumption during sustained exercise reduces the oxygen saturation of venous blood, which can reach less than 15% in a trained athlete; although breathing rate and blood flow increase to compensate, oxygen saturation in arterial blood can drop to 95% or less under these conditions. 

Oxygen saturation this low is considered dangerous in an individual at rest (for instance, during surgery under anesthesia). 

Sustained hypoxia (oxygenation less than 90%), is dangerous to health, and severe hypoxia (saturations less than 30%) may be rapidly fatal.A fetus, receiving oxygen via the placenta, is exposed to much lower oxygen pressures (about 21% of the level found in an adult's lungs), so fetuses produce another form of hemoglobin with a much higher affinity for oxygen (hemoglobin F) to function under these conditions.


=== Carbon dioxide transport ===

CO2 is carried in blood in three different ways. (The exact percentages vary depending whether it is arterial or venous blood). 

Most of it (about 70%) is converted to bicarbonate ions HCO−3 by the enzyme carbonic anhydrase in the red blood cells by the reaction CO2 + H2O → H2CO3 → H+ + HCO−3; about 7% is dissolved in the plasma; and about 23% is bound to hemoglobin as carbamino compounds.Hemoglobin, the main oxygen-carrying molecule in red blood cells, carries both oxygen and carbon dioxide. 

However, the CO2 bound to hemoglobin does not bind to the same site as oxygen. 

Instead, it combines with the N-terminal groups on the four globin chains. 

However, because of allosteric effects on the hemoglobin molecule, the binding of CO2 decreases the amount of oxygen that is bound for a given partial pressure of oxygen. 

The decreased binding to carbon dioxide in the blood due to increased oxygen levels is known as the Haldane effect, and is important in the transport of carbon dioxide from the tissues to the lungs. 

A rise in the partial pressure of CO2 or a lower pH will cause offloading of oxygen from hemoglobin, which is known as the Bohr effect.


=== Transport of hydrogen ions ===

Some oxyhemoglobin loses oxygen and becomes deoxyhemoglobin. 

Deoxyhemoglobin binds most of the hydrogen ions as it has a much greater affinity for more hydrogen than does oxyhemoglobin.


=== Lymphatic system ===


In mammals, blood is in equilibrium with lymph, which is continuously formed in tissues from blood by capillary ultrafiltration. 

Lymph is collected by a system of small lymphatic vessels and directed to the thoracic duct, which drains into the left subclavian vein, where lymph rejoins the systemic blood circulation.


=== Thermoregulation ===

Blood circulation transports heat throughout the body, and adjustments to this flow are an important part of thermoregulation. 

Increasing blood flow to the surface (e.g., during warm weather or strenuous exercise) causes warmer skin, resulting in faster heat loss. 

In contrast, when the external temperature is low, blood flow to the extremities and surface of the skin is reduced and to prevent heat loss and is circulated to the important organs of the body, preferentially.


=== Rate of flow ===

Rate of blood flow varies greatly between different organs. 

Liver has the most abundant blood supply with an approximate flow of 1350 ml/min. 

Kidney and brain are the second and the third most supplied organs, with 1100 ml/min and ~700 ml/min, respectively.Relative rates of blood flow per 100 g of tissue are different, with kidney, adrenal gland and thyroid being the first, second and third most supplied tissues, respectively.


=== Hydraulic functions ===

The restriction of blood flow can also be used in specialized tissues to cause engorgement, resulting in an erection of that tissue; examples are the erectile tissue in the penis and clitoris.
Another example of a hydraulic function is the jumping spider, in which blood forced into the legs under pressure causes them to straighten for a powerful jump, without the need for bulky muscular legs.


=== Invertebrates ===

In insects, the blood (more properly called hemolymph) is not involved in the transport of oxygen. (Openings called tracheae allow oxygen from the air to diffuse directly to the tissues.) Insect blood moves nutrients to the tissues and removes waste products in an open system.
Other invertebrates use respiratory proteins to increase the oxygen-carrying capacity. 

Hemoglobin is the most common respiratory protein found in nature. 

Hemocyanin (blue) contains copper and is found in crustaceans and mollusks. 

It is thought that tunicates (sea squirts) might use vanabins (proteins containing vanadium) for respiratory pigment (bright-green, blue, or orange).
In many invertebrates, these oxygen-carrying proteins are freely soluble in the blood; in vertebrates they are contained in specialized red blood cells, allowing for a higher concentration of respiratory pigments without increasing viscosity or damaging blood filtering organs like the kidneys.
Giant tube worms have unusual hemoglobins that allow them to live in extraordinary environments. 

These hemoglobins also carry sulfides normally fatal in other animals.


== Color ==

The coloring matter of blood (hemochrome) is largely due to the protein in the blood responsible for oxygen transport. 

Different groups of organisms use different proteins.


=== Hemoglobin ===


Hemoglobin is the principal determinant of the color of blood in vertebrates. 

Each molecule has four heme groups, and their interaction with various molecules alters the exact color. 

In vertebrates and other hemoglobin-using creatures, arterial blood and capillary blood are bright red, as oxygen imparts a strong red color to the heme group. 

Deoxygenated blood is a darker shade of red; this is present in veins, and can be seen during blood donation and when venous blood samples are taken. 

This is because the spectrum of light absorbed by hemoglobin differs between the oxygenated and deoxygenated states.Blood in carbon monoxide poisoning is bright red, because carbon monoxide causes the formation of carboxyhemoglobin. 

In cyanide poisoning, the body cannot utilize oxygen, so the venous blood remains oxygenated, increasing the redness. 

There are some conditions affecting the heme groups present in hemoglobin that can make the skin appear blue – a symptom called cyanosis. 

If the heme is oxidized, methemoglobin, which is more brownish and cannot transport oxygen, is formed. 

In the rare condition sulfhemoglobinemia, arterial hemoglobin is partially oxygenated, and appears dark red with a bluish hue.
Veins close to the surface of the skin appear blue for a variety of reasons. 

However, the factors that contribute to this alteration of color perception are related to the light-scattering properties of the skin and the processing of visual input by the visual cortex, rather than the actual color of the venous blood.Skinks in the genus Prasinohaema have green blood due to a buildup of the waste product biliverdin.


=== Hemocyanin ===


The blood of most mollusks – including cephalopods and gastropods – as well as some arthropods, such as horseshoe crabs, is blue, as it contains the copper-containing protein hemocyanin at concentrations of about 50 grams per liter. 

Hemocyanin is colorless when deoxygenated and dark blue when oxygenated. 

The blood in the circulation of these creatures, which generally live in cold environments with low oxygen tensions, is grey-white to pale yellow, and it turns dark blue when exposed to the oxygen in the air, as seen when they bleed. 

This is due to change in color of hemocyanin when it is oxidized. 

Hemocyanin carries oxygen in extracellular fluid, which is in contrast to the intracellular oxygen transport in mammals by hemoglobin in RBCs.


=== Chlorocruorin ===


The blood of most annelid worms and some marine polychaetes use chlorocruorin to transport oxygen. 

It is green in color in dilute solutions.


=== Hemerythrin ===


Hemerythrin is used for oxygen transport in the marine invertebrates sipunculids, priapulids, brachiopods, and the annelid worm, magelona. 

Hemerythrin is violet-pink when oxygenated.


=== Hemovanadin ===


The blood of some species of ascidians and tunicates, also known as sea squirts, contains proteins called vanadins. 

These proteins are based on vanadium, and give the creatures a concentration of vanadium in their bodies 100 times higher than the surrounding seawater. 

Unlike hemocyanin and hemoglobin, hemovanadin is not an oxygen carrier. 

When exposed to oxygen, however, vanadins turn a mustard yellow.


== Disorders ==



=== General medical ===

Disorders of volume
Injury can cause blood loss through bleeding. 

A healthy adult can lose almost 20% of blood volume (1 L) before the first symptom, restlessness, begins, and 40% of volume (2 L) before shock sets in. 

Thrombocytes are important for blood coagulation and the formation of blood clots, which can stop bleeding. 

Trauma to the internal organs or bones can cause internal bleeding, which can sometimes be severe.
Dehydration can reduce the blood volume by reducing the water content of the blood. 

This would rarely result in shock (apart from the very severe cases) but may result in orthostatic hypotension and fainting.
Disorders of circulation
Shock is the ineffective perfusion of tissues, and can be caused by a variety of conditions including blood loss, infection, poor cardiac output.
Atherosclerosis reduces the flow of blood through arteries, because atheroma lines arteries and narrows them. 

Atheroma tends to increase with age, and its progression can be compounded by many causes including smoking, high blood pressure, excess circulating lipids (hyperlipidemia), and diabetes mellitus.
Coagulation can form a thrombosis, which can obstruct vessels.
Problems with blood composition, the pumping action of the heart, or narrowing of blood vessels can have many consequences including hypoxia (lack of oxygen) of the tissues supplied. 

The term ischemia refers to tissue that is inadequately perfused with blood, and infarction refers to tissue death (necrosis), which can occur when the blood supply has been blocked (or is very inadequate).


=== Hematological ===


Anemia
Insufficient red cell mass (anemia) can be the result of bleeding, blood disorders like thalassemia, or nutritional deficiencies, and may require one or more blood transfusions. 

Anemia can also be due to a genetic disorder in which the red blood cells simply do not function effectively. 

Anemia can be confirmed by a blood test if the hemoglobin value is less than 13.5 gm/dl in men or less than 12.0 gm/dl in women. 

Several countries have blood banks to fill the demand for transfusable blood. 

A person receiving a blood transfusion must have a blood type compatible with that of the donor.
Sickle-cell anemia
Disorders of cell proliferation
Leukemia is a group of cancers of the blood-forming tissues and cells.
Non-cancerous overproduction of red cells (polycythemia vera) or platelets (essential thrombocytosis) may be premalignant.
Myelodysplastic syndromes involve ineffective production of one or more cell lines.
Disorders of coagulation
Hemophilia is a genetic illness that causes dysfunction in one of the blood's clotting mechanisms. 

This can allow otherwise inconsequential wounds to be life-threatening, but more commonly results in hemarthrosis, or bleeding into joint spaces, which can be crippling.
Ineffective or insufficient platelets can also result in coagulopathy (bleeding disorders).
Hypercoagulable state (thrombophilia) results from defects in regulation of platelet or clotting factor function, and can cause thrombosis.
Infectious disorders of blood
Blood is an important vector of infection. 

HIV, the virus that causes AIDS, is transmitted through contact with blood, semen or other body secretions of an infected person. 

Hepatitis B and C are transmitted primarily through blood contact. 

Owing to blood-borne infections, bloodstained objects are treated as a biohazard.
Bacterial infection of the blood is bacteremia or sepsis. 

Viral Infection is viremia. 

Malaria and trypanosomiasis are blood-borne parasitic infections.


=== Carbon monoxide poisoning ===


Substances other than oxygen can bind to hemoglobin; in some cases, this can cause irreversible damage to the body. 

Carbon monoxide, for example, is extremely dangerous when carried to the blood via the lungs by inhalation, because carbon monoxide irreversibly binds to hemoglobin to form carboxyhemoglobin, so that less hemoglobin is free to bind oxygen, and fewer oxygen molecules can be transported throughout the blood. 

This can cause suffocation insidiously. 

A fire burning in an enclosed room with poor ventilation presents a very dangerous hazard, since it can create a build-up of carbon monoxide in the air. 

Some carbon monoxide binds to hemoglobin when smoking tobacco.


== Treatments ==



=== Transfusion ===


Blood for transfusion is obtained from human donors by blood donation and stored in a blood bank. 

There are many different blood types in humans, the ABO blood group system, and the Rhesus blood group system being the most important. 

Transfusion of blood of an incompatible blood group may cause severe, often fatal, complications, so crossmatching is done to ensure that a compatible blood product is transfused.
Other blood products administered intravenously are platelets, blood plasma, cryoprecipitate, and specific coagulation factor concentrates.


=== Intravenous administration ===

Many forms of medication (from antibiotics to chemotherapy) are administered intravenously, as they are not readily or adequately absorbed by the digestive tract.
After severe acute blood loss, liquid preparations, generically known as plasma expanders, can be given intravenously, either solutions of salts (NaCl, KCl, CaCl2 etc.) at physiological concentrations, or colloidal solutions, such as dextrans, human serum albumin, or fresh frozen plasma. 

In these emergency situations, a plasma expander is a more effective life-saving procedure than a blood transfusion, because the metabolism of transfused red blood cells does not restart immediately after a transfusion.


=== Letting ===


In modern evidence-based medicine, bloodletting is used in management of a few rare diseases, including hemochromatosis and polycythemia. 

However, bloodletting and leeching were common unvalidated interventions used until the 19th century, as many diseases were incorrectly thought to be due to an excess of blood, according to Hippocratic medicine.


== Etymology ==


English blood (Old English blod) derives from Germanic and has cognates with a similar range of meanings in all other Germanic languages (e.g. 

German Blut, Swedish blod, Gothic blōþ). 

There is no accepted Indo-European etymology.


== History ==



=== Classical Greek medicine ===

Robin Fåhræus (a Swedish physician who devised the erythrocyte sedimentation rate) suggested that the Ancient Greek system of humorism, wherein the body was thought to contain four distinct bodily fluids (associated with different temperaments), were based upon the observation of blood clotting in a transparent container. 

When blood is drawn in a glass container and left undisturbed for about an hour, four different layers can be seen. 

A dark clot forms at the bottom (the "black bile"). 

Above the clot is a layer of red blood cells (the "blood"). 

Above this is a whitish layer of white blood cells (the "phlegm"). 

The top layer is clear yellow serum (the "yellow bile").


=== Types ===

The ABO blood group system was discovered in the year 1900 by Karl Landsteiner. 

Jan Janský is credited with the first classification of blood into the four types (A, B, AB, and O) in 1907, which remains in use today. 

In 1907 the first blood transfusion was performed that used the ABO system to predict compatibility. 

The first non-direct transfusion was performed on 27 March 1914. 

The Rhesus factor was discovered in 1937.


== Culture and religion ==


Due to its importance to life, blood is associated with a large number of beliefs. 

One of the most basic is the use of blood as a symbol for family relationships through birth/parentage; to be "related by blood" is to be related by ancestry or descendence, rather than marriage. 

This bears closely to bloodlines, and sayings such as "blood is thicker than water" and "bad blood", as well as "Blood brother".
Blood is given particular emphasis in the Jewish and Christian religions, because Leviticus 17:11 says "the life of a creature is in the blood." This phrase is part of the Levitical law forbidding the drinking of blood or eating meat with the blood still intact instead of being poured off.
Mythic references to blood can sometimes be connected to the life-giving nature of blood, seen in such events as childbirth, as contrasted with the blood of injury or death.


=== Indigenous Australians ===

In many indigenous Australian Aboriginal peoples' traditions, ochre (particularly red) and blood, both high in iron content and considered Maban, are applied to the bodies of dancers for ritual. 

As Lawlor states:
In many Aboriginal rituals and ceremonies, red ochre is rubbed all over the naked bodies of the dancers. 

In secret, sacred male ceremonies, blood extracted from the veins of the participant's arms is exchanged and rubbed on their bodies. 

Red ochre is used in similar ways in less-secret ceremonies. 

Blood is also used to fasten the feathers of birds onto people's bodies. 

Bird feathers contain a protein that is highly magnetically sensitive. 

Lawlor comments that blood employed in this fashion is held by these peoples to attune the dancers to the invisible energetic realm of the Dreamtime. 

Lawlor then connects these invisible energetic realms and magnetic fields, because iron is magnetic.


=== European paganism ===

Among the Germanic tribes, blood was used during their sacrifices; the Blóts. 

The blood was considered to have the power of its originator, and, after the butchering, the blood was sprinkled on the walls, on the statues of the gods, and on the participants themselves. 

This act of sprinkling blood was called blóedsian in Old English, and the terminology was borrowed by the Roman Catholic Church becoming to bless and blessing. 

The Hittite word for blood, ishar was a cognate to words for "oath" and "bond", see Ishara.
The Ancient Greeks believed that the blood of the gods, ichor, was a substance that was poisonous to mortals.
As a relic of Germanic Law, the cruentation, an ordeal where the corpse of the victim was supposed to start bleeding in the presence of the murderer, was used until the early 17th century.


=== Christianity ===

In Genesis 9:4, God prohibited Noah and his sons from eating blood (see Noahide Law). 

This command continued to be observed by the Eastern Orthodox Church.
It is also found in the Bible that when the Angel of Death came around to the Hebrew house that the first-born child would not die if the angel saw lamb's blood wiped across the doorway.
At the Council of Jerusalem, the apostles prohibited certain Christians from consuming blood – this is documented in Acts 15:20 and 29. 

This chapter specifies a reason (especially in verses 19–21): It was to avoid offending Jews who had become Christians, because the Mosaic Law Code prohibited the practice.
Christ's blood is the means for the atonement of sins. 

Also, ″... the blood of Jesus Christ his [God] Son cleanseth us from all sin." (1 John 1:7), “... 

Unto him [God] that loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood." (Revelation 1:5), and "And they overcame him (Satan) by the blood
of the Lamb [Jesus the Christ], and by the word of their testimony ...” (Revelation 12:11).
Some Christian churches, including Roman Catholicism, Eastern Orthodoxy, Oriental Orthodoxy, and the Assyrian Church of the East teach that, when consecrated, the Eucharistic wine actually becomes the blood of Jesus for worshippers to drink. 

Thus in the consecrated wine, Jesus becomes spiritually and physically present. 

This teaching is rooted in the Last Supper, as written in the four gospels of the Bible, in which Jesus stated to his disciples that the bread that they ate was his body, and the wine was his blood. "This cup is the new testament in my blood, which is shed for you." (Luke 22:20).
Most forms of Protestantism, especially those of a Methodist or Presbyterian lineage, teach that the wine is no more than a symbol of the blood of Christ, who is spiritually but not physically present. 

Lutheran theology teaches that the body and blood is present together "in, with, and under" the bread and wine of the Eucharistic feast.


=== Judaism ===

In Judaism, animal blood may not be consumed even in the smallest quantity (Leviticus 3:17 and elsewhere); this is reflected in Jewish dietary laws (Kashrut). 

Blood is purged from meat by rinsing and soaking in water (to loosen clots), salting and then rinsing with water again several times. 

Eggs must also be checked and any blood spots removed before consumption. 

Although blood from fish is biblically kosher, it is rabbinically forbidden to consume fish blood to avoid the appearance of breaking the Biblical prohibition.Another ritual involving blood involves the covering of the blood of fowl and game after slaughtering (Leviticus 17:13); the reason given by the Torah is: "Because the life of the animal is [in] its blood" (ibid 17:14). 

In relation to human beings, Kabbalah expounds on this verse that the animal soul of a person is in the blood, and that physical desires stem from it.
Likewise, the mystical reason for salting temple sacrifices and slaughtered meat is to remove the blood of animal-like passions from the person. 

By removing the animal's blood, the animal energies and life-force contained in the blood are removed, making the meat fit for human consumption.


=== Islam ===

Consumption of food containing blood is forbidden by Islamic dietary laws. 

This is derived from the statement in the Qur'an, sura Al-Ma'ida (5:3): "Forbidden to you (for food) are: dead meat, blood, the flesh of swine, and that on which has been invoked the name of other than Allah."
Blood is considered unclean, hence there are specific methods to obtain physical and ritual status of cleanliness once bleeding has occurred. 

Specific rules and prohibitions apply to menstruation, postnatal bleeding and irregular vaginal bleeding. 

When an animal has been slaughtered, the animal's neck is cut in a way to ensure that the spine is not severed, hence the brain may send commands to the heart to pump blood to it for oxygen. 

In this way, blood is removed from the body, and the meat is generally now safe to cook and eat. 

In modern times, blood transfusions are generally not considered against the rules.


=== Jehovah's Witnesses ===


Based on their interpretation of scriptures such as Acts 15:28, 29 ("Keep abstaining...from blood."), many Jehovah's Witnesses neither consume blood nor accept transfusions of whole blood or its major components: red blood cells, white blood cells, platelets (thrombocytes), and plasma. 

Members may personally decide whether they will accept medical procedures that involve their own blood or substances that are further fractionated from the four major components.


=== Vampirism ===


Vampires are mythical creatures that drink blood directly for sustenance, usually with a preference for human blood. 

Cultures all over the world have myths of this kind; for example the 'Nosferatu' legend, a human who achieves damnation and immortality by drinking the blood of others, originates from Eastern European folklore. 

Ticks, leeches, female mosquitoes, vampire bats, and an assortment of other natural creatures do consume the blood of other animals, but only bats are associated with vampires. 

This has no relation to vampire bats, which are New World creatures discovered well after the origins of the European myths.


== Other uses ==



=== Forensic and archaeological ===

Blood residue can help forensic investigators identify weapons, reconstruct a criminal action, and link suspects to the crime. 

Through bloodstain pattern analysis, forensic information can also be gained from the spatial distribution of bloodstains.
Blood residue analysis is also a technique used in archeology.


=== Artistic ===

Blood is one of the body fluids that has been used in art. 

In particular, the performances of Viennese Actionist Hermann Nitsch, Istvan Kantor, Franko B, Lennie Lee, Ron Athey, Yang Zhichao, Lucas Abela and Kira O'Reilly, along with the photography of Andres Serrano, have incorporated blood as a prominent visual element. 

Marc Quinn has made sculptures using frozen blood, including a cast of his own head made using his own blood.


=== Genealogical ===

The term blood is used in genealogical circles to refer to one's ancestry, origins, and ethnic background as in the word bloodline. 

Other terms where blood is used in a family history sense are blue-blood, royal blood, mixed-blood and blood relative.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blood
;;;ES;;;



SANGRE


La sangre es un fluido corporal en el sistema circulatorio de los humanos y otros vertebrados que proporciona sustancias necesarias, como nutrientes y oxígeno, a las células y transporta los productos de desecho metabólicos lejos de esas mismas células. La sangre está compuesta de células sanguíneas suspendidas en el plasma sanguíneo.

El plasma, que constituye el 55 % del líquido sanguíneo, es principalmente agua (92 % en volumen) y contiene proteínas, glucosa, iones minerales, hormonas, dióxido de carbono (siendo el plasma el principal medio de transporte de los productos de excreción) y las propias células sanguíneas.

La albúmina es la proteína principal en el plasma y funciona para regular la presión osmótica coloidal de la sangre.

Los glóbulos son principalmente glóbulos rojos (también llamados glóbulos rojos o eritrocitos), glóbulos blancos (también llamados glóbulos blancos o leucocitos) y plaquetas (también llamadas trombocitos).

Las células más abundantes en la sangre de los vertebrados son los glóbulos rojos.

Estos contienen hemoglobina, una proteína que contiene hierro, que facilita el transporte de oxígeno al unirse de forma reversible a este gas respiratorio y aumentar considerablemente su solubilidad en la sangre.

Por el contrario, el dióxido de carbono se transporta principalmente extracelularmente como ion bicarbonato transportado en el plasma.
La sangre de los vertebrados es de color rojo brillante cuando su hemoglobina está oxigenada y de color rojo oscuro cuando está desoxigenada.

Algunos animales, como los crustáceos y los moluscos, usan hemocianina para transportar oxígeno, en lugar de hemoglobina.

Los insectos y algunos moluscos usan un líquido llamado hemolinfa en lugar de sangre, con la diferencia de que la hemolinfa no está contenida en un sistema circulatorio cerrado.

En la mayoría de los insectos, esta "sangre" no contiene moléculas transportadoras de oxígeno como la hemoglobina porque sus cuerpos son lo suficientemente pequeños para que su sistema traqueal sea suficiente para suministrar oxígeno.
Los vertebrados con mandíbula tienen un sistema inmunitario adaptativo, basado en gran medida en los glóbulos blancos.

Los glóbulos blancos ayudan a resistir infecciones y parásitos.

Las plaquetas son importantes en la coagulación de la sangre.

Los artrópodos, al usar hemolinfa, tienen hemocitos como parte de su sistema inmunológico.
La sangre circula por todo el cuerpo a través de los vasos sanguíneos por la acción de bombeo del corazón.

En los animales con pulmones, la sangre arterial transporta oxígeno desde el aire inhalado hasta los tejidos del cuerpo, y la sangre venosa transporta dióxido de carbono, un producto de desecho del metabolismo producido por las células, desde los tejidos hasta los pulmones para ser exhalado.
Los términos médicos relacionados con la sangre a menudo comienzan con hemo- o hemato- (también escrito haemo- y haemato-) de la palabra griega αἷμα (haima) para "sangre".

En términos de anatomía e histología, la sangre se considera una forma especializada de tejido conectivo, dado su origen en los huesos y la presencia de fibras moleculares potenciales en forma de fibrinógeno.


== Funciones ==


La sangre realiza muchas funciones importantes dentro del cuerpo, que incluyen:

Suministro de oxígeno a los tejidos (unido a la hemoglobina, que se transporta en los glóbulos rojos)
Suministro de nutrientes como glucosa, aminoácidos y ácidos grasos (disueltos en la sangre o unidos a proteínas plasmáticas (p. ej., lípidos sanguíneos))
Eliminación de desechos como dióxido de carbono, urea y ácido láctico
Funciones inmunológicas, incluida la circulación de glóbulos blancos y detección de material extraño por anticuerpos.
Coagulación, la respuesta a un vaso sanguíneo roto, la conversión de sangre de un líquido a un gel semisólido para detener el sangrado
Funciones de mensajero, incluido el transporte de hormonas y la señalización del daño tisular.
Regulación de la temperatura corporal central
Funciones hidráulicas


== Constituyentes ==



=== En mamíferos ===


La sangre representa el 7% del peso del cuerpo humano, con una densidad media de alrededor de 1060 kg/m3, muy cercana a la densidad del agua pura de 1000 kg/m3.

El adulto promedio tiene un volumen de sangre de aproximadamente 5 litros (11 pt estadounidenses) o 1,3 galones, que se compone de plasma y elementos formes.

Los elementos formados son los dos tipos de glóbulos o corpúsculos: los glóbulos rojos (eritrocitos) y los glóbulos blancos (leucocitos), y los fragmentos de células llamados plaquetas que participan en la coagulación.

Por volumen, los glóbulos rojos constituyen alrededor del 45% de la sangre total, el plasma alrededor del 54,3% y los glóbulos blancos alrededor del 0,7%.
La sangre completa (plasma y células) exhibe una dinámica de fluidos no newtoniana.

 
 
 


==== Células ====

Un microlitro de sangre contiene:

4,7 a 6,1 millones (hombres), 4,2 a 5,4 millones (mujeres) eritrocitos: los glóbulos rojos contienen la hemoglobina de la sangre y distribuyen el oxígeno.

Los glóbulos rojos maduros carecen de núcleo y organelos en los mamíferos.

Los glóbulos rojos (junto con las células de los vasos endoteliales y otras células) también están marcados por glicoproteínas que definen los diferentes tipos de sangre.

La proporción de sangre ocupada por glóbulos rojos se denomina hematocrito y normalmente es de alrededor del 45%.

El área de superficie combinada de todos los glóbulos rojos del cuerpo humano sería aproximadamente 2000 veces mayor que la superficie exterior del cuerpo.
4,000–11,000 leucocitos: Los glóbulos blancos son parte del sistema inmunológico del cuerpo; destruyen y eliminan células viejas o aberrantes y restos celulares, así como atacan agentes infecciosos (patógenos) y sustancias extrañas.

El cáncer de los leucocitos se llama leucemia.
200 000–500 000 trombocitos: también llamados plaquetas, participan en la coagulación de la sangre.

La fibrina de la cascada de coagulación crea una malla sobre el tapón de plaquetas.


==== plasma ====

Alrededor del 55% de la sangre es plasma sanguíneo, un fluido que es el medio líquido de la sangre, que por sí solo es de color amarillo pajizo.

El volumen de plasma sanguíneo totaliza de 2,7 a 3,0 litros (2,8 a 3,2 cuartos de galón) en un ser humano promedio.

Es esencialmente una solución acuosa que contiene 92 % de agua, 8 % de proteínas del plasma sanguíneo y pequeñas cantidades de otros materiales.

El plasma hace circular nutrientes disueltos, como glucosa, aminoácidos y ácidos grasos (disueltos en la sangre o unidos a proteínas plasmáticas), y elimina productos de desecho, como dióxido de carbono, urea y ácido láctico.
Otros componentes importantes incluyen:

Albúmina de suero
Factores de coagulación de la sangre (para facilitar la coagulación)
Inmunoglobulinas (anticuerpos)
partículas de lipoproteínas
Varias otras proteínas
Varios electrolitos (principalmente sodio y cloruro) El término suero se refiere al plasma del que se han eliminado las proteínas de coagulación.

La mayoría de las proteínas restantes son albúmina e inmunoglobulinas.


==== Valores de pH ====

El pH de la sangre se regula para permanecer dentro del estrecho rango de 7,35 a 7,45, haciéndolo ligeramente básico (compensación).

El fluido extracelular en la sangre que tiene un pH por debajo de 7,35 es demasiado ácido, mientras que el pH de la sangre por encima de 7,45 es demasiado básico.

Un pH inferior a 6,9 o superior a 7,8 suele ser letal.

El pH sanguíneo, la presión parcial de oxígeno (pO2), la presión parcial de dióxido de carbono (pCO2) y el bicarbonato (HCO3−) están cuidadosamente regulados por una serie de mecanismos homeostáticos, que ejercen su influencia principalmente a través del sistema respiratorio y el sistema urinario para controlar el equilibrio ácido-base y la respiración, lo que se denomina compensación. Esto se mide mediante una prueba de gases en sangre arterial.

El plasma también hace circular hormonas que transmiten sus mensajes a varios tejidos.

La lista de rangos de referencia normales para varios electrolitos en sangre es extensa.


=== En vertebrados no mamíferos ===


La sangre humana es típica de la de los mamíferos, aunque los detalles precisos sobre el número de células, el tamaño, la estructura de las proteínas, etc., varían un poco entre las especies.

En los vertebrados no mamíferos, sin embargo, existen algunas diferencias clave:
Los glóbulos rojos de los vertebrados no mamíferos son aplanados y de forma ovoide, y conservan sus núcleos celulares.
Existe una variación considerable en los tipos y proporciones de glóbulos blancos; por ejemplo, los acidófilos son generalmente más comunes que en los humanos.
Las plaquetas son exclusivas de los mamíferos; en otros vertebrados, las pequeñas células fusiformes nucleadas llamadas trombocitos son responsables de la coagulación de la sangre.


== Fisiología ==



=== Sistema circulatorio ===


La sangre circula por todo el cuerpo a través de los vasos sanguíneos por la acción de bombeo del corazón.

En los seres humanos, la sangre se bombea desde el fuerte ventrículo izquierdo del corazón a través de las arterias hasta los tejidos periféricos y regresa a la aurícula derecha del corazón a través de las venas.

Luego ingresa al ventrículo derecho y se bombea a través de la arteria pulmonar hacia los pulmones y regresa a la aurícula izquierda a través de las venas pulmonares.

Luego, la sangre ingresa al ventrículo izquierdo para circular nuevamente.

La sangre arterial transporta oxígeno del aire inhalado a todas las células del cuerpo, y la sangre venosa transporta dióxido de carbono, un producto de desecho del metabolismo de las células, a los pulmones para ser exhalado.

Sin embargo, una excepción incluye las arterias pulmonares, que contienen la sangre más desoxigenada del cuerpo, mientras que las venas pulmonares contienen sangre oxigenada.
El movimiento de los músculos esqueléticos puede generar un flujo de retorno adicional, que puede comprimir las venas y empujar la sangre a través de las válvulas de las venas hacia la aurícula derecha.
La circulación sanguínea fue famosamente descrita por William Harvey en 1628.


=== Producción y degradación celular ===

En los vertebrados, las diversas células de la sangre se fabrican en la médula ósea en un proceso llamado hematopoyesis, que incluye la eritropoyesis, la producción de glóbulos rojos; y mielopoyesis, la producción de glóbulos blancos y plaquetas.

Durante la infancia, casi todos los huesos humanos producen glóbulos rojos; en la edad adulta, la producción de glóbulos rojos se limita a los huesos más grandes: los cuerpos de las vértebras, el esternón (esternón), la caja torácica, los huesos pélvicos y los huesos de la parte superior de los brazos y las piernas.

Además, durante la infancia, la glándula timo, que se encuentra en el mediastino, es una fuente importante de linfocitos T.
El componente proteínico de la sangre (incluidas las proteínas de la coagulación) se produce predominantemente en el hígado, mientras que las glándulas endocrinas producen hormonas y la fracción acuosa está regulada por el hipotálamo y mantenida por el riñón.
Los eritrocitos sanos tienen una vida plasmática de unos 120 días antes de ser degradados por el bazo y las células de Kupffer en el hígado.

El hígado también elimina algunas proteínas, lípidos y aminoácidos.

El riñón secreta activamente productos de desecho en la orina.


=== Transporte de oxígeno ===


Aproximadamente el 98,5% del oxígeno en una muestra de sangre arterial en un ser humano sano que respira aire a la presión del nivel del mar se combina químicamente con la hemoglobina.

Alrededor del 1,5% se disuelve físicamente en los otros líquidos sanguíneos y no está conectado a la hemoglobina.

La molécula de hemoglobina es el principal transportador de oxígeno en los mamíferos y muchas otras especies (para excepciones, ver más abajo).

La hemoglobina tiene una capacidad de unión al oxígeno de entre 1,36 y 1,40 ml de O2 por gramo de hemoglobina, lo que aumenta setenta veces la capacidad total de oxígeno en la sangre, en comparación con si solo se transportara oxígeno por su solubilidad de 0,03 ml de O2 por litro de sangre por mm Hg de presión parcial de oxígeno ( aproximadamente 100 mm Hg en las arterias). Con la excepción de las arterias pulmonar y umbilical y sus venas correspondientes, las arterias transportan sangre oxigenada desde el corazón y la llevan al cuerpo a través de arteriolas y capilares, donde se consume el oxígeno; luego, las vénulas y las venas llevan la sangre desoxigenada de vuelta al corazón.
En condiciones normales en seres humanos adultos en reposo, la hemoglobina en la sangre que sale de los pulmones está saturada con oxígeno en un 98-99%, lo que logra un suministro de oxígeno entre 950 y 1150 ml/min al cuerpo.

En un adulto sano en reposo, el consumo de oxígeno es de aproximadamente 200 a 250 ml/min, y la sangre desoxigenada que regresa a los pulmones todavía está saturada aproximadamente en un 75% (70 a 78%).

El aumento del consumo de oxígeno durante el ejercicio sostenido reduce la saturación de oxígeno de la sangre venosa, que puede llegar a menos del 15 % en un atleta entrenado; aunque la frecuencia respiratoria y el flujo sanguíneo aumentan para compensar, la saturación de oxígeno en la sangre arterial puede caer al 95% o menos en estas condiciones.

Una saturación de oxígeno tan baja se considera peligrosa en un individuo en reposo (por ejemplo, durante una cirugía bajo anestesia).

La hipoxia sostenida (oxigenación inferior al 90 %) es peligrosa para la salud, y la hipoxia grave (saturaciones inferiores al 30 %) puede ser rápidamente fatal. Un feto, que recibe oxígeno a través de la placenta, está expuesto a presiones de oxígeno mucho más bajas (alrededor del 21 % del nivel que se encuentra en los pulmones de un adulto), por lo que los fetos producen otra forma de hemoglobina con una afinidad mucho mayor por el oxígeno (hemoglobina F) para funcionar en estas condiciones.


=== Transporte de dióxido de carbono ===

El CO2 se transporta en la sangre de tres formas diferentes. (Los porcentajes exactos varían según se trate de sangre arterial o venosa).

La mayor parte (alrededor del 70 %) se convierte en iones de bicarbonato HCO−3 por la enzima anhidrasa carbónica en los glóbulos rojos mediante la reacción CO2 + H2O → H2CO3 → H+ + HCO−3; alrededor del 7% se disuelve en el plasma; y alrededor del 23% se une a la hemoglobina como compuestos carbamino. La hemoglobina, la principal molécula transportadora de oxígeno en los glóbulos rojos, transporta oxígeno y dióxido de carbono.

Sin embargo, el CO2 unido a la hemoglobina no se une al mismo sitio que el oxígeno.

En cambio, se combina con los grupos N-terminales en las cuatro cadenas de globina.

Sin embargo, debido a los efectos alostéricos sobre la molécula de hemoglobina, la unión de CO2 disminuye la cantidad de oxígeno que se une para una determinada presión parcial de oxígeno.

La disminución de la unión al dióxido de carbono en la sangre debido al aumento de los niveles de oxígeno se conoce como efecto Haldane y es importante en el transporte de dióxido de carbono desde los tejidos hasta los pulmones.

Un aumento en la presión parcial de CO2 o un pH más bajo provocará una descarga de oxígeno de la hemoglobina, lo que se conoce como efecto Bohr.


=== Transporte de iones de hidrógeno ===

Parte de la oxihemoglobina pierde oxígeno y se convierte en desoxihemoglobina.

La desoxihemoglobina se une a la mayoría de los iones de hidrógeno, ya que tiene una afinidad mucho mayor por más hidrógeno que la oxihemoglobina.


=== Sistema linfático ===


En los mamíferos, la sangre está en equilibrio con la linfa, que se forma continuamente en los tejidos a partir de la sangre por ultrafiltración capilar.

La linfa es recolectada por un sistema de pequeños vasos linfáticos y dirigida al conducto torácico, que drena en la vena subclavia izquierda, donde la linfa se reincorpora a la circulación sanguínea sistémica.


=== Termorregulación ===

La circulación sanguínea transporta el calor por todo el cuerpo, y los ajustes a este flujo son una parte importante de la termorregulación.

El aumento del flujo de sangre a la superficie (p. ej., durante el clima cálido o el ejercicio extenuante) hace que la piel se caliente, lo que resulta en una pérdida de calor más rápida.

Por el contrario, cuando la temperatura externa es baja, el flujo de sangre a las extremidades y la superficie de la piel se reduce y para evitar la pérdida de calor, circula hacia los órganos importantes del cuerpo, preferentemente.


=== Tasa de flujo ===

La tasa de flujo sanguíneo varía mucho entre los diferentes órganos.

El hígado tiene el riego sanguíneo más abundante con un flujo aproximado de 1350 ml/min.

El riñón y el cerebro son el segundo y el tercer órgano con mayor suministro, con 1100 ml/min y ~700 ml/min, respectivamente. Las tasas relativas de flujo sanguíneo por 100 g de tejido son diferentes, siendo el riñón, la glándula suprarrenal y la tiroides los primeros. , segundo y tercer tejidos más abastecidos, respectivamente.


=== Funciones hidráulicas ===

La restricción del flujo sanguíneo también se puede usar en tejidos especializados para causar congestión, lo que resulta en una erección de ese tejido; ejemplos son el tejido eréctil en el pene y el clítoris.
Otro ejemplo de una función hidráulica es la araña saltadora, en la que la sangre forzada en las piernas bajo presión hace que se enderecen para un salto potente, sin necesidad de piernas voluminosas y musculosas.


=== Invertebrados ===

En los insectos, la sangre (más propiamente llamada hemolinfa) no participa en el transporte de oxígeno. (Las aberturas llamadas tráqueas permiten que el oxígeno del aire se difunda directamente a los tejidos). La sangre de los insectos transporta los nutrientes a los tejidos y elimina los productos de desecho en un sistema abierto.
Otros invertebrados utilizan proteínas respiratorias para aumentar la capacidad de transporte de oxígeno.

La hemoglobina es la proteína respiratoria más común que se encuentra en la naturaleza.

La hemocianina (azul) contiene cobre y se encuentra en crustáceos y moluscos.

Se cree que los tunicados (ascidias) podrían usar vanabinas (proteínas que contienen vanadio) para el pigmento respiratorio (verde brillante, azul o naranja).
En muchos invertebrados, estas proteínas transportadoras de oxígeno son fácilmente solubles en la sangre; en los vertebrados están contenidos en glóbulos rojos especializados, lo que permite una mayor concentración de pigmentos respiratorios sin aumentar la viscosidad ni dañar los órganos que filtran la sangre, como los riñones.
Los gusanos tubulares gigantes tienen hemoglobinas inusuales que les permiten vivir en ambientes extraordinarios.

Estas hemoglobinas también transportan sulfuros normalmente fatales en otros animales.


== Color ==

La materia colorante de la sangre (hemocromo) se debe en gran parte a la proteína de la sangre responsable del transporte de oxígeno.

Diferentes grupos de organismos usan diferentes proteínas.


=== Hemoglobina ===


La hemoglobina es el principal determinante del color de la sangre en los vertebrados.

Cada molécula tiene cuatro grupos hemo, y su interacción con varias moléculas altera el color exacto.

En los vertebrados y otras criaturas que utilizan hemoglobina, la sangre arterial y la sangre capilar son de color rojo brillante, ya que el oxígeno imparte un color rojo intenso al grupo hemo.

La sangre desoxigenada tiene un tono más oscuro de rojo; esto está presente en las venas y se puede ver durante la donación de sangre y cuando se toman muestras de sangre venosa.

Esto se debe a que el espectro de luz absorbida por la hemoglobina difiere entre los estados oxigenado y desoxigenado. La sangre en el envenenamiento por monóxido de carbono es de color rojo brillante, porque el monóxido de carbono provoca la formación de carboxihemoglobina.

En el envenenamiento por cianuro, el cuerpo no puede utilizar el oxígeno, por lo que la sangre venosa permanece oxigenada, aumentando el enrojecimiento.

Hay algunas condiciones que afectan a los grupos hemo presentes en la hemoglobina que pueden hacer que la piel se vea azul, un síntoma llamado cianosis.

Si el hemo se oxida, se forma metahemoglobina, que es más pardusca y no puede transportar oxígeno.

En la condición rara de sulfhemoglobinemia, la hemoglobina arterial está parcialmente oxigenada y aparece de color rojo oscuro con un tono azulado.
Las venas cercanas a la superficie de la piel se ven azules por una variedad de razones.

Sin embargo, los factores que contribuyen a esta alteración de la percepción del color están relacionados con las propiedades de dispersión de la luz de la piel y el procesamiento de la información visual por parte de la corteza visual, más que con el color real de la sangre venosa. Las pieles del género Prasinohaema tienen sangre verde debido a la acumulación del producto de desecho biliverdina.


=== Hemocianina ===


La sangre de la mayoría de los moluscos, incluidos los cefalópodos y gasterópodos, así como algunos artrópodos, como los cangrejos herradura, es azul, ya que contiene la proteína hemocianina que contiene cobre en concentraciones de aproximadamente 50 gramos por litro.

La hemocianina es incolora cuando se desoxigena y azul oscuro cuando se oxigena.

La sangre en la circulación de estas criaturas, que generalmente viven en ambientes fríos con bajas tensiones de oxígeno, es de color blanco grisáceo a amarillo pálido, y se vuelve azul oscuro cuando se expone al oxígeno del aire, como se ve cuando sangran.

Esto se debe al cambio de color de la hemocianina cuando se oxida.

La hemocianina transporta oxígeno en el líquido extracelular, lo que contrasta con el transporte de oxígeno intracelular en los mamíferos por la hemoglobina en los glóbulos rojos.


=== Clorocruorina ===


La sangre de la mayoría de los gusanos anélidos y algunos poliquetos marinos utilizan clorocruorina para transportar oxígeno.

Es de color verde en soluciones diluidas.


=== Hemeritrina ===


La hemeritrina se utiliza para el transporte de oxígeno en los invertebrados marinos sipuncúlidos, priapulidos, braquiópodos y el gusano anélido magelona.

La hemeritrina es de color rosa violeta cuando se oxigena.


=== hemovanadina ===


La sangre de algunas especies de ascidias y tunicados, también conocidas como chorros de mar, contiene proteínas llamadas vanadinas.

Estas proteínas se basan en vanadio y dan a las criaturas una concentración de vanadio en sus cuerpos 100 veces mayor que el agua de mar circundante.

A diferencia de la hemocianina y la hemoglobina, la hemovanadina no es un transportador de oxígeno.

Sin embargo, cuando se exponen al oxígeno, las vanadinas se vuelven de color amarillo mostaza.


== Trastornos ==



=== Medicina general ===

Trastornos del volumen
La lesión puede causar pérdida de sangre a través del sangrado.

Un adulto sano puede perder casi el 20 % del volumen de sangre (1 L) antes de que comience el primer síntoma, la inquietud, y el 40 % del volumen (2 L) antes de que comience el shock.

Los trombocitos son importantes para la coagulación de la sangre y la formación de coágulos de sangre, lo que puede detener el sangrado.

Los traumatismos en los órganos internos o los huesos pueden causar hemorragias internas, que a veces pueden ser graves.
La deshidratación puede reducir el volumen de sangre al reducir el contenido de agua de la sangre.

Esto rara vez provocaría un shock (aparte de los casos muy graves), pero puede provocar hipotensión ortostática y desmayo.
Trastornos de la circulacion
El shock es la perfusión ineficaz de los tejidos y puede ser causado por una variedad de condiciones que incluyen pérdida de sangre, infección, gasto cardíaco deficiente.
La aterosclerosis reduce el flujo de sangre a través de las arterias, porque el ateroma recubre las arterias y las estrecha.

El ateroma tiende a aumentar con la edad y su progresión puede verse agravada por muchas causas, como el tabaquismo, la presión arterial alta, el exceso de lípidos circulantes (hiperlipidemia) y la diabetes mellitus.
La coagulación puede formar una trombosis, que puede obstruir los vasos.
Los problemas con la composición de la sangre, la acción de bombeo del corazón o el estrechamiento de los vasos sanguíneos pueden tener muchas consecuencias, incluida la hipoxia (falta de oxígeno) de los tejidos irrigados.

El término isquemia se refiere al tejido que no está adecuadamente perfundido con sangre, y el infarto se refiere a la muerte del tejido (necrosis), que puede ocurrir cuando el suministro de sangre se ha bloqueado (o es muy inadecuado).


=== Hematológico ===


Anemia
La masa insuficiente de glóbulos rojos (anemia) puede ser el resultado de una hemorragia, trastornos sanguíneos como la talasemia o deficiencias nutricionales, y puede requerir una o más transfusiones de sangre.

La anemia también puede deberse a un trastorno genético en el que los glóbulos rojos simplemente no funcionan de manera efectiva.

La anemia se puede confirmar mediante un análisis de sangre si el valor de hemoglobina es inferior a 13,5 g/dl en hombres o inferior a 12,0 g/dl en mujeres.

Varios países cuentan con bancos de sangre para cubrir la demanda de sangre transfundible.

Una persona que recibe una transfusión de sangre debe tener un tipo de sangre compatible con el del donante.
Anemia falciforme
Trastornos de la proliferación celular
La leucemia es un grupo de cánceres de los tejidos y células que forman la sangre.
La sobreproducción no cancerosa de glóbulos rojos (policitemia vera) o plaquetas (trombocitosis esencial) puede ser premaligna.
Los síndromes mielodisplásicos implican la producción ineficaz de una o más líneas celulares.
Trastornos de la coagulación
La hemofilia es una enfermedad genética que causa una disfunción en uno de los mecanismos de coagulación de la sangre.

Esto puede permitir que heridas que de otro modo serían insignificantes pongan en peligro la vida, pero más comúnmente resultan en hemartrosis o sangrado en los espacios articulares, lo que puede ser incapacitante.
Las plaquetas ineficaces o insuficientes también pueden provocar coagulopatía (trastornos hemorrágicos).
El estado de hipercoagulabilidad (trombofilia) resulta de defectos en la regulación de la función de las plaquetas o del factor de coagulación y puede causar trombosis.
Trastornos infecciosos de la sangre
La sangre es un importante vector de infección.

El VIH, el virus que causa el SIDA, se transmite a través del contacto con la sangre, el semen u otras secreciones corporales de una persona infectada.

Las hepatitis B y C se transmiten principalmente a través del contacto con la sangre.

Debido a las infecciones transmitidas por la sangre, los objetos manchados de sangre se tratan como un peligro biológico.
La infección bacteriana de la sangre es bacteriemia o sepsis.

La infección viral es viremia.

La malaria y la tripanosomiasis son infecciones parasitarias transmitidas por la sangre.


=== Envenenamiento por monóxido de carbono ===


Otras sustancias además del oxígeno pueden unirse a la hemoglobina; en algunos casos, esto puede causar daños irreversibles al cuerpo.

El monóxido de carbono, por ejemplo, es extremadamente peligroso cuando se transporta a la sangre a través de los pulmones por inhalación, porque el monóxido de carbono se une irreversiblemente a la hemoglobina para formar carboxihemoglobina, de modo que menos hemoglobina queda libre para unirse al oxígeno y se pueden transportar menos moléculas de oxígeno a través del organismo. sangre.

Esto puede causar asfixia insidiosamente.

Un incendio que arde en una habitación cerrada con mala ventilación presenta un riesgo muy peligroso, ya que puede crear una acumulación de monóxido de carbono en el aire.

Parte del monóxido de carbono se une a la hemoglobina cuando se fuma tabaco.


== Tratamientos ==



=== Transfusión ===


La sangre para transfusión se obtiene de donantes humanos mediante donación de sangre y se almacena en un banco de sangre.

Hay muchos tipos de sangre diferentes en los seres humanos, siendo el sistema de grupos sanguíneos ABO y el sistema de grupos sanguíneos Rhesus los más importantes.

La transfusión de sangre de un grupo sanguíneo incompatible puede causar complicaciones graves, a menudo mortales, por lo que se realizan pruebas cruzadas para garantizar que se transfunda un producto sanguíneo compatible.
Otros hemoderivados administrados por vía intravenosa son plaquetas, plasma sanguíneo, crioprecipitados y concentrados de factores de coagulación específicos.


=== Administración intravenosa ===

Muchas formas de medicación (desde antibióticos hasta quimioterapia) se administran por vía intravenosa, ya que el tracto digestivo no las absorbe fácil o adecuadamente.
Después de una pérdida de sangre aguda severa, las preparaciones líquidas, genéricamente conocidas como expansores de plasma, pueden administrarse por vía intravenosa, ya sea soluciones de sales (NaCl, KCl, CaCl2, etc.) en concentraciones fisiológicas, o soluciones coloidales, como dextranos, albúmina de suero humano, o plasma fresco congelado.

En estas situaciones de emergencia, un expansor de plasma es un procedimiento para salvar vidas más eficaz que una transfusión de sangre, porque el metabolismo de los glóbulos rojos transfundidos no se reinicia inmediatamente después de una transfusión.


=== Dejar ===


En la medicina moderna basada en la evidencia, la sangría se usa en el tratamiento de algunas enfermedades raras, como la hemocromatosis y la policitemia.

Sin embargo, la sangría y las sanguijuelas fueron intervenciones comunes no validadas utilizadas hasta el siglo XIX, ya que se pensaba incorrectamente que muchas enfermedades se debían a un exceso de sangre, según la medicina hipocrática.


== Etimología ==


La sangre inglesa (inglés antiguo blod) se deriva del germánico y tiene cognados con una gama similar de significados en todos los demás idiomas germánicos (por ejemplo,

Blut alemán, blod sueco, blōþ gótico).

No hay una etimología indoeuropea aceptada.


== Historia ==



=== Medicina griega clásica ===

Robin Fåhræus (un médico sueco que ideó la tasa de sedimentación de eritrocitos) sugirió que el sistema de humorismo de la Antigua Grecia, en el que se pensaba que el cuerpo contenía cuatro fluidos corporales distintos (asociados con diferentes temperamentos), se basaba en la observación de la coagulación de la sangre en un recipiente transparente.

Cuando se extrae sangre en un recipiente de vidrio y se deja reposar durante aproximadamente una hora, se pueden ver cuatro capas diferentes.

Se forma un coágulo oscuro en la parte inferior (la "bilis negra").

Por encima del coágulo hay una capa de glóbulos rojos (la "sangre").

Por encima de esto hay una capa blanquecina de glóbulos blancos (la "flema").

La capa superior es suero amarillo claro (la "bilis amarilla").


=== Tipos ===

El sistema de grupos sanguíneos ABO fue descubierto en el año 1900 por Karl Landsteiner.

A Jan Janský se le atribuye la primera clasificación de la sangre en los cuatro tipos (A, B, AB y O) en 1907, que sigue en uso en la actualidad.

En 1907 se realizó la primera transfusión de sangre que utilizó el sistema ABO para predecir la compatibilidad.

La primera transfusión no directa se realizó el 27 de marzo de 1914.

El factor Rhesus fue descubierto en 1937.


== Cultura y religión ==


Debido a su importancia para la vida, la sangre está asociada a un gran número de creencias.

Uno de los más básicos es el uso de la sangre como símbolo de las relaciones familiares por nacimiento/parentesco; estar "relacionado por sangre" es estar relacionado por ascendencia o descendencia, en lugar de matrimonio.

Esto se relaciona estrechamente con las líneas de sangre y dichos como "la sangre es más espesa que el agua" y "mala sangre", así como "hermano de sangre".
La sangre recibe un énfasis particular en las religiones judía y cristiana, porque Levítico 17:11 dice que "la vida de una criatura está en la sangre". Esta frase es parte de la ley levítica que prohíbe beber sangre o comer carne con la sangre intacta en lugar de derramarla.
Las referencias míticas a la sangre a veces pueden conectarse con la naturaleza dadora de vida de la sangre, vista en eventos como el parto, en contraste con la sangre de una lesión o muerte.


=== Indígenas australianos ===

En las tradiciones de muchos pueblos aborígenes australianos, el ocre (particularmente rojo) y la sangre, ambos con alto contenido de hierro y considerados Maban, se aplican a los cuerpos de los bailarines para el ritual.

Como dice Lawlor:
En muchos rituales y ceremonias aborígenes, se frota ocre rojo sobre los cuerpos desnudos de los bailarines.

En ceremonias masculinas secretas y sagradas, la sangre extraída de las venas de los brazos de los participantes se intercambia y se frota en sus cuerpos.

El ocre rojo se usa de manera similar en ceremonias menos secretas.

La sangre también se utiliza para sujetar las plumas de los pájaros al cuerpo de las personas.

Las plumas de las aves contienen una proteína que es muy sensible magnéticamente.

Lawlor comenta que estos pueblos utilizan la sangre empleada de esta manera para sintonizar a los bailarines con el reino energético invisible del Tiempo del Sueño.

Lawlor luego conecta estos reinos energéticos invisibles y los campos magnéticos, porque el hierro es magnético.


=== paganismo europeo ===

Entre las tribus germánicas, se usaba sangre durante sus sacrificios; los Blots.

Se consideraba que la sangre tenía el poder de su creador y, después de la matanza, la sangre se rociaba sobre las paredes, sobre las estatuas de los dioses y sobre los propios participantes.

Este acto de rociar sangre se llamaba blóedsian en inglés antiguo, y la Iglesia Católica Romana tomó prestada la terminología convirtiéndola en bendecir y bendecir.

La palabra hitita para sangre, ishar, era un cognado de las palabras para "juramento" y "vínculo", ver Ishara.
Los antiguos griegos creían que la sangre de los dioses, el icor, era una sustancia venenosa para los mortales.
Como reliquia del derecho germánico, la cruentación, una prueba en la que se suponía que el cadáver de la víctima comenzaba a sangrar en presencia del asesino, se utilizó hasta principios del siglo XVII.


=== cristianismo ===

En Génesis 9:4, Dios prohibió a Noé y a sus hijos comer sangre (ver Ley de Noé).

Este mandato continuó siendo observado por la Iglesia Ortodoxa Oriental.
También se encuentra en la Biblia que cuando el ángel de la muerte llegó a la casa hebrea, el primogénito no moriría si el ángel viera sangre de cordero limpiada en la entrada.
En el Concilio de Jerusalén, los apóstoles prohibieron a ciertos cristianos consumir sangre; esto está documentado en Hechos 15:20 y 29.

Este capítulo especifica una razón (especialmente en los versículos 19–21): Era para evitar ofender a los judíos que se habían hecho cristianos, porque el Código de la Ley Mosaica prohibía la práctica.
La sangre de Cristo es el medio para la expiación de los pecados.

Además, ″... la sangre de Jesucristo su [Dios] Hijo nos limpia de todo pecado." (1 Juan 1:7), "...

al [Dios] que nos amó y nos lavó de nuestros pecados con su propia sangre." (Apocalipsis 1:5), y "Y le vencieron (a Satanás) por la sangre
del Cordero [Jesús el Cristo], y por la palabra del testimonio de ellos...” (Apocalipsis 12:11).
Algunas iglesias cristianas, incluido el catolicismo romano, la ortodoxia oriental, la ortodoxia oriental y la iglesia asiria de Oriente, enseñan que, cuando se consagra, el vino eucarístico en realidad se convierte en la sangre de Jesús para que beban los fieles.

Así, en el vino consagrado, Jesús se hace presente espiritual y físicamente.

Esta enseñanza tiene sus raíces en la Última Cena, tal como está escrito en los cuatro evangelios de la Biblia, en la que Jesús declaró a sus discípulos que el pan que comían era su cuerpo, y el vino era su sangre. “Esta copa es el nuevo testamento en mi sangre, que por vosotros es derramada”. (Lucas 22:20).
La mayoría de las formas de protestantismo, especialmente las de linaje metodista o presbiteriano, enseñan que el vino no es más que un símbolo de la sangre de Cristo, quien está espiritual pero no físicamente presente.

La teología luterana enseña que el cuerpo y la sangre están presentes juntos "en, con y debajo" del pan y el vino de la fiesta eucarística.


=== Judaísmo ===

En el judaísmo, la sangre animal no puede consumirse ni siquiera en la menor cantidad (Levítico 3:17 y otros lugares); esto se refleja en las leyes dietéticas judías (Kashrut).

La sangre se purga de la carne enjuagando y remojando en agua (para aflojar los coágulos), salando y luego enjuagando con agua nuevamente varias veces.

También se deben revisar los huevos y eliminar cualquier mancha de sangre antes del consumo.

Aunque la sangre de pescado es bíblicamente kosher, está prohibido rabínicamente consumir sangre de pescado para evitar la apariencia de quebrantar la prohibición bíblica. Otro ritual que involucra sangre consiste en cubrir la sangre de las aves y la caza después del sacrificio (Levítico 17:13); la razón dada por la Torá es: "Porque la vida del animal está [en] su sangre" (ibid 17:14).

En relación con los seres humanos, la Cabalá explica en este verso que el alma animal de una persona está en la sangre y que los deseos físicos se derivan de ella.
Asimismo, la razón mística para salar los sacrificios del templo y la carne sacrificada es quitar la sangre de las pasiones animales de la persona.

Al eliminar la sangre del animal, se eliminan las energías animales y la fuerza vital contenida en la sangre, lo que hace que la carne sea apta para el consumo humano.


=== Islam ===

El consumo de alimentos que contengan sangre está prohibido por las leyes dietéticas islámicas.

Esto se deriva de la declaración del Corán, sura Al-Ma'ida (5:3): "Prohibidos (como alimento) están: carne muerta, sangre, carne de cerdo, y aquello sobre lo que ha sido invocó el nombre de otro que Alá".
La sangre se considera impura, por lo que existen métodos específicos para obtener el estado físico y ritual de limpieza una vez que se ha producido el sangrado.

Se aplican reglas y prohibiciones específicas a la menstruación, el sangrado posnatal y el sangrado vaginal irregular.

Cuando un animal ha sido sacrificado, se corta el cuello del animal de manera que no se corte la columna vertebral, por lo que el cerebro puede enviar órdenes al corazón para que le bombee sangre en busca de oxígeno.

De esta manera, la sangre se elimina del cuerpo y, por lo general, ahora la carne es segura para cocinar y comer.

En los tiempos modernos, las transfusiones de sangre generalmente no se consideran en contra de las reglas.


=== Testigos de Jehová ===


Basados ​​en su interpretación de escrituras como Hechos 15:28, 29 ("Sigan absteniéndose... de sangre"), muchos Testigos de Jehová no consumen sangre ni aceptan transfusiones de sangre entera o sus componentes principales: glóbulos rojos, glóbulos blancos células, plaquetas (trombocitos) y plasma.

Los miembros pueden decidir personalmente si aceptarán procedimientos médicos que involucren su propia sangre o sustancias que se fraccionen aún más de los cuatro componentes principales.


=== Vampirismo ===


Los vampiros son criaturas míticas que beben sangre directamente para su sustento, generalmente con preferencia por la sangre humana.

Las culturas de todo el mundo tienen mitos de este tipo; por ejemplo, la leyenda de 'Nosferatu', un ser humano que logra la condenación y la inmortalidad bebiendo la sangre de otros, tiene su origen en el folclore de Europa del Este.

Las garrapatas, las sanguijuelas, los mosquitos hembra, los murciélagos vampiros y una variedad de otras criaturas naturales consumen la sangre de otros animales, pero solo los murciélagos están asociados con los vampiros.

Esto no tiene relación con los murciélagos vampiros, que son criaturas del Nuevo Mundo descubiertas mucho después de los orígenes de los mitos europeos.


== Otros usos ==



=== Forense y arqueológico ===

Los residuos de sangre pueden ayudar a los investigadores forenses a identificar armas, reconstruir una acción criminal y vincular a los sospechosos con el crimen.

A través del análisis de patrones de manchas de sangre, también se puede obtener información forense a partir de la distribución espacial de las manchas de sangre.
El análisis de residuos de sangre también es una técnica utilizada en arqueología.


=== Artístico ===

La sangre es uno de los fluidos corporales que se ha utilizado en el arte.

En particular, las performances del accionista vienés Hermann Nitsch, Istvan Kantor, Franko B, Lennie Lee, Ron Athey, Yang Zhichao, Lucas Abela y Kira O'Reilly, junto con la fotografía de Andrés Serrano, han incorporado la sangre como elemento visual destacado. .

Marc Quinn ha realizado esculturas con sangre congelada, incluido un molde de su propia cabeza hecho con su propia sangre.


=== Genealógico ===

El término sangre se usa en círculos genealógicos para referirse a la ascendencia, los orígenes y el origen étnico de una persona como en la palabra línea de sangre.

Otros términos en los que la sangre se usa en un sentido de historia familiar son sangre azul, sangre real, sangre mixta y pariente consanguíneo.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sangre

;;;PT;;;



SANGUE


O sangue é um fluido corporal no sistema circulatório de humanos e outros vertebrados que fornece as substâncias necessárias, como nutrientes e oxigênio para as células e transporta os resíduos metabólicos para longe dessas mesmas células. O sangue é composto de células sanguíneas suspensas no plasma sanguíneo.

O plasma, que constitui 55% do fluido sanguíneo, é principalmente água (92% em volume) e contém proteínas, glicose, íons minerais, hormônios, dióxido de carbono (o plasma é o principal meio de transporte de produtos excretores) e as próprias células sanguíneas.

A albumina é a principal proteína do plasma e funciona para regular a pressão osmótica coloidal do sangue.

As células do sangue são principalmente glóbulos vermelhos (também chamados de hemácias ou eritrócitos), glóbulos brancos (também chamados de leucócitos ou leucócitos) e plaquetas (também chamados de trombócitos).

As células mais abundantes no sangue de vertebrados são os glóbulos vermelhos.

Estes contêm hemoglobina, uma proteína que contém ferro, que facilita o transporte de oxigênio, ligando-se reversivelmente a esse gás respiratório e aumentando sua solubilidade no sangue.

Em contraste, o dióxido de carbono é transportado principalmente extracelularmente como íon bicarbonato transportado no plasma.
O sangue dos vertebrados é vermelho brilhante quando sua hemoglobina está oxigenada e vermelho escuro quando está desoxigenada.

Alguns animais, como crustáceos e moluscos, usam hemocianina para transportar oxigênio, em vez de hemoglobina.

Insetos e alguns moluscos usam um fluido chamado hemolinfa em vez de sangue, a diferença é que a hemolinfa não está contida em um sistema circulatório fechado.

Na maioria dos insetos, esse "sangue" não contém moléculas transportadoras de oxigênio, como a hemoglobina, porque seus corpos são pequenos o suficiente para que seu sistema traqueal seja suficiente para fornecer oxigênio.
Os vertebrados com mandíbula têm um sistema imunológico adaptativo, baseado principalmente em glóbulos brancos.

Os glóbulos brancos ajudam a resistir a infecções e parasitas.

As plaquetas são importantes na coagulação do sangue.

Artrópodes, usando hemolinfa, têm hemócitos como parte de seu sistema imunológico.
O sangue circula pelo corpo através dos vasos sanguíneos pela ação de bombeamento do coração.

Em animais com pulmões, o sangue arterial transporta oxigênio do ar inalado para os tecidos do corpo, e o sangue venoso transporta dióxido de carbono, um produto residual do metabolismo produzido pelas células, dos tecidos aos pulmões para ser exalado.
Os termos médicos relacionados ao sangue geralmente começam com hemo- ou hemato- (também escrito haemo- e haemato-) da palavra grega αἷμα (haima) para "sangue".

Em termos de anatomia e histologia, o sangue é considerado uma forma especializada de tecido conjuntivo, dada sua origem nos ossos e a presença de potenciais fibras moleculares na forma de fibrinogênio.


== Funções ==


O sangue desempenha muitas funções importantes dentro do corpo, incluindo:

Fornecimento de oxigênio aos tecidos (ligado à hemoglobina, que é transportada nos glóbulos vermelhos)
Suprimento de nutrientes como glicose, aminoácidos e ácidos graxos (dissolvidos no sangue ou ligados às proteínas plasmáticas (p.
Remoção de resíduos como dióxido de carbono, uréia e ácido lático
Funções imunológicas, incluindo circulação de glóbulos brancos e detecção de material estranho por anticorpos
Coagulação, a resposta a um vaso sanguíneo rompido, a conversão do sangue de um líquido para um gel semi-sólido para parar o sangramento
Funções de mensageiro, incluindo o transporte de hormônios e a sinalização de danos nos tecidos
Regulação da temperatura corporal central
Funções hidráulicas


== Constituintes ==



=== Em mamíferos ===


O sangue representa 7% do peso do corpo humano, com densidade média em torno de 1.060 kg/m3, muito próxima da densidade da água pura, de 1.000 kg/m3.

O adulto médio tem um volume de sangue de aproximadamente 5 litros (11 US pt) ou 1,3 galões, que é composto de plasma e elementos figurados.

Os elementos formados são os dois tipos de células sanguíneas ou corpúsculos – os glóbulos vermelhos (eritrócitos) e glóbulos brancos (leucócitos), e os fragmentos celulares chamados plaquetas que estão envolvidos na coagulação.

Em volume, os glóbulos vermelhos constituem cerca de 45% do sangue total, o plasma cerca de 54,3% e os glóbulos brancos cerca de 0,7%.
O sangue total (plasma e células) exibe dinâmica de fluidos não newtoniana.

 
 
 


==== Células ====

Um microlitro de sangue contém:

4,7 a 6,1 milhões (masculino), 4,2 a 5,4 milhões (feminino) eritrócitos: Os glóbulos vermelhos contêm a hemoglobina do sangue e distribuem oxigênio.

Os glóbulos vermelhos maduros não possuem núcleo e organelas em mamíferos.

Os glóbulos vermelhos (juntamente com as células dos vasos endoteliais e outras células) também são marcados por glicoproteínas que definem os diferentes tipos sanguíneos.

A proporção de sangue ocupada por glóbulos vermelhos é referida como hematócrito e é normalmente cerca de 45%.

A área de superfície combinada de todos os glóbulos vermelhos do corpo humano seria aproximadamente 2.000 vezes maior que a superfície externa do corpo.
4.000–11.000 leucócitos: Os glóbulos brancos fazem parte do sistema imunológico do corpo; eles destroem e removem células velhas ou aberrantes e restos celulares, bem como atacam agentes infecciosos (patógenos) e substâncias estranhas.

O câncer de leucócitos é chamado de leucemia.
200.000–500.000 trombócitos: Também chamados de plaquetas, participam da coagulação do sangue (coagulação).

A fibrina da cascata de coagulação cria uma malha sobre o tampão plaquetário.


==== Plasma ====

Cerca de 55% do sangue é plasma sanguíneo, um fluido que é o meio líquido do sangue, que por si só é de cor amarelo-palha.

O volume de plasma sanguíneo totaliza de 2,7 a 3,0 litros (2,8 a 3,2 quartos) em um ser humano médio.

É essencialmente uma solução aquosa contendo 92% de água, 8% de proteínas do plasma sanguíneo e vestígios de outros materiais.

O plasma circula nutrientes dissolvidos, como glicose, aminoácidos e ácidos graxos (dissolvidos no sangue ou ligados às proteínas plasmáticas), e remove produtos residuais, como dióxido de carbono, uréia e ácido lático.
Outros componentes importantes incluem:

Albumina sérica
Fatores de coagulação do sangue (para facilitar a coagulação)
Imunoglobulinas (anticorpos)
partículas de lipoproteínas
Várias outras proteínas
Vários eletrólitos (principalmente sódio e cloreto) O termo soro refere-se ao plasma do qual as proteínas da coagulação foram removidas.

A maioria das proteínas restantes são albumina e imunoglobulinas.


==== valores de pH ====

O pH do sangue é regulado para ficar dentro do estreito intervalo de 7,35 a 7,45, tornando-o ligeiramente básico (compensação).

O fluido extracelular no sangue com pH abaixo de 7,35 é muito ácido, enquanto o pH do sangue acima de 7,45 é muito básico.

Um pH abaixo de 6,9 ​​ou acima de 7,8 geralmente é letal.

O pH do sangue, a pressão parcial de oxigênio (pO2), a pressão parcial de dióxido de carbono (pCO2) e o bicarbonato (HCO3−) são cuidadosamente regulados por vários mecanismos homeostáticos, que exercem sua influência principalmente através do sistema respiratório e urinário para controlam o equilíbrio ácido-base e a respiração, o que é chamado de compensação. Um teste de gasometria arterial mede isso.

O plasma também circula hormônios transmitindo suas mensagens para vários tecidos.

A lista de intervalos de referência normais para vários eletrólitos no sangue é extensa.


=== Em vertebrados não mamíferos ===


O sangue humano é típico dos mamíferos, embora os detalhes precisos sobre número de células, tamanho, estrutura de proteínas e assim por diante variem um pouco entre as espécies.

Em vertebrados não mamíferos, no entanto, existem algumas diferenças importantes:
Os glóbulos vermelhos de vertebrados não mamíferos são achatados e de forma ovóide, e retêm seus núcleos celulares.
Há uma variação considerável nos tipos e proporções de glóbulos brancos; por exemplo, os acidófilos são geralmente mais comuns do que em humanos.
As plaquetas são exclusivas dos mamíferos; em outros vertebrados, pequenas células fusiformes nucleadas chamadas trombócitos são responsáveis ​​pela coagulação do sangue.


== Fisiologia ==



=== Sistema circulatório ===


O sangue circula pelo corpo através dos vasos sanguíneos pela ação de bombeamento do coração.

Em humanos, o sangue é bombeado do forte ventrículo esquerdo do coração através das artérias para os tecidos periféricos e retorna ao átrio direito do coração pelas veias.

Em seguida, entra no ventrículo direito e é bombeado pela artéria pulmonar para os pulmões e retorna ao átrio esquerdo pelas veias pulmonares.

O sangue então entra no ventrículo esquerdo para ser circulado novamente.

O sangue arterial transporta oxigênio do ar inalado para todas as células do corpo, e o sangue venoso transporta dióxido de carbono, um produto residual do metabolismo das células, para os pulmões para ser exalado.

No entanto, uma exceção inclui as artérias pulmonares, que contêm o sangue mais desoxigenado do corpo, enquanto as veias pulmonares contêm sangue oxigenado.
O fluxo de retorno adicional pode ser gerado pelo movimento dos músculos esqueléticos, que podem comprimir as veias e empurrar o sangue através das válvulas nas veias em direção ao átrio direito.
A circulação sanguínea foi famosamente descrita por William Harvey em 1628.


=== Produção e degradação celular ===

Nos vertebrados, as várias células do sangue são produzidas na medula óssea em um processo chamado hematopoiese, que inclui a eritropoiese, a produção de glóbulos vermelhos; e mielopoiese, a produção de glóbulos brancos e plaquetas.

Durante a infância, quase todos os ossos humanos produzem glóbulos vermelhos; como adultos, a produção de glóbulos vermelhos é limitada aos ossos maiores: os corpos das vértebras, o esterno (esterno), a caixa torácica, os ossos pélvicos e os ossos dos braços e pernas.

Além disso, durante a infância, o timo, localizado no mediastino, é uma importante fonte de linfócitos T.
O componente proteico do sangue (incluindo proteínas de coagulação) é produzido predominantemente pelo fígado, enquanto os hormônios são produzidos pelas glândulas endócrinas e a fração aquosa é regulada pelo hipotálamo e mantida pelo rim.
Os eritrócitos saudáveis ​​têm uma vida plasmática de cerca de 120 dias antes de serem degradados pelo baço e pelas células de Kupffer no fígado.

O fígado também limpa algumas proteínas, lipídios e aminoácidos.

O rim secreta ativamente produtos residuais na urina.


=== Transporte de oxigênio ===


Cerca de 98,5% do oxigênio em uma amostra de sangue arterial em um ar de respiração humana saudável à pressão do nível do mar é quimicamente combinado com a hemoglobina.

Cerca de 1,5% está fisicamente dissolvido nos outros líquidos do sangue e não está ligado à hemoglobina.

A molécula de hemoglobina é o principal transportador de oxigênio em mamíferos e muitas outras espécies (para exceções, veja abaixo).

A hemoglobina tem uma capacidade de ligação de oxigênio entre 1,36 e 1,40 ml de O2 por grama de hemoglobina, o que aumenta a capacidade total de oxigênio no sangue em setenta vezes, em comparação com se o oxigênio fosse transportado apenas por sua solubilidade de 0,03 ml de O2 por litro de sangue por mm Hg de pressão parcial de oxigênio. cerca de 100 mm Hg nas artérias). Com exceção das artérias pulmonares e umbilicais e suas veias correspondentes, as artérias transportam sangue oxigenado para fora do coração e o entregam ao corpo através de arteríolas e capilares, onde o oxigênio é consumido; depois, vênulas e veias transportam sangue desoxigenado de volta ao coração.
Sob condições normais em humanos adultos em repouso, a hemoglobina no sangue que sai dos pulmões está cerca de 98-99% saturada com oxigênio, alcançando uma entrega de oxigênio entre 950 e 1150 ml/min para o corpo.

Em um adulto saudável em repouso, o consumo de oxigênio é de aproximadamente 200 a 250 ml/min, e o sangue desoxigenado que retorna aos pulmões ainda está cerca de 75% (70 a 78%) saturado.

O aumento do consumo de oxigênio durante o exercício sustentado reduz a saturação de oxigênio do sangue venoso, que pode chegar a menos de 15% em um atleta treinado; embora a frequência respiratória e o fluxo sanguíneo aumentem para compensar, a saturação de oxigênio no sangue arterial pode cair para 95% ou menos nessas condições.

A saturação de oxigênio tão baixa é considerada perigosa em um indivíduo em repouso (por exemplo, durante uma cirurgia sob anestesia).

A hipóxia sustentada (oxigenação inferior a 90%), é perigosa para a saúde, e a hipóxia grave (saturações inferiores a 30%) pode ser rapidamente fatal. do nível encontrado nos pulmões de um adulto), de modo que os fetos produzem outra forma de hemoglobina com uma afinidade muito maior pelo oxigênio (hemoglobina F) para funcionar nessas condições.


=== Transporte de dióxido de carbono ===

O CO2 é transportado no sangue de três maneiras diferentes. (As porcentagens exatas variam dependendo se é sangue arterial ou venoso).

A maior parte (cerca de 70%) é convertida em íons bicarbonato HCO−3 pela enzima anidrase carbônica nas hemácias pela reação CO2 + H2O → H2CO3 → H+ + HCO−3; cerca de 7% é dissolvido no plasma; e cerca de 23% está ligado à hemoglobina como compostos carbamino. A hemoglobina, a principal molécula transportadora de oxigênio nos glóbulos vermelhos, transporta tanto oxigênio quanto dióxido de carbono.

No entanto, o CO2 ligado à hemoglobina não se liga ao mesmo local que o oxigênio.

Em vez disso, combina-se com os grupos N-terminais nas quatro cadeias de globina.

No entanto, devido aos efeitos alostéricos na molécula de hemoglobina, a ligação do CO2 diminui a quantidade de oxigênio que é ligada para uma determinada pressão parcial de oxigênio.

A diminuição da ligação ao dióxido de carbono no sangue devido ao aumento dos níveis de oxigênio é conhecida como efeito Haldane e é importante no transporte de dióxido de carbono dos tecidos para os pulmões.

Um aumento na pressão parcial de CO2 ou um pH mais baixo causará a descarga de oxigênio da hemoglobina, o que é conhecido como efeito Bohr.


=== Transporte de íons de hidrogênio ===

Alguma oxiemoglobina perde oxigênio e se torna desoxiemoglobina.

A desoxiemoglobina liga a maioria dos íons de hidrogênio, pois tem uma afinidade muito maior por mais hidrogênio do que a oxiemoglobina.


=== Sistema linfático ===


Nos mamíferos, o sangue está em equilíbrio com a linfa, que é continuamente formada nos tecidos a partir do sangue por ultrafiltração capilar.

A linfa é coletada por um sistema de pequenos vasos linfáticos e direcionada para o ducto torácico, que drena para a veia subclávia esquerda, onde a linfa se junta à circulação sanguínea sistêmica.


=== Termorregulação ===

A circulação sanguínea transporta calor por todo o corpo e os ajustes nesse fluxo são uma parte importante da termorregulação.

O aumento do fluxo sanguíneo para a superfície (por exemplo, durante o tempo quente ou exercícios extenuantes) causa uma pele mais quente, resultando em uma perda de calor mais rápida.

Em contraste, quando a temperatura externa é baixa, o fluxo sanguíneo para as extremidades e a superfície da pele é reduzido e para evitar a perda de calor é circulado para os órgãos importantes do corpo, preferencialmente.


=== Taxa de fluxo ===

A taxa de fluxo sanguíneo varia muito entre os diferentes órgãos.

O fígado tem o suprimento sanguíneo mais abundante com um fluxo aproximado de 1350 ml/min.

Rim e cérebro são o segundo e terceiro órgãos mais supridos, com 1100 ml/min e ~700 ml/min, respectivamente. As taxas relativas de fluxo sanguíneo por 100 g de tecido são diferentes, sendo o rim, a glândula adrenal e a tireoide os primeiros , segundo e terceiro tecidos mais supridos, respectivamente.


=== Funções hidráulicas ===

A restrição do fluxo sanguíneo também pode ser utilizada em tecidos especializados para causar ingurgitamento, resultando na ereção desse tecido; exemplos são o tecido erétil no pênis e clitóris.
Outro exemplo de função hidráulica é a aranha saltadora, na qual o sangue forçado nas pernas sob pressão faz com que elas se endireitem para um salto poderoso, sem a necessidade de pernas musculosas volumosas.


=== Invertebrados ===

Nos insetos, o sangue (mais propriamente chamado de hemolinfa) não está envolvido no transporte de oxigênio. (As aberturas chamadas traqueias permitem que o oxigênio do ar se difunda diretamente para os tecidos.) O sangue do inseto move os nutrientes para os tecidos e remove os resíduos em um sistema aberto.
Outros invertebrados usam proteínas respiratórias para aumentar a capacidade de transporte de oxigênio.

A hemoglobina é a proteína respiratória mais comum encontrada na natureza.

A hemocianina (azul) contém cobre e é encontrada em crustáceos e moluscos.

Pensa-se que os tunicados (ascídias) podem usar vanabinas (proteínas contendo vanádio) para pigmento respiratório (verde-claro, azul ou laranja).
Em muitos invertebrados, essas proteínas transportadoras de oxigênio são livremente solúveis no sangue; em vertebrados eles estão contidos em glóbulos vermelhos especializados, permitindo uma maior concentração de pigmentos respiratórios sem aumentar a viscosidade ou danificar os órgãos de filtragem do sangue, como os rins.
Vermes tubulares gigantes têm hemoglobinas incomuns que lhes permitem viver em ambientes extraordinários.

Essas hemoglobinas também carregam sulfetos normalmente fatais em outros animais.


== Cor ==

A matéria corante do sangue (hemocromo) é em grande parte devido à proteína no sangue responsável pelo transporte de oxigênio.

Diferentes grupos de organismos usam proteínas diferentes.


=== Hemoglobina ===


A hemoglobina é o principal determinante da cor do sangue nos vertebrados.

Cada molécula tem quatro grupos heme, e sua interação com várias moléculas altera a cor exata.

Em vertebrados e outras criaturas que usam hemoglobina, o sangue arterial e o sangue capilar são vermelhos brilhantes, pois o oxigênio confere uma cor vermelha forte ao grupo heme.

O sangue desoxigenado é um tom mais escuro de vermelho; isso está presente nas veias e pode ser visto durante a doação de sangue e quando as amostras de sangue venoso são coletadas.

Isso ocorre porque o espectro de luz absorvido pela hemoglobina difere entre os estados oxigenado e desoxigenado. O sangue no envenenamento por monóxido de carbono é vermelho brilhante, porque o monóxido de carbono causa a formação de carboxihemoglobina.

No envenenamento por cianeto, o corpo não pode utilizar oxigênio, então o sangue venoso permanece oxigenado, aumentando a vermelhidão.

Existem algumas condições que afetam os grupos heme presentes na hemoglobina que podem fazer a pele parecer azul – um sintoma chamado cianose.

Se o heme for oxidado, forma-se a metemoglobina, que é mais acastanhada e não pode transportar oxigênio.

Na rara condição de sulfemoglobinemia, a hemoglobina arterial é parcialmente oxigenada e aparece vermelho escuro com um tom azulado.
As veias próximas à superfície da pele parecem azuis por vários motivos.

No entanto, os fatores que contribuem para essa alteração da percepção de cores estão relacionados às propriedades de dispersão de luz da pele e ao processamento da entrada visual pelo córtex visual, em vez da cor real do sangue venoso. sangue verde devido a um acúmulo do produto residual biliverdina.


=== Hemocianina ===


O sangue da maioria dos moluscos – incluindo cefalópodes e gastrópodes – bem como de alguns artrópodes, como caranguejos-ferradura, é azul, pois contém a proteína hemocianina contendo cobre em concentrações de cerca de 50 gramas por litro.

A hemocianina é incolor quando desoxigenada e azul escura quando oxigenada.

O sangue na circulação dessas criaturas, que geralmente vivem em ambientes frios com baixas tensões de oxigênio, é branco-acinzentado a amarelo pálido, e fica azul escuro quando exposto ao oxigênio do ar, como visto quando sangram.

Isto é devido à mudança na cor da hemocianina quando é oxidada.

A hemocianina transporta oxigênio no líquido extracelular, o que contrasta com o transporte intracelular de oxigênio em mamíferos pela hemoglobina nos eritrócitos.


=== Clorocruorina ===


O sangue da maioria dos vermes anelídeos e alguns poliquetos marinhos usam clorocruorina para transportar oxigênio.

É de cor verde em soluções diluídas.


=== Hemeritrina ===


A hemeritrina é usada para o transporte de oxigênio nos invertebrados marinhos sipunculídeos, priapulídeos, braquiópodes e no verme anelídeo, magelona.

A hemeritrina é rosa-violeta quando oxigenada.


=== Hemovanadina ===


O sangue de algumas espécies de ascídias e tunicados, também conhecidos como ascídias, contém proteínas chamadas vanadinas.

Essas proteínas são baseadas em vanádio e dão às criaturas uma concentração de vanádio em seus corpos 100 vezes maior do que a água do mar circundante.

Ao contrário da hemocianina e da hemoglobina, a hemovanadina não é um transportador de oxigênio.

Quando expostas ao oxigênio, no entanto, as vanadinas tornam-se amarelo-mostarda.


== Distúrbios ==



=== Medicina geral ===

Distúrbios de volume
A lesão pode causar perda de sangue através de sangramento.

Um adulto saudável pode perder quase 20% do volume sanguíneo (1 L) antes do primeiro sintoma, a inquietação, e 40% do volume (2 L) antes do choque.

Os trombócitos são importantes para a coagulação do sangue e a formação de coágulos sanguíneos, que podem parar o sangramento.

Traumas nos órgãos internos ou nos ossos podem causar sangramento interno, que às vezes pode ser grave.
A desidratação pode reduzir o volume sanguíneo, reduzindo o teor de água do sangue.

Isso raramente resultaria em choque (exceto nos casos muito graves), mas pode resultar em hipotensão ortostática e desmaio.
Distúrbios da circulação
O choque é a perfusão ineficaz dos tecidos e pode ser causado por uma variedade de condições, incluindo perda de sangue, infecção, baixo débito cardíaco.
A aterosclerose reduz o fluxo de sangue através das artérias, porque o ateroma reveste as artérias e as estreita.

O ateroma tende a aumentar com a idade, e sua progressão pode ser agravada por muitas causas, incluindo tabagismo, hipertensão arterial, excesso de lipídios circulantes (hiperlipidemia) e diabetes mellitus.
A coagulação pode formar uma trombose, que pode obstruir os vasos.
Problemas com a composição do sangue, a ação de bombeamento do coração ou o estreitamento dos vasos sanguíneos podem ter muitas consequências, incluindo hipóxia (falta de oxigênio) dos tecidos fornecidos.

O termo isquemia refere-se ao tecido que é inadequadamente perfundido com sangue, e infarto refere-se à morte do tecido (necrose), que pode ocorrer quando o suprimento de sangue foi bloqueado (ou é muito inadequado).


=== Hematológico ===


Anemia
A massa de eritrócitos insuficiente (anemia) pode ser resultado de sangramento, distúrbios sanguíneos como talassemia ou deficiências nutricionais e pode exigir uma ou mais transfusões de sangue.

A anemia também pode ser devido a um distúrbio genético em que os glóbulos vermelhos simplesmente não funcionam de forma eficaz.

A anemia pode ser confirmada por um exame de sangue se o valor de hemoglobina for inferior a 13,5 g/dl em homens ou inferior a 12,0 g/dl em mulheres.

Vários países têm bancos de sangue para suprir a demanda por sangue transfundível.

Uma pessoa que recebe uma transfusão de sangue deve ter um tipo sanguíneo compatível com o do doador.
Anemia falciforme
Distúrbios da proliferação celular
A leucemia é um grupo de cânceres dos tecidos e células formadores de sangue.
A superprodução não cancerosa de glóbulos vermelhos (policitemia vera) ou plaquetas (trombocitose essencial) pode ser pré-maligna.
As síndromes mielodisplásicas envolvem a produção ineficaz de uma ou mais linhagens celulares.
Distúrbios da coagulação
A hemofilia é uma doença genética que causa disfunção em um dos mecanismos de coagulação do sangue.

Isso pode permitir que feridas inconsequentes sejam fatais, mas mais comumente resulta em hemartrose ou sangramento nos espaços articulares, o que pode ser incapacitante.
Plaquetas ineficazes ou insuficientes também podem resultar em coagulopatia (distúrbios hemorrágicos).
O estado de hipercoagulabilidade (trombofilia) resulta de defeitos na regulação da função plaquetária ou do fator de coagulação e pode causar trombose.
Doenças infecciosas do sangue
O sangue é um importante vetor de infecção.

O HIV, o vírus que causa a AIDS, é transmitido através do contato com sangue, sêmen ou outras secreções corporais de uma pessoa infectada.

As hepatites B e C são transmitidas principalmente por contato com sangue.

Devido a infecções transmitidas pelo sangue, objetos manchados de sangue são tratados como um risco biológico.
A infecção bacteriana do sangue é bacteremia ou sepse.

A infecção viral é a viremia.

A malária e a tripanossomíase são infecções parasitárias transmitidas pelo sangue.


=== Intoxicação por monóxido de carbono ===


Outras substâncias além do oxigênio podem se ligar à hemoglobina; em alguns casos, isso pode causar danos irreversíveis ao corpo.

O monóxido de carbono, por exemplo, é extremamente perigoso quando transportado para o sangue pelos pulmões por inalação, porque o monóxido de carbono se liga irreversivelmente à hemoglobina para formar carboxiemoglobina, de modo que menos hemoglobina fica livre para se ligar ao oxigênio e menos moléculas de oxigênio podem ser transportadas por todo o corpo. sangue.

Isso pode causar asfixia insidiosamente.

Um incêndio em uma sala fechada com pouca ventilação apresenta um risco muito perigoso, pois pode criar um acúmulo de monóxido de carbono no ar.

Algum monóxido de carbono se liga à hemoglobina ao fumar tabaco.


== Tratamentos ==



=== Transfusão ===


O sangue para transfusão é obtido de doadores humanos por doação de sangue e armazenado em um banco de sangue.

Existem muitos tipos diferentes de sangue em humanos, o sistema de grupo sanguíneo ABO e o sistema de grupo sanguíneo Rhesus sendo o mais importante.

A transfusão de sangue de um grupo sanguíneo incompatível pode causar complicações graves, muitas vezes fatais, portanto, a prova cruzada é feita para garantir que um produto sanguíneo compatível seja transfundido.
Outros produtos sanguíneos administrados por via intravenosa são plaquetas, plasma sanguíneo, crioprecipitado e concentrados específicos de fatores de coagulação.


=== Administração intravenosa ===

Muitas formas de medicação (de antibióticos a quimioterapia) são administradas por via intravenosa, pois não são prontamente ou adequadamente absorvidas pelo trato digestivo.
Após perda aguda de sangue grave, preparações líquidas, genericamente conhecidas como expansores de plasma, podem ser administradas por via intravenosa, tanto soluções de sais (NaCl, KCl, CaCl2 etc.) em concentrações fisiológicas, quanto soluções coloidais, como dextranos, albumina sérica humana ou plasma fresco congelado.

Nessas situações de emergência, um expansor de plasma é um procedimento salva-vidas mais eficaz do que uma transfusão de sangue, porque o metabolismo das hemácias transfundidas não reinicia imediatamente após a transfusão.


=== Deixando ===


Na medicina moderna baseada em evidências, a sangria é usada no tratamento de algumas doenças raras, incluindo hemocromatose e policitemia.

No entanto, sangrias e sanguessugas eram intervenções comuns não validadas usadas até o século 19, pois muitas doenças eram incorretamente consideradas devido a um excesso de sangue, de acordo com a medicina hipocrática.


== Etimologia ==


O sangue inglês (blod inglês antigo) deriva do germânico e tem cognatos com uma gama semelhante de significados em todas as outras línguas germânicas (por exemplo,

Blut alemão, blod sueco, gótico blōþ).

Não há etimologia indo-europeia aceita.


== História ==



=== Medicina grega clássica ===

Robin Fåhræus (um médico sueco que concebeu a taxa de sedimentação de eritrócitos) sugeriu que o sistema de humorismo grego antigo, em que se pensava que o corpo continha quatro fluidos corporais distintos (associados a diferentes temperamentos), baseava-se na observação da coagulação do sangue em um recipiente transparente.

Quando o sangue é coletado em um recipiente de vidro e deixado em repouso por cerca de uma hora, quatro camadas diferentes podem ser vistas.

Um coágulo escuro se forma na parte inferior (a "bile negra").

Acima do coágulo há uma camada de glóbulos vermelhos (o "sangue").

Acima disso há uma camada esbranquiçada de glóbulos brancos (o "fleuma").

A camada superior é um soro amarelo claro (a "bile amarela").


=== Tipos ===

O sistema de grupo sanguíneo ABO foi descoberto no ano de 1900 por Karl Landsteiner.

Jan Janský é creditado com a primeira classificação do sangue nos quatro tipos (A, B, AB e O) em 1907, que permanece em uso até hoje.

Em 1907 foi realizada a primeira transfusão de sangue que utilizou o sistema ABO para prever a compatibilidade.

A primeira transfusão não direta foi realizada em 27 de março de 1914.

O fator Rhesus foi descoberto em 1937.


== Cultura e religião ==


Devido à sua importância para a vida, o sangue está associado a um grande número de crenças.

Uma das mais básicas é o uso do sangue como símbolo das relações familiares por nascimento/parentesco; ser "parente de sangue" é ser relacionado por ancestralidade ou descendência, ao invés de casamento.

Isso se aproxima muito das linhagens e provérbios como "o sangue é mais grosso que a água" e "sangue ruim", bem como "irmão de sangue".
O sangue recebe ênfase particular nas religiões judaica e cristã, porque Levítico 17:11 diz que "a vida de uma criatura está no sangue". Esta frase faz parte da lei levítica que proíbe beber sangue ou comer carne com o sangue ainda intacto em vez de ser derramado.
As referências míticas ao sangue podem às vezes estar ligadas à natureza vivificante do sangue, vista em eventos como o parto, em contraste com o sangue de ferimentos ou morte.


=== Australianos indígenas ===

Em muitas tradições dos povos indígenas aborígenes australianos, ocre (particularmente vermelho) e sangue, ambos com alto teor de ferro e considerados Maban, são aplicados aos corpos dos dançarinos para o ritual.

Como afirma Lawlor:
Em muitos rituais e cerimônias aborígenes, o ocre vermelho é esfregado nos corpos nus dos dançarinos.

Em cerimônias masculinas secretas e sagradas, o sangue extraído das veias dos braços dos participantes é trocado e esfregado em seus corpos.

O ocre vermelho é usado de maneira semelhante em cerimônias menos secretas.

O sangue também é usado para prender as penas dos pássaros no corpo das pessoas.

As penas das aves contêm uma proteína altamente sensível magneticamente.

Lawlor comenta que o sangue empregado dessa maneira é usado por esses povos para sintonizar os dançarinos com o reino energético invisível do Dreamtime.

Lawlor então conecta esses reinos energéticos invisíveis e campos magnéticos, porque o ferro é magnético.


=== paganismo europeu ===

Entre as tribos germânicas, o sangue era usado durante seus sacrifícios; os Blots.

O sangue era considerado como tendo o poder de seu originador e, após a carnificina, o sangue era aspergido nas paredes, nas estátuas dos deuses e nos próprios participantes.

Este ato de aspersão de sangue foi chamado de blóedsian em inglês antigo, e a terminologia foi emprestada pela Igreja Católica Romana tornando-se abençoar e abençoar.

A palavra hitita para sangue, ishar era um cognato para palavras para "juramento" e "vínculo", veja Ishara.
Os gregos antigos acreditavam que o sangue dos deuses, icor, era uma substância venenosa para os mortais.
Como relíquia do direito germânico, a cruentação, uma provação em que o cadáver da vítima deveria começar a sangrar na presença do assassino, foi usada até o início do século XVII.


=== Cristianismo ===

Em Gênesis 9:4, Deus proibiu Noé e seus filhos de comer sangue (ver Lei de Noé).

Este comando continuou a ser observado pela Igreja Ortodoxa Oriental.
Também é encontrado na Bíblia que quando o Anjo da Morte veio à casa hebraica que o filho primogênito não morreria se o anjo visse o sangue do cordeiro sendo esfregado na porta.
No Concílio de Jerusalém, os apóstolos proibiram certos cristãos de consumir sangue – isso está documentado em Atos 15:20 e 29.

Este capítulo especifica uma razão (especialmente nos versículos 19–21): Era para evitar ofender os judeus que se tornaram cristãos, porque o Código da Lei Mosaica proibia a prática.
O sangue de Cristo é o meio para a expiação dos pecados.

Além disso, "... o sangue de Jesus Cristo, seu [Deus] Filho, nos purifica de todo pecado." (1 João 1:7), "...

Àquele [Deus] que nos amou, e em seu sangue nos lavou dos nossos pecados." (Apocalipse 1:5), e "E eles o venceram (Satanás) pelo sangue
do Cordeiro [Jesus, o Cristo], e pela palavra do seu testemunho...” (Apocalipse 12:11).
Algumas igrejas cristãs, incluindo o Catolicismo Romano, a Ortodoxia Oriental, a Ortodoxia Oriental e a Igreja Assíria do Oriente ensinam que, quando consagrado, o vinho eucarístico na verdade se torna o sangue de Jesus para os fiéis beberem.

Assim, no vinho consagrado, Jesus se torna espiritual e fisicamente presente.

Este ensinamento está enraizado na Última Ceia, como está escrito nos quatro evangelhos da Bíblia, nos quais Jesus declarou aos seus discípulos que o pão que eles comiam era o seu corpo, e o vinho era o seu sangue. "Este cálice é o novo testamento em meu sangue, que é derramado por você." (Lucas 22:20).
A maioria das formas de protestantismo, especialmente aquelas de linhagem metodista ou presbiteriana, ensinam que o vinho não é mais do que um símbolo do sangue de Cristo, que está presente espiritualmente, mas não fisicamente.

A teologia luterana ensina que o corpo e o sangue estão presentes juntos "no, com e sob" o pão e o vinho da festa eucarística.


=== Judaísmo ===

No judaísmo, o sangue animal não pode ser consumido nem mesmo na menor quantidade (Levítico 3:17 e em outros lugares); isso se reflete nas leis dietéticas judaicas (Kashrut).

O sangue é purgado da carne por lavagem e imersão em água (para soltar coágulos), salgando e depois enxaguando com água novamente várias vezes.

Os ovos também devem ser verificados e quaisquer manchas de sangue removidas antes do consumo.

Embora o sangue de peixe seja biblicamente kosher, é rabinicamente proibido consumir sangue de peixe para evitar a aparência de quebrar a proibição bíblica. Outro ritual envolvendo sangue envolve a cobertura do sangue de aves e caça após o abate (Levítico 17:13); a razão dada pela Torá é: "Porque a vida do animal está [no] seu sangue" (ibid 17:14).

Em relação aos seres humanos, a Cabalá expõe neste verso que a alma animal de uma pessoa está no sangue e que os desejos físicos derivam dele.
Da mesma forma, a razão mística para salgar os sacrifícios do templo e a carne abatida é remover o sangue das paixões animalescas da pessoa.

Ao remover o sangue do animal, as energias animais e a força vital contidas no sangue são removidas, tornando a carne própria para consumo humano.


=== Islamismo ===

O consumo de alimentos contendo sangue é proibido pelas leis dietéticas islâmicas.

Isto é derivado da declaração no Alcorão, sura Al-Ma'ida (5:3): "Proibidos para você (para alimento) são: carne morta, sangue, carne de porco e aquilo em que foi invocou o nome de outro que não Allah."
O sangue é considerado impuro, por isso existem métodos específicos para obter o estado físico e ritual de limpeza uma vez que o sangramento tenha ocorrido.

Regras e proibições específicas se aplicam à menstruação, sangramento pós-natal e sangramento vaginal irregular.

Quando um animal é abatido, o pescoço do animal é cortado de forma a garantir que a coluna não seja cortada, portanto, o cérebro pode enviar comandos ao coração para bombear sangue para ele em busca de oxigênio.

Desta forma, o sangue é removido do corpo, e a carne geralmente é segura para cozinhar e comer.

Nos tempos modernos, as transfusões de sangue geralmente não são consideradas contra as regras.


=== Testemunhas de Jeová ===


Com base em sua interpretação de escrituras como Atos 15:28, 29 ("Mantenha-se abstendo-se ... de sangue."), muitas Testemunhas de Jeová não consomem sangue nem aceitam transfusões de sangue total ou seus principais componentes: glóbulos vermelhos, sangue branco células, plaquetas (trombócitos) e plasma.

Os membros podem decidir pessoalmente se aceitarão procedimentos médicos que envolvam seu próprio sangue ou substâncias que sejam ainda fracionadas dos quatro componentes principais.


=== Vampirismo ===


Vampiros são criaturas míticas que bebem sangue diretamente para seu sustento, geralmente com preferência por sangue humano.

Culturas de todo o mundo têm mitos desse tipo; por exemplo, a lenda 'Nosferatu', um humano que alcança a condenação e a imortalidade bebendo o sangue de outros, origina-se do folclore da Europa Oriental.

Carrapatos, sanguessugas, mosquitos fêmeas, morcegos vampiros e uma variedade de outras criaturas naturais consomem o sangue de outros animais, mas apenas os morcegos são associados aos vampiros.

Isso não tem relação com os morcegos vampiros, que são criaturas do Novo Mundo descobertas bem depois das origens dos mitos europeus.


== Outros usos ==



=== Forense e arqueológica ===

Resíduos de sangue podem ajudar os investigadores forenses a identificar armas, reconstruir uma ação criminosa e vincular suspeitos ao crime.

Através da análise do padrão de manchas de sangue, informações forenses também podem ser obtidas a partir da distribuição espacial das manchas de sangue.
A análise de resíduos de sangue também é uma técnica usada em arqueologia.


=== Artístico ===

O sangue é um dos fluidos corporais que tem sido usado na arte.

Em particular, as performances do acionista vienense Hermann Nitsch, Istvan Kantor, Franko B, Lennie Lee, Ron Athey, Yang Zhichao, Lucas Abela e Kira O'Reilly, juntamente com a fotografia de Andres Serrano, incorporaram o sangue como um elemento visual proeminente .

Marc Quinn fez esculturas usando sangue congelado, incluindo um molde de sua própria cabeça feito com seu próprio sangue.


=== Genealógico ===

O termo sangue é usado em círculos genealógicos para se referir à ascendência, origens e origem étnica de alguém, como na palavra linhagem.

Outros termos em que o sangue é usado no sentido de história familiar são sangue azul, sangue real, sangue mestiço e parente de sangue.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blood

;;;FR;;;



DU SANG


Le sang est un fluide corporel dans le système circulatoire des humains et d'autres vertébrés qui fournit les substances nécessaires telles que les nutriments et l'oxygène aux cellules et transporte les déchets métaboliques loin de ces mêmes cellules. Le sang est composé de cellules sanguines en suspension dans le plasma sanguin.

Le plasma, qui constitue 55 % du liquide sanguin, est principalement composé d'eau (92 % en volume) et contient des protéines, du glucose, des ions minéraux, des hormones, du dioxyde de carbone (le plasma étant le principal moyen de transport des produits excréteurs) et les cellules sanguines elles-mêmes.

L'albumine est la principale protéine du plasma et elle régule la pression osmotique colloïdale du sang.

Les globules sanguins sont principalement des globules rouges (également appelés globules rouges ou érythrocytes), des globules blancs (également appelés globules blancs ou leucocytes) et des plaquettes (également appelées thrombocytes).

Les cellules les plus abondantes dans le sang des vertébrés sont les globules rouges.

Ceux-ci contiennent de l'hémoglobine, une protéine contenant du fer, qui facilite le transport de l'oxygène en se liant de manière réversible à ce gaz respiratoire et en augmentant fortement sa solubilité dans le sang.

En revanche, le dioxyde de carbone est principalement transporté de manière extracellulaire sous forme d'ion bicarbonate transporté dans le plasma.
Le sang des vertébrés est rouge vif lorsque son hémoglobine est oxygénée et rouge foncé lorsqu'elle est désoxygénée.

Certains animaux, comme les crustacés et les mollusques, utilisent l'hémocyanine pour transporter l'oxygène, au lieu de l'hémoglobine.

Les insectes et certains mollusques utilisent un liquide appelé hémolymphe au lieu du sang, la différence étant que l'hémolymphe n'est pas contenue dans un système circulatoire fermé.

Chez la plupart des insectes, ce "sang" ne contient pas de molécules porteuses d'oxygène telles que l'hémoglobine car leur corps est suffisamment petit pour que leur système trachéal suffise à fournir de l'oxygène.
Les vertébrés à mâchoires ont un système immunitaire adaptatif, basé en grande partie sur les globules blancs.

Les globules blancs aident à résister aux infections et aux parasites.

Les plaquettes sont importantes dans la coagulation du sang.

Les arthropodes, utilisant l'hémolymphe, ont des hémocytes dans le cadre de leur système immunitaire.
Le sang circule dans le corps par les vaisseaux sanguins grâce à l'action de pompage du cœur.

Chez les animaux dotés de poumons, le sang artériel transporte l'oxygène de l'air inhalé vers les tissus du corps, et le sang veineux transporte le dioxyde de carbone, un déchet du métabolisme produit par les cellules, des tissus vers les poumons à exhaler.
Les termes médicaux liés au sang commencent souvent par hemo- ou hemato- (également orthographié haemo- et haemato-) du mot grec αἷμα ( haima ) pour «sang».

En termes d'anatomie et d'histologie, le sang est considéré comme une forme spécialisée de tissu conjonctif, compte tenu de son origine dans les os et de la présence de fibres moléculaires potentielles sous forme de fibrinogène.


== Fonctions ==


Le sang remplit de nombreuses fonctions importantes dans le corps, notamment :

Apport d'oxygène aux tissus (lié à l'hémoglobine, qui est transportée dans les globules rouges)
Apport de nutriments tels que le glucose, les acides aminés et les acides gras (dissous dans le sang ou liés aux protéines plasmatiques (par exemple, les lipides sanguins))
Élimination des déchets tels que le dioxyde de carbone, l'urée et l'acide lactique
Fonctions immunologiques, y compris la circulation des globules blancs et la détection de corps étrangers par des anticorps
Coagulation, la réponse à un vaisseau sanguin brisé, la conversion du sang d'un liquide à un gel semi-solide pour arrêter le saignement
Fonctions de messager, y compris le transport des hormones et la signalisation des lésions tissulaires
Régulation de la température corporelle centrale
Fonctions hydrauliques


== Constituants ==



=== Chez les mammifères ===


Le sang représente 7% du poids du corps humain, avec une densité moyenne d'environ 1060 kg/m3, très proche de la densité de l'eau pure de 1000 kg/m3.

L'adulte moyen a un volume sanguin d'environ 5 litres (11 US pt) ou 1,3 gallons, composé de plasma et d'éléments formés.

Les éléments formés sont les deux types de cellules sanguines ou corpuscules - les globules rouges (érythrocytes) et les globules blancs (leucocytes) et les fragments de cellules appelés plaquettes qui participent à la coagulation.

En volume, les globules rouges constituent environ 45 % du sang total, le plasma environ 54,3 % et les globules blancs environ 0,7 %.
Le sang total (plasma et cellules) présente une dynamique des fluides non newtonienne.

 
 
 


==== Cellules ====

Un microlitre de sang contient :

4,7 à 6,1 millions d'érythrocytes (hommes), 4,2 à 5,4 millions (femmes) : Les globules rouges contiennent l'hémoglobine du sang et distribuent l'oxygène.

Les globules rouges matures manquent de noyau et d'organites chez les mammifères.

Les globules rouges (ainsi que les cellules des vaisseaux endothéliaux et d'autres cellules) sont également marqués par des glycoprotéines qui définissent les différents types de sang.

La proportion de sang occupée par les globules rouges est appelée hématocrite et est normalement d'environ 45 %.

La surface combinée de tous les globules rouges du corps humain serait environ 2 000 fois plus grande que la surface extérieure du corps.
4 000 à 11 000 leucocytes : les globules blancs font partie du système immunitaire de l'organisme ; ils détruisent et éliminent les cellules et les débris cellulaires anciens ou aberrants, et attaquent les agents infectieux (pathogènes) et les substances étrangères.

Le cancer des leucocytes est appelé leucémie.
200 000 à 500 000 thrombocytes : Aussi appelées plaquettes, elles participent à la coagulation du sang (coagulation).

La fibrine de la cascade de coagulation crée un maillage sur le bouchon plaquettaire.


==== Plasma ====

Environ 55% du sang est du plasma sanguin, un liquide qui est le milieu liquide du sang, qui est lui-même de couleur jaune paille.

Le volume de plasma sanguin totalise 2,7 à 3,0 litres (2,8 à 3,2 quarts) chez un humain moyen.

Il s'agit essentiellement d'une solution aqueuse contenant 92 % d'eau, 8 % de protéines plasmatiques sanguines et des traces d'autres matières.

Le plasma fait circuler les nutriments dissous, tels que le glucose, les acides aminés et les acides gras (dissous dans le sang ou liés aux protéines plasmatiques), et élimine les déchets, tels que le dioxyde de carbone, l'urée et l'acide lactique.
D'autres composants importants incluent:

Albumine sérique
Facteurs de coagulation sanguine (pour faciliter la coagulation)
Immunoglobulines (anticorps)
particules de lipoprotéines
Diverses autres protéines
Divers électrolytes (principalement du sodium et du chlorure)Le terme sérum désigne le plasma dont les protéines de coagulation ont été éliminées.

La plupart des protéines restantes sont l'albumine et les immunoglobulines.


==== Valeurs pH ====

Le pH sanguin est régulé pour rester dans la plage étroite de 7,35 à 7,45, ce qui le rend légèrement basique (compensation).

Le liquide extracellulaire dans le sang qui a un pH inférieur à 7,35 est trop acide, alors qu'un pH sanguin supérieur à 7,45 est trop basique.

Un pH inférieur à 6,9 ou supérieur à 7,8 est généralement mortel.

Le pH sanguin, la pression partielle d'oxygène (pO2), la pression partielle de dioxyde de carbone (pCO2) et le bicarbonate (HCO3−) sont soigneusement régulés par un certain nombre de mécanismes homéostatiques, qui exercent leur influence principalement par le système respiratoire et le système urinaire pour contrôler l'équilibre acido-basique et la respiration, ce qu'on appelle la compensation. Un test des gaz du sang artériel les mesure.

Le plasma fait également circuler des hormones transmettant leurs messages à divers tissus.

La liste des plages de référence normales pour divers électrolytes sanguins est longue.


=== Chez les vertébrés non mammifères ===


Le sang humain est typique de celui des mammifères, bien que les détails précis concernant le nombre de cellules, la taille, la structure des protéines, etc. varient quelque peu d'une espèce à l'autre.

Chez les vertébrés non mammifères, cependant, il existe quelques différences essentielles :
Les globules rouges des vertébrés non mammifères sont aplatis et de forme ovoïde et conservent leurs noyaux cellulaires.
Il existe une variation considérable dans les types et les proportions de globules blancs; par exemple, les acidophiles sont généralement plus fréquents que chez les humains.
Les plaquettes sont uniques aux mammifères; chez d'autres vertébrés, de petites cellules fusiformes nucléées appelées thrombocytes sont plutôt responsables de la coagulation du sang.


== Physiologie ==



=== Système circulatoire ===


Le sang circule dans le corps par les vaisseaux sanguins grâce à l'action de pompage du cœur.

Chez l'homme, le sang est pompé du fort ventricule gauche du cœur à travers les artères vers les tissus périphériques et retourne à l'oreillette droite du cœur par les veines.

Il pénètre ensuite dans le ventricule droit et est pompé à travers l'artère pulmonaire vers les poumons et retourne dans l'oreillette gauche par les veines pulmonaires.

Le sang pénètre alors dans le ventricule gauche pour être à nouveau circulé.

Le sang artériel transporte l'oxygène de l'air inhalé vers toutes les cellules du corps, et le sang veineux transporte le dioxyde de carbone, un déchet du métabolisme par les cellules, vers les poumons pour être exhalé.

Cependant, une exception concerne les artères pulmonaires, qui contiennent le sang le plus désoxygéné du corps, tandis que les veines pulmonaires contiennent du sang oxygéné.
Un flux de retour supplémentaire peut être généré par le mouvement des muscles squelettiques, qui peuvent comprimer les veines et pousser le sang à travers les valves des veines vers l'oreillette droite.
La circulation sanguine a été décrite par William Harvey en 1628.


=== Production et dégradation cellulaire ===

Chez les vertébrés, les différentes cellules sanguines sont fabriquées dans la moelle osseuse au cours d'un processus appelé hématopoïèse, qui comprend l'érythropoïèse, la production de globules rouges ; et la myélopoïèse, la production de globules blancs et de plaquettes.

Pendant l'enfance, presque tous les os humains produisent des globules rouges. à l'âge adulte, la production de globules rouges est limitée aux plus gros os : les corps des vertèbres, le sternum (sternum), la cage thoracique, les os du bassin et les os des bras et des jambes.

De plus, pendant l'enfance, la glande thymus, située dans le médiastin, est une source importante de lymphocytes T.
Le composant protéique du sang (y compris les protéines de coagulation) est produit principalement par le foie, tandis que les hormones sont produites par les glandes endocrines et la fraction aqueuse est régulée par l'hypothalamus et maintenue par le rein.
Les érythrocytes sains ont une durée de vie plasmatique d'environ 120 jours avant d'être dégradés par la rate et les cellules de Kupffer dans le foie.

Le foie élimine également certaines protéines, lipides et acides aminés.

Le rein sécrète activement des déchets dans l'urine.


=== Transport d'oxygène ===


Environ 98,5% de l'oxygène dans un échantillon de sang artériel d'un être humain en bonne santé respirant de l'air à la pression au niveau de la mer est chimiquement combiné avec l'hémoglobine.

Environ 1,5 % est physiquement dissous dans les autres liquides sanguins et n'est pas lié à l'hémoglobine.

La molécule d'hémoglobine est le principal transporteur d'oxygène chez les mammifères et de nombreuses autres espèces (pour les exceptions, voir ci-dessous).

L'hémoglobine a une capacité de liaison à l'oxygène comprise entre 1,36 et 1,40 ml d'O2 par gramme d'hémoglobine, ce qui augmente la capacité totale en oxygène du sang de 70 fois, par rapport à si l'oxygène était uniquement transporté par sa solubilité de 0,03 ml d'O2 par litre de sang par mm Hg de pression partielle d'oxygène ( environ 100 mm Hg dans les artères). À l'exception des artères pulmonaires et ombilicales et de leurs veines correspondantes, les artères évacuent le sang oxygéné du cœur et le délivrent au corps via les artérioles et les capillaires, où l'oxygène est consommé ; ensuite, les veinules et les veines ramènent le sang désoxygéné vers le cœur.
Dans des conditions normales chez l'homme adulte au repos, l'hémoglobine dans le sang quittant les poumons est saturée d'environ 98 à 99% en oxygène, atteignant un apport d'oxygène compris entre 950 et 1150 ml / min vers le corps.

Chez un adulte en bonne santé au repos, la consommation d'oxygène est d'environ 200 à 250 ml / min et le sang désoxygéné retournant aux poumons est encore saturé à environ 75% (70 à 78%).

L'augmentation de la consommation d'oxygène lors d'un exercice soutenu réduit la saturation en oxygène du sang veineux, qui peut atteindre moins de 15 % chez un sportif entraîné ; bien que le rythme respiratoire et le débit sanguin augmentent pour compenser, la saturation en oxygène dans le sang artériel peut chuter à 95 % ou moins dans ces conditions.

Une saturation en oxygène aussi basse est considérée comme dangereuse chez un individu au repos (par exemple, lors d'une intervention chirurgicale sous anesthésie).

Une hypoxie prolongée (oxygénation inférieure à 90 %), est dangereuse pour la santé, et une hypoxie sévère (saturations inférieures à 30 %) peut être rapidement mortelle. Un fœtus, recevant de l'oxygène par le placenta, est exposé à des pressions d'oxygène beaucoup plus faibles (environ 21 % du niveau trouvé dans les poumons d'un adulte), de sorte que les fœtus produisent une autre forme d'hémoglobine avec une affinité beaucoup plus élevée pour l'oxygène (hémoglobine F) pour fonctionner dans ces conditions.


=== Transport de dioxyde de carbone ===

Le CO2 est transporté dans le sang de trois manières différentes. (Les pourcentages exacts varient selon qu'il s'agit de sang artériel ou veineux).

La majeure partie (environ 70 %) est convertie en ions bicarbonate HCO-3 par l'enzyme anhydrase carbonique dans les globules rouges par la réaction CO2 + H2O → H2CO3 → H+ + HCO-3 ; environ 7 % sont dissous dans le plasma ; et environ 23 % sont liés à l'hémoglobine sous forme de composés carbamino. L'hémoglobine, la principale molécule transportant l'oxygène dans les globules rouges, transporte à la fois l'oxygène et le dioxyde de carbone.

Cependant, le CO2 lié à l'hémoglobine ne se lie pas au même site que l'oxygène.

Au lieu de cela, il se combine avec les groupes N-terminaux sur les quatre chaînes de globine.

Cependant, en raison des effets allostériques sur la molécule d'hémoglobine, la liaison du CO2 diminue la quantité d'oxygène liée pour une pression partielle d'oxygène donnée.

La diminution de la liaison au dioxyde de carbone dans le sang due à l'augmentation des niveaux d'oxygène est connue sous le nom d'effet Haldane et est importante dans le transport du dioxyde de carbone des tissus vers les poumons.

Une augmentation de la pression partielle de CO2 ou un pH inférieur entraînera une décharge d'oxygène de l'hémoglobine, connue sous le nom d'effet Bohr.


=== Transport des ions hydrogène ===

Une partie de l'oxyhémoglobine perd de l'oxygène et devient de la désoxyhémoglobine.

La désoxyhémoglobine lie la plupart des ions hydrogène car elle a une affinité beaucoup plus grande pour plus d'hydrogène que l'oxyhémoglobine.


=== Système lymphatique ===


Chez les mammifères, le sang est en équilibre avec la lymphe, qui se forme en continu dans les tissus à partir du sang par ultrafiltration capillaire.

La lymphe est collectée par un système de petits vaisseaux lymphatiques et dirigée vers le canal thoracique, qui se draine dans la veine sous-clavière gauche, où la lymphe rejoint la circulation sanguine systémique.


=== Thermorégulation ===

La circulation sanguine transporte la chaleur dans tout le corps, et les ajustements de ce flux sont une partie importante de la thermorégulation.

L'augmentation du flux sanguin vers la surface (par exemple, par temps chaud ou lors d'exercices intenses) provoque une peau plus chaude, entraînant une perte de chaleur plus rapide.

En revanche, lorsque la température extérieure est basse, le flux sanguin vers les extrémités et la surface de la peau est réduit et pour éviter la perte de chaleur et est distribué aux organes importants du corps, de préférence.


=== Débit ===

Le débit sanguin varie considérablement entre les différents organes.

Le foie a l'approvisionnement en sang le plus abondant avec un débit approximatif de 1350 ml/min.

Le rein et le cerveau sont les deuxième et troisième organes les plus approvisionnés, avec respectivement 1100 ml/min et ~700 ml/min. Les débits sanguins relatifs pour 100 g de tissu sont différents, le rein, la glande surrénale et la thyroïde étant les premiers. , respectivement deuxième et troisième tissus les plus fournis.


=== Fonctions hydrauliques ===

La restriction du flux sanguin peut également être utilisée dans des tissus spécialisés pour provoquer un engorgement, entraînant une érection de ce tissu; des exemples sont le tissu érectile dans le pénis et le clitoris.
Un autre exemple de fonction hydraulique est l'araignée sauteuse, dans laquelle le sang forcé dans les jambes sous pression les fait se redresser pour un saut puissant, sans avoir besoin de jambes musclées volumineuses.


=== Invertébrés ===

Chez les insectes, le sang (plus correctement appelé hémolymphe) n'est pas impliqué dans le transport de l'oxygène. (Des ouvertures appelées trachées permettent à l'oxygène de l'air de se diffuser directement dans les tissus.) Le sang des insectes déplace les nutriments vers les tissus et élimine les déchets dans un système ouvert.
D'autres invertébrés utilisent des protéines respiratoires pour augmenter la capacité de transport d'oxygène.

L'hémoglobine est la protéine respiratoire la plus courante dans la nature.

L'hémocyanine (bleue) contient du cuivre et se trouve dans les crustacés et les mollusques.

On pense que les tuniciers (ascidies) pourraient utiliser des vanabines (protéines contenant du vanadium) comme pigment respiratoire (vert vif, bleu ou orange).
Chez de nombreux invertébrés, ces protéines porteuses d'oxygène sont librement solubles dans le sang; chez les vertébrés, ils sont contenus dans des globules rouges spécialisés, permettant une concentration plus élevée de pigments respiratoires sans augmenter la viscosité ni endommager les organes de filtrage du sang comme les reins.
Les vers tubicoles géants ont des hémoglobines inhabituelles qui leur permettent de vivre dans des environnements extraordinaires.

Ces hémoglobines transportent également des sulfures normalement mortels chez d'autres animaux.


== Couleur ==

La matière colorante du sang (hémochrome) est en grande partie due à la protéine du sang responsable du transport de l'oxygène.

Différents groupes d'organismes utilisent différentes protéines.


=== Hémoglobine ===


L'hémoglobine est le principal déterminant de la couleur du sang chez les vertébrés.

Chaque molécule a quatre groupes hémiques et leur interaction avec diverses molécules modifie la couleur exacte.

Chez les vertébrés et autres créatures utilisant l'hémoglobine, le sang artériel et le sang capillaire sont rouge vif, car l'oxygène confère une forte couleur rouge au groupe hémique.

Le sang désoxygéné est une teinte plus foncée de rouge; celui-ci est présent dans les veines et peut être observé lors du don de sang et lors du prélèvement de sang veineux.

En effet, le spectre de la lumière absorbée par l'hémoglobine diffère entre les états oxygéné et désoxygéné. Le sang dans l'intoxication au monoxyde de carbone est rouge vif, car le monoxyde de carbone provoque la formation de carboxyhémoglobine.

En cas d'empoisonnement au cyanure, le corps ne peut pas utiliser l'oxygène, de sorte que le sang veineux reste oxygéné, ce qui augmente la rougeur.

Certaines affections affectant les groupes hémiques présents dans l'hémoglobine peuvent rendre la peau bleue - un symptôme appelé cyanose.

Si l'hème est oxydé, la méthémoglobine, qui est plus brunâtre et ne peut pas transporter l'oxygène, se forme.

Dans la sulfhémoglobinémie rare, l'hémoglobine artérielle est partiellement oxygénée et apparaît rouge foncé avec une teinte bleuâtre.
Les veines proches de la surface de la peau apparaissent bleues pour diverses raisons.

Cependant, les facteurs qui contribuent à cette altération de la perception des couleurs sont liés aux propriétés de diffusion de la lumière de la peau et au traitement de l'entrée visuelle par le cortex visuel, plutôt qu'à la couleur réelle du sang veineux. Les scinques du genre Prasinohaema ont sang vert en raison d'une accumulation de biliverdine, un déchet.


=== Hémocyanine ===


Le sang de la plupart des mollusques - y compris les céphalopodes et les gastéropodes - ainsi que certains arthropodes, tels que les limules, est bleu, car il contient la protéine hémocyanine contenant du cuivre à des concentrations d'environ 50 grammes par litre.

L'hémocyanine est incolore lorsqu'elle est désoxygénée et bleu foncé lorsqu'elle est oxygénée.

Le sang dans la circulation de ces créatures, qui vivent généralement dans des environnements froids avec de faibles tensions d'oxygène, est gris-blanc à jaune pâle, et il devient bleu foncé lorsqu'il est exposé à l'oxygène de l'air, comme on le voit lorsqu'ils saignent.

Cela est dû au changement de couleur de l'hémocyanine lorsqu'elle est oxydée.

L'hémocyanine transporte l'oxygène dans le liquide extracellulaire, contrairement au transport intracellulaire de l'oxygène chez les mammifères par l'hémoglobine dans les globules rouges.


=== Chlorocruorine ===


Le sang de la plupart des vers annélides et de certains polychètes marins utilise la chlorocruorine pour transporter l'oxygène.

Il est de couleur verte dans les solutions diluées.


=== Hémérythrine ===


L'hémérythrine est utilisée pour le transport de l'oxygène chez les invertébrés marins sipunculidés, priapulides, brachiopodes et le ver annélide, magelona.

L'hémérythrine est rose-violet lorsqu'elle est oxygénée.


=== Hémovanadine ===


Le sang de certaines espèces d'ascidies et de tuniciers, également appelés ascidies, contient des protéines appelées vanadines.

Ces protéines sont à base de vanadium et confèrent aux créatures une concentration de vanadium dans leur corps 100 fois supérieure à celle de l'eau de mer environnante.

Contrairement à l'hémocyanine et à l'hémoglobine, l'hémovanadine n'est pas un transporteur d'oxygène.

Lorsqu'elles sont exposées à l'oxygène, cependant, les vanadines deviennent jaune moutarde.


== Troubles ==



=== Médecine générale ===

Troubles du volume
Une blessure peut entraîner une perte de sang par saignement.

Un adulte en bonne santé peut perdre près de 20 % de son volume sanguin (1 L) avant le début du premier symptôme, l'agitation, et 40 % de son volume (2 L) avant que le choc ne s'installe.

Les thrombocytes sont importants pour la coagulation du sang et la formation de caillots sanguins, qui peuvent arrêter le saignement.

Un traumatisme aux organes internes ou aux os peut provoquer une hémorragie interne, qui peut parfois être grave.
La déshydratation peut réduire le volume sanguin en réduisant la teneur en eau du sang.

Cela entraînerait rarement un choc (en dehors des cas très graves) mais peut entraîner une hypotension orthostatique et un évanouissement.
Troubles de la circulation
Le choc est la perfusion inefficace des tissus et peut être causé par une variété de conditions, y compris la perte de sang, une infection, un faible débit cardiaque.
L'athérosclérose réduit le flux sanguin dans les artères, car l'athérome tapisse les artères et les rétrécit.

L'athérome a tendance à augmenter avec l'âge et sa progression peut être aggravée par de nombreuses causes, notamment le tabagisme, l'hypertension artérielle, l'excès de lipides circulants (hyperlipidémie) et le diabète sucré.
La coagulation peut former une thrombose, qui peut obstruer les vaisseaux.
Les problèmes de composition sanguine, l'action de pompage du cœur ou le rétrécissement des vaisseaux sanguins peuvent avoir de nombreuses conséquences, notamment l'hypoxie (manque d'oxygène) des tissus irrigués.

Le terme ischémie fait référence à un tissu insuffisamment irrigué de sang, et l'infarctus fait référence à la mort tissulaire (nécrose), qui peut survenir lorsque l'approvisionnement en sang a été bloqué (ou est très insuffisant).


=== Hématologique ===


Anémie
Une masse insuffisante de globules rouges (anémie) peut être le résultat de saignements, de troubles sanguins comme la thalassémie ou de carences nutritionnelles, et peut nécessiter une ou plusieurs transfusions sanguines.

L'anémie peut également être due à une maladie génétique dans laquelle les globules rouges ne fonctionnent tout simplement pas efficacement.

L'anémie peut être confirmée par un test sanguin si le taux d'hémoglobine est inférieur à 13,5 g/dl chez l'homme ou inférieur à 12,0 g/dl chez la femme.

Plusieurs pays ont des banques de sang pour répondre à la demande de sang transfusable.

Une personne qui reçoit une transfusion sanguine doit avoir un groupe sanguin compatible avec celui du donneur.
L'anémie falciforme
Troubles de la prolifération cellulaire
La leucémie est un groupe de cancers des tissus et des cellules hématopoïétiques.
La surproduction non cancéreuse de globules rouges (polycythémie vraie) ou de plaquettes (thrombocytose essentielle) peut être précancéreuse.
Les syndromes myélodysplasiques impliquent une production inefficace d'une ou plusieurs lignées cellulaires.
Troubles de la coagulation
L'hémophilie est une maladie génétique qui provoque un dysfonctionnement de l'un des mécanismes de coagulation du sang.

Cela peut permettre à des blessures autrement sans conséquence de mettre la vie en danger, mais entraîne plus souvent une hémarthrose ou un saignement dans les espaces articulaires, ce qui peut être paralysant.
Des plaquettes inefficaces ou insuffisantes peuvent également entraîner une coagulopathie (troubles hémorragiques).
L'état d'hypercoagulabilité (thrombophilie) résulte de défauts de régulation de la fonction plaquettaire ou du facteur de coagulation et peut provoquer une thrombose.
Troubles infectieux du sang
Le sang est un important vecteur d'infection.

Le VIH, le virus qui cause le SIDA, se transmet par contact avec le sang, le sperme ou d'autres sécrétions corporelles d'une personne infectée.

Les hépatites B et C se transmettent principalement par contact sanguin.

En raison des infections à diffusion hématogène, les objets tachés de sang sont traités comme un danger biologique.
L'infection bactérienne du sang est une bactériémie ou une septicémie.

L'infection virale est la virémie.

Le paludisme et la trypanosomiase sont des infections parasitaires à diffusion hématogène.


=== Intoxication au monoxyde de carbone ===


Des substances autres que l'oxygène peuvent se lier à l'hémoglobine; dans certains cas, cela peut causer des dommages irréversibles à l'organisme.

Le monoxyde de carbone, par exemple, est extrêmement dangereux lorsqu'il est transporté dans le sang par les poumons par inhalation, car le monoxyde de carbone se lie de manière irréversible à l'hémoglobine pour former de la carboxyhémoglobine, de sorte que moins d'hémoglobine est libre de se lier à l'oxygène et que moins de molécules d'oxygène peuvent être transportées à travers le corps. du sang.

Cela peut provoquer une suffocation insidieuse.

Un feu brûlant dans une pièce fermée avec une mauvaise ventilation présente un danger très dangereux, car il peut créer une accumulation de monoxyde de carbone dans l'air.

Une partie du monoxyde de carbone se lie à l'hémoglobine lors de la consommation de tabac.


== Traitements ==



=== Transfusions ===


Le sang destiné à la transfusion est obtenu de donneurs humains par don de sang et conservé dans une banque de sang.

Il existe de nombreux groupes sanguins différents chez l'homme, le système de groupe sanguin ABO et le système de groupe sanguin Rhésus étant les plus importants.

La transfusion de sang d'un groupe sanguin incompatible peut entraîner des complications graves, souvent mortelles, de sorte qu'un appariement croisé est effectué pour s'assurer qu'un produit sanguin compatible est transfusé.
Les autres produits sanguins administrés par voie intraveineuse sont les plaquettes, le plasma sanguin, le cryoprécipité et les concentrés de facteurs de coagulation spécifiques.


=== Administration intraveineuse ===

De nombreuses formes de médicaments (des antibiotiques à la chimiothérapie) sont administrés par voie intraveineuse, car ils ne sont pas facilement ou adéquatement absorbés par le tube digestif.
Après une hémorragie aiguë sévère, des préparations liquides, appelées génériquement succédanés du plasma, peuvent être administrées par voie intraveineuse, soit des solutions de sels (NaCl, KCl, CaCl2, etc.) à des concentrations physiologiques, soit des solutions colloïdales, telles que les dextranes, l'albumine sérique humaine, ou plasma frais congelé.

Dans ces situations d'urgence, un expanseur de plasma est une procédure de sauvetage plus efficace qu'une transfusion sanguine, car le métabolisme des globules rouges transfusés ne redémarre pas immédiatement après une transfusion.


=== Location ===


Dans la médecine moderne fondée sur des preuves, la saignée est utilisée dans la prise en charge de quelques maladies rares, notamment l'hémochromatose et la polycythémie.

Cependant, les saignées et les sangsues étaient des interventions non validées courantes utilisées jusqu'au 19ème siècle, car de nombreuses maladies étaient considérées à tort comme dues à un excès de sang, selon la médecine hippocratique.


== Etymologie ==


Le sang anglais (vieil anglais blod) dérive du germanique et est apparenté avec une gamme similaire de significations dans toutes les autres langues germaniques (par exemple

Blut allemand, blod suédois, blōþ gothique).

Il n'y a pas d'étymologie indo-européenne acceptée.


== Historique ==



=== Médecine grecque classique ===

Robin Fåhræus (un médecin suédois qui a conçu le taux de sédimentation des érythrocytes) a suggéré que le système humoristique de la Grèce antique, dans lequel on pensait que le corps contenait quatre fluides corporels distincts (associés à différents tempéraments), était basé sur l'observation de la coagulation du sang dans un récipient transparent.

Lorsque le sang est prélevé dans un récipient en verre et laissé au repos pendant environ une heure, quatre couches différentes peuvent être vues.

Un caillot noir se forme au fond (la "bile noire").

Au-dessus du caillot se trouve une couche de globules rouges (le "sang").

Au-dessus se trouve une couche blanchâtre de globules blancs (le « flegme »).

La couche supérieure est constituée de sérum jaune clair (la "bile jaune").


=== Genre ===

Le système de groupe sanguin ABO a été découvert en 1900 par Karl Landsteiner.

Jan Janský est crédité de la première classification du sang dans les quatre types (A, B, AB et O) en 1907, qui reste en usage aujourd'hui.

En 1907, la première transfusion sanguine a été réalisée en utilisant le système ABO pour prédire la compatibilité.

La première transfusion non directe a été réalisée le 27 mars 1914.

Le facteur Rhésus a été découvert en 1937.


== Culture et religion ==


En raison de son importance pour la vie, le sang est associé à un grand nombre de croyances.

L'une des plus fondamentales est l'utilisation du sang comme symbole des relations familiales par la naissance/la filiation ; être "lié par le sang", c'est être lié par l'ascendance ou la descendance, plutôt que par le mariage.

Cela est étroitement lié aux lignées et à des dictons tels que «le sang est plus épais que l'eau» et «mauvais sang», ainsi que «frère de sang».
Le sang est particulièrement mis en avant dans les religions juive et chrétienne, car Lévitique 17:11 dit que "la vie d'une créature est dans le sang". Cette phrase fait partie de la loi lévitique interdisant de boire du sang ou de manger de la viande avec le sang encore intact au lieu d'être versé.
Les références mythiques au sang peuvent parfois être liées à la nature vivifiante du sang, observée dans des événements tels que l'accouchement, par opposition au sang d'une blessure ou d'un décès.


=== Aborigènes d'Australie ===

Dans de nombreuses traditions des peuples aborigènes australiens, l'ocre (en particulier le rouge) et le sang, tous deux riches en fer et considérés comme Maban, sont appliqués sur le corps des danseurs pour le rituel.

Comme le dit Lawlor :
Dans de nombreux rituels et cérémonies aborigènes, l'ocre rouge est frottée sur tout le corps nu des danseurs.

Lors de cérémonies masculines secrètes et sacrées, le sang extrait des veines des bras des participants est échangé et frotté sur leur corps.

L'ocre rouge est utilisée de manière similaire dans des cérémonies moins secrètes.

Le sang est également utilisé pour attacher les plumes des oiseaux sur le corps des gens.

Les plumes d'oiseaux contiennent une protéine très sensible au magnétisme.

Lawlor commente que le sang employé de cette manière est détenu par ces peuples pour harmoniser les danseurs avec le royaume énergétique invisible du Dreamtime.

Lawlor relie alors ces domaines énergétiques invisibles et ces champs magnétiques, car le fer est magnétique.


=== Paganisme européen ===

Chez les tribus germaniques, le sang était utilisé lors de leurs sacrifices ; les Blot.

Le sang était considéré comme ayant le pouvoir de son auteur et, après le massacre, le sang était aspergé sur les murs, sur les statues des dieux et sur les participants eux-mêmes.

Cet acte d'aspersion de sang était appelé blóedsian en vieil anglais, et la terminologie a été empruntée par l'Église catholique romaine devenant à bénir et à bénir.

Le mot hittite pour le sang, ishar était apparenté aux mots pour "serment" et "lien", voir Ishara.
Les Grecs de l'Antiquité croyaient que le sang des dieux, l'ichor, était une substance toxique pour les mortels.
Relique de la loi germanique, la cruentation, épreuve où le cadavre de la victime devait se mettre à saigner en présence du meurtrier, fut pratiquée jusqu'au début du XVIIe siècle.


=== Christianisme ===

Dans Genèse 9 : 4, Dieu a interdit à Noé et à ses fils de manger du sang (voir Loi de Noahide).

Cette commande a continué à être observée par l'Église orthodoxe orientale.
On trouve également dans la Bible que lorsque l'ange de la mort est venu dans la maison hébraïque, le premier-né ne mourrait pas si l'ange voyait du sang d'agneau essuyé sur la porte.
Au Concile de Jérusalem, les apôtres ont interdit à certains chrétiens de consommer du sang - cela est documenté dans Actes 15:20 et 29.

Ce chapitre précise une raison (en particulier dans les versets 19-21) : c'était pour éviter d'offenser les juifs devenus chrétiens, car le code de la loi mosaïque interdisait la pratique.
Le sang de Christ est le moyen d'expiation des péchés.

Aussi, "... le sang de Jésus-Christ son [Dieu] Fils nous purifie de tout péché." (1 Jean 1:7), "...

À celui [Dieu] qui nous a aimés, et qui nous a lavés de nos péchés par son propre sang." (Apocalypse 1:5), et "Et ils l'ont vaincu (Satan) par le sang
de l'Agneau [Jésus le Christ], et par la parole de leur témoignage... » (Apocalypse 12 :11).
Certaines églises chrétiennes, y compris le catholicisme romain, l'orthodoxie orientale, l'orthodoxie orientale et l'église assyrienne de l'Est enseignent que, lorsqu'il est consacré, le vin eucharistique devient en fait le sang de Jésus que les fidèles peuvent boire.

Ainsi, dans le vin consacré, Jésus devient spirituellement et physiquement présent.

Cet enseignement est enraciné dans la Dernière Cène, telle qu'elle est écrite dans les quatre évangiles de la Bible, dans laquelle Jésus a déclaré à ses disciples que le pain qu'ils mangeaient était son corps et le vin était son sang. "Cette coupe est le nouveau testament dans mon sang, qui est versé pour vous." (Luc 22:20).
La plupart des formes de protestantisme, en particulier celles de lignée méthodiste ou presbytérienne, enseignent que le vin n'est rien de plus qu'un symbole du sang du Christ, qui est spirituellement mais pas physiquement présent.

La théologie luthérienne enseigne que le corps et le sang sont présents ensemble "dans, avec et sous" le pain et le vin de la fête eucharistique.


=== Judaïsme ===

Dans le judaïsme, le sang animal ne peut être consommé même en petite quantité (Lévitique 3 :17 et ailleurs) ; cela se reflète dans les lois alimentaires juives ( Kashrut ).

Le sang est purgé de la viande par rinçage et trempage dans l'eau (pour détacher les caillots), salage puis rinçage à l'eau à plusieurs reprises.

Les œufs doivent également être vérifiés et toute tache de sang retirée avant consommation.

Bien que le sang de poisson soit bibliquement casher, il est rabbiniquement interdit de consommer du sang de poisson pour éviter l'apparence d'enfreindre l'interdiction biblique. la raison donnée par la Torah est : "Parce que la vie de l'animal est [dans] son ​​sang" (ibid 17:14).

En ce qui concerne les êtres humains, la Kabbale explique sur ce verset que l'âme animale d'une personne est dans le sang et que les désirs physiques en découlent.
De même, la raison mystique du salage des sacrifices du temple et de la viande abattue est d'enlever le sang des passions animales de la personne.

En enlevant le sang de l'animal, les énergies animales et la force vitale contenues dans le sang sont supprimées, rendant la viande propre à la consommation humaine.


=== Islam ===

La consommation d'aliments contenant du sang est interdite par les lois alimentaires islamiques.

Ceci est dérivé de la déclaration dans le Coran, sourate Al-Ma'ida (5:3): "Vous sont interdits (pour la nourriture) : la viande morte, le sang, la chair de porc, et ce sur quoi a été invoqué le nom d'un autre qu'Allah."
Le sang est considéré comme impur, il existe donc des méthodes spécifiques pour obtenir le statut physique et rituel de propreté une fois que le saignement s'est produit.

Des règles et des interdictions spécifiques s'appliquent aux menstruations, aux saignements postnatals et aux saignements vaginaux irréguliers.

Lorsqu'un animal a été abattu, le cou de l'animal est coupé de manière à garantir que la colonne vertébrale n'est pas sectionnée, d'où le cerveau peut envoyer des commandes au cœur pour pomper le sang vers lui pour l'oxygène.

De cette façon, le sang est éliminé du corps et la viande peut désormais être cuite et consommée en toute sécurité.

À l'époque moderne, les transfusions sanguines ne sont généralement pas considérées comme contraires aux règles.


=== Témoins de Jéhovah ===


Sur la base de leur interprétation des écritures telles que Actes 15:28, 29 (« Abstenez-vous... de sang. »), de nombreux Témoins de Jéhovah ne consomment pas de sang et n'acceptent pas de transfusions de sang total ou de ses principaux composants : globules rouges, sang blanc. les cellules, les plaquettes (thrombocytes) et le plasma.

Les membres peuvent décider personnellement s'ils accepteront des procédures médicales qui impliquent leur propre sang ou des substances qui sont ensuite fractionnées à partir des quatre principaux composants.


=== Vampirisme ===


Les vampires sont des créatures mythiques qui boivent du sang directement pour se nourrir, généralement avec une préférence pour le sang humain.

Les cultures du monde entier ont des mythes de ce genre ; par exemple, la légende «Nosferatu», un humain qui atteint la damnation et l'immortalité en buvant le sang des autres, provient du folklore d'Europe de l'Est.

Les tiques, les sangsues, les moustiques femelles, les chauves-souris vampires et un assortiment d'autres créatures naturelles consomment le sang d'autres animaux, mais seules les chauves-souris sont associées aux vampires.

Cela n'a aucun rapport avec les chauves-souris vampires, qui sont des créatures du Nouveau Monde découvertes bien après les origines des mythes européens.


== Autres utilisations ==



=== Médecine légale et archéologique ===

Les résidus de sang peuvent aider les enquêteurs médico-légaux à identifier les armes, à reconstituer une action criminelle et à relier les suspects au crime.

Grâce à l'analyse des modèles de taches de sang, des informations médico-légales peuvent également être obtenues à partir de la distribution spatiale des taches de sang.
L'analyse des résidus sanguins est également une technique utilisée en archéologie.


=== Artistique ===

Le sang est l'un des fluides corporels qui a été utilisé dans l'art.

En particulier, les performances de l'actionniste viennois Hermann Nitsch, Istvan Kantor, Franko B, Lennie Lee, Ron Athey, Yang Zhichao, Lucas Abela et Kira O'Reilly, ainsi que la photographie d'Andres Serrano, ont incorporé le sang comme élément visuel de premier plan. .

Marc Quinn a réalisé des sculptures en utilisant du sang congelé, y compris un moulage de sa propre tête réalisé avec son propre sang.


=== Généalogique ===

Le terme sang est utilisé dans les cercles généalogiques pour désigner son ascendance, ses origines et son origine ethnique, comme dans le mot lignée.

D'autres termes où le sang est utilisé dans le sens des antécédents familiaux sont le sang bleu, le sang royal, le sang mêlé et le parent de sang.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blood
