

VERTEBRAL COLUMN


The vertebral column, also known as the backbone or spine, is part of the axial skeleton. 

The vertebral column is the defining characteristic of a vertebrate in which the notochord (a flexible rod of uniform composition) found in all chordates has been replaced by a segmented series of bone: vertebrae separated by intervertebral discs. 

The vertebral column houses the spinal canal, a cavity that encloses and protects the spinal cord.

There are about 50,000 species of animals that have a vertebral column. 

The human vertebral column is one of the most-studied examples.


== Structure ==

The number of vertebrae in a region can vary but overall the number remains the same. 

In a human's vertebral column, there are normally thirty-three vertebrae. 

The upper 24 pre-sacral vertebrae are articulating and separated from each other by intervertebral discs, and the lower nine are fused in adults, five in the sacrum and four in the coccyx, or tailbone. 

The articulating vertebrae are named according to their region of the spine. 

There are seven cervical vertebrae, twelve thoracic vertebrae and five lumbar vertebrae. 

The number of those in the cervical region, however, is only rarely changed, while that in the coccygeal region varies most. 

One study of 908 human adults found 43 individuals with 23 pre-sacral vertebrae (4.7%), 826 individuals with 24 pre-sacral vertebrae (91%), and 39 with 25 pre-sacral vertebrae (4.3%).

There are ligaments extending the length of the column at the front and the back, and in between the vertebrae joining the spinous processes, the transverse processes and the vertebral laminae.


=== Vertebrae ===


The vertebrae in the human vertebral column are divided into different regions, which correspond to the curves of the spinal column. 

The articulating vertebrae are named according to their region of the spine. 

Vertebrae in these regions are essentially alike, with minor variation. 

These regions are called the cervical spine, thoracic spine, lumbar spine, sacrum, and coccyx. 

There are seven cervical vertebrae, twelve thoracic vertebrae, and five lumbar vertebrae.

The number of vertebrae in a region can vary but overall the number remains the same. 

The number of those in the cervical region, however, is only rarely changed. 

The vertebrae of the cervical, thoracic, and lumbar spines are independent bones and generally quite similar. 

The vertebrae of the sacrum and coccyx are usually fused and unable to move independently. 

Two special vertebrae are the atlas and axis, on which the head rests.

A typical vertebra consists of two parts: the vertebral body and the vertebral arch. 

The vertebral arch is posterior, meaning it faces the back of a person. 

Together, these enclose the vertebral foramen, which contains the spinal cord. 

Because the spinal cord ends in the lumbar spine, and the sacrum and coccyx are fused, they do not contain a central foramen. 

The vertebral arch is formed by a pair of pedicles and a pair of laminae, and supports seven processes, four articular, two transverse, and one spinous, the latter also being known as the neural spine. 

Two transverse processes and one spinous process are posterior to (behind) the vertebral body. 

The spinous process comes out the back, one transverse process comes out the left, and one on the right. 

The spinous processes of the cervical and lumbar regions can be felt through the skin.

Above and below each vertebra are joints called facet joints. 

These restrict the range of movement possible, and are joined by a thin portion of the neural arch called the pars interarticularis. 

In between each pair of vertebrae are two small holes called intervertebral foramina. 

The spinal nerves leave the spinal cord through these holes.
Individual vertebrae are named according to their region and position. 

From top to bottom, the vertebrae are:

Cervical spine: 7 vertebrae (C1–C7)
Thoracic spine: 12 vertebrae (T1–T12)
Lumbar spine: 5 vertebrae (L1–L5)
Sacrum: 5 (fused) vertebrae (S1–S5)
Coccyx: 4 (3–5) (fused) vertebrae (Tailbone)

The combined region of the thoracic and lumbar vertebrae is known as the thoracolumbar division, or region.


=== Shape ===

The vertebral column is curved in several places, a result of human bipedal evolution. 

The curves allow the human spine to better stabilize the body in the upright position.

The upper cervical spine has a curve, convex forward, that begins at the axis (second cervical vertebra) at the apex of the odontoid process or dens and ends at the middle of the second thoracic vertebra; it is the least marked of all the curves. 

This inward curve is known as a lordotic curve.

The thoracic curve, concave forward, begins at the middle of the second and ends at the middle of the twelfth thoracic vertebra. 

Its most prominent point behind corresponds to the spinous process of the seventh thoracic vertebra. 

This curve is known as a kyphotic curve.

The lumbar curve is more marked in the female than in the male; it begins at the middle of the last thoracic vertebra, and ends at the sacrovertebral angle. 

It is convex anteriorly, the convexity of the lower three vertebrae being much greater than that of the upper two. 

This curve is described as a lordotic curve.

The sacral curve begins at the sacrovertebral articulation, and ends at the point of the coccyx; its concavity is directed downward and forward as a kyphotic curve.

The thoracic and sacral kyphotic curves are termed primary curves, because they are present in the fetus. 

The cervical and lumbar curves are compensatory, or secondary, and are developed after birth. 

The cervical curve forms when the infant is able to hold up its head (at three or four months) and sit upright (at nine months). 

The lumbar curve forms later from twelve to eighteen months, when the child begins to walk.


=== Surfaces ===

Anterior surfaceWhen viewed from in front, the width of the bodies of the vertebrae is seen to increase from the second cervical to the first thoracic; there is then a slight diminution in the next three vertebrae. 

Below this, there is again a gradual and progressive increase in width as low as the sacrovertebral angle. 

From this point there is a rapid diminution, to the apex of the coccyx.

Posterior surfaceFrom behind, the vertebral column presents in the median line the spinous processes. 

In the cervical region (with the exception of the second and seventh vertebrae), these are short, horizontal, and bifid. 

In the upper part of the thoracic region they are directed obliquely downward; in the middle they are almost vertical, and in the lower part they are nearly horizontal. 

In the lumbar region they are nearly horizontal. 

The spinous processes are separated by considerable intervals in the lumbar region, by narrower intervals in the neck, and are closely approximated in the middle of the thoracic region. 

Occasionally one of these processes deviates a little from the median line — which can sometimes be indicative of a fracture or a displacement of the spine. 

On either side of the spinous processes is the vertebral groove formed by the laminae in the cervical and lumbar regions, where it is shallow, and by the laminae and transverse processes in the thoracic region, where it is deep and broad; these grooves lodge the deep muscles of the back. 

Lateral to the spinous processes are the articular processes, and still more laterally the transverse processes. 

In the thoracic region, the transverse processes stand backward, on a plane considerably behind that of the same processes in the cervical and lumbar regions. 

In the cervical region, the transverse processes are placed in front of the articular processes, lateral to the pedicles and between the intervertebral foramina. 

In the thoracic region they are posterior to the pedicles, intervertebral foramina, and articular processes. 

In the lumbar region they are in front of the articular processes, but behind the intervertebral foramina.

Lateral surfacesThe sides of the vertebral column are separated from the posterior surface by the articular processes in the cervical and thoracic regions and by the transverse processes in the lumbar region. 

In the thoracic region, the sides of the bodies of the vertebrae are marked in the back by the facets for articulation with the heads of the ribs. 

More posteriorly are the intervertebral foramina, formed by the juxtaposition of the vertebral notches, oval in shape, smallest in the cervical and upper part of the thoracic regions and gradually increasing in size to the last lumbar. 

They transmit the special spinal nerves and are situated between the transverse processes in the cervical region and in front of them, in the thoracic and lumbar regions.


== Ligaments ==

There are different ligaments involved in the holding together of the vertebrae in the column, and in the column's movement. 

The anterior and posterior longitudinal ligaments extend the length of the vertebral column along the front and back of the vertebral bodies. 

The interspinous ligaments connect the adjoining spinous processes of the vertebrae. 

The supraspinous ligament extends the length of the spine running along the back of the spinous processes, from the sacrum to the seventh cervical vertebra. 

From there it is continuous with the nuchal ligament.


== Development ==

The striking segmented pattern of the spine is established during embryogenesis when somites are rhythmically added to the posterior of the embryo. 

Somite formation begins around the third week when the embryo begins gastrulation and continues until all somites are formed. 

Their number varies between species: there are 42 to 44 somites in the human embryo and around 52 in the chick embryo. 

The somites are spheres, formed from the paraxial mesoderm that lies at the sides of the neural tube and they contain the precursors of spinal bone, the vertebrae ribs and some of the skull, as well as muscle, ligaments and skin. 

Somitogenesis and the subsequent distribution of somites is controlled by a clock and wavefront model acting in cells of the paraxial mesoderm. 

Soon after their formation, sclerotomes, which give rise to some of the bone of the skull, the vertebrae and ribs, migrate, leaving the remainder of the somite now termed a dermamyotome behind. 

This then splits to give the myotomes which will form the muscles and dermatomes which will form the skin of the back. 

Sclerotomes become subdivided into an anterior and a posterior compartment. 

This subdivision plays a key role in the definitive patterning of vertebrae that form when the posterior part of one somite fuses to the anterior part of the consecutive somite during a process termed resegmentation. 

Disruption of the somitogenesis process in humans results in diseases such as congenital scoliosis. 

So far, the human homologues of three genes associated to the mouse segmentation clock, (MESP2, DLL3 and LFNG), have been shown to be mutated in cases of congenital scoliosis, suggesting that the mechanisms involved in vertebral segmentation are conserved across vertebrates. 

In humans the first four somites are incorporated in the base of the occipital bone of the skull and the next 33 somites will form the vertebrae, ribs, muscles, ligaments and skin. 

The remaining posterior somites degenerate. 

During the fourth week of embryogenesis, the sclerotomes shift their position to surround the spinal cord and the notochord. 

This column of tissue has a segmented appearance, with alternating areas of dense and less dense areas.

As the sclerotome develops, it condenses further eventually developing into the vertebral body. 

Development of the appropriate shapes of the vertebral bodies is regulated by HOX genes.

The less dense tissue that separates the sclerotome segments develop into the intervertebral discs.

The notochord disappears in the sclerotome (vertebral body) segments but persists in the region of the intervertebral discs as the nucleus pulposus. 

The nucleus pulposus and the fibers of the anulus fibrosus make up the intervertebral disc.

The primary curves (thoracic and sacral curvatures) form during fetal development. 

The secondary curves develop after birth. 

The cervical curvature forms as a result of lifting the head and the lumbar curvature forms as a result of walking.


== Function ==


=== Spinal cord ===


The vertebral column surrounds the spinal cord which travels within the spinal canal, formed from a central hole within each vertebra. 

The spinal cord is part of the central nervous system that supplies nerves and receives information from the peripheral nervous system within the body. 

The spinal cord consists of grey and white matter and a central cavity, the central canal. 

Adjacent to each vertebra emerge spinal nerves. 

The spinal nerves provide sympathetic nervous supply to the body, with nerves emerging forming the sympathetic trunk and the splanchnic nerves.

The spinal canal follows the different curves of the column; it is large and triangular in those parts of the column that enjoy the greatest freedom of movement, such as the cervical and lumbar regions, and is small and rounded in the thoracic region, where motion is more limited. 

The spinal cord terminates in the conus medullaris and cauda equina.


== Clinical significance ==


=== Disease ===

Spina bifida is a congenital disorder in which there is a defective closure of the vertebral arch. 

Sometimes the spinal meninges and also the spinal cord can protrude through this, and this is called Spina bifida cystica. 

Where the condition does not involve this protrusion it is known as Spina bifida occulta. 

Sometimes all of the vertebral arches may remain incomplete.

Another, though rare, congenital disease is Klippel–Feil syndrome, which is the fusion of any two of the cervical vertebrae.

Spondylolisthesis is the forward displacement of a vertebra and retrolisthesis is a posterior displacement of one vertebral body with respect to the adjacent vertebra to a degree less than a dislocation.

Spondylolysis, also known as a pars defect, is a defect or fracture at the pars interarticularis of the vertebral arch.

Spinal disc herniation, more commonly called a "slipped disc", is the result of a tear in the outer ring (anulus fibrosus) of the intervertebral disc, which lets some of the soft gel-like material, the nucleus pulposus, bulge out in a hernia.

Spinal stenosis is a narrowing of the spinal canal which can occur in any region of the spine though less commonly in the thoracic region. 

The stenosis can constrict the spinal canal giving rise to a neurological deficit.

Pain at the coccyx (tailbone) is known as coccydynia.

Spinal cord injury is damage to the spinal cord that causes changes in its function, either temporary or permanent. 

Spinal cord injuries can be divided into categories: complete transection, hemisection, central spinal cord lesions, posterior spinal cord lesions, and anterior spinal cord lesions.

Scalloping vertebrae is the increase in the concavity of the posterior vertebral body. 

It can be seen on lateral X-ray and sagittal views of CT and MRI scans. 

Its concavity is due to the increased pressure exerting on the vertebrae due to a mass. 

Internal spinal mass such as spinal astrocytoma, ependymoma, schwannoma, neurofibroma, and achondroplasia causes vertebrae scalloping.


=== Curvature ===


Excessive or abnormal spinal curvature is classed as a spinal disease or dorsopathy and includes the following abnormal curvatures:

Kyphosis is an exaggerated kyphotic (convex) curvature of the thoracic region in the sagittal plane, also called hyperkyphosis. 

This produces the so-called "humpback" or "dowager's hump", a condition commonly resulting from osteoporosis.

Lordosis is an exaggerated lordotic (concave) curvature of the lumbar region in the sagittal plane, is known as lumbar hyperlordosis and also as "swayback". 

Temporary lordosis is common during pregnancy.

Scoliosis, lateral curvature, is the most common abnormal curvature, occurring in 0.5% of the population. 

It is more common among females and may result from unequal growth of the two sides of one or more vertebrae, so that they do not fuse properly. 

It can also be caused by pulmonary atelectasis (partial or complete deflation of one or more lobes of the lungs) as observed in asthma or pneumothorax.

Kyphoscoliosis, a combination of kyphosis and scoliosis.


=== Anatomical landmarks ===


Individual vertebrae of the human vertebral column can be felt and used as surface anatomy, with reference points are taken from the middle of the vertebral body. 

This provides anatomical landmarks that can be used to guide procedures such as a lumbar puncture and also as vertical reference points to describe the locations of other parts of human anatomy, such as the positions of organs.


== Other animals ==


=== Variations in vertebrae ===

The general structure of vertebrae in other animals is largely the same as in humans. 

Individual vertebrae are composed of a centrum (body), arches protruding from the top and bottom of the centrum, and various processes projecting from the centrum and/or arches. 

An arch extending from the top of the centrum is called a neural arch, while the haemal arch or chevron is found underneath the centrum in the caudal (tail) vertebrae of fish, most reptiles, some birds, some dinosaurs and some mammals with long tails. 

The vertebral processes can either give the structure rigidity, help them articulate with ribs, or serve as muscle attachment points. 

Common types are transverse process, diapophyses, parapophyses, and zygapophyses (both the cranial zygapophyses and the caudal zygapophyses). 

The centrum of the vertebra can be classified based on the fusion of its elements. 

In temnospondyls, bones such as the spinous process, the pleurocentrum and the intercentrum are separate ossifications. 

Fused elements, however, classify a vertebra as having holospondyly.
A vertebra can also be described in terms of the shape of the ends of the centrum. 

Centra with flat ends are acoelous, like those in mammals. 

These flat ends of the centra are especially good at supporting and distributing compressive forces. 

Amphicoelous vertebra have centra with both ends concave. 

This shape is common in fish, where most motion is limited. 

Amphicoelous centra often are integrated with a full notochord. 

Procoelous vertebrae are anteriorly concave and posteriorly convex. 

They are found in frogs and modern reptiles. 

Opisthocoelous vertebrae are the opposite, possessing anterior convexity and posterior concavity. 

They are found in salamanders, and in some non-avian dinosaurs. 

Heterocoelous vertebrae have saddle-shaped articular surfaces. 

This type of configuration is seen in turtles that retract their necks, and birds, because it permits extensive lateral and vertical flexion motion without stretching the nerve cord too extensively or wringing it about its long axis.

In horses, the Arabian (breed) can have one less vertebrae and pair of ribs. 

This anomaly disappears in foals that are the product of an Arabian and another breed of horse.


=== Regional vertebrae ===

Vertebrae are defined by the regions of the vertebral column that they occur in, as in humans. 

Cervical vertebrae are those in the neck area. 

With the exception of the two sloth genera (Choloepus and Bradypus) and the manatee genus, (Trichechus), all mammals have seven cervical vertebrae. 

In other vertebrates, the number of cervical vertebrae can range from a single vertebra in amphibians to as many as 25 in swans or 76 in the extinct plesiosaur Elasmosaurus. 

The dorsal vertebrae range from the bottom of the neck to the top of the pelvis. 

Dorsal vertebrae attached to the ribs are called thoracic vertebrae, while those without ribs are called lumbar vertebrae. 

The sacral vertebrae are those in the pelvic region, and range from one in amphibians, to two in most birds and modern reptiles, or up to three to five in mammals. 

When multiple sacral vertebrae are fused into a single structure, it is called the sacrum. 

The synsacrum is a similar fused structure found in birds that is composed of the sacral, lumbar, and some of the thoracic and caudal vertebra, as well as the pelvic girdle. 

Caudal vertebrae compose the tail, and the final few can be fused into the pygostyle in birds, or into the coccygeal or tail bone in chimpanzees (and humans).


=== Fish and amphibians ===


The vertebrae of lobe-finned fishes consist of three discrete bony elements. 

The vertebral arch surrounds the spinal cord, and is of broadly similar form to that found in most other vertebrates. 

Just beneath the arch lies a small plate-like pleurocentrum, which protects the upper surface of the notochord, and below that, a larger arch-shaped intercentrum to protect the lower border. 

Both of these structures are embedded within a single cylindrical mass of cartilage. 

A similar arrangement was found in the primitive Labyrinthodonts, but in the evolutionary line that led to reptiles (and hence, also to mammals and birds), the intercentrum became partially or wholly replaced by an enlarged pleurocentrum, which in turn became the bony vertebral body.

In most ray-finned fishes, including all teleosts, these two structures are fused with, and embedded within, a solid piece of bone superficially resembling the vertebral body of mammals. 

In living amphibians, there is simply a cylindrical piece of bone below the vertebral arch, with no trace of the separate elements present in the early tetrapods.

In cartilaginous fish, such as sharks, the vertebrae consist of two cartilaginous tubes. 

The upper tube is formed from the vertebral arches, but also includes additional cartilaginous structures filling in the gaps between the vertebrae, and so enclosing the spinal cord in an essentially continuous sheath. 

The lower tube surrounds the notochord, and has a complex structure, often including multiple layers of calcification.Lampreys have vertebral arches, but nothing resembling the vertebral bodies found in all higher vertebrates. 

Even the arches are discontinuous, consisting of separate pieces of arch-shaped cartilage around the spinal cord in most parts of the body, changing to long strips of cartilage above and below in the tail region. 

Hagfishes lack a true vertebral column, and are therefore not properly considered vertebrates, but a few tiny neural arches are present in the tail.


=== Other vertebrates ===

The general structure of human vertebrae is fairly typical of that found in mammals, reptiles, and birds. 

The shape of the vertebral body does, however, vary somewhat between different groups. 

In mammals, such as humans, it typically has flat upper and lower surfaces, while in reptiles the anterior surface commonly has a concave socket into which the expanded convex face of the next vertebral body fits. 

Even these patterns are only generalisations, however, and there may be variation in form of the vertebrae along the length of the spine even within a single species. 

Some unusual variations include the saddle-shaped sockets between the cervical vertebrae of birds and the presence of a narrow hollow canal running down the centre of the vertebral bodies of geckos and tuataras, containing a remnant of the notochord.

Reptiles often retain the primitive intercentra, which are present as small crescent-shaped bony elements lying between the bodies of adjacent vertebrae; similar structures are often found in the caudal vertebrae of mammals. 

In the tail, these are attached to chevron-shaped bones called haemal arches, which attach below the base of the spine, and help to support the musculature. 

These latter bones are probably homologous with the ventral ribs of fish. 

The number of vertebrae in the spines of reptiles is highly variable, and may be several hundred in some species of snake.

In birds, there is a variable number of cervical vertebrae, which often form the only truly flexible part of the spine. 

The thoracic vertebrae are partially fused, providing a solid brace for the wings during flight. 

The sacral vertebrae are fused with the lumbar vertebrae, and some thoracic and caudal vertebrae, to form a single structure, the synsacrum, which is thus of greater relative length than the sacrum of mammals. 

In living birds, the remaining caudal vertebrae are fused into a further bone, the pygostyle, for attachment of the tail feathers.Aside from the tail, the number of vertebrae in mammals is generally fairly constant. 

There are almost always seven cervical vertebrae (sloths and manatees are among the few exceptions), followed by around twenty or so further vertebrae, divided between the thoracic and lumbar forms, depending on the number of ribs. 

There are generally three to five vertebrae with the sacrum, and anything up to fifty caudal vertebrae.


=== Dinosaurs ===

The vertebral column in dinosaurs consists of the cervical (neck), dorsal (back), sacral (hips), and caudal (tail) vertebrae. 

Saurischian dinosaur vertebrae sometimes possess features known as pleurocoels, which are hollow depressions on the lateral portions of the vertebrae, perforated to create an entrance into the air chambers within the vertebrae, which served to decrease the weight of these bones without sacrificing strength. 

These pleurocoels were filled with air sacs, which would have further decreased weight. 

In sauropod dinosaurs, the largest known land vertebrates, pleurocoels and air sacs may have reduced the animal's weight by over a ton in some instances, a handy evolutionary adaption in animals that grew to over 30 metres in length. 

In many hadrosaur and theropod dinosaurs, the caudal vertebrae were reinforced by ossified tendons. 

The presence of three or more sacral vertebrae, in association with the hip bones, is one of the defining characteristics of dinosaurs. 

The occipital condyle is a structure on the posterior part of a dinosaur's skull that articulates with the first cervical vertebra.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vertebral_column
;;;ES;;;



LA COLUMNA VERTEBRAL


La columna vertebral, también conocida como columna vertebral o espina dorsal, forma parte del esqueleto axial.

La columna vertebral es la característica definitoria de un vertebrado en el que la notocorda (un bastón flexible de composición uniforme) que se encuentra en todos los cordados ha sido reemplazada por una serie segmentada de hueso: vértebras separadas por discos intervertebrales.

La columna vertebral alberga el canal espinal, una cavidad que encierra y protege la médula espinal.

Hay unas 50.000 especies de animales que tienen columna vertebral.

La columna vertebral humana es uno de los ejemplos más estudiados.


== Estructura ==

El número de vértebras en una región puede variar, pero en general el número sigue siendo el mismo.

En la columna vertebral de un ser humano, normalmente hay treinta y tres vértebras.

Las 24 vértebras presacras superiores están articuladas y separadas entre sí por discos intervertebrales, y las nueve inferiores están fusionadas en los adultos, cinco en el sacro y cuatro en el cóccix o coxis.

Las vértebras articulares se nombran según su región de la columna vertebral.

Hay siete vértebras cervicales, doce vértebras torácicas y cinco vértebras lumbares.

Sin embargo, el número de los que se encuentran en la región cervical rara vez cambia, mientras que el de la región coccígea es el que más varía.

Un estudio de 908 adultos humanos encontró 43 individuos con 23 vértebras presacras (4,7%), 826 individuos con 24 vértebras presacras (91%) y 39 con 25 vértebras presacras (4,3%).

Hay ligamentos que se extienden a lo largo de la columna en la parte delantera y trasera, y entre las vértebras que unen las apófisis espinosas, las apófisis transversas y las láminas vertebrales.


=== Vértebras ===


Las vértebras de la columna vertebral humana se dividen en diferentes regiones, que corresponden a las curvas de la columna vertebral.

Las vértebras articulares se nombran según su región de la columna vertebral.

Las vértebras en estas regiones son esencialmente iguales, con variaciones menores.

Estas regiones se denominan columna cervical, columna torácica, columna lumbar, sacro y cóccix.

Hay siete vértebras cervicales, doce vértebras torácicas y cinco vértebras lumbares.

El número de vértebras en una región puede variar, pero en general el número sigue siendo el mismo.

Sin embargo, el número de aquellos en la región cervical rara vez cambia.

Las vértebras de la columna cervical, torácica y lumbar son huesos independientes y generalmente bastante similares.

Las vértebras del sacro y el cóccix suelen estar fusionadas y no pueden moverse de forma independiente.

Dos vértebras especiales son el atlas y el eje, sobre los que descansa la cabeza.

Una vértebra típica consta de dos partes: el cuerpo vertebral y el arco vertebral.

El arco vertebral es posterior, lo que significa que mira hacia la espalda de una persona.

Juntos, estos encierran el agujero vertebral, que contiene la médula espinal.

Debido a que la médula espinal termina en la columna lumbar y el sacro y el cóccix están fusionados, no contienen un agujero central.

El arco vertebral está formado por un par de pedículos y un par de láminas, y soporta siete procesos, cuatro articulares, dos transversales y uno espinoso, siendo este último también conocido como espina neural.

Dos apófisis transversas y una apófisis espinosa son posteriores (detrás) del cuerpo vertebral.

La apófisis espinosa sale por atrás, una apófisis transversal sale por la izquierda y otra por la derecha.

Las apófisis espinosas de las regiones cervical y lumbar se pueden sentir a través de la piel.

Por encima y por debajo de cada vértebra hay articulaciones llamadas articulaciones facetarias.

Estos restringen el rango de movimiento posible y están unidos por una porción delgada del arco neural llamada pars interarticularis.

Entre cada par de vértebras hay dos pequeños agujeros llamados agujeros intervertebrales.

Los nervios espinales salen de la médula espinal a través de estos agujeros.
Las vértebras individuales se nombran según su región y posición.

De arriba abajo, las vértebras son:

Columna cervical: 7 vértebras (C1-C7)
Columna torácica: 12 vértebras (T1–T12)
Columna lumbar: 5 vértebras (L1–L5)
Sacro: 5 vértebras (fusionadas) (S1–S5)
Coxis: 4 (3–5) vértebras (fusionadas) (coxis)

La región combinada de las vértebras torácicas y lumbares se conoce como división o región toracolumbar.


=== Forma ===

La columna vertebral está curvada en varios lugares, como resultado de la evolución bípeda humana.

Las curvas permiten que la columna vertebral humana estabilice mejor el cuerpo en posición vertical.

La columna cervical superior tiene una curva, convexa hacia adelante, que comienza en el eje (segunda vértebra cervical) en el vértice de la apófisis odontoides o dens y termina en el medio de la segunda vértebra torácica; es la menos marcada de todas las curvas.

Esta curva hacia adentro se conoce como curva lordótica.

La curva torácica, cóncava hacia adelante, comienza en la mitad de la segunda y termina en la mitad de la duodécima vértebra torácica.

Su punto más destacado por detrás corresponde a la apófisis espinosa de la séptima vértebra torácica.

Esta curva se conoce como curva cifótica.

La curva lumbar es más marcada en la mujer que en el hombre; comienza en la mitad de la última vértebra torácica y termina en el ángulo sacrovertebral.

Es convexa anteriormente, siendo la convexidad de las tres vértebras inferiores mucho mayor que la de las dos superiores.

Esta curva se describe como una curva lordótica.

La curva sacra comienza en la articulación sacrovertebral y termina en la punta del cóccix; su concavidad se dirige hacia abajo y hacia adelante como una curva cifótica.

Las curvas cifóticas torácica y sacra se denominan curvas primarias porque están presentes en el feto.

Las curvas cervical y lumbar son compensatorias o secundarias y se desarrollan después del nacimiento.

La curva cervical se forma cuando el bebé puede sostener la cabeza (a los tres o cuatro meses) y sentarse erguido (a los nueve meses).

La curva lumbar se forma más tarde de los doce a los dieciocho meses, cuando el niño comienza a caminar.


=== Superficies ===

Superficie anterior Cuando se ve de frente, se ve que el ancho de los cuerpos de las vértebras aumenta desde la segunda cervical hasta la primera torácica; luego hay una ligera disminución en las siguientes tres vértebras.

Debajo de esto, hay nuevamente un aumento gradual y progresivo en el ancho hasta el ángulo sacrovertebral.

Desde este punto hay una disminución rápida, hasta el vértice del cóccix.

Superficie posterior Por detrás, la columna vertebral presenta en la línea media las apófisis espinosas.

En la región cervical (a excepción de la segunda y séptima vértebra), éstas son cortas, horizontales y bífidas.

En la parte superior de la región torácica se dirigen oblicuamente hacia abajo; en el medio son casi verticales, y en la parte inferior son casi horizontales.

En la región lumbar son casi horizontales.

Las apófisis espinosas están separadas por intervalos considerables en la región lumbar, por intervalos más estrechos en el cuello y se aproximan mucho en el medio de la región torácica.

Ocasionalmente, uno de estos procesos se desvía un poco de la línea media, lo que a veces puede ser indicativo de una fractura o un desplazamiento de la columna.

A ambos lados de las apófisis espinosas está el surco vertebral formado por las láminas en las regiones cervical y lumbar, donde es poco profundo, y por las láminas y las apófisis transversas en la región torácica, donde es profundo y ancho; estos surcos albergan los músculos profundos de la espalda.

Laterales a las apófisis espinosas están las apófisis articulares, y aún más lateralmente las apófisis transversas.

En la región torácica, las apófisis transversas están hacia atrás, en un plano considerablemente por detrás del de las mismas apófisis en las regiones cervical y lumbar.

En la región cervical, las apófisis transversas se sitúan por delante de las apófisis articulares, laterales a los pedículos y entre los agujeros intervertebrales.

En la región torácica son posteriores a los pedículos, agujeros intervertebrales y procesos articulares.

En la región lumbar están por delante de los procesos articulares, pero por detrás de los agujeros intervertebrales.

Superficies laterales Los lados de la columna vertebral están separados de la superficie posterior por las apófisis articulares en las regiones cervical y torácica y por las apófisis transversas en la región lumbar.

En la región torácica, los lados de los cuerpos de las vértebras están marcados en la parte posterior por las facetas de articulación con las cabezas de las costillas.

Más posteriormente se encuentran los agujeros intervertebrales, formados por la yuxtaposición de las escotaduras vertebrales, de forma ovalada, más pequeños en la parte cervical y superior de las regiones torácicas y aumentando gradualmente de tamaño hasta la última lumbar.

Transmiten los nervios espinales especiales y están situados entre los procesos transversos en la región cervical y frente a ellos, en las regiones torácica y lumbar.


== Ligamentos ==

Hay diferentes ligamentos involucrados en la unión de las vértebras en la columna y en el movimiento de la columna.

Los ligamentos longitudinales anterior y posterior se extienden a lo largo de la columna vertebral a lo largo de la parte anterior y posterior de los cuerpos vertebrales.

Los ligamentos interespinosos conectan las apófisis espinosas adyacentes de las vértebras.

El ligamento supraespinoso se extiende a lo largo de la columna vertebral a lo largo de la parte posterior de las apófisis espinosas, desde el sacro hasta la séptima vértebra cervical.

Desde allí se continúa con el ligamento nucal.


== Desarrollo ==

El sorprendente patrón segmentado de la columna vertebral se establece durante la embriogénesis cuando los somitas se agregan rítmicamente a la parte posterior del embrión.

La formación de somitas comienza alrededor de la tercera semana cuando el embrión comienza la gastrulación y continúa hasta que se forman todos los somitas.

Su número varía entre especies: hay de 42 a 44 somitas en el embrión humano y alrededor de 52 en el embrión de pollo.

Los somitas son esferas, formadas a partir del mesodermo paraxial que se encuentra a los lados del tubo neural y contienen los precursores del hueso espinal, las vértebras, las costillas y parte del cráneo, además de músculo, ligamentos y piel.

La somitogénesis y la posterior distribución de los somitas está controlada por un modelo de reloj y frente de onda que actúa en las células del mesodermo paraxial.

Poco después de su formación, los esclerotomos, que dan lugar a parte del hueso del cráneo, las vértebras y las costillas, migran, dejando atrás el resto del somita que ahora se denomina dermamiotoma.

Esto luego se divide para dar los miotomas que formarán los músculos y los dermatomas que formarán la piel de la espalda.

Los esclerotomos se subdividen en un compartimento anterior y otro posterior.

Esta subdivisión juega un papel clave en el patrón definitivo de las vértebras que se forman cuando la parte posterior de un somita se fusiona con la parte anterior del somita consecutivo durante un proceso denominado resegmentación.

La interrupción del proceso de somitogénesis en humanos da como resultado enfermedades como la escoliosis congénita.

Hasta ahora, se ha demostrado que los homólogos humanos de tres genes asociados con el reloj de segmentación del ratón (MESP2, DLL3 y LFNG) están mutados en casos de escoliosis congénita, lo que sugiere que los mecanismos involucrados en la segmentación vertebral se conservan en todos los vertebrados.

En los humanos, los primeros cuatro somitas se incorporan en la base del hueso occipital del cráneo y los siguientes 33 somitas formarán las vértebras, las costillas, los músculos, los ligamentos y la piel.

Los somitas posteriores restantes degeneran.

Durante la cuarta semana de embriogénesis, los esclerotomos cambian de posición para rodear la médula espinal y la notocorda.

Esta columna de tejido tiene una apariencia segmentada, con áreas alternas de áreas densas y menos densas.

A medida que se desarrolla el esclerotomo, se condensa aún más y eventualmente se convierte en el cuerpo vertebral.

El desarrollo de las formas apropiadas de los cuerpos vertebrales está regulado por los genes HOX.

El tejido menos denso que separa los segmentos del esclerotomo se convierte en los discos intervertebrales.

La notocorda desaparece en los segmentos del esclerotoma (cuerpo vertebral), pero persiste en la región de los discos intervertebrales como núcleo pulposo.

El núcleo pulposo y las fibras del anillo fibroso forman el disco intervertebral.

Las curvas primarias (curvaturas torácica y sacra) se forman durante el desarrollo fetal.

Las curvas secundarias se desarrollan después del nacimiento.

La curvatura cervical se forma como resultado de levantar la cabeza y la curvatura lumbar se forma como resultado de caminar.


== Función ==


=== Médula espinal ===


La columna vertebral rodea la médula espinal que viaja dentro del canal espinal, formado a partir de un orificio central dentro de cada vértebra.

La médula espinal es parte del sistema nervioso central que suministra nervios y recibe información del sistema nervioso periférico dentro del cuerpo.

La médula espinal consta de materia gris y blanca y una cavidad central, el canal central.

Adyacente a cada vértebra emergen los nervios espinales.

Los nervios espinales proporcionan suministro nervioso simpático al cuerpo, con nervios que emergen formando el tronco simpático y los nervios esplácnicos.

El canal espinal sigue las diferentes curvas de la columna; es grande y triangular en aquellas partes de la columna que gozan de mayor libertad de movimiento, como las regiones cervical y lumbar, y es pequeño y redondeado en la región torácica, donde el movimiento es más limitado.

La médula espinal termina en el cono medular y la cauda equina.


== Importancia clínica ==


=== Enfermedad ===

La espina bífida es un trastorno congénito en el que existe un cierre defectuoso del arco vertebral.

A veces, las meninges espinales y también la médula espinal pueden sobresalir a través de esto, y esto se llama Espina bífida quística.

Cuando la condición no involucra esta protuberancia, se conoce como espina bífida oculta.

A veces todos los arcos vertebrales pueden quedar incompletos.

Otra enfermedad congénita, aunque rara, es el síndrome de Klippel-Feil, que es la fusión de dos de las vértebras cervicales.

La espondilolistesis es el desplazamiento hacia adelante de una vértebra y la retrolistesis es el desplazamiento posterior de un cuerpo vertebral con respecto a la vértebra adyacente en un grado inferior a una luxación.

La espondilolisis, también conocida como defecto de la pars, es un defecto o fractura en la pars interarticularis del arco vertebral.

La hernia de disco espinal, más comúnmente llamada "deslizamiento de disco", es el resultado de un desgarro en el anillo exterior (anulus fibrosus) del disco intervertebral, lo que permite que parte del material blando similar al gel, el núcleo pulposo, sobresalga en una hernia

La estenosis espinal es un estrechamiento del canal espinal que puede ocurrir en cualquier región de la columna, aunque con menor frecuencia en la región torácica.

La estenosis puede constreñir el canal espinal dando lugar a un déficit neurológico.

El dolor en el cóccix (coxis) se conoce como coccigodinia.

La lesión de la médula espinal es un daño a la médula espinal que provoca cambios en su función, ya sea temporal o permanente.

Las lesiones de la médula espinal se pueden dividir en categorías: transección completa, hemisección, lesiones de la médula espinal central, lesiones de la médula espinal posterior y lesiones de la médula espinal anterior.

El festoneado de vértebras es el aumento de la concavidad del cuerpo vertebral posterior.

Se puede ver en radiografías laterales y vistas sagitales de tomografías computarizadas y resonancias magnéticas.

Su concavidad se debe al aumento de la presión que ejerce sobre las vértebras debido a una masa.

La masa espinal interna, como el astrocitoma espinal, el ependimoma, el schwannoma, el neurofibroma y la acondroplasia, causa el festoneado de las vértebras.


=== Curvatura ===


La curvatura espinal excesiva o anormal se clasifica como una enfermedad espinal o dorsopatía e incluye las siguientes curvaturas anormales:

La cifosis es una curvatura cifótica (convexa) exagerada de la región torácica en el plano sagital, también llamada hipercifosis.

Esto produce la llamada "joroba" o "joroba de viuda", una condición comúnmente resultante de la osteoporosis.

La lordosis es una curvatura lordótica (cóncava) exagerada de la región lumbar en el plano sagital, se conoce como hiperlordosis lumbar y también como "swayback".

La lordosis temporal es común durante el embarazo.

La escoliosis, curvatura lateral, es la curvatura anormal más común y ocurre en el 0,5% de la población.

Es más común entre las mujeres y puede resultar del crecimiento desigual de los dos lados de una o más vértebras, de modo que no se fusionan correctamente.

También puede ser causado por atelectasia pulmonar (deshinchamiento parcial o completo de uno o más lóbulos de los pulmones) como se observa en el asma o el neumotórax.

Cifoescoliosis, una combinación de cifosis y escoliosis.


=== Puntos de referencia anatómicos ===


Las vértebras individuales de la columna vertebral humana se pueden palpar y utilizar como superficie anatómica, con puntos de referencia tomados de la mitad del cuerpo vertebral.

Esto proporciona puntos de referencia anatómicos que se pueden utilizar para guiar procedimientos como una punción lumbar y también como puntos de referencia verticales para describir las ubicaciones de otras partes de la anatomía humana, como las posiciones de los órganos.


== Otros animales ==


=== Variaciones en las vértebras ===

La estructura general de las vértebras en otros animales es en gran medida la misma que en los humanos.

Las vértebras individuales se componen de un centro (cuerpo), arcos que sobresalen de la parte superior e inferior del centro, y varios procesos que se proyectan desde el centro y/o los arcos.

Un arco que se extiende desde la parte superior del centro se denomina arco neural, mientras que el arco hemal o cheurón se encuentra debajo del centro en las vértebras caudales (cola) de los peces, la mayoría de los reptiles, algunas aves, algunos dinosaurios y algunos mamíferos con colas largas. .

Los procesos vertebrales pueden dar rigidez a la estructura, ayudarlos a articularse con las costillas o servir como puntos de unión muscular.

Los tipos comunes son proceso transverso, diapófisis, parapófisis y cigapófisis (tanto la cigapófisis craneal como la cigapófisis caudal).

El centro de la vértebra se puede clasificar en función de la fusión de sus elementos.

En temnospondyls, huesos como el proceso espinoso, el pleurocentrum y el intercentrum son osificaciones separadas.

Los elementos fusionados, sin embargo, clasifican una vértebra con holospondilia.
Una vértebra también se puede describir en términos de la forma de los extremos del centro.

Los centra con extremos planos son acelosos, como los de los mamíferos.

Estos extremos planos del centro son especialmente buenos para soportar y distribuir fuerzas de compresión.

Las vértebras anficolosas tienen centros con ambos extremos cóncavos.

Esta forma es común en los peces, donde la mayor parte del movimiento es limitado.

Los centros anficélicos a menudo se integran con una notocorda completa.

Las vértebras procelosas son anteriormente cóncavas y posteriormente convexas.

Se encuentran en ranas y reptiles modernos.

Las vértebras opistocelosas son opuestas, poseen convexidad anterior y concavidad posterior.

Se encuentran en salamandras y en algunos dinosaurios no aviares.

Las vértebras heterocelosas tienen superficies articulares en forma de silla de montar.

Este tipo de configuración se observa en las tortugas que retraen el cuello y en las aves, porque permite un amplio movimiento de flexión lateral y vertical sin estirar demasiado el cordón nervioso ni retorcerlo sobre su eje longitudinal.

En los caballos, los árabes (raza) pueden tener una vértebra y un par de costillas menos.

Esta anomalía desaparece en los potros que son producto de un árabe y otra raza de caballo.


=== Vértebras regionales ===

Las vértebras se definen por las regiones de la columna vertebral en las que se encuentran, como en los humanos.

Las vértebras cervicales son aquellas en el área del cuello.

Con la excepción de los dos géneros de perezosos (Choloepus y Bradypus) y el género del manatí (Trichechus), todos los mamíferos tienen siete vértebras cervicales.

En otros vertebrados, el número de vértebras cervicales puede variar desde una sola vértebra en los anfibios hasta 25 en los cisnes o 76 en el extinto plesiosaurio Elasmosaurus.

Las vértebras dorsales van desde la parte inferior del cuello hasta la parte superior de la pelvis.

Las vértebras dorsales unidas a las costillas se llaman vértebras torácicas, mientras que las que no tienen costillas se llaman vértebras lumbares.

Las vértebras sacras son las de la región pélvica y van desde una en los anfibios hasta dos en la mayoría de las aves y los reptiles modernos, o hasta tres o cinco en los mamíferos.

Cuando varias vértebras sacras se fusionan en una sola estructura, se denomina sacro.

El sinsacro es una estructura fusionada similar que se encuentra en las aves y que está compuesta por las vértebras sacra, lumbar y algunas de las torácicas y caudales, así como por la cintura pélvica.

Las vértebras caudales componen la cola, y las últimas pueden fusionarse en el pigóstilo en las aves, o en el coccígeo o el hueso de la cola en los chimpancés (y los humanos).


=== Peces y anfibios ===


Las vértebras de los peces con aletas lobuladas constan de tres elementos óseos discretos.

El arco vertebral rodea la médula espinal y tiene una forma muy similar a la que se encuentra en la mayoría de los otros vertebrados.

Justo debajo del arco se encuentra un pequeño pleurocentro en forma de placa, que protege la superficie superior de la notocorda, y debajo, un intercentro más grande en forma de arco para proteger el borde inferior.

Ambas estructuras están incrustadas dentro de una sola masa cilíndrica de cartílago.

Se encontró una disposición similar en los Labyrinthodonts primitivos, pero en la línea evolutiva que condujo a los reptiles (y, por lo tanto, también a los mamíferos y las aves), el intercentro se reemplazó parcial o totalmente por un pleurocentrum agrandado, que a su vez se convirtió en el cuerpo vertebral óseo. .

En la mayoría de los peces con aletas radiadas, incluidos todos los teleósteos, estas dos estructuras están fusionadas e incrustadas dentro de una pieza sólida de hueso que se asemeja superficialmente al cuerpo vertebral de los mamíferos.

En los anfibios vivos, hay simplemente una pieza cilíndrica de hueso debajo del arco vertebral, sin rastro de los elementos separados presentes en los primeros tetrápodos.

En los peces cartilaginosos, como los tiburones, las vértebras consisten en dos tubos cartilaginosos.

El tubo superior se forma a partir de los arcos vertebrales, pero también incluye estructuras cartilaginosas adicionales que llenan los espacios entre las vértebras y, por lo tanto, encierran la médula espinal en una vaina esencialmente continua.

El tubo inferior rodea la notocorda y tiene una estructura compleja, que a menudo incluye múltiples capas de calcificación. Las lampreas tienen arcos vertebrales, pero nada que se parezca a los cuerpos vertebrales que se encuentran en todos los vertebrados superiores.

Incluso los arcos son discontinuos y consisten en piezas separadas de cartílago en forma de arco alrededor de la médula espinal en la mayor parte del cuerpo, cambiando a largas tiras de cartílago arriba y abajo en la región de la cola.

Los mixinos carecen de una columna vertebral verdadera y, por lo tanto, no se consideran vertebrados correctamente, pero algunos arcos neurales diminutos están presentes en la cola.


=== Otros vertebrados ===

La estructura general de las vértebras humanas es bastante típica de la que se encuentra en mamíferos, reptiles y aves.

Sin embargo, la forma del cuerpo vertebral varía algo entre los diferentes grupos.

En los mamíferos, como los humanos, normalmente tiene superficies superiores e inferiores planas, mientras que en los reptiles la superficie anterior suele tener una cavidad cóncava en la que encaja la cara convexa expandida del siguiente cuerpo vertebral.

Sin embargo, incluso estos patrones son solo generalizaciones y puede haber variaciones en la forma de las vértebras a lo largo de la columna, incluso dentro de una sola especie.

Algunas variaciones inusuales incluyen las cuencas en forma de silla de montar entre las vértebras cervicales de las aves y la presencia de un estrecho canal hueco que corre por el centro de los cuerpos vertebrales de los geckos y tuataras, que contiene un remanente de la notocorda.

Los reptiles a menudo conservan los intercentros primitivos, que están presentes como pequeños elementos óseos en forma de media luna que se encuentran entre los cuerpos de las vértebras adyacentes; a menudo se encuentran estructuras similares en las vértebras caudales de los mamíferos.

En la cola, estos están unidos a huesos en forma de cheurón llamados arcos hemales, que se unen debajo de la base de la columna y ayudan a sostener la musculatura.

Estos últimos huesos son probablemente homólogos a las costillas ventrales de los peces.

El número de vértebras en las espinas de los reptiles es muy variable y puede ser de varios cientos en algunas especies de serpientes.

En las aves, existe un número variable de vértebras cervicales, que a menudo forman la única parte verdaderamente flexible de la columna vertebral.

Las vértebras torácicas están parcialmente fusionadas, proporcionando un soporte sólido para las alas durante el vuelo.

Las vértebras sacras se fusionan con las vértebras lumbares y algunas vértebras torácicas y caudales, para formar una sola estructura, el sinsacro, que por lo tanto tiene una longitud relativa mayor que el sacro de los mamíferos.

En las aves vivas, las vértebras caudales restantes se fusionan en otro hueso, el pigóstilo, para unir las plumas de la cola. Aparte de la cola, el número de vértebras en los mamíferos es generalmente bastante constante.

Casi siempre hay siete vértebras cervicales (los perezosos y los manatíes se encuentran entre las pocas excepciones), seguidas de unas veinte vértebras más, divididas entre las formas torácica y lumbar, según el número de costillas.

Generalmente hay de tres a cinco vértebras con el sacro y hasta cincuenta vértebras caudales.


=== Dinosaurios ===

La columna vertebral en los dinosaurios consta de las vértebras cervicales (cuello), dorsales (espalda), sacras (caderas) y caudales (cola).

Las vértebras de los dinosaurios saurisquios a veces poseen características conocidas como pleuroceles, que son depresiones huecas en las porciones laterales de las vértebras, perforadas para crear una entrada a las cámaras de aire dentro de las vértebras, lo que sirvió para disminuir el peso de estos huesos sin sacrificar la fuerza.

Estos pleurocoels estaban llenos de sacos de aire, lo que habría disminuido aún más el peso.

En los dinosaurios saurópodos, los vertebrados terrestres más grandes conocidos, los pleuroceles y los sacos de aire pueden haber reducido el peso del animal en más de una tonelada en algunos casos, una práctica adaptación evolutiva en animales que crecieron hasta más de 30 metros de longitud.

En muchos dinosaurios hadrosaurios y terópodos, las vértebras caudales estaban reforzadas por tendones osificados.

La presencia de tres o más vértebras sacras, en asociación con los huesos de la cadera, es una de las características definitorias de los dinosaurios.

El cóndilo occipital es una estructura en la parte posterior del cráneo de un dinosaurio que se articula con la primera vértebra cervical.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Columna_vertebral

;;;PT;;;



COLUNA VERTEBRAL


A coluna vertebral, também conhecida como espinha dorsal ou coluna vertebral, faz parte do esqueleto axial.

A coluna vertebral é a característica definidora de um vertebrado em que a notocorda (uma haste flexível de composição uniforme) encontrada em todos os cordados foi substituída por uma série segmentada de osso: vértebras separadas por discos intervertebrais.

A coluna vertebral abriga o canal espinhal, uma cavidade que envolve e protege a medula espinhal.

Existem cerca de 50.000 espécies de animais que possuem coluna vertebral.

A coluna vertebral humana é um dos exemplos mais estudados.


== Estrutura ==

O número de vértebras em uma região pode variar, mas no geral o número permanece o mesmo.

Na coluna vertebral de um ser humano, normalmente existem trinta e três vértebras.

As 24 vértebras pré-sacrais superiores são articuladas e separadas umas das outras por discos intervertebrais, e as nove inferiores são fundidas em adultos, cinco no sacro e quatro no cóccix, ou cóccix.

As vértebras articuladas são nomeadas de acordo com sua região da coluna vertebral.

Existem sete vértebras cervicais, doze vértebras torácicas e cinco vértebras lombares.

O número daqueles na região cervical, no entanto, raramente é alterado, enquanto o da região coccígea é o que mais varia.

Um estudo com 908 adultos humanos encontrou 43 indivíduos com 23 vértebras pré-sacrais (4,7%), 826 indivíduos com 24 vértebras pré-sacrais (91%) e 39 com 25 vértebras pré-sacrais (4,3%).

Existem ligamentos que se estendem ao longo do comprimento da coluna na frente e atrás, e entre as vértebras unindo os processos espinhosos, os processos transversos e as lâminas vertebrais.


=== Vértebras ===


As vértebras da coluna vertebral humana são divididas em diferentes regiões, que correspondem às curvas da coluna vertebral.

As vértebras articuladas são nomeadas de acordo com sua região da coluna vertebral.

As vértebras nessas regiões são essencialmente semelhantes, com pequenas variações.

Essas regiões são chamadas de coluna cervical, coluna torácica, coluna lombar, sacro e cóccix.

Existem sete vértebras cervicais, doze vértebras torácicas e cinco vértebras lombares.

O número de vértebras em uma região pode variar, mas no geral o número permanece o mesmo.

O número daqueles na região cervical, no entanto, raramente é alterado.

As vértebras da coluna cervical, torácica e lombar são ossos independentes e geralmente bastante semelhantes.

As vértebras do sacro e do cóccix geralmente são fundidas e incapazes de se mover de forma independente.

Duas vértebras especiais são o atlas e o axis, sobre os quais repousa a cabeça.

Uma vértebra típica consiste em duas partes: o corpo vertebral e o arco vertebral.

O arco vertebral é posterior, o que significa que está voltado para as costas de uma pessoa.

Juntos, eles envolvem o forame vertebral, que contém a medula espinhal.

Como a medula espinhal termina na coluna lombar e o sacro e o cóccix estão fundidos, eles não contêm um forame central.

O arco vertebral é formado por um par de pedículos e um par de lâminas, e suporta sete processos, quatro articulares, dois transversais e um espinhoso, sendo este último também conhecido como espinha neural.

Dois processos transversos e um processo espinhoso são posteriores (atrás) do corpo vertebral.

O processo espinhoso sai por trás, um processo transverso sai à esquerda e outro à direita.

Os processos espinhosos das regiões cervical e lombar podem ser sentidos através da pele.

Acima e abaixo de cada vértebra estão as articulações chamadas articulações facetárias.

Estes restringem a amplitude de movimento possível e são unidos por uma porção fina do arco neural chamada pars interarticularis.

Entre cada par de vértebras existem dois pequenos orifícios chamados forames intervertebrais.

Os nervos espinhais saem da medula espinhal através desses orifícios.
As vértebras individuais são nomeadas de acordo com sua região e posição.

De cima para baixo, as vértebras são:

Coluna cervical: 7 vértebras (C1-C7)
Coluna torácica: 12 vértebras (T1-T12)
Coluna lombar: 5 vértebras (L1-L5)
Sacro: 5 (fundidas) vértebras (S1-S5)
Cóccix: 4 (3-5) (fundidas) vértebras (cóccix)

A região combinada das vértebras torácicas e lombares é conhecida como divisão toracolombar, ou região.


=== Forma ===

A coluna vertebral é curvada em vários lugares, resultado da evolução bípede humana.

As curvas permitem que a coluna humana estabilize melhor o corpo na posição vertical.

A coluna cervical superior tem uma curva, convexa para a frente, que começa no eixo (segunda vértebra cervical) no ápice do processo odontóide ou dens e termina no meio da segunda vértebra torácica; é a menos marcada de todas as curvas.

Essa curva para dentro é conhecida como curva lordótica.

A curva torácica, côncava para a frente, começa no meio da segunda e termina no meio da décima segunda vértebra torácica.

Seu ponto mais proeminente atrás corresponde ao processo espinhoso da sétima vértebra torácica.

Essa curva é conhecida como curva cifótica.

A curva lombar é mais marcada na mulher do que no homem; começa no meio da última vértebra torácica e termina no ângulo sacrovertebral.

É convexa anteriormente, sendo a convexidade das três vértebras inferiores muito maior do que a das duas superiores.

Esta curva é descrita como uma curva lordótica.

A curva sacral começa na articulação sacrovertebral e termina na ponta do cóccix; sua concavidade é direcionada para baixo e para frente como uma curva cifótica.

As curvas cifóticas torácica e sacral são denominadas curvas primárias, pois estão presentes no feto.

As curvas cervical e lombar são compensatórias, ou secundárias, e se desenvolvem após o nascimento.

A curva cervical se forma quando o bebê é capaz de sustentar a cabeça (aos três ou quatro meses) e sentar-se ereto (aos nove meses).

A curva lombar forma-se mais tarde dos doze aos dezoito meses, quando a criança começa a andar.


=== Superfícies ===

Superfície anterior Quando vista de frente, a largura dos corpos das vértebras aumenta da segunda cervical para a primeira torácica; há então uma ligeira diminuição nas próximas três vértebras.

Abaixo disso, há novamente um aumento gradual e progressivo da largura até o ângulo sacrovertebral.

A partir deste ponto há uma diminuição rápida, até o ápice do cóccix.

Superfície posteriorPor trás, a coluna vertebral apresenta na linha mediana os processos espinhosos.

Na região cervical (com exceção da segunda e sétima vértebras), estas são curtas, horizontais e bífidas.

Na parte superior da região torácica são direcionados obliquamente para baixo; no meio são quase verticais e na parte inferior são quase horizontais.

Na região lombar são quase horizontais.

Os processos espinhosos são separados por intervalos consideráveis ​​na região lombar, por intervalos mais estreitos no pescoço, e estão muito próximos no meio da região torácica.

Ocasionalmente, um desses processos se desvia um pouco da linha mediana – o que às vezes pode ser indicativo de fratura ou deslocamento da coluna.

De cada lado dos processos espinhosos está o sulco vertebral formado pelas lâminas nas regiões cervical e lombar, onde é raso, e pelas lâminas e processos transversos na região torácica, onde é profundo e largo; esses sulcos alojam os músculos profundos das costas.

Lateralmente aos processos espinhosos estão os processos articulares, e ainda mais lateralmente os processos transversos.

Na região torácica, os processos transversos ficam para trás, em um plano consideravelmente atrás dos mesmos processos nas regiões cervical e lombar.

Na região cervical, os processos transversos são colocados à frente dos processos articulares, laterais aos pedículos e entre os forames intervertebrais.

Na região torácica são posteriores aos pedículos, forames intervertebrais e processos articulares.

Na região lombar estão à frente dos processos articulares, mas atrás dos forames intervertebrais.

Superfícies lateraisAs laterais da coluna vertebral são separadas da superfície posterior pelos processos articulares nas regiões cervical e torácica e pelos processos transversos na região lombar.

Na região torácica, as laterais dos corpos das vértebras são marcadas no dorso pelas facetas para articulação com as cabeças das costelas.

Mais posteriormente estão os forames intervertebrais, formados pela justaposição das incisuras vertebrais, de formato oval, menores na região cervical e superior das regiões torácicas e aumentando gradativamente de tamanho até a última lombar.

Eles transmitem os nervos espinais especiais e estão situados entre os processos transversos na região cervical e à frente deles, nas regiões torácica e lombar.


== Ligamentos ==

Existem diferentes ligamentos envolvidos na união das vértebras na coluna e no movimento da coluna.

Os ligamentos longitudinais anterior e posterior estendem o comprimento da coluna vertebral ao longo da frente e de trás dos corpos vertebrais.

Os ligamentos interespinhosos conectam os processos espinhosos adjacentes das vértebras.

O ligamento supraespinhoso estende o comprimento da coluna ao longo da parte posterior dos processos espinhosos, desde o sacro até a sétima vértebra cervical.

A partir daí é contínuo com o ligamento nucal.


== Desenvolvimento ==

O padrão segmentado marcante da coluna vertebral é estabelecido durante a embriogênese, quando os somitos são adicionados ritmicamente à parte posterior do embrião.

A formação dos somitos começa por volta da terceira semana, quando o embrião inicia a gastrulação e continua até que todos os somitos estejam formados.

Seu número varia entre as espécies: existem 42 a 44 somitos no embrião humano e cerca de 52 no embrião de galinha.

Os somitos são esferas, formadas a partir do mesoderma paraxial que se encontra nas laterais do tubo neural e contêm os precursores do osso espinhal, as vértebras costelas e parte do crânio, além de músculos, ligamentos e pele.

A somitogênese e a subsequente distribuição dos somitos são controladas por um modelo de relógio e frente de onda atuando nas células do mesoderma paraxial.

Logo após sua formação, os esclerótomos, que dão origem a parte do osso do crânio, vértebras e costelas, migram, deixando o restante do somito agora denominado dermamiótomo para trás.

Isso então se divide para dar os miótomos que formarão os músculos e os dermátomos que formarão a pele das costas.

Os esclerótomos se subdividem em um compartimento anterior e um posterior.

Essa subdivisão desempenha um papel fundamental no padrão definitivo das vértebras que se formam quando a parte posterior de um somito se funde à parte anterior do somito consecutivo durante um processo denominado ressegmentação.

A interrupção do processo de somitogênese em humanos resulta em doenças como a escoliose congênita.

Até agora, os homólogos humanos de três genes associados ao relógio de segmentação do camundongo, (MESP2, DLL3 e LFNG), mostraram estar mutados em casos de escoliose congênita, sugerindo que os mecanismos envolvidos na segmentação vertebral são conservados em todos os vertebrados.

Nos humanos, os primeiros quatro somitos são incorporados na base do osso occipital do crânio e os próximos 33 somitos formarão as vértebras, costelas, músculos, ligamentos e pele.

Os somitos posteriores restantes degeneram.

Durante a quarta semana de embriogênese, os esclerótomos mudam de posição para cercar a medula espinhal e a notocorda.

Esta coluna de tecido tem uma aparência segmentada, com áreas alternadas de áreas densas e menos densas.

À medida que o esclerótomo se desenvolve, ele se condensa ainda mais, desenvolvendo-se no corpo vertebral.

O desenvolvimento das formas apropriadas dos corpos vertebrais é regulado pelos genes HOX.

O tecido menos denso que separa os segmentos do esclerótomo se desenvolve nos discos intervertebrais.

A notocorda desaparece nos segmentos do esclerótomo (corpo vertebral), mas persiste na região dos discos intervertebrais como núcleo pulposo.

O núcleo pulposo e as fibras do anel fibroso formam o disco intervertebral.

As curvas primárias (torrácica e sacral) se formam durante o desenvolvimento fetal.

As curvas secundárias se desenvolvem após o nascimento.

A curvatura cervical se forma como resultado do levantamento da cabeça e a curvatura lombar se forma como resultado da caminhada.


== Função ==


=== medula espinhal ===


A coluna vertebral envolve a medula espinhal que percorre o canal espinhal, formado a partir de um orifício central dentro de cada vértebra.

A medula espinhal faz parte do sistema nervoso central que fornece nervos e recebe informações do sistema nervoso periférico dentro do corpo.

A medula espinhal consiste em substância cinzenta e branca e uma cavidade central, o canal central.

Adjacente a cada vértebra emergem os nervos espinhais.

Os nervos espinhais fornecem suprimento nervoso simpático para o corpo, com nervos emergentes formando o tronco simpático e os nervos esplâncnicos.

O canal medular segue as diferentes curvas da coluna; é grande e triangular nas partes da coluna que gozam de maior liberdade de movimento, como as regiões cervical e lombar, e é pequena e arredondada na região torácica, onde o movimento é mais limitado.

A medula espinhal termina no cone medular e cauda equina.


== Significado clínico ==


=== Doença ===

A espinha bífida é um distúrbio congênito no qual há um fechamento defeituoso do arco vertebral.

Às vezes, as meninges espinhais e também a medula espinhal podem se projetar através disso, e isso é chamado de espinha bífida cística.

Onde a condição não envolve essa saliência é conhecida como Spina bifida occulta.

Às vezes, todos os arcos vertebrais podem permanecer incompletos.

Outra doença congênita, embora rara, é a síndrome de Klippel-Feil, que é a fusão de duas vértebras cervicais.

A espondilolistese é o deslocamento anterior de uma vértebra e a retrolistese é o deslocamento posterior de um corpo vertebral em relação à vértebra adjacente a um grau menor do que um deslocamento.

A espondilólise, também conhecida como defeito da pars, é um defeito ou fratura na pars interarticularis do arco vertebral.

A hérnia de disco espinhal, mais comumente chamada de "hérnia de disco", é o resultado de um rasgo no anel externo (anulus fibroso) do disco intervertebral, que permite que parte do material gelatinoso macio, o núcleo pulposo, saliente em uma hérnia.

A estenose espinhal é um estreitamento do canal espinhal que pode ocorrer em qualquer região da coluna, embora menos comumente na região torácica.

A estenose pode constringir o canal medular dando origem a um déficit neurológico.

A dor no cóccix (cóccix) é conhecida como coccidínia.

A lesão da medula espinhal é um dano à medula espinhal que causa alterações em sua função, temporárias ou permanentes.

As lesões da medula espinhal podem ser divididas em categorias: transecção completa, hemissecção, lesões medulares centrais, lesões medulares posteriores e lesões medulares anteriores.

As vértebras recortadas são o aumento da concavidade do corpo vertebral posterior.

Pode ser visto em radiografias laterais e sagitais de tomografia computadorizada e ressonância magnética.

Sua concavidade se deve ao aumento da pressão exercida sobre as vértebras devido a uma massa.

A massa espinhal interna, como astrocitoma espinhal, ependimoma, schwannoma, neurofibroma e acondroplasia, causa scalloping das vértebras.


=== Curvatura ===


A curvatura espinhal excessiva ou anormal é classificada como uma doença espinhal ou dorsopatia e inclui as seguintes curvaturas anormais:

A cifose é uma curvatura cifótica (convexa) exagerada da região torácica no plano sagital, também chamada de hipercifose.

Isso produz a chamada "corcunda" ou "corcunda da viúva", uma condição comumente resultante da osteoporose.

A lordose é uma curvatura lordótica (côncava) exagerada da região lombar no plano sagital, é conhecida como hiperlordose lombar e também como "swayback".

A lordose temporária é comum durante a gravidez.

A escoliose, curvatura lateral, é a curvatura anormal mais comum, ocorrendo em 0,5% da população.

É mais comum no sexo feminino e pode resultar do crescimento desigual dos dois lados de uma ou mais vértebras, de modo que elas não se fundem adequadamente.

Também pode ser causada por atelectasia pulmonar (deflação parcial ou completa de um ou mais lobos dos pulmões), como observado na asma ou no pneumotórax.

Cifoescoliose, uma combinação de cifose e escoliose.


=== Marcos anatômicos ===


As vértebras individuais da coluna vertebral humana podem ser sentidas e usadas como anatomia de superfície, com pontos de referência tomados do meio do corpo vertebral.

Isso fornece pontos de referência anatômicos que podem ser usados ​​para orientar procedimentos como punção lombar e também como pontos de referência verticais para descrever as localizações de outras partes da anatomia humana, como as posições dos órgãos.


== Outros animais ==


=== Variações nas vértebras ===

A estrutura geral das vértebras em outros animais é basicamente a mesma que em humanos.

As vértebras individuais são compostas por um centro (corpo), arcos que se projetam da parte superior e inferior do centro e vários processos que se projetam do centro e/ou arcos.

Um arco que se estende do topo do centro é chamado de arco neural, enquanto o arco hemal ou chevron é encontrado abaixo do centro nas vértebras caudais (cauda) de peixes, a maioria dos répteis, alguns pássaros, alguns dinossauros e alguns mamíferos com caudas longas. .

Os processos vertebrais podem dar rigidez à estrutura, ajudá-los a se articular com as costelas ou servir como pontos de fixação muscular.

Os tipos comuns são o processo transverso, as diapófises, as parapófises e as zigapófises (tanto as zigapófises craniais quanto as zigapófises caudais).

O centro da vértebra pode ser classificado com base na fusão de seus elementos.

Nos temnospondylis, ossos como o processo espinhoso, o pleurocentrum e o intercentrum são ossificações separadas.

Elementos fundidos, no entanto, classificam uma vértebra como tendo holoespondilia.
Uma vértebra também pode ser descrita em termos da forma das extremidades do centro.

Centra com extremidades planas são acelos, como os dos mamíferos.

Essas extremidades planas do centro são especialmente boas para suportar e distribuir forças de compressão.

A vértebra anficoelosa tem centro com ambas as extremidades côncavas.

Esta forma é comum em peixes, onde a maior parte do movimento é limitada.

Os centros anficoelosos geralmente são integrados a uma notocorda completa.

As vértebras procelosas são anteriormente côncavas e posteriormente convexas.

Eles são encontrados em sapos e répteis modernos.

As vértebras opistocelosas são o oposto, possuindo convexidade anterior e concavidade posterior.

Eles são encontrados em salamandras e em alguns dinossauros não aviários.

As vértebras heterocélicas têm superfícies articulares em forma de sela.

Este tipo de configuração é visto em tartarugas que retraem seus pescoços e aves, porque permite extenso movimento de flexão lateral e vertical sem esticar muito o cordão nervoso ou torcê-lo em torno de seu longo eixo.

Nos cavalos, o árabe (raça) pode ter uma vértebra a menos e um par de costelas.

Essa anomalia desaparece em potros que são produto de um cavalo árabe e de outra raça.


=== Vértebras regionais ===

As vértebras são definidas pelas regiões da coluna vertebral em que ocorrem, como nos humanos.

As vértebras cervicais são aquelas na área do pescoço.

Com exceção dos dois gêneros de preguiça (Choloepus e Bradypus) e do gênero peixe-boi (Trichechus), todos os mamíferos têm sete vértebras cervicais.

Em outros vertebrados, o número de vértebras cervicais pode variar de uma única vértebra em anfíbios a até 25 em cisnes ou 76 no extinto plesiossauro Elasmosaurus.

As vértebras dorsais vão desde a parte inferior do pescoço até o topo da pelve.

As vértebras dorsais ligadas às costelas são chamadas de vértebras torácicas, enquanto aquelas sem costelas são chamadas de vértebras lombares.

As vértebras sacrais são as da região pélvica e variam de uma em anfíbios a duas na maioria das aves e répteis modernos, ou até três a cinco em mamíferos.

Quando várias vértebras sacrais são fundidas em uma única estrutura, ela é chamada de sacro.

O synsacrum é uma estrutura fundida semelhante encontrada em aves que é composta pelo sacro, lombar e algumas vértebras torácicas e caudais, bem como a cintura pélvica.

As vértebras caudais compõem a cauda, ​​e as poucas finais podem ser fundidas no pigóstilo em pássaros, ou no osso coccígeo ou da cauda em chimpanzés (e humanos).


=== Peixes e anfíbios ===


As vértebras dos peixes com nadadeiras lobadas consistem em três elementos ósseos discretos.

O arco vertebral circunda a medula espinhal e tem uma forma muito semelhante à encontrada na maioria dos outros vertebrados.

Logo abaixo do arco encontra-se um pequeno pleurocentrum em forma de placa, que protege a superfície superior da notocorda e, abaixo disso, um intercentro maior em forma de arco para proteger a borda inferior.

Ambas as estruturas estão inseridas em uma única massa cilíndrica de cartilagem.

Um arranjo semelhante foi encontrado nos labirintodontes primitivos, mas na linha evolutiva que levou aos répteis (e, portanto, também aos mamíferos e aves), o intercentro foi parcial ou totalmente substituído por um pleurocentrum alargado, que por sua vez se tornou o corpo vertebral ósseo. .

Na maioria dos peixes com nadadeiras raiadas, incluindo todos os teleósteos, essas duas estruturas são fundidas e embutidas em um pedaço sólido de osso superficialmente semelhante ao corpo vertebral dos mamíferos.

Nos anfíbios vivos, há simplesmente um pedaço cilíndrico de osso abaixo do arco vertebral, sem vestígios dos elementos separados presentes nos primeiros tetrápodes.

Em peixes cartilaginosos, como tubarões, as vértebras consistem em dois tubos cartilaginosos.

O tubo superior é formado a partir dos arcos vertebrais, mas também inclui estruturas cartilaginosas adicionais que preenchem os espaços entre as vértebras e, assim, encerram a medula espinhal em uma bainha essencialmente contínua.

O tubo inferior envolve a notocorda e tem uma estrutura complexa, muitas vezes incluindo múltiplas camadas de calcificação. As lampreias têm arcos vertebrais, mas nada que se assemelhe aos corpos vertebrais encontrados em todos os vertebrados superiores.

Mesmo os arcos são descontínuos, consistindo em pedaços separados de cartilagem em forma de arco ao redor da medula espinhal na maior parte do corpo, mudando para longas tiras de cartilagem acima e abaixo na região da cauda.

Os peixes-bruxa não possuem uma coluna vertebral verdadeira e, portanto, não são considerados vertebrados adequadamente, mas alguns pequenos arcos neurais estão presentes na cauda.


=== Outros vertebrados ===

A estrutura geral das vértebras humanas é bastante típica daquela encontrada em mamíferos, répteis e aves.

A forma do corpo vertebral, no entanto, varia um pouco entre os diferentes grupos.

Em mamíferos, como humanos, normalmente tem superfícies superiores e inferiores planas, enquanto em répteis a superfície anterior geralmente tem um encaixe côncavo no qual se encaixa a face convexa expandida do próximo corpo vertebral.

Mesmo esses padrões são apenas generalizações, no entanto, e pode haver variação na forma das vértebras ao longo do comprimento da coluna, mesmo dentro de uma única espécie.

Algumas variações incomuns incluem as cavidades em forma de sela entre as vértebras cervicais das aves e a presença de um canal estreito e oco que percorre o centro dos corpos vertebrais de lagartixas e tuataras, contendo um remanescente da notocorda.

Os répteis geralmente retêm os intercentros primitivos, que estão presentes como pequenos elementos ósseos em forma de meia-lua situados entre os corpos das vértebras adjacentes; estruturas semelhantes são frequentemente encontradas nas vértebras caudais de mamíferos.

Na cauda, ​​eles estão presos a ossos em forma de chevron chamados arcos hemais, que se prendem abaixo da base da coluna e ajudam a sustentar a musculatura.

Estes últimos ossos são provavelmente homólogos às costelas ventrais dos peixes.

O número de vértebras nos espinhos dos répteis é altamente variável e pode ser várias centenas em algumas espécies de cobras.

Nas aves, há um número variável de vértebras cervicais, que muitas vezes formam a única parte verdadeiramente flexível da coluna.

As vértebras torácicas são parcialmente fundidas, proporcionando um suporte sólido para as asas durante o voo.

As vértebras sacrais são fundidas com as vértebras lombares e algumas vértebras torácicas e caudais, para formar uma única estrutura, o sinsacro, que é, portanto, de comprimento relativo maior que o sacro dos mamíferos.

Nas aves vivas, as vértebras caudais restantes são fundidas em outro osso, o pigóstilo, para fixação das penas da cauda. Além da cauda, ​​o número de vértebras nos mamíferos é geralmente bastante constante.

Há quase sempre sete vértebras cervicais (preguiças e peixes-boi estão entre as poucas exceções), seguidas por cerca de vinte ou mais vértebras, divididas entre as formas torácica e lombar, dependendo do número de costelas.

Existem geralmente três a cinco vértebras com o sacro, e qualquer coisa até cinquenta vértebras caudais.


=== Dinossauros ===

A coluna vertebral nos dinossauros consiste nas vértebras cervicais (pescoço), dorsais (costas), sacrais (quadris) e caudais (cauda).

As vértebras dos dinossauros saurísquios às vezes possuem características conhecidas como pleuroceles, que são depressões ocas nas porções laterais das vértebras, perfuradas para criar uma entrada nas câmaras de ar dentro das vértebras, o que serviu para diminuir o peso desses ossos sem sacrificar a força.

Essas pleuroceles estavam cheias de sacos aéreos, o que diminuiria ainda mais o peso.

Nos dinossauros saurópodes, os maiores vertebrados terrestres conhecidos, pleuroceles e sacos aéreos podem ter reduzido o peso do animal em mais de uma tonelada em alguns casos, uma adaptação evolutiva útil em animais que cresceram mais de 30 metros de comprimento.

Em muitos dinossauros hadrossauros e terópodes, as vértebras caudais eram reforçadas por tendões ossificados.

A presença de três ou mais vértebras sacrais, em associação com os ossos do quadril, é uma das características definidoras dos dinossauros.

O côndilo occipital é uma estrutura na parte posterior do crânio de um dinossauro que se articula com a primeira vértebra cervical.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vertebral_column

;;;FR;;;



COLONNE VERTÉBRALE


La colonne vertébrale, également connue sous le nom de colonne vertébrale ou colonne vertébrale, fait partie du squelette axial.

La colonne vertébrale est la caractéristique déterminante d'un vertébré dans lequel la notocorde (une tige flexible de composition uniforme) présente dans tous les cordés a été remplacée par une série segmentée d'os : des vertèbres séparées par des disques intervertébraux.

La colonne vertébrale abrite le canal rachidien, une cavité qui renferme et protège la moelle épinière.

Il existe environ 50 000 espèces d'animaux qui ont une colonne vertébrale.

La colonne vertébrale humaine est l'un des exemples les plus étudiés.


== Structure ==

Le nombre de vertèbres dans une région peut varier mais globalement le nombre reste le même.

Dans la colonne vertébrale d'un être humain, il y a normalement trente-trois vertèbres.

Les 24 vertèbres pré-sacrées supérieures sont articulées et séparées les unes des autres par des disques intervertébraux, et les neuf inférieures sont fusionnées chez l'adulte, cinq dans le sacrum et quatre dans le coccyx ou le coccyx.

Les vertèbres articulées sont nommées en fonction de leur région de la colonne vertébrale.

Il y a sept vertèbres cervicales, douze vertèbres thoraciques et cinq vertèbres lombaires.

Le nombre de ceux de la région cervicale, cependant, n'est que rarement modifié, tandis que celui de la région coccygienne varie le plus.

Une étude portant sur 908 adultes humains a trouvé 43 individus avec 23 vertèbres pré-sacrées (4,7%), 826 individus avec 24 vertèbres pré-sacrées (91%) et 39 avec 25 vertèbres pré-sacrées (4,3%).

Il y a des ligaments s'étendant sur la longueur de la colonne à l'avant et à l'arrière, et entre les vertèbres joignant les apophyses épineuses, les apophyses transverses et les lames vertébrales.


=== Vertèbres ===


Les vertèbres de la colonne vertébrale humaine sont divisées en différentes régions, qui correspondent aux courbes de la colonne vertébrale.

Les vertèbres articulées sont nommées en fonction de leur région de la colonne vertébrale.

Les vertèbres de ces régions sont essentiellement similaires, avec des variations mineures.

Ces régions sont appelées rachis cervical, rachis thoracique, rachis lombaire, sacrum et coccyx.

Il y a sept vertèbres cervicales, douze vertèbres thoraciques et cinq vertèbres lombaires.

Le nombre de vertèbres dans une région peut varier mais globalement le nombre reste le même.

Le nombre de ceux dans la région cervicale, cependant, n'est que rarement modifié.

Les vertèbres des rachis cervical, thoracique et lombaire sont des os indépendants et généralement assez similaires.

Les vertèbres du sacrum et du coccyx sont généralement fusionnées et incapables de se déplacer indépendamment.

Deux vertèbres spéciales sont l'atlas et l'axe, sur lesquels repose la tête.

Une vertèbre typique se compose de deux parties : le corps vertébral et l'arc vertébral.

L'arc vertébral est postérieur, ce qui signifie qu'il fait face au dos d'une personne.

Ensemble, ceux-ci renferment le foramen vertébral, qui contient la moelle épinière.

Parce que la moelle épinière se termine dans la colonne lombaire et que le sacrum et le coccyx sont fusionnés, ils ne contiennent pas de foramen central.

L'arc vertébral est formé d'une paire de pédicules et d'une paire de lames et supporte sept processus, quatre articulaires, deux transversaux et un épineux, ce dernier étant également connu sous le nom d'épine neurale.

Deux apophyses transverses et une apophyse épineuse sont postérieures (derrière) le corps vertébral.

L'apophyse épineuse sort par l'arrière, une apophyse transverse sort par la gauche et une par la droite.

Les apophyses épineuses des régions cervicale et lombaire peuvent être ressenties à travers la peau.

Au-dessus et au-dessous de chaque vertèbre se trouvent des articulations appelées articulations facettaires.

Ceux-ci limitent l'amplitude des mouvements possibles et sont rejoints par une fine partie de l'arc neural appelée pars interarticularis.

Entre chaque paire de vertèbres se trouvent deux petits trous appelés foramens intervertébraux.

Les nerfs spinaux quittent la moelle épinière par ces trous.
Les vertèbres individuelles sont nommées en fonction de leur région et de leur position.

De haut en bas, les vertèbres sont :

Rachis cervical : 7 vertèbres (C1–C7)
Rachis thoracique : 12 vertèbres (T1–T12)
Colonne lombaire : 5 vertèbres (L1–L5)
Sacrum : 5 vertèbres (fusionnées) (S1–S5)
Coccyx : 4 (3–5) vertèbres (fusionnées) (coccyx)

La région combinée des vertèbres thoraciques et lombaires est connue sous le nom de division ou région thoraco-lombaire.


=== Forme ===

La colonne vertébrale est incurvée à plusieurs endroits, résultat de l'évolution bipède humaine.

Les courbes permettent à la colonne vertébrale humaine de mieux stabiliser le corps en position verticale.

La colonne cervicale supérieure a une courbe, convexe vers l'avant, qui commence à l'axe (deuxième vertèbre cervicale) au sommet de l'apophyse odontoïde ou des tanières et se termine au milieu de la deuxième vertèbre thoracique ; c'est la moins marquée de toutes les courbes.

Cette courbe vers l'intérieur est connue sous le nom de courbe lordotique.

La courbure thoracique, concave vers l'avant, commence au milieu de la deuxième et se termine au milieu de la douzième vertèbre thoracique.

Son point le plus proéminent en arrière correspond à l'apophyse épineuse de la septième vertèbre thoracique.

Cette courbe est connue sous le nom de courbe cyphotique.

La courbure lombaire est plus marquée chez la femme que chez l'homme ; il commence au milieu de la dernière vertèbre thoracique et se termine à l'angle sacro-vertébral.

Il est convexe vers l'avant, la convexité des trois vertèbres inférieures étant beaucoup plus grande que celle des deux supérieures.

Cette courbe est décrite comme une courbe lordotique.

La courbure sacrée commence à l'articulation sacro-vertébrale et se termine à la pointe du coccyx ; sa concavité est dirigée vers le bas et vers l'avant comme une courbe cyphotique.

Les courbes cyphotiques thoraciques et sacrées sont appelées courbes primaires, car elles sont présentes chez le fœtus.

Les courbures cervicales et lombaires sont compensatoires, ou secondaires, et se développent après la naissance.

La courbure cervicale se forme lorsque le nourrisson est capable de tenir sa tête droite (à trois ou quatre mois) et de s'asseoir droit (à neuf mois).

La courbe lombaire se forme plus tard de douze à dix-huit mois, lorsque l'enfant commence à marcher.


=== Surfaces ===

Surface antérieureLorsque vue de face, la largeur des corps des vertèbres augmente de la deuxième cervicale à la première thoracique; il y a alors une légère diminution dans les trois vertèbres suivantes.

En dessous, il y a à nouveau une augmentation graduelle et progressive de la largeur aussi bas que l'angle sacro-vertébral.

A partir de ce point, il y a une diminution rapide jusqu'au sommet du coccyx.

Face postérieureDe derrière, la colonne vertébrale présente dans la ligne médiane les apophyses épineuses.

Dans la région cervicale (à l'exception des deuxième et septième vertèbres), celles-ci sont courtes, horizontales et bifides.

Dans la partie supérieure de la région thoracique, ils sont dirigés obliquement vers le bas ; au milieu, ils sont presque verticaux et dans la partie inférieure, ils sont presque horizontaux.

Dans la région lombaire, ils sont presque horizontaux.

Les processus épineux sont séparés par des intervalles considérables dans la région lombaire, par des intervalles plus étroits dans le cou, et sont rapprochés au milieu de la région thoracique.

Parfois, l'un de ces processus s'écarte un peu de la ligne médiane - ce qui peut parfois être le signe d'une fracture ou d'un déplacement de la colonne vertébrale.

De part et d'autre des apophyses épineuses se trouve le sillon vertébral formé par les lames dans les régions cervicale et lombaire, où il est peu profond, et par les lames et les apophyses transverses dans la région thoracique, où il est profond et large ; ces rainures logent les muscles profonds du dos.

Latéralement aux apophyses épineuses se trouvent les apophyses articulaires, et encore plus latéralement les apophyses transverses.

Dans la région thoracique, les processus transverses se tiennent en arrière, sur un plan considérablement en arrière de celui des mêmes processus dans les régions cervicale et lombaire.

Dans la région cervicale, les apophyses transverses sont placées devant les apophyses articulaires, latéralement aux pédicules et entre les foramens intervertébraux.

Dans la région thoracique, ils sont postérieurs aux pédicules, aux foramens intervertébraux et aux processus articulaires.

Dans la région lombaire, ils sont devant les processus articulaires, mais derrière les foramens intervertébraux.

Surfaces latéralesLes côtés de la colonne vertébrale sont séparés de la surface postérieure par les processus articulaires dans les régions cervicale et thoracique et par les processus transverses dans la région lombaire.

Dans la région thoracique, les côtés des corps des vertèbres sont marqués dans le dos par les facettes pour l'articulation avec les têtes des côtes.

Plus en arrière se trouvent les foramens intervertébraux, formés par la juxtaposition des encoches vertébrales, de forme ovale, les plus petits dans la partie cervicale et supérieure des régions thoraciques et augmentant progressivement de taille jusqu'au dernier lombaire.

Ils transmettent les nerfs spinaux spéciaux et sont situés entre les processus transverses dans la région cervicale et en avant d'eux, dans les régions thoracique et lombaire.


== Ligaments ==

Il existe différents ligaments impliqués dans le maintien des vertèbres dans la colonne et dans le mouvement de la colonne.

Les ligaments longitudinaux antérieur et postérieur étendent la longueur de la colonne vertébrale le long de l'avant et de l'arrière des corps vertébraux.

Les ligaments interépineux relient les apophyses épineuses adjacentes des vertèbres.

Le ligament supra-épineux étend la longueur de la colonne vertébrale longeant l'arrière des apophyses épineuses, du sacrum à la septième vertèbre cervicale.

De là, il est continu avec le ligament nucal.


== Développement ==

Le motif segmenté frappant de la colonne vertébrale est établi au cours de l'embryogenèse lorsque des somites sont ajoutés de manière rythmique à la partie postérieure de l'embryon.

La formation de somites commence vers la troisième semaine lorsque l'embryon commence la gastrulation et se poursuit jusqu'à ce que tous les somites soient formés.

Leur nombre varie selon les espèces : il y a 42 à 44 somites dans l'embryon humain et environ 52 dans l'embryon de poulet.

Les somites sont des sphères formées à partir du mésoderme paraxial qui se trouve sur les côtés du tube neural et contiennent les précurseurs de l'os rachidien, les côtes des vertèbres et une partie du crâne, ainsi que des muscles, des ligaments et de la peau.

La somitogenèse et la distribution ultérieure des somites sont contrôlées par un modèle d'horloge et de front d'onde agissant dans les cellules du mésoderme paraxial.

Peu de temps après leur formation, les sclérotomes, qui donnent naissance à une partie de l'os du crâne, des vertèbres et des côtes, migrent, laissant derrière eux le reste du somite maintenant appelé dermamyotome.

Celle-ci se scinde ensuite pour donner les myotomes qui formeront les muscles et les dermatomes qui formeront la peau du dos.

Les sclérotomes se subdivisent en un compartiment antérieur et un compartiment postérieur.

Cette subdivision joue un rôle clé dans la structuration définitive des vertèbres qui se forment lorsque la partie postérieure d'un somite fusionne avec la partie antérieure du somite consécutif au cours d'un processus appelé resegmentation.

La perturbation du processus de somitogenèse chez l'homme entraîne des maladies telles que la scoliose congénitale.

Jusqu'à présent, il a été démontré que les homologues humains de trois gènes associés à l'horloge de segmentation de la souris (MESP2, DLL3 et LFNG) sont mutés dans les cas de scoliose congénitale, suggérant que les mécanismes impliqués dans la segmentation vertébrale sont conservés chez les vertébrés.

Chez l'homme, les quatre premiers somites sont incorporés à la base de l'os occipital du crâne et les 33 somites suivants formeront les vertèbres, les côtes, les muscles, les ligaments et la peau.

Les somites postérieurs restants dégénèrent.

Au cours de la quatrième semaine d'embryogenèse, les sclérotomes changent de position pour entourer la moelle épinière et la notochorde.

Cette colonne de tissu a un aspect segmenté, avec une alternance de zones denses et moins denses.

Au fur et à mesure que le sclérotome se développe, il se condense davantage pour finalement se développer dans le corps vertébral.

Le développement des formes appropriées des corps vertébraux est régulé par les gènes HOX.

Le tissu moins dense qui sépare les segments du sclérotome se développe dans les disques intervertébraux.

La notochorde disparaît dans les segments du sclérotome (corps vertébral) mais persiste dans la région des disques intervertébraux comme le nucleus pulposus.

Le nucleus pulposus et les fibres de l'anulus fibrosus constituent le disque intervertébral.

Les courbes primaires (courbures thoraciques et sacrées) se forment au cours du développement fœtal.

Les courbes secondaires se développent après la naissance.

La courbure cervicale se forme à la suite du soulèvement de la tête et la courbure lombaire se forme à la suite de la marche.


== Fonction ==


=== Moelle épinière ===


La colonne vertébrale entoure la moelle épinière qui se déplace dans le canal rachidien, formé d'un trou central à l'intérieur de chaque vertèbre.

La moelle épinière fait partie du système nerveux central qui alimente les nerfs et reçoit des informations du système nerveux périphérique dans le corps.

La moelle épinière est constituée de matière grise et blanche et d'une cavité centrale, le canal central.

Adjacent à chaque vertèbre émergent des nerfs rachidiens.

Les nerfs spinaux fournissent une alimentation nerveuse sympathique au corps, les nerfs émergeant formant le tronc sympathique et les nerfs splanchniques.

Le canal rachidien suit les différentes courbes de la colonne ; il est large et triangulaire dans les parties de la colonne qui jouissent de la plus grande liberté de mouvement, telles que les régions cervicale et lombaire, et petit et arrondi dans la région thoracique, où le mouvement est plus limité.

La moelle épinière se termine par le cône médullaire et la queue de cheval.


== Signification clinique ==


=== Maladie ===

Le spina bifida est une maladie congénitale caractérisée par une fermeture défectueuse de l'arc vertébral.

Parfois, les méninges spinales et aussi la moelle épinière peuvent dépasser à travers cela, et cela s'appelle Spina bifida cystica.

Lorsque la condition n'implique pas cette saillie, elle est connue sous le nom de Spina bifida occulta.

Parfois, tous les arcs vertébraux peuvent rester incomplets.

Une autre maladie congénitale, bien que rare, est le syndrome de Klippel-Feil, qui est la fusion de deux vertèbres cervicales.

Le spondylolisthésis est le déplacement vers l'avant d'une vertèbre et le rétrolisthésis est un déplacement postérieur d'un corps vertébral par rapport à la vertèbre adjacente à un degré inférieur à une luxation.

La spondylolyse, également connue sous le nom de défaut de la pars, est un défaut ou une fracture de la pars interarticularis de l'arc vertébral.

La hernie discale rachidienne, plus communément appelée "disque glissé", est le résultat d'une déchirure de l'anneau externe (anulus fibrosus) du disque intervertébral, qui laisse une partie du matériau ressemblant à un gel mou, le nucleus pulposus, se gonfler dans une hernie.

La sténose spinale est un rétrécissement du canal rachidien qui peut survenir dans n'importe quelle région de la colonne vertébrale, mais moins fréquemment dans la région thoracique.

La sténose peut resserrer le canal rachidien entraînant un déficit neurologique.

La douleur au coccyx (coccyx) est connue sous le nom de coccydynie.

Une lésion de la moelle épinière est une lésion de la moelle épinière qui entraîne des modifications de sa fonction, temporaires ou permanentes.

Les lésions de la moelle épinière peuvent être divisées en catégories : transection complète, hémisection, lésions de la moelle épinière centrale, lésions de la moelle épinière postérieure et lésions de la moelle épinière antérieure.

Les vertèbres festonnées sont l'augmentation de la concavité du corps vertébral postérieur.

Il peut être vu sur les radiographies latérales et les vues sagittales des scanners et des IRM.

Sa concavité est due à la pression accrue exercée sur les vertèbres due à une masse.

La masse vertébrale interne telle que l'astrocytome spinal, l'épendymome, le schwannome, le neurofibrome et l'achondroplasie provoque le feston des vertèbres.


=== Courbure ===


Une courbure excessive ou anormale de la colonne vertébrale est classée comme une maladie de la colonne vertébrale ou une dorsopathie et comprend les courbures anormales suivantes :

La cyphose est une courbure cyphotique (convexe) exagérée de la région thoracique dans le plan sagittal, également appelée hypercyphose.

Cela produit ce qu'on appelle la "bosse à bosse" ou la "bosse de la douairière", une affection résultant généralement de l'ostéoporose.

La lordose est une courbure lordotique (concave) exagérée de la région lombaire dans le plan sagittal, connue sous le nom d'hyperlordose lombaire et également de "swayback".

La lordose temporaire est fréquente pendant la grossesse.

La scoliose, courbure latérale, est la courbure anormale la plus courante, survenant chez 0,5 % de la population.

Elle est plus fréquente chez les femmes et peut résulter d'une croissance inégale des deux côtés d'une ou plusieurs vertèbres, de sorte qu'elles ne fusionnent pas correctement.

Elle peut également être causée par une atélectasie pulmonaire (dégonflement partiel ou complet d'un ou plusieurs lobes des poumons) comme on l'observe dans l'asthme ou le pneumothorax.

Cyphoscoliose, combinaison de cyphose et de scoliose.


=== Repères anatomiques ===


Les vertèbres individuelles de la colonne vertébrale humaine peuvent être ressenties et utilisées comme anatomie de surface, les points de référence étant pris au milieu du corps vertébral.

Cela fournit des repères anatomiques qui peuvent être utilisés pour guider des procédures telles qu'une ponction lombaire et également comme points de référence verticaux pour décrire les emplacements d'autres parties de l'anatomie humaine, telles que les positions des organes.


== Autres animaux ==


=== Variations des vertèbres ===

La structure générale des vertèbres chez les autres animaux est en grande partie la même que chez les humains.

Les vertèbres individuelles sont composées d'un centre (corps), d'arcs dépassant du haut et du bas du centre et de divers processus faisant saillie du centre et / ou des arcs.

Un arc s'étendant du haut du centre est appelé arc neural, tandis que l'arc hémal ou le chevron se trouve sous le centre dans les vertèbres caudales (queue) des poissons, de la plupart des reptiles, de certains oiseaux, de certains dinosaures et de certains mammifères à longue queue. .

Les processus vertébraux peuvent soit donner de la rigidité à la structure, les aider à s'articuler avec les côtes, soit servir de points d'attache musculaire.

Les types courants sont le processus transverse, les diapophyses, les parapophyses et les zygapophyses (à la fois les zygapophyses crâniennes et les zygapophyses caudales).

Le centre de la vertèbre peut être classé en fonction de la fusion de ses éléments.

Chez les temnospondyles, les os tels que l'apophyse épineuse, le pleurocentrum et l'intercentrum sont des ossifications distinctes.

Les éléments fusionnés, cependant, classent une vertèbre comme ayant une holospondylie.
Une vertèbre peut également être décrite en termes de forme des extrémités du centrum.

Les centres à bouts plats sont acœlés, comme ceux des mammifères.

Ces extrémités plates du centra sont particulièrement efficaces pour supporter et répartir les forces de compression.

Les vertèbres amphicèles ont des centra avec les deux extrémités concaves.

Cette forme est courante chez les poissons, où la plupart des mouvements sont limités.

Les centres amphicèles sont souvent intégrés à une notocorde complète.

Les vertèbres procèles sont concaves en avant et convexes en arrière.

On les trouve chez les grenouilles et les reptiles modernes.

Les vertèbres opisthocèles sont à l'opposé, possédant une convexité antérieure et une concavité postérieure.

On les trouve dans les salamandres et dans certains dinosaures non aviaires.

Les vertèbres hétérocèles ont des surfaces articulaires en forme de selle.

Ce type de configuration est observé chez les tortues qui rétractent leur cou et les oiseaux, car il permet un mouvement de flexion latéral et vertical étendu sans trop étirer le cordon nerveux ni l'enrouler autour de son axe long.

Chez les chevaux, l'Arabe (race) peut avoir une vertèbre et une paire de côtes en moins.

Cette anomalie disparaît chez les poulains issus d'un cheval arabe et d'une autre race de chevaux.


=== Vertèbres régionales ===

Les vertèbres sont définies par les régions de la colonne vertébrale dans lesquelles elles se trouvent, comme chez l'homme.

Les vertèbres cervicales sont celles de la région du cou.

À l'exception des deux genres de paresseux (Choloepus et Bradypus) et du genre lamantin (Trichechus), tous les mammifères ont sept vertèbres cervicales.

Chez d'autres vertébrés, le nombre de vertèbres cervicales peut aller d'une seule vertèbre chez les amphibiens à 25 chez les cygnes ou 76 chez le plésiosaure éteint Elasmosaurus.

Les vertèbres dorsales vont du bas du cou au haut du bassin.

Les vertèbres dorsales attachées aux côtes sont appelées vertèbres thoraciques, tandis que celles sans côtes sont appelées vertèbres lombaires.

Les vertèbres sacrées sont celles de la région pelvienne et vont de une chez les amphibiens à deux chez la plupart des oiseaux et des reptiles modernes, ou jusqu'à trois à cinq chez les mammifères.

Lorsque plusieurs vertèbres sacrées sont fusionnées en une seule structure, on l'appelle le sacrum.

Le synsacrum est une structure fusionnée similaire que l'on trouve chez les oiseaux et qui est composée de la vertèbre sacrée, lombaire et de certaines vertèbres thoraciques et caudales, ainsi que de la ceinture pelvienne.

Les vertèbres caudales composent la queue, et les dernières peuvent être fusionnées dans le pygostyle chez les oiseaux, ou dans le coccyx ou l'os de la queue chez les chimpanzés (et les humains).


=== Poissons et amphibiens ===


Les vertèbres des poissons à nageoires lobes sont constituées de trois éléments osseux discrets.

L'arc vertébral entoure la moelle épinière et a une forme globalement similaire à celle que l'on trouve chez la plupart des autres vertébrés.

Juste en dessous de l'arc se trouve un petit pleurocentrum en forme de plaque, qui protège la surface supérieure de la notocorde, et en dessous, un intercentrum en forme d'arc plus grand pour protéger le bord inférieur.

Ces deux structures sont intégrées dans une seule masse cylindrique de cartilage.

Un arrangement similaire a été trouvé chez les Labyrinthodontes primitifs, mais dans la lignée évolutive qui a conduit aux reptiles (et donc aussi aux mammifères et aux oiseaux), l'intercentrum a été partiellement ou totalement remplacé par un pleurocentrum élargi, qui à son tour est devenu le corps vertébral osseux. .

Chez la plupart des poissons à nageoires rayonnées, y compris tous les téléostéens, ces deux structures sont fusionnées et intégrées à un morceau d'os solide ressemblant superficiellement au corps vertébral des mammifères.

Chez les amphibiens vivants, il y a simplement un morceau d'os cylindrique sous l'arc vertébral, sans aucune trace des éléments séparés présents dans les premiers tétrapodes.

Chez les poissons cartilagineux, comme les requins, les vertèbres sont constituées de deux tubes cartilagineux.

Le tube supérieur est formé à partir des arcs vertébraux, mais comprend également des structures cartilagineuses supplémentaires remplissant les interstices entre les vertèbres, et enfermant ainsi la moelle épinière dans une gaine essentiellement continue.

Le tube inférieur entoure la notochorde et a une structure complexe, comprenant souvent plusieurs couches de calcification. Les lamproies ont des arcs vertébraux, mais rien ne ressemble aux corps vertébraux trouvés chez tous les vertébrés supérieurs.

Même les arcs sont discontinus, constitués de morceaux séparés de cartilage en forme d'arc autour de la moelle épinière dans la plupart des parties du corps, se transformant en longues bandes de cartilage au-dessus et en dessous dans la région de la queue.

Les myxines n'ont pas de véritable colonne vertébrale et ne sont donc pas correctement considérées comme des vertébrés, mais quelques minuscules arcs neuraux sont présents dans la queue.


=== Autres vertébrés ===

La structure générale des vertèbres humaines est assez typique de celle que l'on trouve chez les mammifères, les reptiles et les oiseaux.

La forme du corps vertébral varie cependant quelque peu entre les différents groupes.

Chez les mammifères, tels que les humains, il a généralement des surfaces supérieures et inférieures plates, tandis que chez les reptiles, la surface antérieure a généralement une cavité concave dans laquelle s'insère la face convexe élargie du corps vertébral suivant.

Cependant, même ces modèles ne sont que des généralisations et il peut y avoir des variations dans la forme des vertèbres le long de la colonne vertébrale, même au sein d'une même espèce.

Certaines variations inhabituelles incluent les douilles en forme de selle entre les vertèbres cervicales des oiseaux et la présence d'un canal creux étroit descendant au centre des corps vertébraux des geckos et des tuataras, contenant un reste de la notocorde.

Les reptiles conservent souvent les intercentra primitifs, qui sont présents sous forme de petits éléments osseux en forme de croissant situés entre les corps des vertèbres adjacentes ; des structures similaires se trouvent souvent dans les vertèbres caudales des mammifères.

Dans la queue, ceux-ci sont attachés à des os en forme de chevron appelés arcs hémaux, qui se fixent sous la base de la colonne vertébrale et aident à soutenir la musculature.

Ces derniers os sont probablement homologues aux côtes ventrales des poissons.

Le nombre de vertèbres dans les épines des reptiles est très variable et peut atteindre plusieurs centaines chez certaines espèces de serpents.

Chez les oiseaux, il existe un nombre variable de vertèbres cervicales, qui forment souvent la seule partie vraiment flexible de la colonne vertébrale.

Les vertèbres thoraciques sont partiellement fusionnées, fournissant un support solide pour les ailes pendant le vol.

Les vertèbres sacrées sont fusionnées avec les vertèbres lombaires et certaines vertèbres thoraciques et caudales pour former une structure unique, le synsacrum, qui est donc d'une longueur relative supérieure à celle du sacrum des mammifères.

Chez les oiseaux vivants, les vertèbres caudales restantes sont fusionnées dans un autre os, le pygostyle, pour la fixation des plumes de la queue. En dehors de la queue, le nombre de vertèbres chez les mammifères est généralement assez constant.

Il y a presque toujours sept vertèbres cervicales (les paresseux et les lamantins sont parmi les rares exceptions), suivies d'une vingtaine d'autres vertèbres, réparties entre les formes thoracique et lombaire, selon le nombre de côtes.

Il y a généralement trois à cinq vertèbres avec le sacrum et jusqu'à cinquante vertèbres caudales.


=== Dinosaures ===

La colonne vertébrale des dinosaures comprend les vertèbres cervicales (cou), dorsales (dos), sacrées (hanches) et caudales (queue).

Les vertèbres de dinosaures saurischiens possèdent parfois des caractéristiques connues sous le nom de pleurocoels, qui sont des dépressions creuses sur les parties latérales des vertèbres, perforées pour créer une entrée dans les chambres à air à l'intérieur des vertèbres, ce qui a servi à diminuer le poids de ces os sans sacrifier la force.

Ces pleurocoels étaient remplis de sacs aériens, ce qui aurait encore diminué le poids.

Chez les dinosaures sauropodes, les plus grands vertébrés terrestres connus, les pleurocoels et les sacs aériens peuvent avoir réduit le poids de l'animal de plus d'une tonne dans certains cas, une adaptation évolutive pratique chez les animaux qui ont atteint plus de 30 mètres de long.

Chez de nombreux hadrosaures et dinosaures théropodes, les vertèbres caudales étaient renforcées par des tendons ossifiés.

La présence de trois vertèbres sacrées ou plus, en association avec les os de la hanche, est l'une des caractéristiques déterminantes des dinosaures.

Le condyle occipital est une structure sur la partie postérieure du crâne d'un dinosaure qui s'articule avec la première vertèbre cervicale.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vertebral_column
