! Confusion between the latest definitions (TA2-2019) of brain, cerebrum and telencephalon !


BRAIN


A brain is an organ that serves as the center of the nervous system in all vertebrate and most invertebrate animals. 

It is located in the head, usually close to the sensory organs for senses such as vision. 

It is the most complex organ in a vertebrate's body. 

In a human, the cerebral cortex contains approximately 14–16 billion neurons, and the estimated number of neurons in the cerebellum is 55–70 billion. 

Each neuron is connected by synapses to several thousand other neurons. 

These neurons typically communicate with one another by means of long fibers called axons, which carry trains of signal pulses called action potentials to distant parts of the brain or body targeting specific recipient cells.
Physiologically, brains exert centralized control over a body's other organs. 

They act on the rest of the body both by generating patterns of muscle activity and by driving the secretion of chemicals called hormones. 

This centralized control allows rapid and coordinated responses to changes in the environment. 

Some basic types of responsiveness such as reflexes can be mediated by the spinal cord or peripheral ganglia, but sophisticated purposeful control of behavior based on complex sensory input requires the information integrating capabilities of a centralized brain.
The operations of individual brain cells are now understood in considerable detail but the way they cooperate in ensembles of millions is yet to be solved. 

Recent models in modern neuroscience treat the brain as a biological computer, very different in mechanism from an electronic computer, but similar in the sense that it acquires information from the surrounding world, stores it, and processes it in a variety of ways.
This article compares the properties of brains across the entire range of animal species, with the greatest attention to vertebrates. 

It deals with the human brain insofar as it shares the properties of other brains. 

The ways in which the human brain differs from other brains are covered in the human brain article. 

Several topics that might be covered here are instead covered there because much more can be said about them in a human context. 

The most important is brain disease and the effects of brain damage, that are covered in the human brain article.


== Anatomy ==


The shape and size of the brain varies greatly between species, and identifying common features is often difficult. 

Nevertheless, there are a number of principles of brain architecture that apply across a wide range of species. 

Some aspects of brain structure are common to almost the entire range of animal species; others distinguish "advanced" brains from more primitive ones, or distinguish vertebrates from invertebrates.The simplest way to gain information about brain anatomy is by visual inspection, but many more sophisticated techniques have been developed. 

Brain tissue in its natural state is too soft to work with, but it can be hardened by immersion in alcohol or other fixatives, and then sliced apart for examination of the interior. 

Visually, the interior of the brain consists of areas of so-called grey matter, with a dark color, separated by areas of white matter, with a lighter color. 

Further information can be gained by staining slices of brain tissue with a variety of chemicals that bring out areas where specific types of molecules are present in high concentrations. 

It is also possible to examine the microstructure of brain tissue using a microscope, and to trace the pattern of connections from one brain area to another.


=== Cellular structure ===


The brains of all species are composed primarily of two broad classes of cells: neurons and glial cells. 

Glial cells (also known as glia or neuroglia) come in several types, and perform a number of critical functions, including structural support, metabolic support, insulation, and guidance of development. 

Neurons, however, are usually considered the most important cells in the brain.
The property that makes neurons unique is their ability to send signals to specific target cells over long distances. 

They send these signals by means of an axon, which is a thin protoplasmic fiber that extends from the cell body and projects, usually with numerous branches, to other areas, sometimes nearby, sometimes in distant parts of the brain or body. 

The length of an axon can be extraordinary: for example, if a pyramidal cell (an excitatory neuron) of the cerebral cortex were magnified so that its cell body became the size of a human body, its axon, equally magnified, would become a cable a few centimeters in diameter, extending more than a kilometer. 

These axons transmit signals in the form of electrochemical pulses called action potentials, which last less than a thousandth of a second and travel along the axon at speeds of 1–100 meters per second. 

Some neurons emit action potentials constantly, at rates of 10–100 per second, usually in irregular patterns; other neurons are quiet most of the time, but occasionally emit a burst of action potentials.Axons transmit signals to other neurons by means of specialized junctions called synapses. 

A single axon may make as many as several thousand synaptic connections with other cells. 

When an action potential, traveling along an axon, arrives at a synapse, it causes a chemical called a neurotransmitter to be released. 

The neurotransmitter binds to receptor molecules in the membrane of the target cell.Synapses are the key functional elements of the brain. 

The essential function of the brain is cell-to-cell communication, and synapses are the points at which communication occurs. 

The human brain has been estimated to contain approximately 100 trillion synapses; even the brain of a fruit fly contains several million. 

The functions of these synapses are very diverse: some are excitatory (exciting the target cell); others are inhibitory; others work by activating second messenger systems that change the internal chemistry of their target cells in complex ways. 

A large number of synapses are dynamically modifiable; that is, they are capable of changing strength in a way that is controlled by the patterns of signals that pass through them. 

It is widely believed that activity-dependent modification of synapses is the brain's primary mechanism for learning and memory.Most of the space in the brain is taken up by axons, which are often bundled together in what are called nerve fiber tracts. 

A myelinated axon is wrapped in a fatty insulating sheath of myelin, which serves to greatly increase the speed of signal propagation. (There are also unmyelinated axons). 

Myelin is white, making parts of the brain filled exclusively with nerve fibers appear as light-colored white matter, in contrast to the darker-colored grey matter that marks areas with high densities of neuron cell bodies.


=== Evolution ===



==== Generic bilaterian nervous system ====

Except for a few primitive organisms such as sponges (which have no nervous system) and cnidarians (which have a nervous system consisting of a diffuse nerve net), all living multicellular animals are bilaterians, meaning animals with a bilaterally symmetric body shape (that is, left and right sides that are approximate mirror images of each other). 

All bilaterians are thought to have descended from a common ancestor that appeared early in the Cambrian period, 485–540 million years ago, and it has been hypothesized that this common ancestor had the shape of a simple tubeworm with a segmented body. 

At a schematic level, that basic worm-shape continues to be reflected in the body and nervous system architecture of all modern bilaterians, including vertebrates. 

The fundamental bilateral body form is a tube with a hollow gut cavity running from the mouth to the anus, and a nerve cord with an enlargement (a ganglion) for each body segment, with an especially large ganglion at the front, called the brain. 

The brain is small and simple in some species, such as nematode worms; in other species, including vertebrates, it is the most complex organ in the body. 

Some types of worms, such as leeches, also have an enlarged ganglion at the back end of the nerve cord, known as a "tail brain".There are a few types of existing bilaterians that lack a recognizable brain, including echinoderms and tunicates. 

It has not been definitively established whether the existence of these brainless species indicates that the earliest bilaterians lacked a brain, or whether their ancestors evolved in a way that led to the disappearance of a previously existing brain structure.


==== Invertebrates ====

This category includes tardigrades, arthropods, molluscs, and numerous types of worms. 

The diversity of invertebrate body plans is matched by an equal diversity in brain structures.Two groups of invertebrates have notably complex brains: arthropods (insects, crustaceans, arachnids, and others), and cephalopods (octopuses, squids, and similar molluscs). 

The brains of arthropods and cephalopods arise from twin parallel nerve cords that extend through the body of the animal. 

Arthropods have a central brain, the supraesophageal ganglion, with three divisions and large optical lobes behind each eye for visual processing. 

Cephalopods such as the octopus and squid have the largest brains of any invertebrates.There are several invertebrate species whose brains have been studied intensively because they have properties that make them convenient for experimental work:

Fruit flies (Drosophila), because of the large array of techniques available for studying their genetics, have been a natural subject for studying the role of genes in brain development. 

In spite of the large evolutionary distance between insects and mammals, many aspects of Drosophila neurogenetics have been shown to be relevant to humans. 

The first biological clock genes, for example, were identified by examining Drosophila mutants that showed disrupted daily activity cycles. 

A search in the genomes of vertebrates revealed a set of analogous genes, which were found to play similar roles in the mouse biological clock—and therefore almost certainly in the human biological clock as well. 

Studies done on Drosophila, also show that most neuropil regions of the brain are continuously reorganized throughout life in response to specific living conditions.
The nematode worm Caenorhabditis elegans, like Drosophila, has been studied largely because of its importance in genetics. 

In the early 1970s, Sydney Brenner chose it as a model organism for studying the way that genes control development. 

One of the advantages of working with this worm is that the body plan is very stereotyped: the nervous system of the hermaphrodite contains exactly 302 neurons, always in the same places, making identical synaptic connections in every worm. 

Brenner's team sliced worms into thousands of ultrathin sections and photographed each one under an electron microscope, then visually matched fibers from section to section, to map out every neuron and synapse in the entire body. 

The complete neuronal wiring diagram of C.elegans – its connectome was achieved. 

Nothing approaching this level of detail is available for any other organism, and the information gained has enabled a multitude of studies that would otherwise have not been possible.
The sea slug Aplysia californica was chosen by Nobel Prize-winning neurophysiologist Eric Kandel as a model for studying the cellular basis of learning and memory, because of the simplicity and accessibility of its nervous system, and it has been examined in hundreds of experiments.


==== Vertebrates ====

The first vertebrates appeared over 500 million years ago (Mya), during the Cambrian period, and may have resembled the modern hagfish in form. 

Sharks appeared about 450 Mya, amphibians about 400 Mya, reptiles about 350 Mya, and mammals about 200 Mya. 

Each species has an equally long evolutionary history, but the brains of modern hagfishes, lampreys, sharks, amphibians, reptiles, and mammals show a gradient of size and complexity that roughly follows the evolutionary sequence. 

All of these brains contain the same set of basic anatomical components, but many are rudimentary in the hagfish, whereas in mammals the foremost part (the telencephalon) is greatly elaborated and expanded.Brains are most simply compared in terms of their size. 

The relationship between brain size, body size and other variables has been studied across a wide range of vertebrate species. 

As a rule, brain size increases with body size, but not in a simple linear proportion. 

In general, smaller animals tend to have larger brains, measured as a fraction of body size. 

For mammals, the relationship between brain volume and body mass essentially follows a power law with an exponent of about 0.75. 

This formula describes the central tendency, but every family of mammals departs from it to some degree, in a way that reflects in part the complexity of their behavior. 

For example, primates have brains 5 to 10 times larger than the formula predicts. 

Predators tend to have larger brains than their prey, relative to body size.

All vertebrate brains share a common underlying form, which appears most clearly during early stages of embryonic development. 

In its earliest form, the brain appears as three swellings at the front end of the neural tube; these swellings eventually become the forebrain, midbrain, and hindbrain (the prosencephalon, mesencephalon, and rhombencephalon, respectively). 

At the earliest stages of brain development, the three areas are roughly equal in size. 

In many classes of vertebrates, such as fish and amphibians, the three parts remain similar in size in the adult, but in mammals the forebrain becomes much larger than the other parts, and the midbrain becomes very small.The brains of vertebrates are made of very soft tissue. 

Living brain tissue is pinkish on the outside and mostly white on the inside, with subtle variations in color. 

Vertebrate brains are surrounded by a system of connective tissue membranes called meninges that separate the skull from the brain. 

Blood vessels enter the central nervous system through holes in the meningeal layers. 

The cells in the blood vessel walls are joined tightly to one another, forming the blood–brain barrier, which blocks the passage of many toxins and pathogens (though at the same time blocking antibodies and some drugs, thereby presenting special challenges in treatment of diseases of the brain).Neuroanatomists usually divide the vertebrate brain into six main regions: the telencephalon (cerebral hemispheres), diencephalon (thalamus and hypothalamus), mesencephalon (midbrain), cerebellum, pons, and medulla oblongata. 

Each of these areas has a complex internal structure. 

Some parts, such as the cerebral cortex and the cerebellar cortex, consist of layers that are folded or convoluted to fit within the available space. 

Other parts, such as the thalamus and hypothalamus, consist of clusters of many small nuclei. 

Thousands of distinguishable areas can be identified within the vertebrate brain based on fine distinctions of neural structure, chemistry, and connectivity.

Although the same basic components are present in all vertebrate brains, some branches of vertebrate evolution have led to substantial distortions of brain geometry, especially in the forebrain area. 

The brain of a shark shows the basic components in a straightforward way, but in teleost fishes (the great majority of existing fish species), the forebrain has become "everted", like a sock turned inside out. 

In birds, there are also major changes in forebrain structure. 

These distortions can make it difficult to match brain components from one species with those of another species.Here is a list of some of the most important vertebrate brain components, along with a brief description of their functions as currently understood:

The medulla, along with the spinal cord, contains many small nuclei involved in a wide variety of sensory and involuntary motor functions such as vomiting, heart rate and digestive processes.
The pons lies in the brainstem directly above the medulla. 

Among other things, it contains nuclei that control often voluntary but simple acts such as sleep, respiration, swallowing, bladder function, equilibrium, eye movement, facial expressions, and posture.
The hypothalamus is a small region at the base of the forebrain, whose complexity and importance belies its size. 

It is composed of numerous small nuclei, each with distinct connections and neurochemistry. 

The hypothalamus is engaged in additional involuntary or partially voluntary acts such as sleep and wake cycles, eating and drinking, and the release of some hormones.
The thalamus is a collection of nuclei with diverse functions: some are involved in relaying information to and from the cerebral hemispheres, while others are involved in motivation. 

The subthalamic area (zona incerta) seems to contain action-generating systems for several types of "consummatory" behaviors such as eating, drinking, defecation, and copulation.
The cerebellum modulates the outputs of other brain systems, whether motor-related or thought related, to make them certain and precise. 

Removal of the cerebellum does not prevent an animal from doing anything in particular, but it makes actions hesitant and clumsy. 

This precision is not built-in but learned by trial and error. 

The muscle coordination learned while riding a bicycle is an example of a type of neural plasticity that may take place largely within the cerebellum. 10% of the brain's total volume consists of the cerebellum and 50% of all neurons are held within its structure.
The optic tectum allows actions to be directed toward points in space, most commonly in response to visual input. 

In mammals, it is usually referred to as the superior colliculus, and its best-studied function is to direct eye movements. 

It also directs reaching movements and other object-directed actions. 

It receives strong visual inputs, but also inputs from other senses that are useful in directing actions, such as auditory input in owls and input from the thermosensitive pit organs in snakes. 

In some primitive fishes, such as lampreys, this region is the largest part of the brain. 

The superior colliculus is part of the midbrain.
The pallium is a layer of grey matter that lies on the surface of the forebrain and is the most complex and most recent evolutionary development of the brain as an organ. 

In reptiles and mammals, it is called the cerebral cortex. 

Multiple functions involve the pallium, including smell and spatial memory. 

In mammals, where it becomes so large as to dominate the brain, it takes over functions from many other brain areas. 

In many mammals, the cerebral cortex consists of folded bulges called gyri that create deep furrows or fissures called sulci. 

The folds increase the surface area of the cortex and therefore increase the amount of gray matter and the amount of information that can be stored and processed.
The hippocampus, strictly speaking, is found only in mammals. 

However, the area it derives from, the medial pallium, has counterparts in all vertebrates. 

There is evidence that this part of the brain is involved in complex events such as spatial memory and navigation in fishes, birds, reptiles, and mammals.
The basal ganglia are a group of interconnected structures in the forebrain. 

The primary function of the basal ganglia appears to be action selection: they send inhibitory signals to all parts of the brain that can generate motor behaviors, and in the right circumstances can release the inhibition, so that the action-generating systems are able to execute their actions. 

Reward and punishment exert their most important neural effects by altering connections within the basal ganglia.
The olfactory bulb is a special structure that processes olfactory sensory signals and sends its output to the olfactory part of the pallium. 

It is a major brain component in many vertebrates, but is greatly reduced in humans and other primates (whose senses are dominated by information acquired by sight rather than smell).


===== Reptiles =====


====== Birds ======


===== Mammals =====
The most obvious difference between the brains of mammals and other vertebrates is in terms of size. 

On average, a mammal has a brain roughly twice as large as that of a bird of the same body size, and ten times as large as that of a reptile of the same body size.Size, however, is not the only difference: there are also substantial differences in shape. 

The hindbrain and midbrain of mammals are generally similar to those of other vertebrates, but dramatic differences appear in the forebrain, which is greatly enlarged and also altered in structure. 

The cerebral cortex is the part of the brain that most strongly distinguishes mammals. 

In non-mammalian vertebrates, the surface of the cerebrum is lined with a comparatively simple three-layered structure called the pallium. 

In mammals, the pallium evolves into a complex six-layered structure called neocortex or isocortex. 

Several areas at the edge of the neocortex, including the hippocampus and amygdala, are also much more extensively developed in mammals than in other vertebrates.The elaboration of the cerebral cortex carries with it changes to other brain areas. 

The superior colliculus, which plays a major role in visual control of behavior in most vertebrates, shrinks to a small size in mammals, and many of its functions are taken over by visual areas of the cerebral cortex. 

The cerebellum of mammals contains a large portion (the neocerebellum) dedicated to supporting the cerebral cortex, which has no counterpart in other vertebrates.


====== Primates ======

The brains of humans and other primates contain the same structures as the brains of other mammals, but are generally larger in proportion to body size. 

The encephalization quotient (EQ) is used to compare brain sizes across species. 

It takes into account the nonlinearity of the brain-to-body relationship. 

Humans have an average EQ in the 7-to-8 range, while most other primates have an EQ in the 2-to-3 range. 

Dolphins have values higher than those of primates other than humans, but nearly all other mammals have EQ values that are substantially lower.
Most of the enlargement of the primate brain comes from a massive expansion of the cerebral cortex, especially the prefrontal cortex and the parts of the cortex involved in vision. 

The visual processing network of primates includes at least 30 distinguishable brain areas, with a complex web of interconnections. 

It has been estimated that visual processing areas occupy more than half of the total surface of the primate neocortex. 

The prefrontal cortex carries out functions that include planning, working memory, motivation, attention, and executive control. 

It takes up a much larger proportion of the brain for primates than for other species, and an especially large fraction of the human brain.


== Development ==


The brain develops in an intricately orchestrated sequence of stages. 

It changes in shape from a simple swelling at the front of the nerve cord in the earliest embryonic stages, to a complex array of areas and connections. 

Neurons are created in special zones that contain stem cells, and then migrate through the tissue to reach their ultimate locations. 

Once neurons have positioned themselves, their axons sprout and navigate through the brain, branching and extending as they go, until the tips reach their targets and form synaptic connections. 

In a number of parts of the nervous system, neurons and synapses are produced in excessive numbers during the early stages, and then the unneeded ones are pruned away.For vertebrates, the early stages of neural development are similar across all species. 

As the embryo transforms from a round blob of cells into a wormlike structure, a narrow strip of ectoderm running along the midline of the back is induced to become the neural plate, the precursor of the nervous system. 

The neural plate folds inward to form the neural groove, and then the lips that line the groove merge to enclose the neural tube, a hollow cord of cells with a fluid-filled ventricle at the center. 

At the front end, the ventricles and cord swell to form three vesicles that are the precursors of the prosencephalon (forebrain), mesencephalon (midbrain), and rhombencephalon (hindbrain). 

At the next stage, the forebrain splits into two vesicles called the telencephalon (which will contain the cerebral cortex, basal ganglia, and related structures) and the diencephalon (which will contain the thalamus and hypothalamus). 

At about the same time, the hindbrain splits into the metencephalon (which will contain the cerebellum and pons) and the myelencephalon (which will contain the medulla oblongata). 

Each of these areas contains proliferative zones where neurons and glial cells are generated; the resulting cells then migrate, sometimes for long distances, to their final positions.Once a neuron is in place, it extends dendrites and an axon into the area around it. 

Axons, because they commonly extend a great distance from the cell body and need to reach specific targets, grow in a particularly complex way. 

The tip of a growing axon consists of a blob of protoplasm called a growth cone, studded with chemical receptors. 

These receptors sense the local environment, causing the growth cone to be attracted or repelled by various cellular elements, and thus to be pulled in a particular direction at each point along its path. 

The result of this pathfinding process is that the growth cone navigates through the brain until it reaches its destination area, where other chemical cues cause it to begin generating synapses. 

Considering the entire brain, thousands of genes create products that influence axonal pathfinding.The synaptic network that finally emerges is only partly determined by genes, though. 

In many parts of the brain, axons initially "overgrow", and then are "pruned" by mechanisms that depend on neural activity. 

In the projection from the eye to the midbrain, for example, the structure in the adult contains a very precise mapping, connecting each point on the surface of the retina to a corresponding point in a midbrain layer. 

In the first stages of development, each axon from the retina is guided to the right general vicinity in the midbrain by chemical cues, but then branches very profusely and makes initial contact with a wide swath of midbrain neurons. 

The retina, before birth, contains special mechanisms that cause it to generate waves of activity that originate spontaneously at a random point and then propagate slowly across the retinal layer. 

These waves are useful because they cause neighboring neurons to be active at the same time; that is, they produce a neural activity pattern that contains information about the spatial arrangement of the neurons. 

This information is exploited in the midbrain by a mechanism that causes synapses to weaken, and eventually vanish, if activity in an axon is not followed by activity of the target cell. 

The result of this sophisticated process is a gradual tuning and tightening of the map, leaving it finally in its precise adult form.Similar things happen in other brain areas: an initial synaptic matrix is generated as a result of genetically determined chemical guidance, but then gradually refined by activity-dependent mechanisms, partly driven by internal dynamics, partly by external sensory inputs. 

In some cases, as with the retina-midbrain system, activity patterns depend on mechanisms that operate only in the developing brain, and apparently exist solely to guide development.In humans and many other mammals, new neurons are created mainly before birth, and the infant brain contains substantially more neurons than the adult brain. 

There are, however, a few areas where new neurons continue to be generated throughout life. 

The two areas for which adult neurogenesis is well established are the olfactory bulb, which is involved in the sense of smell, and the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus, where there is evidence that the new neurons play a role in storing newly acquired memories. 

With these exceptions, however, the set of neurons that is present in early childhood is the set that is present for life. 

Glial cells are different: as with most types of cells in the body, they are generated throughout the lifespan.There has long been debate about whether the qualities of mind, personality, and intelligence can be attributed to heredity or to upbringing—this is the nature and nurture controversy. 

Although many details remain to be settled, neuroscience research has clearly shown that both factors are important. 

Genes determine the general form of the brain, and genes determine how the brain reacts to experience. 

Experience, however, is required to refine the matrix of synaptic connections, which in its developed form contains far more information than the genome does. 

In some respects, all that matters is the presence or absence of experience during critical periods of development. 

In other respects, the quantity and quality of experience are important; for example, there is substantial evidence that animals raised in enriched environments have thicker cerebral cortices, indicating a higher density of synaptic connections, than animals whose levels of stimulation are restricted.


== Physiology ==

The functions of the brain depend on the ability of neurons to transmit electrochemical signals to other cells, and their ability to respond appropriately to electrochemical signals received from other cells. 

The electrical properties of neurons are controlled by a wide variety of biochemical and metabolic processes, most notably the interactions between neurotransmitters and receptors that take place at synapses.


=== Neurotransmitters and receptors ===

Neurotransmitters are chemicals that are released at synapses when the local membrane is depolarised and Ca2+ enters into the cell, typically when an action potential arrives at the synapse – neurotransmitters attach themselves to receptor molecules on the membrane of the synapse's target cell (or cells), and thereby alter the electrical or chemical properties of the receptor molecules.
With few exceptions, each neuron in the brain releases the same chemical neurotransmitter, or combination of neurotransmitters, at all the synaptic connections it makes with other neurons; this rule is known as Dale's principle. 

Thus, a neuron can be characterized by the neurotransmitters that it releases. 

The great majority of psychoactive drugs exert their effects by altering specific neurotransmitter systems. 

This applies to drugs such as cannabinoids, nicotine, heroin, cocaine, alcohol, fluoxetine, chlorpromazine, and many others.The two neurotransmitters that are most widely found in the vertebrate brain are glutamate, which almost always exerts excitatory effects on target neurons, and gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), which is almost always inhibitory. 

Neurons using these transmitters can be found in nearly every part of the brain. 

Because of their ubiquity, drugs that act on glutamate or GABA tend to have broad and powerful effects. 

Some general anesthetics act by reducing the effects of glutamate; most tranquilizers exert their sedative effects by enhancing the effects of GABA.There are dozens of other chemical neurotransmitters that are used in more limited areas of the brain, often areas dedicated to a particular function. 

Serotonin, for example—the primary target of many antidepressant drugs and many dietary aids—comes exclusively from a small brainstem area called the raphe nuclei. 

Norepinephrine, which is involved in arousal, comes exclusively from a nearby small area called the locus coeruleus. 

Other neurotransmitters such as acetylcholine and dopamine have multiple sources in the brain but are not as ubiquitously distributed as glutamate and GABA.


=== Electrical activity ===


As a side effect of the electrochemical processes used by neurons for signaling, brain tissue generates electric fields when it is active. 

When large numbers of neurons show synchronized activity, the electric fields that they generate can be large enough to detect outside the skull, using electroencephalography (EEG) or magnetoencephalography (MEG). 

EEG recordings, along with recordings made from electrodes implanted inside the brains of animals such as rats, show that the brain of a living animal is constantly active, even during sleep. 

Each part of the brain shows a mixture of rhythmic and nonrhythmic activity, which may vary according to behavioral state. 

In mammals, the cerebral cortex tends to show large slow delta waves during sleep, faster alpha waves when the animal is awake but inattentive, and chaotic-looking irregular activity when the animal is actively engaged in a task, called beta and gamma waves. 

During an epileptic seizure, the brain's inhibitory control mechanisms fail to function and electrical activity rises to pathological levels, producing EEG traces that show large wave and spike patterns not seen in a healthy brain. 

Relating these population-level patterns to the computational functions of individual neurons is a major focus of current research in neurophysiology.


=== Metabolism ===

All vertebrates have a blood–brain barrier that allows metabolism inside the brain to operate differently from metabolism in other parts of the body. 

Glial cells play a major role in brain metabolism by controlling the chemical composition of the fluid that surrounds neurons, including levels of ions and nutrients.Brain tissue consumes a large amount of energy in proportion to its volume, so large brains place severe metabolic demands on animals. 

The need to limit body weight in order, for example, to fly, has apparently led to selection for a reduction of brain size in some species, such as bats. 

Most of the brain's energy consumption goes into sustaining the electric charge (membrane potential) of neurons. 

Most vertebrate species devote between 2% and 8% of basal metabolism to the brain. 

In primates, however, the percentage is much higher—in humans it rises to 20–25%. 

The energy consumption of the brain does not vary greatly over time, but active regions of the cerebral cortex consume somewhat more energy than inactive regions; this forms the basis for the functional brain imaging methods of PET, fMRI, and NIRS. 

The brain typically gets most of its energy from oxygen-dependent metabolism of glucose (i.e., blood sugar), but ketones provide a major alternative source, together with contributions from medium chain fatty acids (caprylic and heptanoic acids), lactate, acetate, and possibly amino acids.


== Function ==


Information from the sense organs is collected in the brain. 

There it is used to determine what actions the organism is to take. 

The brain processes the raw data to extract information about the structure of the environment. 

Next it combines the processed information with information about the current needs of the animal and with memory of past circumstances. 

Finally, on the basis of the results, it generates motor response patterns. 

These signal-processing tasks require intricate interplay between a variety of functional subsystems.The function of the brain is to provide coherent control over the actions of an animal. 

A centralized brain allows groups of muscles to be co-activated in complex patterns; it also allows stimuli impinging on one part of the body to evoke responses in other parts, and it can prevent different parts of the body from acting at cross-purposes to each other.


=== Perception ===


The human brain is provided with information about light, sound, the chemical composition of the atmosphere, temperature, the position of the body in space (proprioception), the chemical composition of the bloodstream, and more. 

In other animals additional senses are present, such as the infrared heat-sense of snakes, the magnetic field sense of some birds, or the electric field sense mainly seen in aquatic animals.
Each sensory system begins with specialized receptor cells, such as photoreceptor cells in the retina of the eye, or vibration-sensitive hair cells in the cochlea of the ear. 

The axons of sensory receptor cells travel into the spinal cord or brain, where they transmit their signals to a first-order sensory nucleus dedicated to one specific sensory modality. 

This primary sensory nucleus sends information to higher-order sensory areas that are dedicated to the same modality. 

Eventually, via a way-station in the thalamus, the signals are sent to the cerebral cortex, where they are processed to extract the relevant features, and integrated with signals coming from other sensory systems.


=== Motor control ===

Motor systems are areas of the brain that are involved in initiating body movements, that is, in activating muscles. 

Except for the muscles that control the eye, which are driven by nuclei in the midbrain, all the voluntary muscles in the body are directly innervated by motor neurons in the spinal cord and hindbrain. 

Spinal motor neurons are controlled both by neural circuits intrinsic to the spinal cord, and by inputs that descend from the brain. 

The intrinsic spinal circuits implement many reflex responses, and contain pattern generators for rhythmic movements such as walking or swimming. 

The descending connections from the brain allow for more sophisticated control.The brain contains several motor areas that project directly to the spinal cord. 

At the lowest level are motor areas in the medulla and pons, which control stereotyped movements such as walking, breathing, or swallowing. 

At a higher level are areas in the midbrain, such as the red nucleus, which is responsible for coordinating movements of the arms and legs. 

At a higher level yet is the primary motor cortex, a strip of tissue located at the posterior edge of the frontal lobe. 

The primary motor cortex sends projections to the subcortical motor areas, but also sends a massive projection directly to the spinal cord, through the pyramidal tract. 

This direct corticospinal projection allows for precise voluntary control of the fine details of movements. 

Other motor-related brain areas exert secondary effects by projecting to the primary motor areas. 

Among the most important secondary areas are the premotor cortex, supplementary motor area, basal ganglia, and cerebellum. 

In addition to all of the above, the brain and spinal cord contain extensive circuitry to control the autonomic nervous system which controls the movement of the smooth muscle of the body.


=== Sleep ===


Many animals alternate between sleeping and waking in a daily cycle. 

Arousal and alertness are also modulated on a finer time scale by a network of brain areas. 

A key component of the sleep system is the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), a tiny part of the hypothalamus located directly above the point at which the optic nerves from the two eyes cross. 

The SCN contains the body's central biological clock. 

Neurons there show activity levels that rise and fall with a period of about 24 hours, circadian rhythms: these activity fluctuations are driven by rhythmic changes in expression of a set of "clock genes". 

The SCN continues to keep time even if it is excised from the brain and placed in a dish of warm nutrient solution, but it ordinarily receives input from the optic nerves, through the retinohypothalamic tract (RHT), that allows daily light-dark cycles to calibrate the clock.The SCN projects to a set of areas in the hypothalamus, brainstem, and midbrain that are involved in implementing sleep-wake cycles. 

An important component of the system is the reticular formation, a group of neuron-clusters scattered diffusely through the core of the lower brain. 

Reticular neurons send signals to the thalamus, which in turn sends activity-level-controlling signals to every part of the cortex. 

Damage to the reticular formation can produce a permanent state of coma.Sleep involves great changes in brain activity. 

Until the 1950s it was generally believed that the brain essentially shuts off during sleep, but this is now known to be far from true; activity continues, but patterns become very different. 

There are two types of sleep: REM sleep (with dreaming) and NREM (non-REM, usually without dreaming) sleep, which repeat in slightly varying patterns throughout a sleep episode. 

Three broad types of distinct brain activity patterns can be measured: REM, light NREM and deep NREM. 

During deep NREM sleep, also called slow wave sleep, activity in the cortex takes the form of large synchronized waves, whereas in the waking state it is noisy and desynchronized. 

Levels of the neurotransmitters norepinephrine and serotonin drop during slow wave sleep, and fall almost to zero during REM sleep; levels of acetylcholine show the reverse pattern.


=== Homeostasis ===


For any animal, survival requires maintaining a variety of parameters of bodily state within a limited range of variation: these include temperature, water content, salt concentration in the bloodstream, blood glucose levels, blood oxygen level, and others. 

The ability of an animal to regulate the internal environment of its body—the milieu intérieur, as the pioneering physiologist Claude Bernard called it—is known as homeostasis (Greek for "standing still"). 

Maintaining homeostasis is a crucial function of the brain. 

The basic principle that underlies homeostasis is negative feedback: any time a parameter diverges from its set-point, sensors generate an error signal that evokes a response that causes the parameter to shift back toward its optimum value. (This principle is widely used in engineering, for example in the control of temperature using a thermostat.)
In vertebrates, the part of the brain that plays the greatest role is the hypothalamus, a small region at the base of the forebrain whose size does not reflect its complexity or the importance of its function. 

The hypothalamus is a collection of small nuclei, most of which are involved in basic biological functions. 

Some of these functions relate to arousal or to social interactions such as sexuality, aggression, or maternal behaviors; but many of them relate to homeostasis. 

Several hypothalamic nuclei receive input from sensors located in the lining of blood vessels, conveying information about temperature, sodium level, glucose level, blood oxygen level, and other parameters. 

These hypothalamic nuclei send output signals to motor areas that can generate actions to rectify deficiencies. 

Some of the outputs also go to the pituitary gland, a tiny gland attached to the brain directly underneath the hypothalamus. 

The pituitary gland secretes hormones into the bloodstream, where they circulate throughout the body and induce changes in cellular activity.


=== Motivation ===


The individual animals need to express survival-promoting behaviors, such as seeking food, water, shelter, and a mate. 

The motivational system in the brain monitors the current state of satisfaction of these goals, and activates behaviors to meet any needs that arise. 

The motivational system works largely by a reward–punishment mechanism. 

When a particular behavior is followed by favorable consequences, the reward mechanism in the brain is activated, which induces structural changes inside the brain that cause the same behavior to be repeated later, whenever a similar situation arises. 

Conversely, when a behavior is followed by unfavorable consequences, the brain's punishment mechanism is activated, inducing structural changes that cause the behavior to be suppressed when similar situations arise in the future.Most organisms studied to date utilize a reward–punishment mechanism: for instance, worms and insects can alter their behavior to seek food sources or to avoid dangers. 

In vertebrates, the reward-punishment system is implemented by a specific set of brain structures, at the heart of which lie the basal ganglia, a set of interconnected areas at the base of the forebrain. 

The basal ganglia are the central site at which decisions are made: the basal ganglia exert a sustained inhibitory control over most of the motor systems in the brain; when this inhibition is released, a motor system is permitted to execute the action it is programmed to carry out. 

Rewards and punishments function by altering the relationship between the inputs that the basal ganglia receive and the decision-signals that are emitted. 

The reward mechanism is better understood than the punishment mechanism, because its role in drug abuse has caused it to be studied very intensively. 

Research has shown that the neurotransmitter dopamine plays a central role: addictive drugs such as cocaine, amphetamine, and nicotine either cause dopamine levels to rise or cause the effects of dopamine inside the brain to be enhanced.


=== Learning and memory ===

Almost all animals are capable of modifying their behavior as a result of experience—even the most primitive types of worms. 

Because behavior is driven by brain activity, changes in behavior must somehow correspond to changes inside the brain. 

Already in the late 19th century theorists like Santiago Ramón y Cajal argued that the most plausible explanation is that learning and memory are expressed as changes in the synaptic connections between neurons. 

Until 1970, however, experimental evidence to support the synaptic plasticity hypothesis was lacking. 

In 1971 Tim Bliss and Terje Lømo published a paper on a phenomenon now called long-term potentiation: the paper showed clear evidence of activity-induced synaptic changes that lasted for at least several days. 

Since then technical advances have made these sorts of experiments much easier to carry out, and thousands of studies have been made that have clarified the mechanism of synaptic change, and uncovered other types of activity-driven synaptic change in a variety of brain areas, including the cerebral cortex, hippocampus, basal ganglia, and cerebellum. 

Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and physical activity appear to play a beneficial role in the process.Neuroscientists currently distinguish several types of learning and memory that are implemented by the brain in distinct ways:

Working memory is the ability of the brain to maintain a temporary representation of information about the task that an animal is currently engaged in. 

This sort of dynamic memory is thought to be mediated by the formation of cell assemblies—groups of activated neurons that maintain their activity by constantly stimulating one another.
Episodic memory is the ability to remember the details of specific events. 

This sort of memory can last for a lifetime. 

Much evidence implicates the hippocampus in playing a crucial role: people with severe damage to the hippocampus sometimes show amnesia, that is, inability to form new long-lasting episodic memories.
Semantic memory is the ability to learn facts and relationships. 

This sort of memory is probably stored largely in the cerebral cortex, mediated by changes in connections between cells that represent specific types of information.
Instrumental learning is the ability for rewards and punishments to modify behavior. 

It is implemented by a network of brain areas centered on the basal ganglia.
Motor learning is the ability to refine patterns of body movement by practicing, or more generally by repetition. 

A number of brain areas are involved, including the premotor cortex, basal ganglia, and especially the cerebellum, which functions as a large memory bank for microadjustments of the parameters of movement.


== Research ==


The field of neuroscience encompasses all approaches that seek to understand the brain and the rest of the nervous system. 

Psychology seeks to understand mind and behavior, and neurology is the medical discipline that diagnoses and treats diseases of the nervous system. 

The brain is also the most important organ studied in psychiatry, the branch of medicine that works to study, prevent, and treat mental disorders. 

Cognitive science seeks to unify neuroscience and psychology with other fields that concern themselves with the brain, such as computer science (artificial intelligence and similar fields) and philosophy.The oldest method of studying the brain is anatomical, and until the middle of the 20th century, much of the progress in neuroscience came from the development of better cell stains and better microscopes. 

Neuroanatomists study the large-scale structure of the brain as well as the microscopic structure of neurons and their components, especially synapses. 

Among other tools, they employ a plethora of stains that reveal neural structure, chemistry, and connectivity. 

In recent years, the development of immunostaining techniques has allowed investigation of neurons that express specific sets of genes. 

Also, functional neuroanatomy uses medical imaging techniques to correlate variations in human brain structure with differences in cognition or behavior.Neurophysiologists study the chemical, pharmacological, and electrical properties of the brain: their primary tools are drugs and recording devices. 

Thousands of experimentally developed drugs affect the nervous system, some in highly specific ways. 

Recordings of brain activity can be made using electrodes, either glued to the scalp as in EEG studies, or implanted inside the brains of animals for extracellular recordings, which can detect action potentials generated by individual neurons. 

Because the brain does not contain pain receptors, it is possible using these techniques to record brain activity from animals that are awake and behaving without causing distress. 

The same techniques have occasionally been used to study brain activity in human patients suffering from intractable epilepsy, in cases where there was a medical necessity to implant electrodes to localize the brain area responsible for epileptic seizures. 

Functional imaging techniques such as fMRI are also used to study brain activity; these techniques have mainly been used with human subjects, because they require a conscious subject to remain motionless for long periods of time, but they have the great advantage of being noninvasive.

Another approach to brain function is to examine the consequences of damage to specific brain areas. 

Even though it is protected by the skull and meninges, surrounded by cerebrospinal fluid, and isolated from the bloodstream by the blood–brain barrier, the delicate nature of the brain makes it vulnerable to numerous diseases and several types of damage. 

In humans, the effects of strokes and other types of brain damage have been a key source of information about brain function. 

Because there is no ability to experimentally control the nature of the damage, however, this information is often difficult to interpret. 

In animal studies, most commonly involving rats, it is possible to use electrodes or locally injected chemicals to produce precise patterns of damage and then examine the consequences for behavior.Computational neuroscience encompasses two approaches: first, the use of computers to study the brain; second, the study of how brains perform computation. 

On one hand, it is possible to write a computer program to simulate the operation of a group of neurons by making use of systems of equations that describe their electrochemical activity; such simulations are known as biologically realistic neural networks. 

On the other hand, it is possible to study algorithms for neural computation by simulating, or mathematically analyzing, the operations of simplified "units" that have some of the properties of neurons but abstract out much of their biological complexity. 

The computational functions of the brain are studied both by computer scientists and neuroscientists.Computational neurogenetic modeling is concerned with the study and development of dynamic neuronal models for modeling brain functions with respect to genes and dynamic interactions between genes.
Recent years have seen increasing applications of genetic and genomic techniques to the study of the brain and a focus on the roles of neurotrophic factors and physical activity in neuroplasticity. 

The most common subjects are mice, because of the availability of technical tools. 

It is now possible with relative ease to "knock out" or mutate a wide variety of genes, and then examine the effects on brain function. 

More sophisticated approaches are also being used: for example, using Cre-Lox recombination it is possible to activate or deactivate genes in specific parts of the brain, at specific times.


=== History ===


The oldest brain to have been discovered was in Armenia in the Areni-1 cave complex. 

The brain, estimated to be over 5,000 years old, was found in the skull of a 12 to 14-year-old girl. 

Although the brains were shriveled, they were well preserved due to the climate found inside the cave.Early philosophers were divided as to whether the seat of the soul lies in the brain or heart. 

Aristotle favored the heart, and thought that the function of the brain was merely to cool the blood. 

Democritus, the inventor of the atomic theory of matter, argued for a three-part soul, with intellect in the head, emotion in the heart, and lust near the liver. 

The unknown author of On the Sacred Disease, a medical treatise in the Hippocratic Corpus, came down unequivocally in favor of the brain, writing:

Men ought to know that from nothing else but the brain come joys, delights, laughter and sports, and sorrows, griefs, despondency, and lamentations. ... 

And by the same organ we become mad and delirious, and fears and terrors assail us, some by night, and some by day, and dreams and untimely wanderings, and cares that are not suitable, and ignorance of present circumstances, desuetude, and unskillfulness. 

All these things we endure from the brain, when it is not healthy...
On the Sacred Disease, attributed to Hippocrates

The Roman physician Galen also argued for the importance of the brain, and theorized in some depth about how it might work. 

Galen traced out the anatomical relationships among brain, nerves, and muscles, demonstrating that all muscles in the body are connected to the brain through a branching network of nerves. 

He postulated that nerves activate muscles mechanically by carrying a mysterious substance he called pneumata psychikon, usually translated as "animal spirits". 

Galen's ideas were widely known during the Middle Ages, but not much further progress came until the Renaissance, when detailed anatomical study resumed, combined with the theoretical speculations of René Descartes and those who followed him. 

Descartes, like Galen, thought of the nervous system in hydraulic terms. 

He believed that the highest cognitive functions are carried out by a non-physical res cogitans, but that the majority of behaviors of humans, and all behaviors of animals, could be explained mechanistically.The first real progress toward a modern understanding of nervous function, though, came from the investigations of Luigi Galvani (1737–1798), who discovered that a shock of static electricity applied to an exposed nerve of a dead frog could cause its leg to contract. 

Since that time, each major advance in understanding has followed more or less directly from the development of a new technique of investigation. 

Until the early years of the 20th century, the most important advances were derived from new methods for staining cells. 

Particularly critical was the invention of the Golgi stain, which (when correctly used) stains only a small fraction of neurons, but stains them in their entirety, including cell body, dendrites, and axon. 

Without such a stain, brain tissue under a microscope appears as an impenetrable tangle of protoplasmic fibers, in which it is impossible to determine any structure. 

In the hands of Camillo Golgi, and especially of the Spanish neuroanatomist Santiago Ramón y Cajal, the new stain revealed hundreds of distinct types of neurons, each with its own unique dendritic structure and pattern of connectivity.

In the first half of the 20th century, advances in electronics enabled investigation of the electrical properties of nerve cells, culminating in work by Alan Hodgkin, Andrew Huxley, and others on the biophysics of the action potential, and the work of Bernard Katz and others on the electrochemistry of the synapse. 

These studies complemented the anatomical picture with a conception of the brain as a dynamic entity. 

Reflecting the new understanding, in 1942 Charles Sherrington visualized the workings of the brain waking from sleep:

The great topmost sheet of the mass, that where hardly a light had twinkled or moved, becomes now a sparkling field of rhythmic flashing points with trains of traveling sparks hurrying hither and thither. 

The brain is waking and with it the mind is returning. 

It is as if the Milky Way entered upon some cosmic dance. 

Swiftly the head mass becomes an enchanted loom where millions of flashing shuttles weave a dissolving pattern, always a meaningful pattern though never an abiding one; a shifting harmony of subpatterns.
—Sherrington, 1942, Man on his Nature
The invention of electronic computers in the 1940s, along with the development of mathematical information theory, led to a realization that brains can potentially be understood as information processing systems. 

This concept formed the basis of the field of cybernetics, and eventually gave rise to the field now known as computational neuroscience. 

The earliest attempts at cybernetics were somewhat crude in that they treated the brain as essentially a digital computer in disguise, as for example in John von Neumann's 1958 book, The Computer and the Brain. 

Over the years, though, accumulating information about the electrical responses of brain cells recorded from behaving animals has steadily moved theoretical concepts in the direction of increasing realism.One of the most influential early contributions was a 1959 paper titled What the frog's eye tells the frog's brain: the paper examined the visual responses of neurons in the retina and optic tectum of frogs, and came to the conclusion that some neurons in the tectum of the frog are wired to combine elementary responses in a way that makes them function as "bug perceivers". 

A few years later David Hubel and Torsten Wiesel discovered cells in the primary visual cortex of monkeys that become active when sharp edges move across specific points in the field of view—a discovery for which they won a Nobel Prize. 

Follow-up studies in higher-order visual areas found cells that detect binocular disparity, color, movement, and aspects of shape, with areas located at increasing distances from the primary visual cortex showing increasingly complex responses. 

Other investigations of brain areas unrelated to vision have revealed cells with a wide variety of response correlates, some related to memory, some to abstract types of cognition such as space.Theorists have worked to understand these response patterns by constructing mathematical models of neurons and neural networks, which can be simulated using computers. 

Some useful models are abstract, focusing on the conceptual structure of neural algorithms rather than the details of how they are implemented in the brain; other models attempt to incorporate data about the biophysical properties of real neurons. 

No model on any level is yet considered to be a fully valid description of brain function, though. 

The essential difficulty is that sophisticated computation by neural networks requires distributed processing in which hundreds or thousands of neurons work cooperatively—current methods of brain activity recording are only capable of isolating action potentials from a few dozen neurons at a time.Furthermore, even single neurons appear to be complex and capable of performing computations. 

So, brain models that don't reflect this are too abstract to be representative of brain operation; models that do try to capture this are very computationally expensive and arguably intractable with present computational resources. 

However, the Human Brain Project is trying to build a realistic, detailed computational model of the entire human brain. 

The wisdom of this approach has been publicly contested, with high-profile scientists on both sides of the argument.
In the second half of the 20th century, developments in chemistry, electron microscopy, genetics, computer science, functional brain imaging, and other fields progressively opened new windows into brain structure and function. 

In the United States, the 1990s were officially designated as the "Decade of the Brain" to commemorate advances made in brain research, and to promote funding for such research.In the 21st century, these trends have continued, and several new approaches have come into prominence, including multielectrode recording, which allows the activity of many brain cells to be recorded all at the same time; genetic engineering, which allows molecular components of the brain to be altered experimentally; genomics, which allows variations in brain structure to be correlated with variations in DNA properties and neuroimaging.


== Society and culture ==



=== As food ===


Animal brains are used as food in numerous cuisines.


=== In rituals ===

Some archaeological evidence suggests that the mourning rituals of European Neanderthals also involved the consumption of the brain.The Fore people of Papua New Guinea are known to eat human brains. 

In funerary rituals, those close to the dead would eat the brain of the deceased to create a sense of immortality. 

A prion disease called kuru has been traced to this.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brain
;;;ES;;;

! ¡Confusión entre las últimas definiciones (TA2-2019) de cerebro, cerebro y telencéfalo!


CEREBRO


Un cerebro es un órgano que sirve como el centro del sistema nervioso en todos los animales vertebrados y la mayoría de los invertebrados.

Está ubicado en la cabeza, generalmente cerca de los órganos sensoriales para sentidos como la visión.

Es el órgano más complejo del cuerpo de un vertebrado.

En un ser humano, la corteza cerebral contiene aproximadamente de 14 a 16 mil millones de neuronas, y el número estimado de neuronas en el cerebelo es de 55 a 70 mil millones.

Cada neurona está conectada por sinapsis con varios miles de otras neuronas.

Estas neuronas generalmente se comunican entre sí por medio de fibras largas llamadas axones, que transportan trenes de pulsos de señales llamados potenciales de acción a partes distantes del cerebro o del cuerpo que se dirigen a células receptoras específicas.
Fisiológicamente, los cerebros ejercen un control centralizado sobre los demás órganos del cuerpo.

Actúan sobre el resto del cuerpo tanto generando patrones de actividad muscular como impulsando la secreción de sustancias químicas llamadas hormonas.

Este control centralizado permite respuestas rápidas y coordinadas a los cambios en el entorno.

Algunos tipos básicos de capacidad de respuesta, como los reflejos, pueden ser mediados por la médula espinal o los ganglios periféricos, pero el control sofisticado y intencionado del comportamiento basado en entradas sensoriales complejas requiere las capacidades de integración de información de un cerebro centralizado.
Las operaciones de las células cerebrales individuales ahora se comprenden con considerable detalle, pero aún no se ha resuelto la forma en que cooperan en conjuntos de millones.

Los modelos recientes de la neurociencia moderna tratan al cerebro como una computadora biológica, con un mecanismo muy diferente al de una computadora electrónica, pero similar en el sentido de que adquiere información del mundo circundante, la almacena y la procesa de diversas maneras.
Este artículo compara las propiedades de los cerebros en toda la gama de especies animales, con la mayor atención a los vertebrados.

Se trata del cerebro humano en la medida en que comparte las propiedades de otros cerebros.

Las formas en que el cerebro humano se diferencia de otros cerebros se tratan en el artículo sobre el cerebro humano.

Varios temas que podrían cubrirse aquí, en cambio, se tratan allí porque se puede decir mucho más sobre ellos en un contexto humano.

La más importante es la enfermedad cerebral y los efectos del daño cerebral, que se tratan en el artículo sobre el cerebro humano.


== Anatomía ==


La forma y el tamaño del cerebro varían mucho entre especies, y la identificación de características comunes suele ser difícil.

Sin embargo, hay una serie de principios de la arquitectura del cerebro que se aplican a una amplia gama de especies.

Algunos aspectos de la estructura del cerebro son comunes a casi toda la gama de especies animales; otros distinguen los cerebros "avanzados" de los más primitivos, o distinguen a los vertebrados de los invertebrados. La forma más sencilla de obtener información sobre la anatomía del cerebro es mediante inspección visual, pero se han desarrollado muchas técnicas más sofisticadas.

El tejido cerebral en su estado natural es demasiado blando para trabajar con él, pero puede endurecerse sumergiéndolo en alcohol u otros fijadores y luego cortarlo en rodajas para examinar el interior.

Visualmente, el interior del cerebro está formado por zonas de la denominada materia gris, de color oscuro, separadas por zonas de materia blanca, de color más claro.

Se puede obtener más información tiñendo cortes de tejido cerebral con una variedad de sustancias químicas que resaltan áreas donde tipos específicos de moléculas están presentes en altas concentraciones.

También es posible examinar la microestructura del tejido cerebral usando un microscopio y rastrear el patrón de conexiones de un área del cerebro a otra.


=== Estructura celular ===


Los cerebros de todas las especies se componen principalmente de dos amplias clases de células: neuronas y células gliales.

Las células gliales (también conocidas como glía o neuroglia) vienen en varios tipos y realizan una serie de funciones críticas, incluido el soporte estructural, el soporte metabólico, el aislamiento y la guía del desarrollo.

Las neuronas, sin embargo, generalmente se consideran las células más importantes del cerebro.
La propiedad que hace únicas a las neuronas es su capacidad para enviar señales a largas distancias a células diana específicas.

Envían estas señales por medio de un axón, que es una fibra protoplásmica delgada que se extiende desde el cuerpo celular y se proyecta, generalmente con numerosas ramificaciones, a otras áreas, a veces cercanas, a veces en partes distantes del cerebro o del cuerpo.

La longitud de un axón puede ser extraordinaria: por ejemplo, si se magnificara una célula piramidal (una neurona excitadora) de la corteza cerebral de modo que su cuerpo celular adquiriera el tamaño de un cuerpo humano, su axón, igualmente magnificado, se convertiría en un cable unos pocos centímetros de diámetro, extendiéndose más de un kilómetro.

Estos axones transmiten señales en forma de pulsos electroquímicos llamados potenciales de acción, que duran menos de una milésima de segundo y viajan a lo largo del axón a velocidades de 1 a 100 metros por segundo.

Algunas neuronas emiten potenciales de acción constantemente, a velocidades de 10 a 100 por segundo, por lo general en patrones irregulares; otras neuronas están tranquilas la mayor parte del tiempo, pero ocasionalmente emiten una ráfaga de potenciales de acción. Los axones transmiten señales a otras neuronas por medio de uniones especializadas llamadas sinapsis.

Un solo axón puede hacer varios miles de conexiones sinápticas con otras células.

Cuando un potencial de acción, que viaja a lo largo de un axón, llega a una sinapsis, hace que se libere una sustancia química llamada neurotransmisor.

El neurotransmisor se une a las moléculas receptoras en la membrana de la célula diana. Las sinapsis son los elementos funcionales clave del cerebro.

La función esencial del cerebro es la comunicación de célula a célula, y las sinapsis son los puntos en los que se produce la comunicación.

Se ha estimado que el cerebro humano contiene aproximadamente 100 billones de sinapsis; incluso el cerebro de una mosca de la fruta contiene varios millones.

Las funciones de estas sinapsis son muy diversas: algunas son excitatorias (excitando a la célula diana); otros son inhibitorios; otros funcionan activando sistemas de segundos mensajeros que cambian la química interna de sus células diana de formas complejas.

Un gran número de sinapsis son dinámicamente modificables; es decir, son capaces de cambiar la fuerza de una manera controlada por los patrones de señales que pasan a través de ellos.

Se cree ampliamente que la modificación de las sinapsis dependiente de la actividad es el mecanismo principal del cerebro para el aprendizaje y la memoria. La mayor parte del espacio en el cerebro está ocupado por axones, que a menudo se agrupan en lo que se denominan tractos de fibras nerviosas.

Un axón mielinizado está envuelto en una vaina aislante de grasa de mielina, que sirve para aumentar en gran medida la velocidad de propagación de la señal. (También hay axones no mielinizados).

La mielina es blanca, lo que hace que las partes del cerebro llenas exclusivamente de fibras nerviosas aparezcan como materia blanca de color claro, en contraste con la materia gris de color más oscuro que marca áreas con altas densidades de cuerpos celulares neuronales.


=== Evolución ===



==== Genérico sistema nervioso bilateral ====

A excepción de algunos organismos primitivos como las esponjas (que no tienen sistema nervioso) y los cnidarios (que tienen un sistema nervioso que consiste en una red nerviosa difusa), todos los animales multicelulares vivos son bilaterales, es decir, animales con una forma corporal bilateralmente simétrica (es decir, , lados izquierdo y derecho que son imágenes especulares aproximadas entre sí).

Se cree que todos los bilaterales descienden de un ancestro común que apareció a principios del período Cámbrico, hace 485-540 millones de años, y se ha planteado la hipótesis de que este ancestro común tenía la forma de un gusano tubular simple con un cuerpo segmentado.

A nivel esquemático, esa forma básica de gusano continúa reflejándose en la arquitectura del cuerpo y del sistema nervioso de todos los bilaterales modernos, incluidos los vertebrados.

La forma corporal bilateral fundamental es un tubo con una cavidad intestinal hueca que va desde la boca hasta el ano, y un cordón nervioso con un agrandamiento (un ganglio) para cada segmento del cuerpo, con un ganglio especialmente grande en la parte delantera, llamado cerebro.

El cerebro es pequeño y simple en algunas especies, como los gusanos nematodos; en otras especies, incluidos los vertebrados, es el órgano más complejo del cuerpo.

Algunos tipos de gusanos, como las sanguijuelas, también tienen un ganglio agrandado en el extremo posterior del cordón nervioso, conocido como "cerebro de cola". Existen algunos tipos de gusanos bilaterales que carecen de un cerebro reconocible, incluidos los equinodermos y los tunicados.

No se ha establecido definitivamente si la existencia de estas especies sin cerebro indica que los primeros bilaterianos carecían de cerebro o si sus antepasados ​​evolucionaron de una manera que condujo a la desaparición de una estructura cerebral previamente existente.


==== Invertebrados ====

Esta categoría incluye tardígrados, artrópodos, moluscos y numerosos tipos de gusanos.

La diversidad de planes corporales de los invertebrados se corresponde con una diversidad igual en las estructuras cerebrales. Dos grupos de invertebrados tienen cerebros notablemente complejos: los artrópodos (insectos, crustáceos, arácnidos y otros) y los cefalópodos (pulpos, calamares y moluscos similares).

Los cerebros de los artrópodos y cefalópodos surgen de cordones nerviosos paralelos gemelos que se extienden a través del cuerpo del animal.

Los artrópodos tienen un cerebro central, el ganglio supraesofágico, con tres divisiones y grandes lóbulos ópticos detrás de cada ojo para el procesamiento visual.

Los cefalópodos como el pulpo y el calamar tienen los cerebros más grandes de todos los invertebrados. Hay varias especies de invertebrados cuyos cerebros se han estudiado intensamente porque tienen propiedades que los hacen convenientes para el trabajo experimental:

Las moscas de la fruta (Drosophila), debido a la gran variedad de técnicas disponibles para estudiar su genética, han sido un tema natural para estudiar el papel de los genes en el desarrollo del cerebro.

A pesar de la gran distancia evolutiva entre insectos y mamíferos, se ha demostrado que muchos aspectos de la neurogenética de Drosophila son relevantes para los humanos.

Los primeros genes del reloj biológico, por ejemplo, se identificaron examinando mutantes de Drosophila que mostraban ciclos de actividad diarios interrumpidos.

Una búsqueda en los genomas de los vertebrados reveló un conjunto de genes análogos, que se descubrió que desempeñaban funciones similares en el reloj biológico del ratón y, por lo tanto, casi con seguridad también en el reloj biológico humano.

Los estudios realizados en Drosophila también muestran que la mayoría de las regiones neuropil del cerebro se reorganizan continuamente a lo largo de la vida en respuesta a condiciones de vida específicas.
El gusano nematodo Caenorhabditis elegans, al igual que Drosophila, se ha estudiado en gran medida debido a su importancia en la genética.

A principios de la década de 1970, Sydney Brenner lo eligió como organismo modelo para estudiar la forma en que los genes controlan el desarrollo.

Una de las ventajas de trabajar con este gusano es que el plan corporal está muy estereotipado: el sistema nervioso del hermafrodita contiene exactamente 302 neuronas, siempre en los mismos lugares, haciendo idénticas conexiones sinápticas en cada gusano.

El equipo de Brenner cortó gusanos en miles de secciones ultrafinas y fotografió cada una bajo un microscopio electrónico, luego comparó visualmente las fibras de una sección a otra, para mapear cada neurona y sinapsis en todo el cuerpo.

Se logró el diagrama de cableado neuronal completo de C.elegans: su conectoma.

Nada que se acerque a este nivel de detalle está disponible para ningún otro organismo, y la información obtenida ha permitido una multitud de estudios que de otro modo no habrían sido posibles.
La babosa de mar Aplysia californica fue elegida por el neurofisiólogo ganador del Premio Nobel Eric Kandel como modelo para estudiar la base celular del aprendizaje y la memoria, debido a la simplicidad y accesibilidad de su sistema nervioso, y ha sido examinada en cientos de experimentos.


==== Vertebrados ====

Los primeros vertebrados aparecieron hace más de 500 millones de años (Mya), durante el período Cámbrico, y pueden haberse parecido a los mixinos modernos en forma.

Los tiburones aparecieron alrededor de 450 Mya, los anfibios alrededor de 400 Mya, los reptiles alrededor de 350 Mya y los mamíferos alrededor de 200 Mya.

Cada especie tiene una historia evolutiva igualmente larga, pero los cerebros de los mixinos, lampreas, tiburones, anfibios, reptiles y mamíferos modernos muestran un gradiente de tamaño y complejidad que sigue aproximadamente la secuencia evolutiva.

Todos estos cerebros contienen el mismo conjunto de componentes anatómicos básicos, pero muchos son rudimentarios en los mixinos, mientras que en los mamíferos la parte principal (el telencéfalo) está muy elaborada y expandida. Los cerebros se comparan más simplemente en términos de su tamaño.

La relación entre el tamaño del cerebro, el tamaño del cuerpo y otras variables se ha estudiado en una amplia gama de especies de vertebrados.

Por regla general, el tamaño del cerebro aumenta con el tamaño del cuerpo, pero no en una proporción lineal simple.

En general, los animales más pequeños tienden a tener cerebros más grandes, medidos como una fracción del tamaño del cuerpo.

Para los mamíferos, la relación entre el volumen del cerebro y la masa corporal sigue esencialmente una ley de potencia con un exponente de alrededor de 0,75.

Esta fórmula describe la tendencia central, pero cada familia de mamíferos se aparta de ella en algún grado, de una forma que refleja en parte la complejidad de su comportamiento.

Por ejemplo, los primates tienen cerebros de 5 a 10 veces más grandes de lo que predice la fórmula.

Los depredadores tienden a tener cerebros más grandes que sus presas, en relación con el tamaño del cuerpo.

Todos los cerebros de vertebrados comparten una forma subyacente común, que aparece más claramente durante las primeras etapas del desarrollo embrionario.

En su forma más temprana, el cerebro aparece como tres protuberancias en el extremo anterior del tubo neural; estas protuberancias eventualmente se convierten en el prosencéfalo, el mesencéfalo y el rombencéfalo, respectivamente.

En las primeras etapas del desarrollo del cerebro, las tres áreas tienen aproximadamente el mismo tamaño.

En muchas clases de vertebrados, como los peces y los anfibios, las tres partes siguen siendo de tamaño similar en el adulto, pero en los mamíferos el cerebro anterior se vuelve mucho más grande que las otras partes y el cerebro medio se vuelve muy pequeño. Los cerebros de los vertebrados están hechos de tejido muy suave.

El tejido cerebral vivo es rosado por fuera y mayormente blanco por dentro, con sutiles variaciones de color.

Los cerebros de los vertebrados están rodeados por un sistema de membranas de tejido conectivo llamadas meninges que separan el cráneo del cerebro.

Los vasos sanguíneos ingresan al sistema nervioso central a través de orificios en las capas meníngeas.

Las células de las paredes de los vasos sanguíneos se unen estrechamente entre sí, formando la barrera hematoencefálica, que bloquea el paso de muchas toxinas y patógenos (aunque al mismo tiempo bloquea los anticuerpos y algunos medicamentos, lo que presenta desafíos especiales en el tratamiento de enfermedades). del cerebro). Los neuroanatomistas suelen dividir el cerebro de los vertebrados en seis regiones principales: el telencéfalo (hemisferios cerebrales), el diencéfalo (tálamo e hipotálamo), el mesencéfalo (cerebro medio), el cerebelo, la protuberancia y el bulbo raquídeo.

Cada una de estas áreas tiene una estructura interna compleja.

Algunas partes, como la corteza cerebral y la corteza cerebelosa, constan de capas que se pliegan o enroscan para encajar en el espacio disponible.

Otras partes, como el tálamo y el hipotálamo, consisten en grupos de muchos núcleos pequeños.

Se pueden identificar miles de áreas distinguibles dentro del cerebro de los vertebrados en función de distinciones finas de estructura neuronal, química y conectividad.

Aunque los mismos componentes básicos están presentes en todos los cerebros de los vertebrados, algunas ramas de la evolución de los vertebrados han llevado a distorsiones sustanciales de la geometría del cerebro, especialmente en el área del cerebro anterior.

El cerebro de un tiburón muestra los componentes básicos de forma sencilla, pero en los peces teleósteos (la gran mayoría de las especies de peces existentes), el cerebro anterior se ha "evertido", como un calcetín al revés.

En las aves, también hay cambios importantes en la estructura del cerebro anterior.

Estas distorsiones pueden dificultar la combinación de componentes cerebrales de una especie con los de otra especie. A continuación, se incluye una lista de algunos de los componentes cerebrales de vertebrados más importantes, junto con una breve descripción de sus funciones tal como se entienden actualmente:

La médula, junto con la médula espinal, contiene muchos núcleos pequeños involucrados en una amplia variedad de funciones motoras involuntarias y sensoriales, como vómitos, frecuencia cardíaca y procesos digestivos.
La protuberancia se encuentra en el tronco del encéfalo directamente sobre el bulbo raquídeo.

Entre otras cosas, contiene núcleos que controlan actos a menudo voluntarios pero simples, como el sueño, la respiración, la deglución, la función de la vejiga, el equilibrio, el movimiento de los ojos, las expresiones faciales y la postura.
El hipotálamo es una pequeña región en la base del cerebro anterior, cuya complejidad e importancia desmiente su tamaño.

Se compone de numerosos núcleos pequeños, cada uno con distintas conexiones y neuroquímica.

El hipotálamo participa en actos involuntarios o parcialmente voluntarios adicionales, como los ciclos de sueño y vigilia, comer y beber, y la liberación de algunas hormonas.
El tálamo es una colección de núcleos con diversas funciones: algunos están involucrados en la transmisión de información hacia y desde los hemisferios cerebrales, mientras que otros están involucrados en la motivación.

El área subtalámica (zona incerta) parece contener sistemas generadores de acción para varios tipos de comportamientos "consumadores", como comer, beber, defecar y copular.
El cerebelo modula las salidas de otros sistemas cerebrales, ya sean relacionados con el motor o el pensamiento, para hacerlos ciertos y precisos.

La extirpación del cerebelo no impide que un animal haga nada en particular, pero hace que las acciones sean vacilantes y torpes.

Esta precisión no está incorporada sino que se aprende por ensayo y error.

La coordinación muscular aprendida al andar en bicicleta es un ejemplo de un tipo de plasticidad neuronal que puede tener lugar principalmente dentro del cerebelo. El 10% del volumen total del cerebro consiste en el cerebelo y el 50% de todas las neuronas se encuentran dentro de su estructura.
El techo óptico permite que las acciones se dirijan hacia puntos en el espacio, más comúnmente en respuesta a una entrada visual.

En los mamíferos, se suele denominar colículo superior y su función mejor estudiada es la de dirigir los movimientos oculares.

También dirige los movimientos de alcance y otras acciones dirigidas a objetos.

Recibe fuertes entradas visuales, pero también entradas de otros sentidos que son útiles para dirigir acciones, como la entrada auditiva en los búhos y la entrada de los órganos de la fosa termosensibles en las serpientes.

En algunos peces primitivos, como las lampreas, esta región es la parte más grande del cerebro.

El colículo superior es parte del mesencéfalo.
El palio es una capa de materia gris que se encuentra en la superficie del cerebro anterior y es el desarrollo evolutivo más complejo y más reciente del cerebro como órgano.

En reptiles y mamíferos, se llama corteza cerebral.

Múltiples funciones involucran el palio, incluido el olfato y la memoria espacial.

En los mamíferos, donde se vuelve tan grande que domina el cerebro, asume funciones de muchas otras áreas del cerebro.

En muchos mamíferos, la corteza cerebral consta de protuberancias plegadas llamadas circunvoluciones que crean surcos profundos o fisuras llamadas surcos.

Los pliegues aumentan el área de superficie de la corteza y, por lo tanto, aumentan la cantidad de materia gris y la cantidad de información que se puede almacenar y procesar.
El hipocampo, estrictamente hablando, se encuentra solo en los mamíferos.

Sin embargo, el área de la que deriva, el palio medial, tiene contrapartes en todos los vertebrados.

Hay evidencia de que esta parte del cerebro está involucrada en eventos complejos como la memoria espacial y la navegación en peces, aves, reptiles y mamíferos.
Los ganglios basales son un grupo de estructuras interconectadas en el cerebro anterior.

La función principal de los ganglios basales parece ser la selección de acciones: envían señales inhibitorias a todas las partes del cerebro que pueden generar comportamientos motores y, en las circunstancias adecuadas, pueden liberar la inhibición, de modo que los sistemas generadores de acciones puedan ejecutar. sus acciones.

La recompensa y el castigo ejercen sus efectos neurales más importantes al alterar las conexiones dentro de los ganglios basales.
El bulbo olfativo es una estructura especial que procesa las señales sensoriales olfativas y envía su salida a la parte olfativa del palio.

Es un componente principal del cerebro en muchos vertebrados, pero está muy reducido en humanos y otros primates (cuyos sentidos están dominados por la información adquirida por la vista más que por el olfato).


===== Reptiles =====


====== Pájaros ======


===== Mamíferos =====
La diferencia más obvia entre el cerebro de los mamíferos y el de otros vertebrados es el tamaño.

En promedio, un mamífero tiene un cerebro aproximadamente dos veces más grande que el de un ave del mismo tamaño corporal y diez veces más grande que el de un reptil del mismo tamaño corporal. Sin embargo, el tamaño no es la única diferencia: hay también hay diferencias sustanciales en la forma.

El cerebro posterior y el cerebro medio de los mamíferos son generalmente similares a los de otros vertebrados, pero aparecen diferencias dramáticas en el cerebro anterior, que está muy agrandado y también alterado en su estructura.

La corteza cerebral es la parte del cerebro que distingue con más fuerza a los mamíferos.

En los vertebrados no mamíferos, la superficie del cerebro está revestida con una estructura de tres capas comparativamente simple llamada palio.

En los mamíferos, el palio evoluciona hacia una estructura compleja de seis capas llamada neocorteza o isocorteza.

Varias áreas en el borde de la neocorteza, incluidos el hipocampo y la amígdala, también están mucho más desarrolladas en los mamíferos que en otros vertebrados. La elaboración de la corteza cerebral conlleva cambios en otras áreas del cerebro.

El colículo superior, que juega un papel importante en el control visual del comportamiento en la mayoría de los vertebrados, se reduce a un tamaño pequeño en los mamíferos y muchas de sus funciones son asumidas por áreas visuales de la corteza cerebral.

El cerebelo de los mamíferos contiene una gran porción (el neocerebelo) dedicada a sostener la corteza cerebral, que no tiene equivalente en otros vertebrados.


====== Primates ======

Los cerebros de humanos y otros primates contienen las mismas estructuras que los cerebros de otros mamíferos, pero generalmente son más grandes en proporción al tamaño del cuerpo.

El cociente de encefalización (EQ) se utiliza para comparar el tamaño del cerebro entre especies.

Tiene en cuenta la no linealidad de la relación cerebro-cuerpo.

Los humanos tienen un EQ promedio en el rango de 7 a 8, mientras que la mayoría de los otros primates tienen un EQ en el rango de 2 a 3.

Los delfines tienen valores más altos que los de los primates distintos de los humanos, pero casi todos los demás mamíferos tienen valores de EQ que son sustancialmente más bajos.
La mayor parte del agrandamiento del cerebro de los primates proviene de una expansión masiva de la corteza cerebral, especialmente la corteza prefrontal y las partes de la corteza involucradas en la visión.

La red de procesamiento visual de los primates incluye al menos 30 áreas cerebrales distinguibles, con una compleja red de interconexiones.

Se ha estimado que las áreas de procesamiento visual ocupan más de la mitad de la superficie total del neocórtex de los primates.

La corteza prefrontal lleva a cabo funciones que incluyen la planificación, la memoria de trabajo, la motivación, la atención y el control ejecutivo.

Ocupa una proporción mucho mayor del cerebro de los primates que de otras especies, y una fracción especialmente grande del cerebro humano.


== Desarrollo ==


El cerebro se desarrolla en una secuencia de etapas intrincadamente orquestada.

Cambia de forma desde una simple hinchazón en la parte frontal del cordón nervioso en las etapas embrionarias más tempranas, hasta una serie compleja de áreas y conexiones.

Las neuronas se crean en zonas especiales que contienen células madre y luego migran a través del tejido para llegar a sus ubicaciones definitivas.

Una vez que las neuronas se han posicionado, sus axones brotan y navegan por el cerebro, ramificándose y extendiéndose a medida que avanzan, hasta que las puntas alcanzan sus objetivos y forman conexiones sinápticas.

En varias partes del sistema nervioso, las neuronas y las sinapsis se producen en cantidades excesivas durante las primeras etapas, y luego se eliminan las innecesarias. Para los vertebrados, las primeras etapas del desarrollo neuronal son similares en todas las especies.

A medida que el embrión se transforma de una masa redonda de células en una estructura parecida a un gusano, una estrecha franja de ectodermo que corre a lo largo de la línea media de la espalda es inducida a convertirse en la placa neural, el precursor del sistema nervioso.

La placa neural se pliega hacia adentro para formar el surco neural, y luego los labios que recubren el surco se unen para encerrar el tubo neural, un cordón hueco de células con un ventrículo lleno de líquido en el centro.

En el extremo anterior, los ventrículos y el cordón se hinchan para formar tres vesículas que son las precursoras del prosencéfalo (cerebro anterior), mesencéfalo (cerebro medio) y rombencéfalo (cerebro posterior).

En la siguiente etapa, el cerebro anterior se divide en dos vesículas llamadas telencéfalo (que contendrá la corteza cerebral, los ganglios basales y estructuras relacionadas) y el diencéfalo (que contendrá el tálamo y el hipotálamo).

Aproximadamente al mismo tiempo, el cerebro posterior se divide en el metencéfalo (que contendrá el cerebelo y la protuberancia) y el mielencéfalo (que contendrá el bulbo raquídeo).

Cada una de estas áreas contiene zonas proliferativas donde se generan neuronas y células gliales; las células resultantes luego migran, a veces por largas distancias, a sus posiciones finales. Una vez que una neurona está en su lugar, extiende las dendritas y un axón en el área que la rodea.

Debido a que comúnmente se extienden a una gran distancia del cuerpo celular y necesitan alcanzar objetivos específicos, los axones crecen de una manera particularmente compleja.

La punta de un axón en crecimiento consiste en una gota de protoplasma llamada cono de crecimiento, tachonada de receptores químicos.

Estos receptores detectan el ambiente local, haciendo que el cono de crecimiento sea atraído o repelido por varios elementos celulares y, por lo tanto, sea jalado en una dirección particular en cada punto a lo largo de su trayectoria.

El resultado de este proceso de búsqueda de caminos es que el cono de crecimiento navega a través del cerebro hasta llegar a su área de destino, donde otras señales químicas hacen que comience a generar sinapsis.

Teniendo en cuenta todo el cerebro, miles de genes crean productos que influyen en la búsqueda de rutas axonales. Sin embargo, la red sináptica que finalmente emerge está determinada solo en parte por los genes.

En muchas partes del cerebro, los axones inicialmente "crecen demasiado" y luego son "podados" por mecanismos que dependen de la actividad neuronal.

En la proyección del ojo al mesencéfalo, por ejemplo, la estructura en el adulto contiene un mapeo muy preciso, conectando cada punto en la superficie de la retina con un punto correspondiente en una capa del mesencéfalo.

En las primeras etapas de desarrollo, cada axón de la retina es guiado a la vecindad general derecha en el mesencéfalo por señales químicas, pero luego se ramifica muy profusamente y establece un contacto inicial con una amplia franja de neuronas del mesencéfalo.

La retina, antes del nacimiento, contiene mecanismos especiales que hacen que genere ondas de actividad que se originan espontáneamente en un punto aleatorio y luego se propagan lentamente a través de la capa retiniana.

Estas ondas son útiles porque hacen que las neuronas vecinas estén activas al mismo tiempo; es decir, producen un patrón de actividad neuronal que contiene información sobre la disposición espacial de las neuronas.

Esta información es aprovechada en el mesencéfalo por un mecanismo que hace que las sinapsis se debiliten y eventualmente desaparezcan, si la actividad en un axón no es seguida por la actividad de la célula diana.

El resultado de este proceso sofisticado es un ajuste y ajuste gradual del mapa, dejándolo finalmente en su forma adulta precisa. Suceden cosas similares en otras áreas del cerebro: se genera una matriz sináptica inicial como resultado de una guía química determinada genéticamente, pero luego refinado gradualmente por mecanismos dependientes de la actividad, en parte impulsados ​​por dinámicas internas, en parte por entradas sensoriales externas.

En algunos casos, como ocurre con el sistema retina-mesencéfalo, los patrones de actividad dependen de mecanismos que operan solo en el cerebro en desarrollo y aparentemente existen únicamente para guiar el desarrollo. En los humanos y muchos otros mamíferos, las nuevas neuronas se crean principalmente antes del nacimiento, y el El cerebro infantil contiene sustancialmente más neuronas que el cerebro adulto.

Sin embargo, hay algunas áreas en las que se siguen generando nuevas neuronas a lo largo de la vida.

Las dos áreas para las cuales la neurogénesis adulta está bien establecida son el bulbo olfatorio, que está involucrado en el sentido del olfato, y la circunvolución dentada del hipocampo, donde hay evidencia de que las nuevas neuronas desempeñan un papel en el almacenamiento de recuerdos recién adquiridos.

Sin embargo, con estas excepciones, el conjunto de neuronas que está presente en la primera infancia es el conjunto que está presente de por vida.

Las células gliales son diferentes: como ocurre con la mayoría de los tipos de células del cuerpo, se generan a lo largo de la vida. Durante mucho tiempo se ha debatido si las cualidades de la mente, la personalidad y la inteligencia se pueden atribuir a la herencia o a la crianza; esta es la controversia naturaleza y crianza.

Aunque quedan muchos detalles por resolver, la investigación en neurociencia ha demostrado claramente que ambos factores son importantes.

Los genes determinan la forma general del cerebro y los genes determinan cómo reacciona el cerebro a la experiencia.

Sin embargo, se requiere experiencia para refinar la matriz de conexiones sinápticas, que en su forma desarrollada contiene mucha más información que el genoma.

En algunos aspectos, todo lo que importa es la presencia o ausencia de experiencia durante los períodos críticos del desarrollo.

En otros aspectos, la cantidad y calidad de la experiencia son importantes; por ejemplo, existe evidencia sustancial de que los animales criados en ambientes enriquecidos tienen cortezas cerebrales más gruesas, lo que indica una mayor densidad de conexiones sinápticas, que los animales cuyos niveles de estimulación están restringidos.


== Fisiología ==

Las funciones del cerebro dependen de la capacidad de las neuronas para transmitir señales electroquímicas a otras células y de su capacidad para responder adecuadamente a las señales electroquímicas recibidas de otras células.

Las propiedades eléctricas de las neuronas están controladas por una amplia variedad de procesos bioquímicos y metabólicos, sobre todo las interacciones entre los neurotransmisores y los receptores que tienen lugar en las sinapsis.


=== Neurotransmisores y receptores ===

Los neurotransmisores son sustancias químicas que se liberan en las sinapsis cuando la membrana local se despolariza y el Ca2+ ingresa a la célula, generalmente cuando llega un potencial de acción a la sinapsis: los neurotransmisores se adhieren a las moléculas receptoras en la membrana de la célula (o células) diana de la sinapsis. y por lo tanto alterar las propiedades eléctricas o químicas de las moléculas receptoras.
Con pocas excepciones, cada neurona del cerebro libera el mismo neurotransmisor químico, o combinación de neurotransmisores, en todas las conexiones sinápticas que establece con otras neuronas; esta regla se conoce como el principio de Dale.

Así, una neurona se puede caracterizar por los neurotransmisores que libera.

La gran mayoría de las drogas psicoactivas ejercen sus efectos alterando sistemas de neurotransmisores específicos.

Esto se aplica a drogas como los cannabinoides, la nicotina, la heroína, la cocaína, el alcohol, la fluoxetina, la clorpromazina y muchas otras. Los dos neurotransmisores que se encuentran con más frecuencia en el cerebro de los vertebrados son el glutamato, que casi siempre ejerce efectos excitatorios sobre las neuronas diana, y ácido gamma-aminobutírico (GABA), que casi siempre es inhibitorio.

Las neuronas que utilizan estos transmisores se pueden encontrar en casi todas las partes del cerebro.

Debido a su ubicuidad, los fármacos que actúan sobre el glutamato o el GABA tienden a tener efectos amplios y potentes.

Algunos anestésicos generales actúan reduciendo los efectos del glutamato; la mayoría de los tranquilizantes ejercen sus efectos sedantes al potenciar los efectos del GABA. Hay docenas de otros neurotransmisores químicos que se usan en áreas más limitadas del cerebro, a menudo áreas dedicadas a una función particular.

La serotonina, por ejemplo, el objetivo principal de muchos medicamentos antidepresivos y muchas ayudas dietéticas, proviene exclusivamente de una pequeña área del tronco encefálico llamada núcleo del rafe.

La norepinefrina, que está involucrada en la excitación, proviene exclusivamente de un área pequeña cercana llamada locus coeruleus.

Otros neurotransmisores como la acetilcolina y la dopamina tienen múltiples fuentes en el cerebro, pero no se distribuyen de manera tan ubicua como el glutamato y el GABA.


=== Actividad eléctrica ===


Como efecto secundario de los procesos electroquímicos utilizados por las neuronas para la señalización, el tejido cerebral genera campos eléctricos cuando está activo.

Cuando un gran número de neuronas muestran actividad sincronizada, los campos eléctricos que generan pueden ser lo suficientemente grandes como para ser detectados fuera del cráneo mediante electroencefalografía (EEG) o magnetoencefalografía (MEG).

Las grabaciones de EEG, junto con las grabaciones realizadas con electrodos implantados dentro del cerebro de animales como las ratas, muestran que el cerebro de un animal vivo está constantemente activo, incluso durante el sueño.

Cada parte del cerebro muestra una mezcla de actividad rítmica y no rítmica, que puede variar según el estado de comportamiento.

En los mamíferos, la corteza cerebral tiende a mostrar grandes ondas delta lentas durante el sueño, ondas alfa más rápidas cuando el animal está despierto pero distraído, y una actividad irregular de aspecto caótico cuando el animal participa activamente en una tarea, llamadas ondas beta y gamma.

Durante un ataque epiléptico, los mecanismos de control inhibitorio del cerebro dejan de funcionar y la actividad eléctrica se eleva a niveles patológicos, produciendo trazas de EEG que muestran patrones de ondas y picos grandes que no se ven en un cerebro sano.

Relacionar estos patrones a nivel de población con las funciones computacionales de las neuronas individuales es un enfoque importante de la investigación actual en neurofisiología.


=== Metabolismo ===

Todos los vertebrados tienen una barrera hematoencefálica que permite que el metabolismo dentro del cerebro funcione de manera diferente al metabolismo en otras partes del cuerpo.

Las células gliales desempeñan un papel importante en el metabolismo del cerebro al controlar la composición química del líquido que rodea las neuronas, incluidos los niveles de iones y nutrientes. El tejido cerebral consume una gran cantidad de energía en proporción a su volumen, por lo que los cerebros grandes imponen demandas animales

La necesidad de limitar el peso corporal para, por ejemplo, volar, aparentemente ha llevado a la selección para reducir el tamaño del cerebro en algunas especies, como los murciélagos.

La mayor parte del consumo de energía del cerebro se destina a mantener la carga eléctrica (potencial de membrana) de las neuronas.

La mayoría de las especies de vertebrados dedican entre el 2% y el 8% del metabolismo basal al cerebro.

En los primates, sin embargo, el porcentaje es mucho más alto: en los humanos se eleva al 20-25%.

El consumo de energía del cerebro no varía mucho con el tiempo, pero las regiones activas de la corteza cerebral consumen algo más de energía que las regiones inactivas; esto constituye la base de los métodos de obtención de imágenes cerebrales funcionales de PET, fMRI y NIRS.

El cerebro generalmente obtiene la mayor parte de su energía del metabolismo de la glucosa dependiente del oxígeno (es decir, azúcar en la sangre), pero las cetonas brindan una fuente alternativa importante, junto con las contribuciones de los ácidos grasos de cadena media (ácidos caprílico y heptanoico), lactato, acetato y posiblemente aminoácidos.


== Función ==


La información de los órganos de los sentidos se recoge en el cerebro.

Allí se usa para determinar qué acciones debe tomar el organismo.

El cerebro procesa los datos sin procesar para extraer información sobre la estructura del entorno.

A continuación, combina la información procesada con información sobre las necesidades actuales del animal y con la memoria de circunstancias pasadas.

Finalmente, en base a los resultados, genera patrones de respuesta motora.

Estas tareas de procesamiento de señales requieren una interacción compleja entre una variedad de subsistemas funcionales. La función del cerebro es proporcionar un control coherente sobre las acciones de un animal.

Un cerebro centralizado permite que grupos de músculos se coactiven en patrones complejos; también permite que los estímulos que inciden en una parte del cuerpo provoquen respuestas en otras partes, y puede evitar que diferentes partes del cuerpo actúen con propósitos opuestos entre sí.


=== Percepción ===


El cerebro humano recibe información sobre la luz, el sonido, la composición química de la atmósfera, la temperatura, la posición del cuerpo en el espacio (propiocepción), la composición química del torrente sanguíneo y más.

En otros animales están presentes sentidos adicionales, como el sentido del calor infrarrojo de las serpientes, el sentido del campo magnético de algunas aves o el sentido del campo eléctrico que se observa principalmente en los animales acuáticos.
Cada sistema sensorial comienza con células receptoras especializadas, como las células fotorreceptoras en la retina del ojo o las células ciliadas sensibles a las vibraciones en la cóclea del oído.

Los axones de las células receptoras sensoriales viajan a la médula espinal o al cerebro, donde transmiten sus señales a un núcleo sensorial de primer orden dedicado a una modalidad sensorial específica.

Este núcleo sensorial primario envía información a áreas sensoriales de orden superior que se dedican a la misma modalidad.

Eventualmente, a través de una estación de paso en el tálamo, las señales se envían a la corteza cerebral, donde se procesan para extraer las características relevantes y se integran con señales provenientes de otros sistemas sensoriales.


=== Control de motores ===

Los sistemas motores son áreas del cerebro que están involucradas en la iniciación de los movimientos corporales, es decir, en la activación de los músculos.

Excepto los músculos que controlan el ojo, que son impulsados ​​por núcleos en el mesencéfalo, todos los músculos voluntarios del cuerpo están inervados directamente por neuronas motoras en la médula espinal y el rombencéfalo.

Las neuronas motoras espinales están controladas tanto por circuitos neuronales intrínsecos a la médula espinal como por entradas que descienden del cerebro.

Los circuitos espinales intrínsecos implementan muchas respuestas reflejas y contienen generadores de patrones para movimientos rítmicos como caminar o nadar.

Las conexiones descendentes del cerebro permiten un control más sofisticado. El cerebro contiene varias áreas motoras que se proyectan directamente a la médula espinal.

En el nivel más bajo están las áreas motoras en el bulbo raquídeo y la protuberancia, que controlan movimientos estereotipados como caminar, respirar o tragar.

En un nivel superior se encuentran áreas del mesencéfalo, como el núcleo rojo, que se encarga de coordinar los movimientos de brazos y piernas.

En un nivel aún más alto se encuentra la corteza motora primaria, una tira de tejido ubicada en el borde posterior del lóbulo frontal.

La corteza motora primaria envía proyecciones a las áreas motoras subcorticales, pero también envía una proyección masiva directamente a la médula espinal, a través del tracto piramidal.

Esta proyección corticoespinal directa permite un control voluntario preciso de los detalles finos de los movimientos.

Otras áreas cerebrales relacionadas con la motricidad ejercen efectos secundarios al proyectarse a las áreas motoras primarias.

Entre las áreas secundarias más importantes se encuentran la corteza premotora, el área motora suplementaria, los ganglios basales y el cerebelo.

Además de todo lo anterior, el cerebro y la médula espinal contienen un extenso circuito para controlar el sistema nervioso autónomo que controla el movimiento del músculo liso del cuerpo.


=== Sueño ===


Muchos animales alternan entre dormir y despertar en un ciclo diario.

La excitación y el estado de alerta también son modulados en una escala de tiempo más fina por una red de áreas cerebrales.

Un componente clave del sistema del sueño es el núcleo supraquiasmático (SCN), una pequeña parte del hipotálamo ubicada directamente sobre el punto en el que se cruzan los nervios ópticos de los dos ojos.

El SCN contiene el reloj biológico central del cuerpo.

Las neuronas allí muestran niveles de actividad que suben y bajan con un período de aproximadamente 24 horas, ritmos circadianos: estas fluctuaciones de actividad son impulsadas por cambios rítmicos en la expresión de un conjunto de "genes de reloj".

El SCN continúa marcando el tiempo, incluso si se extirpa del cerebro y se coloca en un plato con una solución nutritiva tibia, pero normalmente recibe información de los nervios ópticos, a través del tracto retinohipotalámico (RHT), que permite que se produzcan los ciclos diarios de luz y oscuridad. calibrar el reloj. El SCN se proyecta a un conjunto de áreas en el hipotálamo, el tronco encefálico y el mesencéfalo que están involucradas en la implementación de los ciclos de sueño y vigilia.

Un componente importante del sistema es la formación reticular, un grupo de cúmulos de neuronas dispersos de forma difusa a través del núcleo de la parte inferior del cerebro.

Las neuronas reticulares envían señales al tálamo, que a su vez envía señales de control del nivel de actividad a cada parte de la corteza.

El daño a la formación reticular puede producir un estado de coma permanente. El sueño implica grandes cambios en la actividad cerebral.

Hasta la década de 1950, generalmente se creía que el cerebro esencialmente se apaga durante el sueño, pero ahora se sabe que esto está lejos de ser cierto; la actividad continúa, pero los patrones se vuelven muy diferentes.

Hay dos tipos de sueño: sueño REM (con sueños) y sueño NREM (no REM, por lo general sin sueños), que se repiten en patrones ligeramente variables a lo largo de un episodio de sueño.

Se pueden medir tres tipos amplios de patrones distintos de actividad cerebral: REM, NREM ligero y NREM profundo.

Durante el sueño profundo NREM, también llamado sueño de ondas lentas, la actividad en la corteza toma la forma de grandes ondas sincronizadas, mientras que en el estado de vigilia es ruidosa y desincronizada.

Los niveles de los neurotransmisores noradrenalina y serotonina descienden durante el sueño de ondas lentas y descienden casi a cero durante el sueño REM; los niveles de acetilcolina muestran el patrón inverso.


=== Homeostasis ===


Para cualquier animal, la supervivencia requiere mantener una variedad de parámetros de estado corporal dentro de un rango limitado de variación: estos incluyen temperatura, contenido de agua, concentración de sal en el torrente sanguíneo, niveles de glucosa en sangre, nivel de oxígeno en sangre y otros.

La capacidad de un animal para regular el entorno interno de su cuerpo, el milieu intérieur, como lo llamó el fisiólogo pionero Claude Bernard, se conoce como homeostasis (que en griego significa "estar quieto").

Mantener la homeostasis es una función crucial del cerebro.

El principio básico que subyace a la homeostasis es la retroalimentación negativa: cada vez que un parámetro se desvía de su punto de ajuste, los sensores generan una señal de error que provoca una respuesta que hace que el parámetro vuelva a su valor óptimo. (Este principio se usa mucho en ingeniería, por ejemplo, en el control de la temperatura mediante un termostato).
En los vertebrados, la parte del cerebro que juega un papel más importante es el hipotálamo, una pequeña región en la base del cerebro anterior cuyo tamaño no refleja su complejidad o la importancia de su función.

El hipotálamo es una colección de pequeños núcleos, la mayoría de los cuales están involucrados en funciones biológicas básicas.

Algunas de estas funciones se relacionan con la excitación o las interacciones sociales como la sexualidad, la agresión o los comportamientos maternales; pero muchos de ellos se relacionan con la homeostasis.

Varios núcleos hipotalámicos reciben información de sensores ubicados en el revestimiento de los vasos sanguíneos, que transmiten información sobre la temperatura, el nivel de sodio, el nivel de glucosa, el nivel de oxígeno en la sangre y otros parámetros.

Estos núcleos hipotalámicos envían señales de salida a las áreas motoras que pueden generar acciones para corregir deficiencias.

Algunas de las salidas también van a la glándula pituitaria, una pequeña glándula adherida al cerebro directamente debajo del hipotálamo.

La glándula pituitaria secreta hormonas en el torrente sanguíneo, donde circulan por todo el cuerpo e inducen cambios en la actividad celular.


=== Motivación ===


Los animales individuales necesitan expresar comportamientos que promuevan la supervivencia, como buscar comida, agua, refugio y pareja.

El sistema motivacional en el cerebro monitorea el estado actual de satisfacción de estos objetivos y activa comportamientos para satisfacer cualquier necesidad que surja.

El sistema motivacional funciona en gran medida mediante un mecanismo de recompensa-castigo.

Cuando un comportamiento en particular es seguido por consecuencias favorables, se activa el mecanismo de recompensa en el cerebro, lo que induce cambios estructurales dentro del cerebro que hacen que el mismo comportamiento se repita más tarde, siempre que se presente una situación similar.

Por el contrario, cuando un comportamiento va seguido de consecuencias desfavorables, el mecanismo de castigo del cerebro se activa, induciendo cambios estructurales que hacen que el comportamiento se suprima cuando surjan situaciones similares en el futuro. La mayoría de los organismos estudiados hasta la fecha utilizan un mecanismo de recompensa-castigo: por ejemplo , gusanos e insectos pueden alterar su comportamiento para buscar fuentes de alimento o evitar peligros.

En los vertebrados, el sistema de recompensa-castigo se implementa mediante un conjunto específico de estructuras cerebrales, en cuyo centro se encuentran los ganglios basales, un conjunto de áreas interconectadas en la base del cerebro anterior.

Los ganglios basales son el sitio central en el que se toman las decisiones: los ganglios basales ejercen un control inhibitorio sostenido sobre la mayoría de los sistemas motores del cerebro; cuando se libera esta inhibición, se permite que un sistema motor ejecute la acción para la que está programado.

Las recompensas y los castigos funcionan alterando la relación entre las entradas que reciben los ganglios basales y las señales de decisión que se emiten.

El mecanismo de recompensa se comprende mejor que el mecanismo de castigo, porque su papel en el abuso de drogas ha hecho que se estudie muy intensamente.

La investigación ha demostrado que el neurotransmisor dopamina juega un papel central: las drogas adictivas como la cocaína, las anfetaminas y la nicotina hacen que aumenten los niveles de dopamina o que aumenten los efectos de la dopamina dentro del cerebro.


=== Aprendizaje y memoria ===

Casi todos los animales son capaces de modificar su comportamiento como resultado de la experiencia, incluso los tipos de gusanos más primitivos.

Debido a que el comportamiento es impulsado por la actividad cerebral, los cambios en el comportamiento deben corresponder de alguna manera a los cambios dentro del cerebro.

Ya a finales del siglo XIX teóricos como Santiago Ramón y Cajal defendían que la explicación más plausible es que el aprendizaje y la memoria se expresan como cambios en las conexiones sinápticas entre neuronas.

Sin embargo, hasta 1970 faltaba evidencia experimental para apoyar la hipótesis de la plasticidad sináptica.

En 1971, Tim Bliss y Terje Lømo publicaron un artículo sobre un fenómeno que ahora se llama potenciación a largo plazo: el artículo mostró una clara evidencia de cambios sinápticos inducidos por la actividad que duraron al menos varios días.

Desde entonces, los avances técnicos han hecho que este tipo de experimentos sean mucho más fáciles de realizar y se han realizado miles de estudios que han aclarado el mecanismo del cambio sináptico y han descubierto otros tipos de cambios sinápticos impulsados ​​por la actividad en una variedad de áreas del cerebro, que incluyen la corteza cerebral, el hipocampo, los ganglios basales y el cerebelo.

El factor neurotrófico derivado del cerebro (BDNF) y la actividad física parecen desempeñar un papel beneficioso en el proceso. Actualmente, los neurocientíficos distinguen varios tipos de aprendizaje y memoria que el cerebro implementa de distintas maneras:

La memoria de trabajo es la capacidad del cerebro para mantener una representación temporal de información sobre la tarea que un animal está realizando actualmente.

Se cree que este tipo de memoria dinámica está mediada por la formación de ensamblajes de células, grupos de neuronas activadas que mantienen su actividad estimulándose constantemente unas a otras.
La memoria episódica es la capacidad de recordar los detalles de eventos específicos.

Este tipo de memoria puede durar toda la vida.

Mucha evidencia implica que el hipocampo juega un papel crucial: las personas con daños severos en el hipocampo a veces muestran amnesia, es decir, incapacidad para formar nuevos recuerdos episódicos duraderos.
La memoria semántica es la capacidad de aprender hechos y relaciones.

Es probable que este tipo de memoria se almacene en gran medida en la corteza cerebral, mediada por cambios en las conexiones entre células que representan tipos específicos de información.
El aprendizaje instrumental es la capacidad de recompensas y castigos para modificar el comportamiento.

Se implementa mediante una red de áreas cerebrales centradas en los ganglios basales.
El aprendizaje motor es la capacidad de refinar los patrones de movimiento del cuerpo mediante la práctica o, de manera más general, mediante la repetición.

Varias áreas del cerebro están involucradas, incluida la corteza premotora, los ganglios basales y especialmente el cerebelo, que funciona como un gran banco de memoria para microajustes de los parámetros del movimiento.


== Investigación ==


El campo de la neurociencia engloba todos los enfoques que buscan comprender el cerebro y el resto del sistema nervioso.

La psicología busca comprender la mente y el comportamiento, y la neurología es la disciplina médica que diagnostica y trata las enfermedades del sistema nervioso.

El cerebro es también el órgano más importante estudiado en psiquiatría, la rama de la medicina que trabaja para estudiar, prevenir y tratar los trastornos mentales.

La ciencia cognitiva busca unificar la neurociencia y la psicología con otros campos que se ocupan del cerebro, como la informática (inteligencia artificial y campos similares) y la filosofía. El método más antiguo para estudiar el cerebro es anatómico, y hasta mediados del siglo XX. , gran parte del progreso en neurociencia provino del desarrollo de mejores tinciones celulares y mejores microscopios.

Los neuroanatomistas estudian la estructura a gran escala del cerebro, así como la estructura microscópica de las neuronas y sus componentes, especialmente las sinapsis.

Entre otras herramientas, emplean una plétora de tinciones que revelan la estructura neuronal, la química y la conectividad.

En los últimos años, el desarrollo de técnicas de inmunotinción ha permitido la investigación de neuronas que expresan conjuntos específicos de genes.

Además, la neuroanatomía funcional utiliza técnicas de imágenes médicas para correlacionar variaciones en la estructura del cerebro humano con diferencias en la cognición o el comportamiento. Los neurofisiólogos estudian las propiedades químicas, farmacológicas y eléctricas del cerebro: sus principales herramientas son las drogas y los dispositivos de registro.

Miles de medicamentos desarrollados experimentalmente afectan el sistema nervioso, algunos de formas muy específicas.

Los registros de la actividad cerebral se pueden realizar utilizando electrodos, ya sea pegados al cuero cabelludo como en los estudios de EEG, o implantados dentro del cerebro de los animales para registros extracelulares, que pueden detectar potenciales de acción generados por neuronas individuales.

Debido a que el cerebro no contiene receptores del dolor, es posible usar estas técnicas para registrar la actividad cerebral de animales que están despiertos y se comportan sin causar angustia.

Las mismas técnicas se han utilizado ocasionalmente para estudiar la actividad cerebral en pacientes humanos que padecen epilepsia intratable, en casos en los que había una necesidad médica de implantar electrodos para localizar el área del cerebro responsable de los ataques epilépticos.

Las técnicas de imagen funcional como fMRI también se utilizan para estudiar la actividad cerebral; estas técnicas se han utilizado principalmente con sujetos humanos, porque requieren que un sujeto consciente permanezca inmóvil durante largos períodos de tiempo, pero tienen la gran ventaja de ser no invasivas.

Otro enfoque de la función cerebral es examinar las consecuencias del daño en áreas específicas del cerebro.

Aunque está protegido por el cráneo y las meninges, rodeado de líquido cefalorraquídeo y aislado del torrente sanguíneo por la barrera hematoencefálica, la delicada naturaleza del cerebro lo hace vulnerable a numerosas enfermedades y varios tipos de daños.

En los seres humanos, los efectos de los accidentes cerebrovasculares y otros tipos de daños cerebrales han sido una fuente clave de información sobre la función cerebral.

Sin embargo, debido a que no existe la capacidad de controlar experimentalmente la naturaleza del daño, esta información suele ser difícil de interpretar.

En estudios con animales, más comúnmente con ratas, es posible usar electrodos o químicos inyectados localmente para producir patrones precisos de daño y luego examinar las consecuencias para el comportamiento. La neurociencia computacional abarca dos enfoques: primero, el uso de computadoras para estudiar el cerebro; segundo, el estudio de cómo el cerebro realiza los cálculos.

Por un lado, es posible escribir un programa de computadora para simular el funcionamiento de un grupo de neuronas haciendo uso de sistemas de ecuaciones que describen su actividad electroquímica; tales simulaciones se conocen como redes neuronales biológicamente realistas.

Por otro lado, es posible estudiar algoritmos para el cálculo neuronal simulando o analizando matemáticamente las operaciones de "unidades" simplificadas que tienen algunas de las propiedades de las neuronas pero abstraen gran parte de su complejidad biológica.

Las funciones computacionales del cerebro son estudiadas tanto por informáticos como por neurocientíficos. El modelado neurogenético computacional se ocupa del estudio y desarrollo de modelos neuronales dinámicos para modelar las funciones cerebrales con respecto a los genes y las interacciones dinámicas entre genes.
En los últimos años se han visto aplicaciones cada vez mayores de técnicas genéticas y genómicas para el estudio del cerebro y un enfoque en los roles de los factores neurotróficos y la actividad física en la neuroplasticidad.

Los temas más comunes son los ratones, debido a la disponibilidad de herramientas técnicas.

Ahora es posible con relativa facilidad "noquear" o mutar una amplia variedad de genes y luego examinar los efectos sobre la función cerebral.

También se están utilizando enfoques más sofisticados: por ejemplo, usando la recombinación Cre-Lox es posible activar o desactivar genes en partes específicas del cerebro, en momentos específicos.


=== Historia ===


El cerebro más antiguo que se descubrió fue en Armenia en el complejo de cuevas Areni-1.

El cerebro, que se estima que tiene más de 5.000 años, se encontró en el cráneo de una niña de 12 a 14 años.

Aunque los cerebros estaban arrugados, estaban bien conservados debido al clima que se encontraba dentro de la cueva. Los primeros filósofos estaban divididos en cuanto a si el asiento del alma se encontraba en el cerebro o en el corazón.

Aristóteles favorecía el corazón y pensaba que la función del cerebro era simplemente enfriar la sangre.

Demócrito, el inventor de la teoría atómica de la materia, abogó por un alma de tres partes, con el intelecto en la cabeza, la emoción en el corazón y la lujuria cerca del hígado.

El autor desconocido de Sobre la enfermedad sagrada, un tratado médico del Corpus hipocrático, se pronunció inequívocamente a favor del cerebro, escribiendo:

Los hombres deben saber que de nada más que del cerebro provienen alegrías, deleites, risas y deportes, y penas, penas, desánimo y lamentaciones. ...

Y por el mismo órgano nos enloquecemos y deliramos, y nos asaltan miedos y terrores, unos de noche, y otros de día, y sueños y vagabundeos inoportunos, y cuidados que no convienen, y desconocimiento de las circunstancias presentes, desuso e inhabilidad. .

Todas estas cosas que aguantamos del cerebro, cuando no está sano...
Sobre la Sagrada Enfermedad, atribuida a Hipócrates

El médico romano Galeno también defendió la importancia del cerebro y teorizó con cierta profundidad sobre cómo podría funcionar.

Galen trazó las relaciones anatómicas entre el cerebro, los nervios y los músculos, demostrando que todos los músculos del cuerpo están conectados al cerebro a través de una red ramificada de nervios.

Postuló que los nervios activan los músculos mecánicamente al llevar una sustancia misteriosa que llamó pneumata psychikon, generalmente traducida como "espíritus animales".

Las ideas de Galeno fueron ampliamente conocidas durante la Edad Media, pero no hubo mucho progreso hasta el Renacimiento, cuando se reanudó el estudio anatómico detallado, combinado con las especulaciones teóricas de René Descartes y sus seguidores.

Descartes, como Galeno, pensó en el sistema nervioso en términos hidráulicos.

Él creía que las funciones cognitivas más altas son realizadas por una res cogitans no física, pero que la mayoría de los comportamientos de los humanos, y todos los comportamientos de los animales, podrían explicarse mecánicamente. El primer progreso real hacia una comprensión moderna de la función nerviosa, sin embargo, provino de las investigaciones de Luigi Galvani (1737–1798), quien descubrió que una descarga de electricidad estática aplicada a un nervio expuesto de una rana muerta podía hacer que su pata se contrajera.

Desde entonces, cada gran avance en la comprensión ha seguido más o menos directamente del desarrollo de una nueva técnica de investigación.

Hasta los primeros años del siglo XX, los avances más importantes se derivaron de los nuevos métodos de tinción de células.

Particularmente crítica fue la invención de la tinción de Golgi, que (cuando se usa correctamente) tiñe solo una pequeña fracción de las neuronas, pero las tiñe en su totalidad, incluido el cuerpo celular, las dendritas y el axón.

Sin tal tinción, el tejido cerebral bajo el microscopio aparece como una maraña impenetrable de fibras protoplásmicas, en la que es imposible determinar ninguna estructura.

En manos de Camillo Golgi, y especialmente del neuroanatomista español Santiago Ramón y Cajal, la nueva tinción reveló cientos de tipos distintos de neuronas, cada una con su propia estructura dendrítica y patrón de conectividad únicos.

En la primera mitad del siglo XX, los avances en la electrónica permitieron la investigación de las propiedades eléctricas de las células nerviosas, lo que culminó con el trabajo de Alan Hodgkin, Andrew Huxley y otros sobre la biofísica del potencial de acción, y el trabajo de Bernard Katz y otros. sobre la electroquímica de la sinapsis.

Estos estudios complementaron el cuadro anatómico con una concepción del cerebro como una entidad dinámica.

Como reflejo de la nueva comprensión, en 1942 Charles Sherrington visualizó el funcionamiento del cerebro al despertar del sueño:

La gran lámina superior de la masa, donde apenas una luz había parpadeado o se había movido, se convierte ahora en un campo chispeante de rítmicos puntos centelleantes con trenes de chispas viajeras que se precipitan de un lado a otro.

El cerebro se está despertando y con él la mente está regresando.

Es como si la Vía Láctea entrara en una danza cósmica.

Rápidamente, la masa de la cabeza se convierte en un telar encantado donde millones de lanzaderas resplandecientes tejen un patrón que se disuelve, siempre un patrón significativo aunque nunca duradero; una armonía cambiante de subpatrones.
—Sherrington, 1942, El hombre en su naturaleza
La invención de las computadoras electrónicas en la década de 1940, junto con el desarrollo de la teoría matemática de la información, llevó a comprender que los cerebros pueden entenderse potencialmente como sistemas de procesamiento de información.

Este concepto formó la base del campo de la cibernética y eventualmente dio lugar al campo que ahora se conoce como neurociencia computacional.

Los primeros intentos de cibernética fueron algo toscos en el sentido de que trataban al cerebro como una computadora digital disfrazada, como por ejemplo en el libro de John von Neumann de 1958, The Computer and the Brain.

A lo largo de los años, sin embargo, la acumulación de información sobre las respuestas eléctricas de las células cerebrales registradas en el comportamiento de los animales ha movido constantemente los conceptos teóricos en la dirección de aumentar el realismo. Una de las primeras contribuciones más influyentes fue un artículo de 1959 titulado What the frog's eye tells the frog's cerebro: el artículo examinó las respuestas visuales de las neuronas en la retina y el techo óptico de las ranas, y llegó a la conclusión de que algunas neuronas en el techo de la rana están conectadas para combinar respuestas elementales de una manera que las hace funcionar como "perceptores de insectos". ".

Unos años más tarde, David Hubel y Torsten Wiesel descubrieron células en la corteza visual primaria de los monos que se activan cuando los bordes afilados se mueven a través de puntos específicos en el campo de visión, un descubrimiento por el que ganaron un Premio Nobel.

Los estudios de seguimiento en áreas visuales de orden superior encontraron células que detectan disparidad binocular, color, movimiento y aspectos de la forma, con áreas ubicadas a distancias cada vez mayores de la corteza visual primaria que muestran respuestas cada vez más complejas.

Otras investigaciones de áreas del cerebro no relacionadas con la visión han revelado células con una amplia variedad de respuestas correlativas, algunas relacionadas con la memoria, otras con tipos abstractos de cognición como el espacio. Los teóricos han trabajado para comprender estos patrones de respuesta mediante la construcción de modelos matemáticos de neuronas y neuronas. redes, que se pueden simular usando computadoras.

Algunos modelos útiles son abstractos y se centran en la estructura conceptual de los algoritmos neuronales en lugar de los detalles de cómo se implementan en el cerebro; otros modelos intentan incorporar datos sobre las propiedades biofísicas de las neuronas reales.

Sin embargo, todavía no se considera que ningún modelo en ningún nivel sea una descripción completamente válida de la función cerebral.

La dificultad esencial es que la computación sofisticada por redes neuronales requiere un procesamiento distribuido en el que cientos o miles de neuronas trabajan de manera cooperativa; los métodos actuales de registro de la actividad cerebral solo son capaces de aislar los potenciales de acción de unas pocas docenas de neuronas a la vez. Además, incluso las neuronas individuales parecen ser complejos y capaces de realizar cálculos.

Entonces, los modelos cerebrales que no reflejan esto son demasiado abstractos para ser representativos del funcionamiento del cerebro; los modelos que intentan capturar esto son muy costosos desde el punto de vista computacional y posiblemente intratables con los recursos computacionales actuales.

Sin embargo, el Proyecto Cerebro Humano está tratando de construir un modelo computacional realista y detallado de todo el cerebro humano.

La sabiduría de este enfoque ha sido cuestionada públicamente, con científicos de alto perfil en ambos lados del argumento.
En la segunda mitad del siglo XX, los desarrollos en química, microscopía electrónica, genética, informática, imágenes cerebrales funcionales y otros campos abrieron progresivamente nuevas ventanas a la estructura y función del cerebro.

En los Estados Unidos, la década de 1990 se designó oficialmente como la "Década del cerebro" para conmemorar los avances logrados en la investigación del cerebro y promover la financiación de dicha investigación. En el siglo XXI, estas tendencias han continuado y han surgido varios enfoques nuevos. en prominencia, incluida la grabación multielectrodo, que permite registrar la actividad de muchas células cerebrales al mismo tiempo; la ingeniería genética, que permite alterar experimentalmente componentes moleculares del cerebro; la genómica, que permite correlacionar variaciones en la estructura cerebral con variaciones en las propiedades del ADN y la neuroimagen.


== Sociedad y cultura ==



=== Como alimento ===


Los cerebros de animales se utilizan como alimento en numerosas cocinas.


=== En rituales ===

Cierta evidencia arqueológica sugiere que los rituales de duelo de los neandertales europeos también involucraban el consumo del cerebro. Se sabe que la gente Fore de Papúa Nueva Guinea come cerebros humanos.

En los rituales funerarios, las personas cercanas a los muertos comerían el cerebro del difunto para crear una sensación de inmortalidad.

Se ha atribuido a esto una enfermedad priónica llamada kuru.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cerebro

;;;PT;;;

! Confusão entre as últimas definições (TA2-2019) de cérebro, cérebro e telencéfalo!


CÉREBRO


O cérebro é um órgão que serve como o centro do sistema nervoso em todos os animais vertebrados e na maioria dos animais invertebrados.

Ele está localizado na cabeça, geralmente próximo aos órgãos sensoriais para sentidos como a visão.

É o órgão mais complexo do corpo de um vertebrado.

Em um ser humano, o córtex cerebral contém aproximadamente 14 a 16 bilhões de neurônios, e o número estimado de neurônios no cerebelo é de 55 a 70 bilhões.

Cada neurônio está conectado por sinapses a vários milhares de outros neurônios.

Esses neurônios normalmente se comunicam entre si por meio de fibras longas chamadas axônios, que transportam trens de pulsos de sinal chamados potenciais de ação para partes distantes do cérebro ou do corpo visando células receptoras específicas.
Fisiologicamente, os cérebros exercem controle centralizado sobre os outros órgãos do corpo.

Eles agem no resto do corpo gerando padrões de atividade muscular e conduzindo a secreção de substâncias químicas chamadas hormônios.

Esse controle centralizado permite respostas rápidas e coordenadas às mudanças no ambiente.

Alguns tipos básicos de responsividade, como os reflexos, podem ser mediados pela medula espinhal ou pelos gânglios periféricos, mas o controle proposital sofisticado do comportamento baseado em entradas sensoriais complexas requer as capacidades de integração de informações de um cérebro centralizado.
As operações de células cerebrais individuais são agora compreendidas em detalhes consideráveis, mas a maneira como elas cooperam em conjuntos de milhões ainda não foi resolvida.

Modelos recentes da neurociência moderna tratam o cérebro como um computador biológico, muito diferente em mecanismo de um computador eletrônico, mas semelhante no sentido de que adquire informações do mundo circundante, armazena-as e processa-as de várias maneiras.
Este artigo compara as propriedades dos cérebros em toda a gama de espécies animais, com maior atenção aos vertebrados.

Ele lida com o cérebro humano na medida em que compartilha as propriedades de outros cérebros.

As maneiras pelas quais o cérebro humano difere de outros cérebros são abordadas no artigo sobre o cérebro humano.

Vários tópicos que podem ser abordados aqui são abordados lá porque muito mais pode ser dito sobre eles em um contexto humano.

O mais importante é a doença cerebral e os efeitos dos danos cerebrais, que são abordados no artigo sobre o cérebro humano.


== Anatomia ==


A forma e o tamanho do cérebro variam muito entre as espécies, e identificar características comuns é muitas vezes difícil.

No entanto, existem vários princípios da arquitetura cerebral que se aplicam a uma ampla gama de espécies.

Alguns aspectos da estrutura cerebral são comuns a quase todas as espécies animais; outros distinguem cérebros "avançados" de mais primitivos, ou distinguem vertebrados de invertebrados. A maneira mais simples de obter informações sobre a anatomia do cérebro é por inspeção visual, mas muitas técnicas mais sofisticadas foram desenvolvidas.

O tecido cerebral em seu estado natural é muito mole para trabalhar, mas pode ser endurecido por imersão em álcool ou outros fixadores e depois cortado em pedaços para exame do interior.

Visualmente, o interior do cérebro é composto por áreas da chamada matéria cinzenta, de cor escura, separadas por áreas de matéria branca, de cor mais clara.

Mais informações podem ser obtidas pela coloração de fatias de tecido cerebral com uma variedade de produtos químicos que revelam áreas onde tipos específicos de moléculas estão presentes em altas concentrações.

Também é possível examinar a microestrutura do tecido cerebral usando um microscópio e traçar o padrão de conexões de uma área do cérebro para outra.


=== Estrutura celular ===


Os cérebros de todas as espécies são compostos principalmente por duas grandes classes de células: neurônios e células gliais.

As células gliais (também conhecidas como glia ou neuroglia) vêm em vários tipos e desempenham várias funções críticas, incluindo suporte estrutural, suporte metabólico, isolamento e orientação do desenvolvimento.

Os neurônios, no entanto, são geralmente considerados as células mais importantes do cérebro.
A propriedade que torna os neurônios únicos é sua capacidade de enviar sinais para células-alvo específicas por longas distâncias.

Eles enviam esses sinais por meio de um axônio, que é uma fibra protoplasmática fina que se estende do corpo celular e se projeta, geralmente com inúmeras ramificações, para outras áreas, às vezes próximas, às vezes em partes distantes do cérebro ou do corpo.

O comprimento de um axônio pode ser extraordinário: por exemplo, se uma célula piramidal (um neurônio excitatório) do córtex cerebral fosse ampliada de modo que seu corpo celular se tornasse do tamanho de um corpo humano, seu axônio, igualmente ampliado, se tornaria um cabo alguns centímetros de diâmetro, estendendo-se por mais de um quilômetro.

Esses axônios transmitem sinais na forma de pulsos eletroquímicos chamados potenciais de ação, que duram menos de um milésimo de segundo e viajam ao longo do axônio a velocidades de 1 a 100 metros por segundo.

Alguns neurônios emitem potenciais de ação constantemente, a taxas de 10 a 100 por segundo, geralmente em padrões irregulares; outros neurônios ficam quietos a maior parte do tempo, mas ocasionalmente emitem uma explosão de potenciais de ação. Os axônios transmitem sinais para outros neurônios por meio de junções especializadas chamadas sinapses.

Um único axônio pode fazer milhares de conexões sinápticas com outras células.

Quando um potencial de ação, viajando ao longo de um axônio, chega a uma sinapse, ele causa a liberação de uma substância química chamada neurotransmissor.

O neurotransmissor se liga a moléculas receptoras na membrana da célula-alvo. As sinapses são os principais elementos funcionais do cérebro.

A função essencial do cérebro é a comunicação célula a célula, e as sinapses são os pontos em que a comunicação ocorre.

Estima-se que o cérebro humano contenha aproximadamente 100 trilhões de sinapses; até o cérebro de uma mosca da fruta contém vários milhões.

As funções dessas sinapses são muito diversas: algumas são excitatórias (excitando a célula-alvo); outros são inibitórios; outros funcionam ativando sistemas de segundos mensageiros que alteram a química interna de suas células-alvo de maneiras complexas.

Um grande número de sinapses é modificável dinamicamente; isto é, eles são capazes de mudar a força de uma forma que é controlada pelos padrões de sinais que passam por eles.

Acredita-se amplamente que a modificação dependente da atividade das sinapses é o mecanismo primário do cérebro para aprendizado e memória. A maior parte do espaço no cérebro é ocupada por axônios, que geralmente são agrupados nos chamados tratos de fibras nervosas.

Um axônio mielinizado é envolto em uma bainha isolante de mielina gordurosa, que serve para aumentar muito a velocidade de propagação do sinal. (Há também axônios não mielinizados).

A mielina é branca, fazendo com que partes do cérebro preenchidas exclusivamente com fibras nervosas apareçam como substância branca de cor clara, em contraste com a substância cinzenta de cor mais escura que marca áreas com alta densidade de corpos celulares de neurônios.


=== Evolução ===



==== Sistema nervoso bilateral genérico ====

Com exceção de alguns organismos primitivos, como esponjas (que não têm sistema nervoso) e cnidários (que têm um sistema nervoso que consiste em uma rede nervosa difusa), todos os animais multicelulares vivos são bilaterianos, ou seja, animais com uma forma corporal bilateralmente simétrica (ou seja, , lados esquerdo e direito que são imagens espelhadas aproximadas um do outro).

Acredita-se que todos os bilaterianos descendem de um ancestral comum que apareceu no início do período cambriano, 485-540 milhões de anos atrás, e foi levantada a hipótese de que esse ancestral comum tinha a forma de um verme tubular simples com um corpo segmentado.

Em um nível esquemático, essa forma básica de verme continua a ser refletida na arquitetura do corpo e do sistema nervoso de todos os bilaterianos modernos, incluindo os vertebrados.

A forma bilateral fundamental do corpo é um tubo com uma cavidade intestinal oca que vai da boca ao ânus e um cordão nervoso com uma ampliação (um gânglio) para cada segmento do corpo, com um gânglio especialmente grande na frente, chamado cérebro.

O cérebro é pequeno e simples em algumas espécies, como vermes nematóides; em outras espécies, incluindo vertebrados, é o órgão mais complexo do corpo.

Alguns tipos de vermes, como as sanguessugas, também têm um gânglio aumentado na extremidade posterior do cordão nervoso, conhecido como "cérebro da cauda". Existem alguns tipos de bilaterianos existentes que não possuem um cérebro reconhecível, incluindo equinodermos e tunicados.

Não foi definitivamente estabelecido se a existência dessas espécies sem cérebro indica que os primeiros bilaterianos não tinham cérebro, ou se seus ancestrais evoluíram de uma maneira que levou ao desaparecimento de uma estrutura cerebral previamente existente.


==== Invertebrados ====

Esta categoria inclui tardígrados, artrópodes, moluscos e vários tipos de vermes.

A diversidade dos planos corporais dos invertebrados é acompanhada por uma diversidade igual nas estruturas cerebrais. Dois grupos de invertebrados têm cérebros notavelmente complexos: artrópodes (insetos, crustáceos, aracnídeos e outros) e cefalópodes (polvos, lulas e moluscos semelhantes).

Os cérebros de artrópodes e cefalópodes surgem de cordões nervosos paralelos gêmeos que se estendem pelo corpo do animal.

Os artrópodes têm um cérebro central, o gânglio supraesofágico, com três divisões e grandes lobos ópticos atrás de cada olho para processamento visual.

Cefalópodes como o polvo e a lula têm os maiores cérebros de todos os invertebrados. Existem várias espécies de invertebrados cujos cérebros foram estudados intensivamente porque possuem propriedades que os tornam convenientes para trabalhos experimentais:

As moscas da fruta (Drosophila), devido à grande variedade de técnicas disponíveis para estudar sua genética, têm sido um assunto natural para estudar o papel dos genes no desenvolvimento do cérebro.

Apesar da grande distância evolutiva entre insetos e mamíferos, muitos aspectos da neurogenética de Drosophila têm se mostrado relevantes para humanos.

Os primeiros genes do relógio biológico, por exemplo, foram identificados examinando mutantes de Drosophila que apresentavam ciclos de atividade diária interrompidos.

Uma pesquisa nos genomas de vertebrados revelou um conjunto de genes análogos, que desempenham papéis semelhantes no relógio biológico do camundongo – e, portanto, quase certamente também no relógio biológico humano.

Estudos feitos em Drosophila também mostram que a maioria das regiões neuropilares do cérebro são continuamente reorganizadas ao longo da vida em resposta a condições de vida específicas.
O verme nematoide Caenorhabditis elegans, assim como a Drosophila, tem sido amplamente estudado devido à sua importância na genética.

No início dos anos 1970, Sydney Brenner o escolheu como organismo modelo para estudar a maneira como os genes controlam o desenvolvimento.

Uma das vantagens de trabalhar com esse verme é que o plano corporal é muito estereotipado: o sistema nervoso do hermafrodita contém exatamente 302 neurônios, sempre nos mesmos lugares, fazendo conexões sinápticas idênticas em cada verme.

A equipe de Brenner cortou os vermes em milhares de seções ultrafinas e fotografou cada uma sob um microscópio eletrônico, depois combinou visualmente as fibras de seção em seção, para mapear cada neurônio e sinapse em todo o corpo.

O diagrama de fiação neuronal completo de C.elegans – seu conectoma foi alcançado.

Nada que se aproxime desse nível de detalhe está disponível para qualquer outro organismo, e as informações obtidas permitiram uma infinidade de estudos que de outra forma não seriam possíveis.
A lesma marinha Aplysia californica foi escolhida pelo neurofisiologista vencedor do Prêmio Nobel Eric Kandel como modelo para estudar as bases celulares do aprendizado e da memória, devido à simplicidade e acessibilidade de seu sistema nervoso, e foi examinada em centenas de experimentos.


==== Vertebrados ====

Os primeiros vertebrados apareceram há mais de 500 milhões de anos (Mya), durante o período Cambriano, e podem ter se assemelhado ao moderno peixe-bruxa.

Os tubarões apareceram cerca de 450 Mya, anfíbios cerca de 400 Mya, répteis cerca de 350 Mya e mamíferos cerca de 200 Mya.

Cada espécie tem uma história evolutiva igualmente longa, mas os cérebros de peixes-bruxas, lampreias, tubarões, anfíbios, répteis e mamíferos modernos mostram um gradiente de tamanho e complexidade que segue aproximadamente a sequência evolutiva.

Todos esses cérebros contêm o mesmo conjunto de componentes anatômicos básicos, mas muitos são rudimentares no peixe-bruxa, enquanto nos mamíferos a parte principal (o telencéfalo) é muito elaborada e expandida. Os cérebros são comparados mais simplesmente em termos de tamanho.

A relação entre o tamanho do cérebro, tamanho do corpo e outras variáveis ​​tem sido estudada em uma ampla gama de espécies de vertebrados.

Como regra, o tamanho do cérebro aumenta com o tamanho do corpo, mas não em uma proporção linear simples.

Em geral, animais menores tendem a ter cérebros maiores, medidos como uma fração do tamanho do corpo.

Para os mamíferos, a relação entre o volume cerebral e a massa corporal segue essencialmente uma lei de potência com um expoente de cerca de 0,75.

Essa fórmula descreve a tendência central, mas todas as famílias de mamíferos se afastam dela em algum grau, de uma forma que reflete em parte a complexidade de seu comportamento.

Por exemplo, os primatas têm cérebros 5 a 10 vezes maiores do que a fórmula prevê.

Os predadores tendem a ter cérebros maiores do que suas presas, em relação ao tamanho do corpo.

Todos os cérebros de vertebrados compartilham uma forma subjacente comum, que aparece mais claramente durante os estágios iniciais do desenvolvimento embrionário.

Em sua forma mais primitiva, o cérebro aparece como três inchaços na extremidade frontal do tubo neural; esses inchaços eventualmente se tornam o prosencéfalo, o mesencéfalo e o rombencéfalo (o prosencéfalo, o mesencéfalo e o rombencéfalo, respectivamente).

Nos estágios iniciais do desenvolvimento do cérebro, as três áreas são aproximadamente iguais em tamanho.

Em muitas classes de vertebrados, como peixes e anfíbios, as três partes permanecem semelhantes em tamanho no adulto, mas nos mamíferos o prosencéfalo torna-se muito maior do que as outras partes, e o mesencéfalo fica muito pequeno. tecido muito macio.

O tecido cerebral vivo é rosado por fora e principalmente branco por dentro, com variações sutis de cor.

Os cérebros dos vertebrados são cercados por um sistema de membranas de tecido conjuntivo chamadas meninges que separam o crânio do cérebro.

Os vasos sanguíneos entram no sistema nervoso central através de orifícios nas camadas meníngeas.

As células nas paredes dos vasos sanguíneos são unidas firmemente umas às outras, formando a barreira hematoencefálica, que bloqueia a passagem de muitas toxinas e patógenos (embora ao mesmo tempo bloqueie anticorpos e alguns medicamentos, apresentando desafios especiais no tratamento de doenças). Os neuroanatomistas geralmente dividem o cérebro dos vertebrados em seis regiões principais: o telencéfalo (hemisférios cerebrais), diencéfalo (tálamo e hipotálamo), mesencéfalo (mesencéfalo), cerebelo, ponte e medula oblonga.

Cada uma dessas áreas tem uma estrutura interna complexa.

Algumas partes, como o córtex cerebral e o córtex cerebelar, consistem em camadas que são dobradas ou enroladas para caber no espaço disponível.

Outras partes, como o tálamo e o hipotálamo, consistem em aglomerados de muitos núcleos pequenos.

Milhares de áreas distinguíveis podem ser identificadas dentro do cérebro de vertebrados com base em distinções sutis de estrutura neural, química e conectividade.

Embora os mesmos componentes básicos estejam presentes em todos os cérebros dos vertebrados, alguns ramos da evolução dos vertebrados levaram a distorções substanciais da geometria do cérebro, especialmente na área do prosencéfalo.

O cérebro de um tubarão mostra os componentes básicos de forma direta, mas em peixes teleósteos (a grande maioria das espécies de peixes existentes), o prosencéfalo tornou-se "evertido", como uma meia virada do avesso.

Nas aves, também há grandes mudanças na estrutura do prosencéfalo.

Essas distorções podem dificultar a correspondência de componentes cerebrais de uma espécie com os de outra espécie. Aqui está uma lista de alguns dos componentes cerebrais mais importantes de vertebrados, juntamente com uma breve descrição de suas funções como atualmente compreendidas:

A medula, juntamente com a medula espinhal, contém muitos pequenos núcleos envolvidos em uma ampla variedade de funções motoras sensoriais e involuntárias, como vômitos, frequência cardíaca e processos digestivos.
A ponte fica no tronco encefálico diretamente acima da medula.

Entre outras coisas, contém núcleos que controlam atos frequentemente voluntários, mas simples, como sono, respiração, deglutição, função da bexiga, equilíbrio, movimento dos olhos, expressões faciais e postura.
O hipotálamo é uma pequena região na base do prosencéfalo, cuja complexidade e importância contrariam seu tamanho.

É composto por numerosos pequenos núcleos, cada um com conexões e neuroquímica distintas.

O hipotálamo está envolvido em atos involuntários ou parcialmente voluntários adicionais, como ciclos de sono e vigília, comer e beber e a liberação de alguns hormônios.
O tálamo é uma coleção de núcleos com funções diversas: alguns estão envolvidos na transmissão de informações de e para os hemisférios cerebrais, enquanto outros estão envolvidos na motivação.

A área subtalâmica (zona incerta) parece conter sistemas geradores de ação para vários tipos de comportamentos "consumatórios", como comer, beber, defecar e copular.
O cerebelo modula as saídas de outros sistemas cerebrais, sejam relacionados ao motor ou ao pensamento, para torná-los certos e precisos.

A remoção do cerebelo não impede um animal de fazer algo em particular, mas torna as ações hesitantes e desajeitadas.

Essa precisão não é incorporada, mas aprendida por tentativa e erro.

A coordenação muscular aprendida ao andar de bicicleta é um exemplo de um tipo de plasticidade neural que pode ocorrer em grande parte no cerebelo. 10% do volume total do cérebro consiste no cerebelo e 50% de todos os neurônios são mantidos dentro de sua estrutura.
O tecto óptico permite que as ações sejam direcionadas para pontos no espaço, mais comumente em resposta à entrada visual.

Nos mamíferos, geralmente é chamado de colículo superior, e sua função mais bem estudada é direcionar os movimentos oculares.

Ele também direciona os movimentos de alcance e outras ações direcionadas a objetos.

Ele recebe fortes estímulos visuais, mas também estímulos de outros sentidos que são úteis para direcionar ações, como estímulos auditivos em corujas e estímulos de órgãos termossensíveis em cobras.

Em alguns peixes primitivos, como as lampreias, essa região é a maior parte do cérebro.

O colículo superior faz parte do mesencéfalo.
O pálio é uma camada de matéria cinzenta que se encontra na superfície do prosencéfalo e é o desenvolvimento evolutivo mais complexo e mais recente do cérebro como órgão.

Em répteis e mamíferos, é chamado de córtex cerebral.

Múltiplas funções envolvem o pálio, incluindo olfato e memória espacial.

Nos mamíferos, onde se torna tão grande a ponto de dominar o cérebro, assume funções de muitas outras áreas do cérebro.

Em muitos mamíferos, o córtex cerebral consiste em protuberâncias dobradas chamadas giros que criam sulcos profundos ou fissuras chamadas sulcos.

As dobras aumentam a área de superfície do córtex e, portanto, aumentam a quantidade de matéria cinzenta e a quantidade de informação que pode ser armazenada e processada.
O hipocampo, estritamente falando, é encontrado apenas em mamíferos.

No entanto, a área de onde deriva, o pálio medial, tem homólogos em todos os vertebrados.

Há evidências de que essa parte do cérebro está envolvida em eventos complexos, como memória espacial e navegação em peixes, pássaros, répteis e mamíferos.
Os gânglios da base são um grupo de estruturas interconectadas no prosencéfalo.

A função primária dos gânglios da base parece ser a seleção de ação: eles enviam sinais inibitórios para todas as partes do cérebro que podem gerar comportamentos motores e, nas circunstâncias certas, podem liberar a inibição, de modo que os sistemas geradores de ação sejam capazes de executar Suas ações.

Recompensa e punição exercem seus efeitos neurais mais importantes, alterando as conexões dentro dos gânglios da base.
O bulbo olfativo é uma estrutura especial que processa os sinais sensoriais olfativos e envia sua saída para a parte olfativa do pálio.

É um componente importante do cérebro em muitos vertebrados, mas é bastante reduzido em humanos e outros primatas (cujos sentidos são dominados pela informação adquirida pela visão e não pelo olfato).


===== Répteis =====


====== Aves ======


===== Mamíferos =====
A diferença mais óbvia entre os cérebros de mamíferos e outros vertebrados é em termos de tamanho.

Em média, um mamífero tem um cérebro aproximadamente duas vezes maior que o de uma ave do mesmo tamanho corporal e dez vezes maior que o de um réptil do mesmo tamanho corporal. também existem diferenças substanciais na forma.

O rombencéfalo e o mesencéfalo dos mamíferos são geralmente semelhantes aos de outros vertebrados, mas diferenças dramáticas aparecem no prosencéfalo, que é grandemente aumentado e também alterado na estrutura.

O córtex cerebral é a parte do cérebro que mais distingue os mamíferos.

Em vertebrados não mamíferos, a superfície do cérebro é revestida com uma estrutura de três camadas comparativamente simples chamada pálio.

Nos mamíferos, o pálio evolui para uma estrutura complexa de seis camadas chamada neocórtex ou isocórtex.

Várias áreas na borda do neocórtex, incluindo o hipocampo e a amígdala, também são muito mais extensamente desenvolvidas em mamíferos do que em outros vertebrados. A elaboração do córtex cerebral traz consigo mudanças para outras áreas do cérebro.

O colículo superior, que desempenha um papel importante no controle visual do comportamento na maioria dos vertebrados, encolhe para um tamanho pequeno nos mamíferos, e muitas de suas funções são assumidas por áreas visuais do córtex cerebral.

O cerebelo dos mamíferos contém uma grande porção (o neocerebelo) dedicada a sustentar o córtex cerebral, que não tem contrapartida em outros vertebrados.


====== Primatas ======

Os cérebros de humanos e outros primatas contêm as mesmas estruturas que os cérebros de outros mamíferos, mas geralmente são maiores em proporção ao tamanho do corpo.

O quociente de encefalização (EQ) é usado para comparar os tamanhos do cérebro entre as espécies.

Leva em conta a não linearidade da relação cérebro-corpo.

Os seres humanos têm um EQ médio na faixa de 7 a 8, enquanto a maioria dos outros primatas tem um EQ na faixa de 2 a 3.

Os golfinhos têm valores mais altos do que os dos primatas que não os humanos, mas quase todos os outros mamíferos têm valores de EQ que são substancialmente mais baixos.
A maior parte do aumento do cérebro dos primatas vem de uma expansão maciça do córtex cerebral, especialmente o córtex pré-frontal e as partes do córtex envolvidas na visão.

A rede de processamento visual dos primatas inclui pelo menos 30 áreas cerebrais distinguíveis, com uma complexa teia de interconexões.

Estima-se que as áreas de processamento visual ocupam mais da metade da superfície total do neocórtex primata.

O córtex pré-frontal desempenha funções que incluem planejamento, memória de trabalho, motivação, atenção e controle executivo.

Ele ocupa uma proporção muito maior do cérebro dos primatas do que de outras espécies, e uma fração especialmente grande do cérebro humano.


== Desenvolvimento ==


O cérebro se desenvolve em uma sequência intrincadamente orquestrada de estágios.

Ele muda de forma de um simples inchaço na frente do cordão nervoso nos primeiros estágios embrionários, para um conjunto complexo de áreas e conexões.

Os neurônios são criados em zonas especiais que contêm células-tronco e, em seguida, migram através do tecido para alcançar seus locais finais.

Uma vez que os neurônios se posicionam, seus axônios brotam e navegam pelo cérebro, ramificando-se e estendendo-se à medida que avançam, até que as pontas atinjam seus alvos e formem conexões sinápticas.

Em várias partes do sistema nervoso, neurônios e sinapses são produzidos em número excessivo durante os estágios iniciais, e então os desnecessários são eliminados. Para os vertebrados, os estágios iniciais do desenvolvimento neural são semelhantes em todas as espécies.

À medida que o embrião se transforma de uma bolha redonda de células em uma estrutura semelhante a um verme, uma estreita faixa de ectoderme que corre ao longo da linha média das costas é induzida a se tornar a placa neural, o precursor do sistema nervoso.

A placa neural dobra-se para dentro para formar o sulco neural e, em seguida, os lábios que revestem o sulco se fundem para envolver o tubo neural, um cordão oco de células com um ventrículo cheio de líquido no centro.

Na extremidade frontal, os ventrículos e a medula intumescem para formar três vesículas que são os precursores do prosencéfalo (prosencéfalo), mesencéfalo (mesencéfalo) e rombencéfalo (rombencéfalo).

No estágio seguinte, o prosencéfalo se divide em duas vesículas chamadas telencéfalo (que conterá o córtex cerebral, gânglios da base e estruturas relacionadas) e diencéfalo (que conterá o tálamo e o hipotálamo).

Mais ou menos ao mesmo tempo, o rombencéfalo se divide em metencéfalo (que conterá o cerebelo e a ponte) e o mielencéfalo (que conterá a medula oblonga).

Cada uma dessas áreas contém zonas proliferativas onde são gerados neurônios e células gliais; as células resultantes então migram, às vezes por longas distâncias, para suas posições finais. Uma vez que um neurônio está no lugar, ele estende dendritos e um axônio para a área ao seu redor.

Os axônios, porque comumente se estendem a uma grande distância do corpo celular e precisam atingir alvos específicos, crescem de maneira particularmente complexa.

A ponta de um axônio em crescimento consiste em uma bolha de protoplasma chamada cone de crescimento, cravejada de receptores químicos.

Esses receptores detectam o ambiente local, fazendo com que o cone de crescimento seja atraído ou repelido por vários elementos celulares e, assim, seja puxado em uma direção específica em cada ponto ao longo de seu caminho.

O resultado desse processo de descoberta de caminhos é que o cone de crescimento navega pelo cérebro até atingir sua área de destino, onde outras pistas químicas fazem com que ele comece a gerar sinapses.

Considerando todo o cérebro, milhares de genes criam produtos que influenciam a descoberta de caminhos axonais. A rede sináptica que finalmente emerge é apenas parcialmente determinada pelos genes.

Em muitas partes do cérebro, os axônios inicialmente "crescem demais" e depois são "podados" por mecanismos que dependem da atividade neural.

Na projeção do olho para o mesencéfalo, por exemplo, a estrutura no adulto contém um mapeamento muito preciso, conectando cada ponto na superfície da retina a um ponto correspondente em uma camada do mesencéfalo.

Nos primeiros estágios de desenvolvimento, cada axônio da retina é guiado para a vizinhança geral direita no mesencéfalo por sinais químicos, mas depois se ramifica muito profusamente e faz contato inicial com uma ampla faixa de neurônios do mesencéfalo.

A retina, antes do nascimento, contém mecanismos especiais que a fazem gerar ondas de atividade que se originam espontaneamente em um ponto aleatório e depois se propagam lentamente pela camada retiniana.

Essas ondas são úteis porque fazem com que os neurônios vizinhos estejam ativos ao mesmo tempo; isto é, eles produzem um padrão de atividade neural que contém informações sobre o arranjo espacial dos neurônios.

Essa informação é explorada no mesencéfalo por um mecanismo que faz com que as sinapses enfraqueçam e, eventualmente, desapareçam, se a atividade em um axônio não for seguida pela atividade da célula-alvo.

O resultado desse processo sofisticado é um ajuste e um ajuste gradual do mapa, deixando-o finalmente em sua forma adulta precisa. Coisas semelhantes acontecem em outras áreas do cérebro: uma matriz sináptica inicial é gerada como resultado de orientação química geneticamente determinada, mas depois gradualmente refinado por mecanismos dependentes de atividade, em parte impulsionados pela dinâmica interna, em parte por entradas sensoriais externas.

Em alguns casos, como no sistema retina-mesencéfalo, os padrões de atividade dependem de mecanismos que operam apenas no cérebro em desenvolvimento e, aparentemente, existem apenas para guiar o desenvolvimento. o cérebro infantil contém substancialmente mais neurônios do que o cérebro adulto.

Existem, no entanto, algumas áreas onde novos neurônios continuam a ser gerados ao longo da vida.

As duas áreas para as quais a neurogênese adulta está bem estabelecida são o bulbo olfatório, que está envolvido no sentido do olfato, e o giro denteado do hipocampo, onde há evidências de que os novos neurônios desempenham um papel no armazenamento de memórias recém-adquiridas.

Com essas exceções, no entanto, o conjunto de neurônios que está presente na primeira infância é o conjunto que está presente por toda a vida.

As células da glia são diferentes: como acontece com a maioria dos tipos de células do corpo, elas são geradas ao longo da vida. controvérsia da natureza e da criação.

Embora muitos detalhes ainda precisem ser resolvidos, a pesquisa em neurociência mostrou claramente que ambos os fatores são importantes.

Os genes determinam a forma geral do cérebro e os genes determinam como o cérebro reage à experiência.

A experiência, no entanto, é necessária para refinar a matriz de conexões sinápticas, que em sua forma desenvolvida contém muito mais informações do que o genoma.

Em alguns aspectos, tudo o que importa é a presença ou ausência de experiência durante períodos críticos de desenvolvimento.

Em outros aspectos, a quantidade e a qualidade da experiência são importantes; por exemplo, há evidências substanciais de que animais criados em ambientes enriquecidos têm córtices cerebrais mais espessos, indicando uma maior densidade de conexões sinápticas, do que animais cujos níveis de estimulação são restritos.


== Fisiologia ==

As funções do cérebro dependem da capacidade dos neurônios de transmitir sinais eletroquímicos para outras células e de sua capacidade de responder adequadamente aos sinais eletroquímicos recebidos de outras células.

As propriedades elétricas dos neurônios são controladas por uma ampla variedade de processos bioquímicos e metabólicos, principalmente as interações entre neurotransmissores e receptores que ocorrem nas sinapses.


=== Neurotransmissores e receptores ===

Os neurotransmissores são substâncias químicas liberadas nas sinapses quando a membrana local é despolarizada e o Ca2+ entra na célula, normalmente quando um potencial de ação chega à sinapse – os neurotransmissores se ligam a moléculas receptoras na membrana da célula (ou células) alvo da sinapse. e assim alteram as propriedades elétricas ou químicas das moléculas receptoras.
Com poucas exceções, cada neurônio no cérebro libera o mesmo neurotransmissor químico, ou combinação de neurotransmissores, em todas as conexões sinápticas que faz com outros neurônios; esta regra é conhecida como princípio de Dale.

Assim, um neurônio pode ser caracterizado pelos neurotransmissores que ele libera.

A grande maioria das drogas psicoativas exerce seus efeitos alterando sistemas neurotransmissores específicos.

Isso se aplica a drogas como canabinoides, nicotina, heroína, cocaína, álcool, fluoxetina, clorpromazina e muitas outras. ácido gama-aminobutírico (GABA), que é quase sempre inibitório.

Neurônios que usam esses transmissores podem ser encontrados em quase todas as partes do cérebro.

Devido à sua onipresença, as drogas que atuam no glutamato ou GABA tendem a ter efeitos amplos e poderosos.

Alguns anestésicos gerais atuam reduzindo os efeitos do glutamato; a maioria dos tranquilizantes exerce seus efeitos sedativos aumentando os efeitos do GABA. Existem dezenas de outros neurotransmissores químicos que são usados ​​em áreas mais limitadas do cérebro, geralmente áreas dedicadas a uma função específica.

A serotonina, por exemplo – o alvo primário de muitos medicamentos antidepressivos e muitos auxiliares de dieta – vem exclusivamente de uma pequena área do tronco cerebral chamada núcleos da rafe.

A norepinefrina, que está envolvida na excitação, vem exclusivamente de uma pequena área próxima chamada locus coeruleus.

Outros neurotransmissores, como acetilcolina e dopamina, têm múltiplas fontes no cérebro, mas não são distribuídos de forma tão onipresente quanto o glutamato e o GABA.


=== Atividade elétrica ===


Como efeito colateral dos processos eletroquímicos usados ​​pelos neurônios para sinalização, o tecido cerebral gera campos elétricos quando está ativo.

Quando um grande número de neurônios mostra atividade sincronizada, os campos elétricos que eles geram podem ser grandes o suficiente para detectar fora do crânio, usando eletroencefalografia (EEG) ou magnetoencefalografia (MEG).

Gravações de EEG, juntamente com gravações feitas de eletrodos implantados dentro do cérebro de animais como ratos, mostram que o cérebro de um animal vivo está constantemente ativo, mesmo durante o sono.

Cada parte do cérebro apresenta uma mistura de atividade rítmica e não rítmica, que pode variar de acordo com o estado comportamental.

Nos mamíferos, o córtex cerebral tende a mostrar grandes ondas delta lentas durante o sono, ondas alfa mais rápidas quando o animal está acordado, mas desatento, e atividade irregular de aparência caótica quando o animal está ativamente envolvido em uma tarefa, chamadas ondas beta e gama.

Durante um ataque epiléptico, os mecanismos de controle inibitórios do cérebro não funcionam e a atividade elétrica aumenta para níveis patológicos, produzindo traços de EEG que mostram padrões de ondas grandes e picos não vistos em um cérebro saudável.

Relacionar esses padrões de nível populacional com as funções computacionais de neurônios individuais é um dos principais focos da pesquisa atual em neurofisiologia.


=== Metabolismo ===

Todos os vertebrados têm uma barreira hematoencefálica que permite que o metabolismo dentro do cérebro funcione de maneira diferente do metabolismo em outras partes do corpo.

As células da glia desempenham um papel importante no metabolismo cerebral, controlando a composição química do fluido que envolve os neurônios, incluindo os níveis de íons e nutrientes. animais.

A necessidade de limitar o peso corporal para, por exemplo, voar, aparentemente levou à seleção para a redução do tamanho do cérebro em algumas espécies, como os morcegos.

A maior parte do consumo de energia do cérebro vai para sustentar a carga elétrica (potencial de membrana) dos neurônios.

A maioria das espécies de vertebrados dedica entre 2% e 8% do metabolismo basal ao cérebro.

Em primatas, no entanto, a porcentagem é muito maior – em humanos, sobe para 20 a 25%.

O consumo de energia do cérebro não varia muito ao longo do tempo, mas as regiões ativas do córtex cerebral consomem um pouco mais de energia do que as regiões inativas; isso forma a base para os métodos de imagem funcional do cérebro de PET, fMRI e NIRS.

O cérebro normalmente obtém a maior parte de sua energia do metabolismo da glicose dependente de oxigênio (ou seja, açúcar no sangue), mas as cetonas fornecem uma importante fonte alternativa, juntamente com contribuições de ácidos graxos de cadeia média (ácidos caprílico e heptanóico), lactato, acetato e possivelmente aminoácidos.


== Função ==


As informações dos órgãos dos sentidos são coletadas no cérebro.

Lá é usado para determinar quais ações o organismo deve tomar.

O cérebro processa os dados brutos para extrair informações sobre a estrutura do ambiente.

Em seguida, combina as informações processadas com informações sobre as necessidades atuais do animal e com a memória de circunstâncias passadas.

Por fim, com base nos resultados, gera padrões de resposta motora.

Essas tarefas de processamento de sinais requerem uma interação complexa entre uma variedade de subsistemas funcionais. A função do cérebro é fornecer controle coerente sobre as ações de um animal.

Um cérebro centralizado permite que grupos de músculos sejam co-ativados em padrões complexos; também permite que estímulos que atingem uma parte do corpo evoquem respostas em outras partes, e pode impedir que diferentes partes do corpo atuem com propósitos opostos umas às outras.


=== Percepção ===


O cérebro humano recebe informações sobre luz, som, composição química da atmosfera, temperatura, posição do corpo no espaço (propriocepção), composição química da corrente sanguínea e muito mais.

Em outros animais, sentidos adicionais estão presentes, como o sentido de calor infravermelho de cobras, o sentido de campo magnético de alguns pássaros ou o sentido de campo elétrico visto principalmente em animais aquáticos.
Cada sistema sensorial começa com células receptoras especializadas, como células fotorreceptoras na retina do olho ou células ciliadas sensíveis à vibração na cóclea do ouvido.

Os axônios das células receptoras sensoriais viajam para a medula espinhal ou cérebro, onde transmitem seus sinais para um núcleo sensorial de primeira ordem dedicado a uma modalidade sensorial específica.

Esse núcleo sensorial primário envia informações para áreas sensoriais de ordem superior que são dedicadas à mesma modalidade.

Eventualmente, por meio de uma estação intermediária no tálamo, os sinais são enviados ao córtex cerebral, onde são processados ​​para extrair as características relevantes e integrados a sinais provenientes de outros sistemas sensoriais.


=== Controle do motor ===

Os sistemas motores são áreas do cérebro que estão envolvidas no início dos movimentos do corpo, ou seja, na ativação dos músculos.

Com exceção dos músculos que controlam o olho, que são acionados por núcleos no mesencéfalo, todos os músculos voluntários do corpo são inervados diretamente por neurônios motores na medula espinhal e no rombencéfalo.

Os neurônios motores espinhais são controlados tanto por circuitos neurais intrínsecos à medula espinhal quanto por entradas que descem do cérebro.

Os circuitos espinhais intrínsecos implementam muitas respostas reflexas e contêm geradores de padrões para movimentos rítmicos, como caminhar ou nadar.

As conexões descendentes do cérebro permitem um controle mais sofisticado. O cérebro contém várias áreas motoras que se projetam diretamente para a medula espinhal.

No nível mais baixo estão as áreas motoras na medula e na ponte, que controlam os movimentos estereotipados, como andar, respirar ou engolir.

Em um nível superior estão as áreas do mesencéfalo, como o núcleo vermelho, que é responsável pela coordenação dos movimentos dos braços e pernas.

Em um nível mais alto ainda está o córtex motor primário, uma faixa de tecido localizada na borda posterior do lobo frontal.

O córtex motor primário envia projeções para as áreas motoras subcorticais, mas também envia uma projeção maciça diretamente para a medula espinhal, através do trato piramidal.

Essa projeção corticoespinhal direta permite o controle voluntário preciso dos pequenos detalhes dos movimentos.

Outras áreas cerebrais relacionadas ao motor exercem efeitos secundários ao se projetarem para as áreas motoras primárias.

Entre as áreas secundárias mais importantes estão o córtex pré-motor, a área motora suplementar, os gânglios da base e o cerebelo.

Além de todos os itens acima, o cérebro e a medula espinhal contêm extensos circuitos para controlar o sistema nervoso autônomo que controla o movimento do músculo liso do corpo.


=== Dormir ===


Muitos animais alternam entre dormir e acordar em um ciclo diário.

A excitação e o estado de alerta também são modulados em uma escala de tempo mais fina por uma rede de áreas cerebrais.

Um componente-chave do sistema do sono é o núcleo supraquiasmático (SCN), uma pequena parte do hipotálamo localizada diretamente acima do ponto em que os nervos ópticos dos dois olhos se cruzam.

O SCN contém o relógio biológico central do corpo.

Os neurônios mostram níveis de atividade que aumentam e diminuem com um período de cerca de 24 horas, ritmos circadianos: essas flutuações de atividade são impulsionadas por mudanças rítmicas na expressão de um conjunto de "genes do relógio".

O SCN continua a marcar o tempo mesmo se for extirpado do cérebro e colocado em um prato de solução nutritiva quente, mas normalmente recebe informações dos nervos ópticos, através do trato retino-hipotalâmico (RHT), que permite que os ciclos diários de luz-escuridão calibrar o relógio. O SCN projeta para um conjunto de áreas no hipotálamo, tronco cerebral e mesencéfalo que estão envolvidas na implementação dos ciclos sono-vigília.

Um componente importante do sistema é a formação reticular, um grupo de aglomerados de neurônios espalhados difusamente pelo núcleo da parte inferior do cérebro.

Os neurônios reticulares enviam sinais para o tálamo, que, por sua vez, envia sinais de controle do nível de atividade para todas as partes do córtex.

Danos à formação reticular podem produzir um estado permanente de coma. O sono envolve grandes mudanças na atividade cerebral.

Até a década de 1950, acreditava-se geralmente que o cérebro essencialmente se desligava durante o sono, mas agora se sabe que isso está longe de ser verdade; a atividade continua, mas os padrões tornam-se muito diferentes.

Existem dois tipos de sono: sono REM (com sonhos) e sono NREM (não-REM, geralmente sem sonhos), que se repetem em padrões ligeiramente variados ao longo de um episódio de sono.

Três tipos amplos de padrões distintos de atividade cerebral podem ser medidos: REM, NREM leve e NREM profundo.

Durante o sono NREM profundo, também chamado de sono de ondas lentas, a atividade no córtex assume a forma de grandes ondas sincronizadas, enquanto no estado de vigília é barulhenta e dessincronizada.

Os níveis dos neurotransmissores norepinefrina e serotonina caem durante o sono de ondas lentas e caem quase a zero durante o sono REM; os níveis de acetilcolina mostram o padrão inverso.


=== Homeostase ===


Para qualquer animal, a sobrevivência requer a manutenção de uma variedade de parâmetros do estado corporal dentro de uma faixa limitada de variação: estes incluem temperatura, teor de água, concentração de sal na corrente sanguínea, níveis de glicose no sangue, nível de oxigênio no sangue e outros.

A capacidade de um animal de regular o ambiente interno de seu corpo - o milieu intérieur, como o fisiologista pioneiro Claude Bernard o chamou - é conhecida como homeostase (do grego "ficar parado").

Manter a homeostase é uma função crucial do cérebro.

O princípio básico subjacente à homeostase é o feedback negativo: sempre que um parâmetro diverge de seu ponto de ajuste, os sensores geram um sinal de erro que evoca uma resposta que faz com que o parâmetro volte ao seu valor ideal. (Este princípio é amplamente utilizado na engenharia, por exemplo, no controle de temperatura usando um termostato.)
Nos vertebrados, a parte do cérebro que desempenha o maior papel é o hipotálamo, uma pequena região na base do prosencéfalo cujo tamanho não reflete sua complexidade ou a importância de sua função.

O hipotálamo é uma coleção de pequenos núcleos, a maioria dos quais está envolvida em funções biológicas básicas.

Algumas dessas funções estão relacionadas à excitação ou às interações sociais, como sexualidade, agressão ou comportamentos maternos; mas muitos deles se relacionam com a homeostase.

Vários núcleos hipotalâmicos recebem informações de sensores localizados no revestimento dos vasos sanguíneos, transmitindo informações sobre temperatura, nível de sódio, nível de glicose, nível de oxigênio no sangue e outros parâmetros.

Esses núcleos hipotalâmicos enviam sinais de saída para áreas motoras que podem gerar ações para corrigir deficiências.

Algumas das saídas também vão para a glândula pituitária, uma pequena glândula ligada ao cérebro diretamente abaixo do hipotálamo.

A glândula pituitária secreta hormônios na corrente sanguínea, onde circulam por todo o corpo e induzem mudanças na atividade celular.


=== Motivação ===


Os animais individuais precisam expressar comportamentos que promovam a sobrevivência, como buscar comida, água, abrigo e um companheiro.

O sistema motivacional no cérebro monitora o estado atual de satisfação desses objetivos e ativa comportamentos para atender a quaisquer necessidades que surjam.

O sistema motivacional funciona em grande parte por um mecanismo de recompensa-punição.

Quando um determinado comportamento é seguido por consequências favoráveis, o mecanismo de recompensa no cérebro é ativado, o que induz mudanças estruturais dentro do cérebro que fazem com que o mesmo comportamento se repita posteriormente, sempre que uma situação semelhante surgir.

Por outro lado, quando um comportamento é seguido por consequências desfavoráveis, o mecanismo de punição do cérebro é ativado, induzindo mudanças estruturais que fazem com que o comportamento seja suprimido quando situações semelhantes surgirem no futuro. , vermes e insetos podem alterar seu comportamento para buscar fontes de alimento ou para evitar perigos.

Nos vertebrados, o sistema de recompensa-punição é implementado por um conjunto específico de estruturas cerebrais, no centro das quais se encontram os gânglios da base, um conjunto de áreas interconectadas na base do prosencéfalo.

Os gânglios da base são o local central no qual as decisões são tomadas: os gânglios da base exercem um controle inibitório sustentado sobre a maioria dos sistemas motores do cérebro; quando esta inibição é liberada, um sistema motor pode executar a ação para a qual está programado.

Recompensas e punições funcionam alterando a relação entre as entradas que os gânglios da base recebem e os sinais de decisão que são emitidos.

O mecanismo de recompensa é mais bem compreendido do que o mecanismo de punição, pois seu papel no abuso de drogas fez com que fosse estudado de forma muito intensa.

A pesquisa mostrou que o neurotransmissor dopamina desempenha um papel central: drogas viciantes, como cocaína, anfetamina e nicotina, aumentam os níveis de dopamina ou aumentam os efeitos da dopamina dentro do cérebro.


=== Aprendizagem e memória ===

Quase todos os animais são capazes de modificar seu comportamento como resultado da experiência – mesmo os tipos mais primitivos de vermes.

Como o comportamento é impulsionado pela atividade cerebral, as mudanças no comportamento devem, de alguma forma, corresponder às mudanças dentro do cérebro.

Já no final do século 19 teóricos como Santiago Ramón y Cajal argumentavam que a explicação mais plausível é que a aprendizagem e a memória se expressam como mudanças nas conexões sinápticas entre os neurônios.

Até 1970, no entanto, faltavam evidências experimentais para apoiar a hipótese da plasticidade sináptica.

Em 1971, Tim Bliss e Terje Lømo publicaram um artigo sobre um fenômeno agora chamado de potenciação de longo prazo: o artigo mostrou evidências claras de mudanças sinápticas induzidas por atividade que duraram pelo menos vários dias.

Desde então, os avanços técnicos tornaram esses tipos de experimentos muito mais fáceis de realizar, e milhares de estudos foram feitos que esclareceram o mecanismo da mudança sináptica e descobriram outros tipos de mudança sináptica impulsionada pela atividade em uma variedade de áreas do cérebro, incluindo córtex cerebral, hipocampo, gânglios da base e cerebelo.

O fator neurotrófico derivado do cérebro (BDNF) e a atividade física parecem desempenhar um papel benéfico no processo. Atualmente, os neurocientistas distinguem vários tipos de aprendizado e memória que são implementados pelo cérebro de maneiras distintas:

A memória de trabalho é a capacidade do cérebro de manter uma representação temporária de informações sobre a tarefa em que um animal está atualmente envolvido.

Acredita-se que esse tipo de memória dinâmica seja mediado pela formação de conjuntos celulares – grupos de neurônios ativados que mantêm sua atividade estimulando constantemente uns aos outros.
A memória episódica é a capacidade de lembrar os detalhes de eventos específicos.

Esse tipo de memória pode durar uma vida inteira.

Muitas evidências implicam que o hipocampo desempenha um papel crucial: pessoas com danos graves ao hipocampo às vezes apresentam amnésia, ou seja, incapacidade de formar novas memórias episódicas de longa duração.
A memória semântica é a capacidade de aprender fatos e relacionamentos.

Esse tipo de memória provavelmente está armazenado em grande parte no córtex cerebral, mediado por mudanças nas conexões entre células que representam tipos específicos de informação.
A aprendizagem instrumental é a capacidade de recompensas e punições para modificar o comportamento.

É implementado por uma rede de áreas cerebrais centradas nos gânglios da base.
A aprendizagem motora é a capacidade de refinar os padrões de movimento do corpo pela prática ou, mais geralmente, pela repetição.

Várias áreas do cérebro estão envolvidas, incluindo o córtex pré-motor, gânglios da base e especialmente o cerebelo, que funciona como um grande banco de memória para microajustes dos parâmetros do movimento.


== Pesquisa ==


O campo da neurociência engloba todas as abordagens que buscam compreender o cérebro e o restante do sistema nervoso.

A psicologia procura entender a mente e o comportamento, e a neurologia é a disciplina médica que diagnostica e trata doenças do sistema nervoso.

O cérebro também é o órgão mais importante estudado em psiquiatria, o ramo da medicina que trabalha para estudar, prevenir e tratar transtornos mentais.

A ciência cognitiva busca unificar a neurociência e a psicologia com outros campos que se preocupam com o cérebro, como ciência da computação (inteligência artificial e áreas afins) e filosofia. , muito do progresso na neurociência veio do desenvolvimento de melhores colorações de células e melhores microscópios.

Os neuroanatomistas estudam a estrutura em grande escala do cérebro, bem como a estrutura microscópica dos neurônios e seus componentes, especialmente as sinapses.

Entre outras ferramentas, eles empregam uma infinidade de manchas que revelam estrutura neural, química e conectividade.

Nos últimos anos, o desenvolvimento de técnicas de imunocoloração permitiu a investigação de neurônios que expressam conjuntos específicos de genes.

Além disso, a neuroanatomia funcional usa técnicas de imagens médicas para correlacionar variações na estrutura do cérebro humano com diferenças na cognição ou comportamento. Os neurofisiologistas estudam as propriedades químicas, farmacológicas e elétricas do cérebro: suas ferramentas primárias são drogas e dispositivos de gravação.

Milhares de drogas desenvolvidas experimentalmente afetam o sistema nervoso, algumas de maneiras altamente específicas.

Gravações da atividade cerebral podem ser feitas usando eletrodos, colados ao couro cabeludo como em estudos de EEG, ou implantados dentro do cérebro de animais para gravações extracelulares, que podem detectar potenciais de ação gerados por neurônios individuais.

Como o cérebro não contém receptores de dor, é possível usar essas técnicas para registrar a atividade cerebral de animais que estão acordados e se comportando sem causar angústia.

As mesmas técnicas têm sido usadas ocasionalmente para estudar a atividade cerebral em pacientes humanos que sofrem de epilepsia intratável, nos casos em que havia uma necessidade médica de implantar eletrodos para localizar a área do cérebro responsável pelas crises epilépticas.

Técnicas de imagem funcional, como fMRI, também são usadas para estudar a atividade cerebral; essas técnicas têm sido usadas principalmente com seres humanos, pois exigem que um sujeito consciente permaneça imóvel por longos períodos de tempo, mas têm a grande vantagem de não serem invasivas.

Outra abordagem para a função cerebral é examinar as consequências de danos em áreas específicas do cérebro.

Mesmo protegido pelo crânio e pelas meninges, circundado pelo líquido cefalorraquidiano e isolado da corrente sanguínea pela barreira hematoencefálica, a natureza delicada do cérebro o torna vulnerável a inúmeras doenças e diversos tipos de danos.

Em humanos, os efeitos de derrames e outros tipos de danos cerebrais têm sido uma fonte importante de informações sobre a função cerebral.

Como não há capacidade de controlar experimentalmente a natureza do dano, no entanto, essa informação é muitas vezes difícil de interpretar.

Em estudos com animais, mais comumente envolvendo ratos, é possível usar eletrodos ou produtos químicos injetados localmente para produzir padrões precisos de dano e então examinar as consequências para o comportamento. A neurociência computacional engloba duas abordagens: primeiro, o uso de computadores para estudar o cérebro; segundo, o estudo de como os cérebros realizam a computação.

Por um lado, é possível escrever um programa de computador para simular o funcionamento de um grupo de neurônios utilizando sistemas de equações que descrevem sua atividade eletroquímica; tais simulações são conhecidas como redes neurais biologicamente realistas.

Por outro lado, é possível estudar algoritmos para computação neural simulando, ou analisando matematicamente, as operações de "unidades" simplificadas que têm algumas das propriedades dos neurônios, mas abstraem muito de sua complexidade biológica.

As funções computacionais do cérebro são estudadas tanto por cientistas da computação quanto por neurocientistas. A modelagem neurogenética computacional está preocupada com o estudo e desenvolvimento de modelos neuronais dinâmicos para modelagem de funções cerebrais em relação a genes e interações dinâmicas entre genes.
Nos últimos anos, houve aplicações crescentes de técnicas genéticas e genômicas para o estudo do cérebro e foco nos papéis dos fatores neurotróficos e da atividade física na neuroplasticidade.

Os assuntos mais comuns são os ratos, devido à disponibilidade de ferramentas técnicas.

Agora é possível com relativa facilidade "nocautear" ou mutar uma ampla variedade de genes e, em seguida, examinar os efeitos na função cerebral.

Abordagens mais sofisticadas também estão sendo usadas: por exemplo, usando a recombinação Cre-Lox é possível ativar ou desativar genes em partes específicas do cérebro, em momentos específicos.


=== História ===


O cérebro mais antigo a ser descoberto estava na Armênia, no complexo de cavernas Areni-1.

O cérebro, estimado em mais de 5.000 anos, foi encontrado no crânio de uma menina de 12 a 14 anos.

Embora os cérebros estivessem enrugados, eles estavam bem preservados devido ao clima encontrado dentro da caverna. Os primeiros filósofos estavam divididos sobre se a sede da alma estava no cérebro ou no coração.

Aristóteles favoreceu o coração, e pensou que a função do cérebro era apenas esfriar o sangue.

Demócrito, o inventor da teoria atômica da matéria, defendia uma alma em três partes, com intelecto na cabeça, emoção no coração e luxúria perto do fígado.

O autor desconhecido de On the Sacred Disease, um tratado médico no Hippocratic Corpus, foi inequivocamente a favor do cérebro, escrevendo:

Os homens devem saber que de nada mais que o cérebro vêm alegrias, deleites, risos e esportes, e tristezas, tristezas, desânimo e lamentações. ...

E pelo mesmo órgão nos tornamos loucos e delirantes, e medos e terrores nos assaltam, alguns de noite, outros de dia, e sonhos e perambulações intempestivas, e cuidados que não são adequados, e ignorância das circunstâncias presentes, desleixo e inabilidade. .

Todas essas coisas que sofremos do cérebro, quando não é saudável...
Sobre a doença sagrada, atribuída a Hipócrates

O médico romano Galeno também defendeu a importância do cérebro e teorizou com alguma profundidade sobre como ele poderia funcionar.

Galeno traçou as relações anatômicas entre cérebro, nervos e músculos, demonstrando que todos os músculos do corpo estão conectados ao cérebro por meio de uma rede ramificada de nervos.

Ele postulou que os nervos ativam os músculos mecanicamente carregando uma substância misteriosa que ele chamou de pneumata psychikon, geralmente traduzida como "espíritos animais".

As idéias de Galeno eram amplamente conhecidas durante a Idade Média, mas não houve muito progresso até o Renascimento, quando o estudo anatômico detalhado foi retomado, combinado com as especulações teóricas de René Descartes e aqueles que o seguiram.

Descartes, como Galeno, pensava no sistema nervoso em termos hidráulicos.

Ele acreditava que as funções cognitivas mais elevadas são realizadas por uma res cogitans não-física, mas que a maioria dos comportamentos dos humanos, e todos os comportamentos dos animais, podem ser explicados mecanicamente. no entanto, veio das investigações de Luigi Galvani (1737-1798), que descobriu que um choque de eletricidade estática aplicado a um nervo exposto de um sapo morto poderia causar a contração de sua perna.

Desde aquela época, cada grande avanço na compreensão seguiu mais ou menos diretamente o desenvolvimento de uma nova técnica de investigação.

Até os primeiros anos do século 20, os avanços mais importantes foram derivados de novos métodos para coloração de células.

Particularmente crítica foi a invenção da coloração de Golgi, que (quando usada corretamente) cora apenas uma pequena fração dos neurônios, mas os cora em sua totalidade, incluindo corpo celular, dendritos e axônio.

Sem essa coloração, o tecido cerebral ao microscópio aparece como um emaranhado impenetrável de fibras protoplasmáticas, no qual é impossível determinar qualquer estrutura.

Nas mãos de Camillo Golgi, e especialmente do neuroanatomista espanhol Santiago Ramón y Cajal, a nova coloração revelou centenas de tipos distintos de neurônios, cada um com sua estrutura dendrítica e padrão de conectividade únicos.

Na primeira metade do século 20, os avanços na eletrônica permitiram a investigação das propriedades elétricas das células nervosas, culminando no trabalho de Alan Hodgkin, Andrew Huxley e outros sobre a biofísica do potencial de ação, e o trabalho de Bernard Katz e outros na eletroquímica da sinapse.

Esses estudos complementaram o quadro anatômico com uma concepção do cérebro como uma entidade dinâmica.

Refletindo a nova compreensão, em 1942 Charles Sherrington visualizou o funcionamento do cérebro despertando do sono:

A grande folha superior da massa, aquela onde quase nenhuma luz piscava ou se movia, torna-se agora um campo cintilante de pontos rítmicos piscando com trens de faíscas viajantes correndo de um lado para o outro.

O cérebro está despertando e com ele a mente está voltando.

É como se a Via Láctea entrasse em alguma dança cósmica.

Rapidamente a massa da cabeça torna-se um tear encantado onde milhões de lançadeiras piscantes tecem um padrão de dissolução, sempre um padrão significativo, embora nunca permanente; uma harmonia cambiante de subpadrões.
—Sherrington, 1942, Man on his Nature
A invenção dos computadores eletrônicos na década de 1940, juntamente com o desenvolvimento da teoria matemática da informação, levou à percepção de que os cérebros podem ser entendidos como sistemas de processamento de informações.

Este conceito formou a base do campo da cibernética e, eventualmente, deu origem ao campo agora conhecido como neurociência computacional.

As primeiras tentativas de cibernética eram um tanto grosseiras, pois tratavam o cérebro como essencialmente um computador digital disfarçado, como por exemplo no livro de 1958 de John von Neumann, The Computer and the Brain.

Ao longo dos anos, no entanto, o acúmulo de informações sobre as respostas elétricas das células cerebrais registradas em animais que se comportam tem movido os conceitos teóricos na direção de um realismo crescente. cérebro: o artigo examinou as respostas visuais dos neurônios na retina e no tecto óptico de sapos, e chegou à conclusão de que alguns neurônios no tecto do sapo são programados para combinar respostas elementares de uma maneira que os faz funcionar como "percebedores de insetos ".

Alguns anos depois, David Hubel e Torsten Wiesel descobriram células no córtex visual primário de macacos que se tornam ativas quando bordas afiadas se movem em pontos específicos no campo de visão – uma descoberta pela qual ganharam um Prêmio Nobel.

Estudos de acompanhamento em áreas visuais de ordem superior encontraram células que detectam disparidade binocular, cor, movimento e aspectos de forma, com áreas localizadas a distâncias crescentes do córtex visual primário mostrando respostas cada vez mais complexas.

Outras investigações de áreas cerebrais não relacionadas à visão revelaram células com uma ampla variedade de correlações de resposta, algumas relacionadas à memória, outras a tipos abstratos de cognição, como o espaço. redes, que podem ser simuladas usando computadores.

Alguns modelos úteis são abstratos, concentrando-se na estrutura conceitual dos algoritmos neurais em vez dos detalhes de como eles são implementados no cérebro; outros modelos tentam incorporar dados sobre as propriedades biofísicas de neurônios reais.

No entanto, nenhum modelo em qualquer nível ainda é considerado uma descrição totalmente válida da função cerebral.

A dificuldade essencial é que a computação sofisticada por redes neurais requer processamento distribuído no qual centenas ou milhares de neurônios trabalham cooperativamente – os métodos atuais de registro da atividade cerebral só são capazes de isolar potenciais de ação de algumas dezenas de neurônios por vez. parecem ser complexos e capazes de realizar cálculos.

Assim, os modelos cerebrais que não refletem isso são abstratos demais para serem representativos do funcionamento do cérebro; os modelos que tentam capturar isso são computacionalmente muito caros e indiscutivelmente intratáveis ​​com os recursos computacionais atuais.

No entanto, o Projeto Cérebro Humano está tentando construir um modelo computacional realista e detalhado de todo o cérebro humano.

A sabedoria dessa abordagem foi contestada publicamente, com cientistas de alto nível em ambos os lados do argumento.
Na segunda metade do século 20, os desenvolvimentos em química, microscopia eletrônica, genética, ciência da computação, imagens funcionais do cérebro e outros campos abriram progressivamente novas janelas para a estrutura e função do cérebro.

Nos Estados Unidos, a década de 1990 foi oficialmente designada como a "Década do Cérebro" para comemorar os avanços feitos na pesquisa do cérebro e promover o financiamento dessas pesquisas. em destaque, incluindo o registro multieletrodo, que permite que a atividade de muitas células cerebrais seja registrada ao mesmo tempo; engenharia genética, que permite que componentes moleculares do cérebro sejam alterados experimentalmente; genômica, que permite que variações na estrutura cerebral sejam correlacionadas com variações nas propriedades do DNA e neuroimagem.


== Sociedade e cultura ==



=== Como comida ===


Cérebros de animais são usados ​​como alimento em várias cozinhas.


=== Em rituais ===

Algumas evidências arqueológicas sugerem que os rituais de luto dos neandertais europeus também envolviam o consumo do cérebro. O povo Fore de Papua Nova Guiné é conhecido por comer cérebros humanos.

Em rituais funerários, aqueles próximos aos mortos comiam o cérebro do falecido para criar uma sensação de imortalidade.

Uma doença priônica chamada kuru foi atribuída a isso.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brain

;;;FR;;;

! Confusion entre les dernières définitions (TA2-2019) de cerveau, cerveau et télencéphale !


CERVEAU


Un cerveau est un organe qui sert de centre du système nerveux chez tous les vertébrés et la plupart des animaux invertébrés.

Il est situé dans la tête, généralement à proximité des organes sensoriels pour des sens tels que la vision.

C'est l'organe le plus complexe du corps d'un vertébré.

Chez un humain, le cortex cérébral contient environ 14 à 16 milliards de neurones et le nombre estimé de neurones dans le cervelet est de 55 à 70 milliards.

Chaque neurone est relié par des synapses à plusieurs milliers d'autres neurones.

Ces neurones communiquent généralement entre eux au moyen de longues fibres appelées axones, qui transportent des trains d'impulsions de signal appelées potentiels d'action vers des parties distantes du cerveau ou du corps ciblant des cellules réceptrices spécifiques.
Physiologiquement, le cerveau exerce un contrôle centralisé sur les autres organes du corps.

Ils agissent sur le reste du corps à la fois en générant des schémas d'activité musculaire et en entraînant la sécrétion de substances chimiques appelées hormones.

Ce contrôle centralisé permet des réponses rapides et coordonnées aux changements de l'environnement.

Certains types de réactivité de base tels que les réflexes peuvent être médiés par la moelle épinière ou les ganglions périphériques, mais un contrôle sophistiqué et délibéré du comportement basé sur des entrées sensorielles complexes nécessite les capacités d'intégration d'informations d'un cerveau centralisé.
Les opérations des cellules cérébrales individuelles sont maintenant comprises dans des détails considérables, mais la manière dont elles coopèrent dans des ensembles de millions reste à résoudre.

Les modèles récents des neurosciences modernes traitent le cerveau comme un ordinateur biologique, dont le mécanisme est très différent d'un ordinateur électronique, mais similaire dans le sens où il acquiert des informations du monde environnant, les stocke et les traite de diverses manières.
Cet article compare les propriétés des cerveaux de toute la gamme des espèces animales, en accordant la plus grande attention aux vertébrés.

Il traite du cerveau humain dans la mesure où il partage les propriétés d'autres cerveaux.

Les différences entre le cerveau humain et les autres cerveaux sont décrites dans l'article sur le cerveau humain.

Plusieurs sujets qui pourraient être abordés ici le sont plutôt là car on peut en dire beaucoup plus dans un contexte humain.

Le plus important est la maladie du cerveau et les effets des lésions cérébrales, qui sont couverts dans l'article sur le cerveau humain.


== Anatomie ==


La forme et la taille du cerveau varient considérablement d'une espèce à l'autre et il est souvent difficile d'identifier des caractéristiques communes.

Néanmoins, il existe un certain nombre de principes d'architecture cérébrale qui s'appliquent à un large éventail d'espèces.

Certains aspects de la structure cérébrale sont communs à presque toute la gamme des espèces animales ; d'autres distinguent les cerveaux "avancés" des plus primitifs, ou distinguent les vertébrés des invertébrés. Le moyen le plus simple d'obtenir des informations sur l'anatomie du cerveau est l'inspection visuelle, mais de nombreuses techniques plus sophistiquées ont été développées.

Le tissu cérébral dans son état naturel est trop mou pour être travaillé, mais il peut être durci par immersion dans de l'alcool ou d'autres fixateurs, puis découpé en tranches pour examen de l'intérieur.

Visuellement, l'intérieur du cerveau est constitué de zones dites de matière grise, de couleur foncée, séparées par des zones de matière blanche, de couleur plus claire.

Des informations supplémentaires peuvent être obtenues en colorant des tranches de tissu cérébral avec une variété de produits chimiques qui font ressortir les zones où des types spécifiques de molécules sont présents à des concentrations élevées.

Il est également possible d'examiner la microstructure du tissu cérébral à l'aide d'un microscope et de tracer le schéma des connexions d'une zone cérébrale à une autre.


=== Structure cellulaire ===


Le cerveau de toutes les espèces est composé principalement de deux grandes classes de cellules : les neurones et les cellules gliales.

Les cellules gliales (également appelées glie ou névroglie) se présentent sous plusieurs types et remplissent un certain nombre de fonctions essentielles, notamment le soutien structurel, le soutien métabolique, l'isolation et l'orientation du développement.

Les neurones, cependant, sont généralement considérés comme les cellules les plus importantes du cerveau.
La propriété qui rend les neurones uniques est leur capacité à envoyer des signaux à des cellules cibles spécifiques sur de longues distances.

Ils envoient ces signaux au moyen d'un axone, qui est une fine fibre protoplasmique qui s'étend du corps cellulaire et se projette, généralement avec de nombreuses branches, vers d'autres zones, parfois proches, parfois dans des parties éloignées du cerveau ou du corps.

La longueur d'un axone peut être extraordinaire : par exemple, si une cellule pyramidale (un neurone excitateur) du cortex cérébral était agrandie de sorte que son corps cellulaire devienne la taille d'un corps humain, son axone, également agrandi, deviendrait un câble quelques centimètres de diamètre, s'étendant sur plus d'un kilomètre.

Ces axones transmettent des signaux sous la forme d'impulsions électrochimiques appelées potentiels d'action, qui durent moins d'un millième de seconde et se déplacent le long de l'axone à des vitesses de 1 à 100 mètres par seconde.

Certains neurones émettent constamment des potentiels d'action, à des taux de 10 à 100 par seconde, généralement selon des schémas irréguliers; d'autres neurones sont calmes la plupart du temps, mais émettent occasionnellement une salve de potentiels d'action. Les axones transmettent des signaux à d'autres neurones au moyen de jonctions spécialisées appelées synapses.

Un seul axone peut établir jusqu'à plusieurs milliers de connexions synaptiques avec d'autres cellules.

Lorsqu'un potentiel d'action, voyageant le long d'un axone, arrive à une synapse, il provoque la libération d'un produit chimique appelé neurotransmetteur.

Le neurotransmetteur se lie aux molécules réceptrices dans la membrane de la cellule cible. Les synapses sont les éléments fonctionnels clés du cerveau.

La fonction essentielle du cerveau est la communication de cellule à cellule, et les synapses sont les points de communication.

On estime que le cerveau humain contient environ 100 000 milliards de synapses ; même le cerveau d'une mouche des fruits en contient plusieurs millions.

Les fonctions de ces synapses sont très diverses : certaines sont excitatrices (excitant la cellule cible) ; d'autres sont inhibiteurs ; d'autres fonctionnent en activant des systèmes de seconds messagers qui modifient la chimie interne de leurs cellules cibles de manière complexe.

Un grand nombre de synapses sont dynamiquement modifiables ; c'est-à-dire qu'ils sont capables de changer d'intensité d'une manière contrôlée par les modèles de signaux qui les traversent.

Il est largement admis que la modification des synapses en fonction de l'activité est le principal mécanisme d'apprentissage et de mémoire du cerveau. La majeure partie de l'espace dans le cerveau est occupée par les axones, qui sont souvent regroupés dans ce qu'on appelle les fibres nerveuses.

Un axone myélinisé est enveloppé dans une gaine isolante grasse de myéline, qui sert à augmenter considérablement la vitesse de propagation du signal. (Il existe aussi des axones non myélinisés).

La myéline est blanche, ce qui fait apparaître des parties du cerveau remplies exclusivement de fibres nerveuses sous forme de matière blanche de couleur claire, contrairement à la matière grise de couleur plus foncée qui marque les zones à forte densité de corps cellulaires neuronaux.


=== Évolution ===



==== Système nerveux bilatéral générique ====

À l'exception de quelques organismes primitifs tels que les éponges (qui n'ont pas de système nerveux) et les cnidaires (qui ont un système nerveux constitué d'un réseau nerveux diffus), tous les animaux multicellulaires vivants sont des bilatériens, c'est-à-dire des animaux avec une forme de corps à symétrie bilatérale (c'est-à-dire , côtés gauche et droit qui sont des images miroir approximatives l'un de l'autre).

On pense que tous les bilatériens descendent d'un ancêtre commun apparu au début de la période cambrienne , il y a 485 à 540 millions d'années, et on a émis l'hypothèse que cet ancêtre commun avait la forme d'un simple ver tubicole avec un corps segmenté.

À un niveau schématique, cette forme de ver de base continue de se refléter dans l'architecture du corps et du système nerveux de tous les bilatériens modernes, y compris les vertébrés.

La forme corporelle bilatérale fondamentale est un tube avec une cavité intestinale creuse allant de la bouche à l'anus, et un cordon nerveux avec un élargissement (un ganglion) pour chaque segment du corps, avec un ganglion particulièrement grand à l'avant, appelé le cerveau.

Le cerveau est petit et simple chez certaines espèces, comme les vers nématodes ; chez d'autres espèces, y compris les vertébrés, c'est l'organe le plus complexe du corps.

Certains types de vers, tels que les sangsues, ont également un ganglion élargi à l'arrière du cordon nerveux, connu sous le nom de "cerveau de la queue". Il existe quelques types de bilatériens existants qui n'ont pas de cerveau reconnaissable, notamment les échinodermes et les tuniciers.

Il n'a pas été définitivement établi si l'existence de ces espèces sans cerveau indique que les premiers bilatériens manquaient de cerveau, ou si leurs ancêtres ont évolué d'une manière qui a conduit à la disparition d'une structure cérébrale préexistante.


==== Invertébrés ====

Cette catégorie comprend les tardigrades, les arthropodes, les mollusques et de nombreux types de vers.

La diversité des plans corporels des invertébrés correspond à une égale diversité des structures cérébrales. Deux groupes d'invertébrés ont des cerveaux particulièrement complexes : les arthropodes (insectes, crustacés, arachnides et autres) et les céphalopodes (pieuvres, calmars et mollusques similaires).

Le cerveau des arthropodes et des céphalopodes provient de cordons nerveux parallèles jumeaux qui s'étendent à travers le corps de l'animal.

Les arthropodes ont un cerveau central, le ganglion supra-œsophagien, avec trois divisions et de grands lobes optiques derrière chaque œil pour le traitement visuel.

Les céphalopodes tels que la pieuvre et le calmar ont le plus gros cerveau de tous les invertébrés.

Les mouches des fruits (Drosophile), en raison du large éventail de techniques disponibles pour étudier leur génétique, ont été un sujet naturel pour étudier le rôle des gènes dans le développement du cerveau.

Malgré la grande distance évolutive entre les insectes et les mammifères, de nombreux aspects de la neurogénétique de la drosophile se sont révélés pertinents pour l'homme.

Les premiers gènes de l'horloge biologique, par exemple, ont été identifiés en examinant des mutants de drosophile qui présentaient des cycles d'activité quotidiens perturbés.

Une recherche dans les génomes de vertébrés a révélé un ensemble de gènes analogues, qui se sont avérés jouer des rôles similaires dans l'horloge biologique de la souris - et donc presque certainement dans l'horloge biologique humaine également.

Des études réalisées sur la drosophile montrent également que la plupart des régions neuropiles du cerveau sont continuellement réorganisées tout au long de la vie en réponse à des conditions de vie spécifiques.
Le ver nématode Caenorhabditis elegans, comme la drosophile, a été étudié en grande partie en raison de son importance en génétique.

Au début des années 1970, Sydney Brenner le choisit comme organisme modèle pour étudier la manière dont les gènes contrôlent le développement.

L'un des avantages de travailler avec ce ver est que le plan corporel est très stéréotypé : le système nerveux de l'hermaphrodite contient exactement 302 neurones, toujours aux mêmes endroits, faisant des connexions synaptiques identiques chez chaque ver.

L'équipe de Brenner a découpé des vers en milliers de sections ultrafines et photographié chacune au microscope électronique, puis a visuellement apparié les fibres d'une section à l'autre, pour cartographier chaque neurone et synapse dans tout le corps.

Le schéma de câblage neuronal complet de C.elegans - son connectome a été réalisé.

Rien d'approchant ce niveau de détail n'est disponible pour aucun autre organisme, et les informations obtenues ont permis une multitude d'études qui n'auraient pas été possibles autrement.
La limace de mer Aplysia californica a été choisie par le neurophysiologiste lauréat du prix Nobel Eric Kandel comme modèle pour étudier les bases cellulaires de l'apprentissage et de la mémoire, en raison de la simplicité et de l'accessibilité de son système nerveux, et elle a été examinée dans des centaines d'expériences.


==== Vertébrés ====

Les premiers vertébrés sont apparus il y a plus de 500 millions d'années (Mya), pendant la période cambrienne, et ont peut-être ressemblé à la myxine moderne par sa forme.

Les requins sont apparus il y a environ 450 Mya, les amphibiens environ 400 Mya, les reptiles environ 350 Mya et les mammifères environ 200 Mya.

Chaque espèce a une histoire évolutive tout aussi longue, mais les cerveaux des myxines, lamproies, requins, amphibiens, reptiles et mammifères modernes présentent un gradient de taille et de complexité qui suit à peu près la séquence évolutive.

Tous ces cerveaux contiennent le même ensemble de composants anatomiques de base, mais beaucoup sont rudimentaires chez la myxine, alors que chez les mammifères, la partie la plus avancée (le télencéphale) est considérablement élaborée et élargie. Les cerveaux sont plus simplement comparés en termes de taille.

La relation entre la taille du cerveau, la taille du corps et d'autres variables a été étudiée dans un large éventail d'espèces de vertébrés.

En règle générale, la taille du cerveau augmente avec la taille du corps, mais pas dans une simple proportion linéaire.

En général, les petits animaux ont tendance à avoir un cerveau plus gros, mesuré en fraction de la taille du corps.

Pour les mammifères, la relation entre le volume du cerveau et la masse corporelle suit essentiellement une loi de puissance avec un exposant d'environ 0,75.

Cette formule décrit la tendance centrale, mais chaque famille de mammifères s'en écarte dans une certaine mesure, d'une manière qui reflète en partie la complexité de leur comportement.

Par exemple, les primates ont des cerveaux 5 à 10 fois plus gros que ne le prédit la formule.

Les prédateurs ont tendance à avoir un cerveau plus gros que leurs proies, par rapport à la taille du corps.

Tous les cerveaux de vertébrés partagent une forme sous-jacente commune, qui apparaît le plus clairement au cours des premiers stades du développement embryonnaire.

Dans sa forme la plus ancienne, le cerveau apparaît sous la forme de trois gonflements à l'extrémité avant du tube neural ; ces gonflements finissent par devenir le cerveau antérieur, le cerveau moyen et le cerveau postérieur (le prosencéphale, le mésencéphale et le rhombencéphale, respectivement).

Aux premiers stades du développement du cerveau, les trois zones sont à peu près égales en taille.

Dans de nombreuses classes de vertébrés, comme les poissons et les amphibiens, les trois parties restent de taille similaire chez l'adulte, mais chez les mammifères, le cerveau antérieur devient beaucoup plus gros que les autres parties et le mésencéphale devient très petit. Les cerveaux des vertébrés sont constitués de tissus très doux.

Le tissu cérébral vivant est rosâtre à l'extérieur et principalement blanc à l'intérieur, avec de subtiles variations de couleur.

Le cerveau des vertébrés est entouré d'un système de membranes de tissu conjonctif appelées méninges qui séparent le crâne du cerveau.

Les vaisseaux sanguins pénètrent dans le système nerveux central par des trous dans les couches méningées.

Les cellules des parois des vaisseaux sanguins sont étroitement liées les unes aux autres, formant la barrière hémato-encéphalique, qui bloque le passage de nombreuses toxines et agents pathogènes (tout en bloquant en même temps les anticorps et certains médicaments, ce qui présente des défis particuliers dans le traitement des maladies du cerveau). Les neuroanatomistes divisent généralement le cerveau des vertébrés en six régions principales : le télencéphale (hémisphères cérébraux), le diencéphale (thalamus et hypothalamus), le mésencéphale (mésencéphale), le cervelet, le pont et le bulbe rachidien.

Chacun de ces domaines a une structure interne complexe.

Certaines parties, telles que le cortex cérébral et le cortex cérébelleux, sont constituées de couches qui sont pliées ou alambiquées pour s'adapter à l'espace disponible.

D'autres parties, telles que le thalamus et l'hypothalamus, sont constituées de grappes de nombreux petits noyaux.

Des milliers de zones distinctes peuvent être identifiées dans le cerveau des vertébrés sur la base de distinctions fines de la structure neurale, de la chimie et de la connectivité.

Bien que les mêmes composants de base soient présents dans tous les cerveaux des vertébrés, certaines branches de l'évolution des vertébrés ont conduit à des distorsions substantielles de la géométrie du cerveau, en particulier dans la région du cerveau antérieur.

Le cerveau d'un requin montre les composants de base d'une manière simple, mais chez les poissons téléostéens (la grande majorité des espèces de poissons existantes), le cerveau antérieur est devenu "éversé", comme une chaussette retournée.

Chez les oiseaux, il y a aussi des changements majeurs dans la structure du cerveau antérieur.

Ces distorsions peuvent rendre difficile l'appariement des composants cérébraux d'une espèce avec ceux d'une autre espèce.

La moelle épinière, avec la moelle épinière, contient de nombreux petits noyaux impliqués dans une grande variété de fonctions motrices sensorielles et involontaires telles que les vomissements, la fréquence cardiaque et les processus digestifs.
Le pons se situe dans le tronc cérébral directement au-dessus de la moelle.

Entre autres choses, il contient des noyaux qui contrôlent des actes souvent volontaires mais simples tels que le sommeil, la respiration, la déglutition, la fonction vésicale, l'équilibre, les mouvements oculaires, les expressions faciales et la posture.
L'hypothalamus est une petite région à la base du cerveau antérieur, dont la complexité et l'importance démentent sa taille.

Il est composé de nombreux petits noyaux, chacun avec des connexions et une neurochimie distinctes.

L'hypothalamus est engagé dans des actes supplémentaires involontaires ou partiellement volontaires tels que les cycles de sommeil et d'éveil, manger et boire, et la libération de certaines hormones.
Le thalamus est un ensemble de noyaux aux fonctions diverses : certains sont impliqués dans la transmission d'informations vers et depuis les hémisphères cérébraux, tandis que d'autres sont impliqués dans la motivation.

La zone sous-thalamique (zona incerta) semble contenir des systèmes générateurs d'action pour plusieurs types de comportements "consumatoires" tels que manger, boire, déféquer et copuler.
Le cervelet module les sorties d'autres systèmes cérébraux, qu'elles soient liées à la motricité ou à la pensée, pour les rendre certaines et précises.

L'ablation du cervelet n'empêche pas un animal de faire quelque chose de particulier, mais rend les actions hésitantes et maladroites.

Cette précision n'est pas intégrée mais apprise par essais et erreurs.

La coordination musculaire apprise en faisant du vélo est un exemple d'un type de plasticité neurale qui peut avoir lieu en grande partie dans le cervelet. 10 % du volume total du cerveau est constitué du cervelet et 50 % de tous les neurones sont contenus dans sa structure.
Le tectum optique permet aux actions d'être dirigées vers des points dans l'espace, le plus souvent en réponse à une entrée visuelle.

Chez les mammifères, il est généralement appelé colliculus supérieur et sa fonction la mieux étudiée est de diriger les mouvements oculaires.

Il dirige également les mouvements d'atteinte et d'autres actions dirigées par l'objet.

Il reçoit de fortes entrées visuelles, mais également des entrées d'autres sens qui sont utiles pour diriger les actions, telles que l'entrée auditive chez les hiboux et l'entrée des organes thermosensibles chez les serpents.

Chez certains poissons primitifs, comme les lamproies, cette région est la plus grande partie du cerveau.

Le colliculus supérieur fait partie du mésencéphale.
Le pallium est une couche de matière grise qui se trouve à la surface du cerveau antérieur et constitue le développement évolutif le plus complexe et le plus récent du cerveau en tant qu'organe.

Chez les reptiles et les mammifères, on l'appelle le cortex cérébral.

De multiples fonctions impliquent le pallium, notamment l'odorat et la mémoire spatiale.

Chez les mammifères, où il devient si gros qu'il domine le cerveau, il prend en charge les fonctions de nombreuses autres zones cérébrales.

Chez de nombreux mammifères, le cortex cérébral est constitué de renflements pliés appelés gyri qui créent des sillons profonds ou des fissures appelées sulci.

Les plis augmentent la surface du cortex et augmentent donc la quantité de matière grise et la quantité d'informations pouvant être stockées et traitées.
L'hippocampe, à proprement parler, ne se trouve que chez les mammifères.

Cependant, la zone dont il dérive, le pallium médial, a des homologues chez tous les vertébrés.

Il est prouvé que cette partie du cerveau est impliquée dans des événements complexes tels que la mémoire spatiale et la navigation chez les poissons, les oiseaux, les reptiles et les mammifères.
Les noyaux gris centraux sont un groupe de structures interconnectées dans le cerveau antérieur.

La fonction principale des ganglions de la base semble être la sélection d'actions : ils envoient des signaux inhibiteurs à toutes les parties du cerveau qui peuvent générer des comportements moteurs et, dans les bonnes circonstances, peuvent libérer l'inhibition, de sorte que les systèmes générateurs d'actions sont capables d'exécuter leurs actions.

La récompense et la punition exercent leurs effets neuronaux les plus importants en modifiant les connexions au sein des ganglions de la base.
Le bulbe olfactif est une structure spéciale qui traite les signaux sensoriels olfactifs et envoie sa sortie à la partie olfactive du pallium.

C'est un composant majeur du cerveau chez de nombreux vertébrés, mais il est fortement réduit chez les humains et les autres primates (dont les sens sont dominés par les informations acquises par la vue plutôt que par l'odorat).


===== Reptiles =====


====== Oiseaux ======


===== Mammifères =====
La différence la plus évidente entre le cerveau des mammifères et celui des autres vertébrés se situe au niveau de la taille.

En moyenne, un mammifère a un cerveau environ deux fois plus gros que celui d'un oiseau de même taille et dix fois plus gros que celui d'un reptile de même taille. La taille n'est cependant pas la seule différence : il sont également des différences substantielles dans la forme.

Le cerveau postérieur et le mésencéphale des mammifères sont généralement similaires à ceux des autres vertébrés, mais des différences dramatiques apparaissent dans le cerveau antérieur, qui est considérablement élargi et dont la structure est également modifiée.

Le cortex cérébral est la partie du cerveau qui distingue le plus les mammifères.

Chez les vertébrés non mammifères, la surface du cerveau est tapissée d'une structure à trois couches relativement simple appelée pallium.

Chez les mammifères, le pallium évolue en une structure complexe à six couches appelée néocortex ou isocortex.

Plusieurs zones situées à la périphérie du néocortex, dont l'hippocampe et l'amygdale, sont également beaucoup plus développées chez les mammifères que chez les autres vertébrés. L'élaboration du cortex cérébral entraîne des changements dans d'autres zones du cerveau.

Le colliculus supérieur, qui joue un rôle majeur dans le contrôle visuel du comportement chez la plupart des vertébrés, se rétrécit à une petite taille chez les mammifères, et bon nombre de ses fonctions sont prises en charge par les zones visuelles du cortex cérébral.

Le cervelet des mammifères contient une grande partie (le néocervelet) dédiée au soutien du cortex cérébral, qui n'a pas d'équivalent chez les autres vertébrés.


====== Primates ======

Les cerveaux des humains et des autres primates contiennent les mêmes structures que les cerveaux des autres mammifères, mais sont généralement plus gros proportionnellement à la taille du corps.

Le quotient d'encéphalisation (EQ) est utilisé pour comparer la taille du cerveau entre les espèces.

Il prend en compte la non-linéarité de la relation cerveau-corps.

Les humains ont un QE moyen de l'ordre de 7 à 8, tandis que la plupart des autres primates ont un QE de l'ordre de 2 à 3.

Les dauphins ont des valeurs supérieures à celles des primates autres que les humains, mais presque tous les autres mammifères ont des valeurs de QE sensiblement inférieures.
La majeure partie de l'élargissement du cerveau des primates provient d'une expansion massive du cortex cérébral, en particulier du cortex préfrontal et des parties du cortex impliquées dans la vision.

Le réseau de traitement visuel des primates comprend au moins 30 zones cérébrales distinctes, avec un réseau complexe d'interconnexions.

Il a été estimé que les zones de traitement visuel occupent plus de la moitié de la surface totale du néocortex des primates.

Le cortex préfrontal remplit des fonctions telles que la planification, la mémoire de travail, la motivation, l'attention et le contrôle exécutif.

Il occupe une proportion beaucoup plus importante du cerveau des primates que des autres espèces, et une fraction particulièrement importante du cerveau humain.


== Développement ==


Le cerveau se développe selon une séquence d'étapes orchestrée de manière complexe.

Il change de forme d'un simple gonflement à l'avant du cordon nerveux dans les premiers stades embryonnaires, à un ensemble complexe de zones et de connexions.

Les neurones sont créés dans des zones spéciales qui contiennent des cellules souches, puis migrent à travers les tissus pour atteindre leurs emplacements ultimes.

Une fois que les neurones se sont positionnés, leurs axones poussent et naviguent à travers le cerveau, se ramifiant et s'étendant au fur et à mesure, jusqu'à ce que les pointes atteignent leurs cibles et forment des connexions synaptiques.

Dans un certain nombre de parties du système nerveux, les neurones et les synapses sont produits en nombre excessif au cours des premiers stades, puis ceux qui sont inutiles sont élagués. Pour les vertébrés, les premiers stades du développement neural sont similaires dans toutes les espèces.

Au fur et à mesure que l'embryon se transforme d'une masse ronde de cellules en une structure semblable à un ver, une étroite bande d'ectoderme courant le long de la ligne médiane du dos est amenée à devenir la plaque neurale, le précurseur du système nerveux.

La plaque neurale se replie vers l'intérieur pour former la rainure neurale, puis les lèvres qui bordent la rainure fusionnent pour enfermer le tube neural, un cordon creux de cellules avec un ventricule rempli de liquide au centre.

À l'avant, les ventricules et le cordon gonflent pour former trois vésicules qui sont les précurseurs du prosencéphale (cerveau antérieur), du mésencéphale (cerveau moyen) et du rhombencéphale (cerveau postérieur).

Au stade suivant, le cerveau antérieur se divise en deux vésicules appelées télencéphale (qui contiendra le cortex cérébral, les ganglions de la base et les structures associées) et le diencéphale (qui contiendra le thalamus et l'hypothalamus).

À peu près au même moment, le cerveau postérieur se divise en métencéphale (qui contiendra le cervelet et le pont) et en myélencéphale (qui contiendra le bulbe rachidien).

Chacune de ces zones contient des zones prolifératives où les neurones et les cellules gliales sont générés ; les cellules résultantes migrent alors, parfois sur de longues distances, vers leurs positions finales. Une fois qu'un neurone est en place, il étend des dendrites et un axone dans la zone qui l'entoure.

Les axones, parce qu'ils s'étendent généralement à une grande distance du corps cellulaire et doivent atteindre des cibles spécifiques, se développent de manière particulièrement complexe.

La pointe d'un axone en croissance consiste en une masse de protoplasme appelée cône de croissance, parsemée de récepteurs chimiques.

Ces récepteurs détectent l'environnement local, ce qui fait que le cône de croissance est attiré ou repoussé par divers éléments cellulaires, et donc tiré dans une direction particulière à chaque point de sa trajectoire.

Le résultat de ce processus d'orientation est que le cône de croissance navigue à travers le cerveau jusqu'à ce qu'il atteigne sa zone de destination, où d'autres signaux chimiques le font commencer à générer des synapses.

Considérant l'ensemble du cerveau, des milliers de gènes créent des produits qui influencent la recherche de trajectoire axonale. Le réseau synaptique qui émerge finalement n'est cependant que partiellement déterminé par les gènes.

Dans de nombreuses parties du cerveau, les axones "prolifèrent" initialement, puis sont "élagués" par des mécanismes qui dépendent de l'activité neuronale.

Dans la projection de l'œil au mésencéphale, par exemple, la structure chez l'adulte contient une cartographie très précise, reliant chaque point de la surface de la rétine à un point correspondant dans une couche du mésencéphale.

Dans les premiers stades de développement, chaque axone de la rétine est guidé vers le bon voisinage général dans le mésencéphale par des signaux chimiques, mais se ramifie ensuite très abondamment et établit un contact initial avec une large bande de neurones du mésencéphale.

La rétine, avant la naissance, contient des mécanismes spéciaux qui lui font générer des vagues d'activité qui prennent naissance spontanément à un point aléatoire et se propagent ensuite lentement à travers la couche rétinienne.

Ces ondes sont utiles car elles provoquent l'activité simultanée des neurones voisins ; c'est-à-dire qu'ils produisent un modèle d'activité neuronale qui contient des informations sur la disposition spatiale des neurones.

Cette information est exploitée dans le mésencéphale par un mécanisme qui provoque l'affaiblissement des synapses, et finalement leur disparition, si l'activité dans un axone n'est pas suivie par l'activité de la cellule cible.

Le résultat de ce processus sophistiqué est un réglage et un resserrement progressifs de la carte, la laissant finalement dans sa forme adulte précise. Des choses similaires se produisent dans d'autres zones du cerveau : une matrice synaptique initiale est générée à la suite d'un guidage chimique déterminé génétiquement, mais ensuite progressivement affiné par des mécanismes dépendants de l'activité, en partie entraînés par la dynamique interne, en partie par des apports sensoriels externes.

Dans certains cas, comme pour le système rétine-mésencéphale, les schémas d'activité dépendent de mécanismes qui n'opèrent que dans le cerveau en développement et n'existent apparemment que pour guider le développement. Chez l'homme et de nombreux autres mammifères, de nouveaux neurones sont créés principalement avant la naissance, et le le cerveau du nourrisson contient beaucoup plus de neurones que le cerveau adulte.

Il existe cependant quelques domaines dans lesquels de nouveaux neurones continuent d'être générés tout au long de la vie.

Les deux domaines pour lesquels la neurogenèse adulte est bien établie sont le bulbe olfactif, qui est impliqué dans l'odorat, et le gyrus denté de l'hippocampe, où il est prouvé que les nouveaux neurones jouent un rôle dans le stockage des souvenirs nouvellement acquis.

À ces exceptions près, cependant, l'ensemble de neurones qui est présent dans la petite enfance est l'ensemble qui est présent toute la vie.

Les cellules gliales sont différentes : comme la plupart des types de cellules dans le corps, elles sont générées tout au long de la vie. Il y a longtemps eu un débat sur la question de savoir si les qualités de l'esprit, de la personnalité et de l'intelligence peuvent être attribuées à l'hérédité ou à l'éducation. controverse nature et culture.

Bien que de nombreux détails restent à régler, la recherche en neurosciences a clairement montré que les deux facteurs sont importants.

Les gènes déterminent la forme générale du cerveau, et les gènes déterminent comment le cerveau réagit à l'expérience.

Cependant, l'expérience est nécessaire pour affiner la matrice des connexions synaptiques qui, dans sa forme développée, contient beaucoup plus d'informations que le génome.

À certains égards, tout ce qui importe est la présence ou l'absence d'expérience pendant les périodes critiques du développement.

À d'autres égards, la quantité et la qualité de l'expérience sont importantes; par exemple, il existe des preuves substantielles que les animaux élevés dans des environnements enrichis ont des cortex cérébraux plus épais, indiquant une densité plus élevée de connexions synaptiques, que les animaux dont les niveaux de stimulation sont restreints.


== Physiologie ==

Les fonctions du cerveau dépendent de la capacité des neurones à transmettre des signaux électrochimiques à d'autres cellules et de leur capacité à répondre de manière appropriée aux signaux électrochimiques reçus d'autres cellules.

Les propriétés électriques des neurones sont contrôlées par une grande variété de processus biochimiques et métaboliques, notamment les interactions entre les neurotransmetteurs et les récepteurs qui ont lieu au niveau des synapses.


=== Neurotransmetteurs et récepteurs ===

Les neurotransmetteurs sont des produits chimiques qui sont libérés au niveau des synapses lorsque la membrane locale est dépolarisée et que le Ca2+ pénètre dans la cellule, généralement lorsqu'un potentiel d'action arrive à la synapse - les neurotransmetteurs se fixent aux molécules réceptrices sur la membrane de la ou des cellules cibles de la synapse, et ainsi modifier les propriétés électriques ou chimiques des molécules réceptrices.
À quelques exceptions près, chaque neurone du cerveau libère le même neurotransmetteur chimique, ou combinaison de neurotransmetteurs, à toutes les connexions synaptiques qu'il établit avec d'autres neurones ; cette règle est connue sous le nom de principe de Dale.

Ainsi, un neurone peut être caractérisé par les neurotransmetteurs qu'il libère.

La grande majorité des drogues psychoactives exercent leurs effets en altérant des systèmes spécifiques de neurotransmetteurs.

Cela s'applique aux drogues telles que les cannabinoïdes, la nicotine, l'héroïne, la cocaïne, l'alcool, la fluoxétine, la chlorpromazine et bien d'autres. Les deux neurotransmetteurs les plus répandus dans le cerveau des vertébrés sont le glutamate, qui exerce presque toujours des effets excitateurs sur les neurones cibles, et l'acide gamma-aminobutyrique (GABA), qui est presque toujours inhibiteur.

Les neurones utilisant ces émetteurs peuvent être trouvés dans presque toutes les parties du cerveau.

En raison de leur ubiquité, les médicaments qui agissent sur le glutamate ou le GABA ont tendance à avoir des effets larges et puissants.

Certains anesthésiques généraux agissent en diminuant les effets du glutamate ; la plupart des tranquillisants exercent leurs effets sédatifs en renforçant les effets du GABA. Il existe des dizaines d'autres neurotransmetteurs chimiques qui sont utilisés dans des zones plus limitées du cerveau, souvent des zones dédiées à une fonction particulière.

La sérotonine, par exemple - la cible principale de nombreux antidépresseurs et de nombreux compléments alimentaires - provient exclusivement d'une petite zone du tronc cérébral appelée les noyaux du raphé.

La noradrénaline, qui est impliquée dans l'excitation, provient exclusivement d'une petite zone voisine appelée le locus coeruleus.

D'autres neurotransmetteurs tels que l'acétylcholine et la dopamine ont de multiples sources dans le cerveau mais ne sont pas aussi omniprésents que le glutamate et le GABA.


=== Activité électrique ===


En tant qu'effet secondaire des processus électrochimiques utilisés par les neurones pour la signalisation, le tissu cérébral génère des champs électriques lorsqu'il est actif.

Lorsqu'un grand nombre de neurones présentent une activité synchronisée, les champs électriques qu'ils génèrent peuvent être suffisamment importants pour être détectés à l'extérieur du crâne, en utilisant l'électroencéphalographie (EEG) ou la magnétoencéphalographie (MEG).

Les enregistrements EEG, ainsi que les enregistrements effectués à partir d'électrodes implantées à l'intérieur du cerveau d'animaux tels que des rats, montrent que le cerveau d'un animal vivant est constamment actif, même pendant le sommeil.

Chaque partie du cerveau montre un mélange d'activité rythmique et non rythmique, qui peut varier selon l'état comportemental.

Chez les mammifères, le cortex cérébral a tendance à montrer de grandes ondes delta lentes pendant le sommeil, des ondes alpha plus rapides lorsque l'animal est éveillé mais inattentif, et une activité irrégulière d'apparence chaotique lorsque l'animal est activement engagé dans une tâche, appelée ondes bêta et gamma.

Au cours d'une crise d'épilepsie, les mécanismes de contrôle inhibiteurs du cerveau ne fonctionnent pas et l'activité électrique atteint des niveaux pathologiques, produisant des traces EEG qui montrent de grandes ondes et des pics que l'on ne voit pas dans un cerveau sain.

Relier ces modèles au niveau de la population aux fonctions de calcul des neurones individuels est un axe majeur de la recherche actuelle en neurophysiologie.


=== Métabolisme ===

Tous les vertébrés ont une barrière hémato-encéphalique qui permet au métabolisme à l'intérieur du cerveau de fonctionner différemment du métabolisme dans d'autres parties du corps.

Les cellules gliales jouent un rôle majeur dans le métabolisme cérébral en contrôlant la composition chimique du liquide qui entoure les neurones, y compris les niveaux d'ions et de nutriments. animaux.

La nécessité de limiter le poids corporel pour, par exemple, voler, a apparemment conduit à une sélection pour une réduction de la taille du cerveau chez certaines espèces, comme les chauves-souris.

La majeure partie de la consommation d'énergie du cerveau sert à maintenir la charge électrique (potentiel de membrane) des neurones.

La plupart des espèces de vertébrés consacrent entre 2% et 8% du métabolisme de base au cerveau.

Chez les primates, cependant, le pourcentage est beaucoup plus élevé - chez l'homme, il atteint 20 à 25 %.

La consommation d'énergie du cerveau ne varie pas beaucoup dans le temps, mais les régions actives du cortex cérébral consomment un peu plus d'énergie que les régions inactives ; cela constitue la base des méthodes d'imagerie cérébrale fonctionnelle de la TEP, de l'IRMf et du NIRS.

Le cerveau tire généralement la majeure partie de son énergie du métabolisme du glucose dépendant de l'oxygène (c. éventuellement des acides aminés.


== Fonction ==


Les informations des organes sensoriels sont collectées dans le cerveau.

Là, il est utilisé pour déterminer les actions que l'organisme doit entreprendre.

Le cerveau traite les données brutes pour extraire des informations sur la structure de l'environnement.

Ensuite, il combine les informations traitées avec des informations sur les besoins actuels de l'animal et avec la mémoire des circonstances passées.

Enfin, sur la base des résultats, il génère des schémas de réponse motrice.

Ces tâches de traitement du signal nécessitent une interaction complexe entre une variété de sous-systèmes fonctionnels. La fonction du cerveau est de fournir un contrôle cohérent sur les actions d'un animal.

Un cerveau centralisé permet à des groupes de muscles d'être co-activés selon des schémas complexes ; il permet également aux stimuli frappant une partie du corps d'évoquer des réponses dans d'autres parties, et il peut empêcher différentes parties du corps d'agir à contre-courant les unes des autres.


=== Perception ===


Le cerveau humain reçoit des informations sur la lumière, le son, la composition chimique de l'atmosphère, la température, la position du corps dans l'espace (proprioception), la composition chimique de la circulation sanguine, etc.

Chez d'autres animaux, des sens supplémentaires sont présents, tels que le sens de la chaleur infrarouge des serpents, le sens du champ magnétique de certains oiseaux ou le sens du champ électrique principalement observé chez les animaux aquatiques.
Chaque système sensoriel commence par des cellules réceptrices spécialisées, telles que des cellules photoréceptrices dans la rétine de l'œil ou des cellules ciliées sensibles aux vibrations dans la cochlée de l'oreille.

Les axones des cellules réceptrices sensorielles voyagent dans la moelle épinière ou le cerveau, où ils transmettent leurs signaux à un noyau sensoriel de premier ordre dédié à une modalité sensorielle spécifique.

Ce noyau sensoriel primaire envoie des informations aux zones sensorielles d'ordre supérieur qui sont dédiées à la même modalité.

Finalement, via une station de cheminement dans le thalamus, les signaux sont envoyés au cortex cérébral, où ils sont traités pour extraire les caractéristiques pertinentes, et intégrés aux signaux provenant d'autres systèmes sensoriels.


=== Commande moteur ===

Les systèmes moteurs sont des zones du cerveau impliquées dans l'initiation des mouvements du corps, c'est-à-dire dans l'activation des muscles.

À l'exception des muscles qui contrôlent l'œil, qui sont entraînés par des noyaux dans le mésencéphale, tous les muscles volontaires du corps sont directement innervés par des motoneurones dans la moelle épinière et le cerveau postérieur.

Les motoneurones spinaux sont contrôlés à la fois par des circuits neuronaux intrinsèques à la moelle épinière et par des entrées qui descendent du cerveau.

Les circuits spinaux intrinsèques mettent en œuvre de nombreuses réponses réflexes et contiennent des générateurs de modèles pour les mouvements rythmiques tels que la marche ou la natation.

Les connexions descendantes du cerveau permettent un contrôle plus sophistiqué. Le cerveau contient plusieurs zones motrices qui se projettent directement sur la moelle épinière.

Au niveau le plus bas se trouvent les zones motrices de la moelle et du pont, qui contrôlent les mouvements stéréotypés tels que la marche, la respiration ou la déglutition.

À un niveau supérieur se trouvent des zones du mésencéphale, telles que le noyau rouge, qui est responsable de la coordination des mouvements des bras et des jambes.

À un niveau supérieur se trouve encore le cortex moteur primaire, une bande de tissu située au bord postérieur du lobe frontal.

Le cortex moteur primaire envoie des projections aux aires motrices sous-corticales, mais envoie également une projection massive directement à la moelle épinière, à travers le tractus pyramidal.

Cette projection corticospinale directe permet un contrôle volontaire précis des détails fins des mouvements.

D'autres aires cérébrales liées à la motricité exercent des effets secondaires en se projetant sur les aires motrices primaires.

Parmi les aires secondaires les plus importantes figurent le cortex prémoteur, l'aire motrice supplémentaire, les ganglions de la base et le cervelet.

En plus de tout ce qui précède, le cerveau et la moelle épinière contiennent des circuits étendus pour contrôler le système nerveux autonome qui contrôle le mouvement du muscle lisse du corps.


=== Dormir ===


De nombreux animaux alternent entre dormir et se réveiller dans un cycle quotidien.

L'éveil et la vigilance sont également modulés sur une échelle de temps plus fine par un réseau d'aires cérébrales.

Un élément clé du système du sommeil est le noyau suprachiasmatique (SCN), une infime partie de l'hypothalamus située directement au-dessus du point où les nerfs optiques des deux yeux se croisent.

Le SCN contient l'horloge biologique centrale du corps.

Les neurones y montrent des niveaux d'activité qui montent et descendent avec une période d'environ 24 heures, des rythmes circadiens : ces fluctuations d'activité sont entraînées par des changements rythmiques dans l'expression d'un ensemble de "gènes d'horloge".

Le SCN continue de garder le temps même s'il est excisé du cerveau et placé dans un plat de solution nutritive chaude, mais il reçoit généralement l'apport des nerfs optiques, via le tractus rétinohypothalamique (RHT), qui permet aux cycles quotidiens lumière-obscurité de calibrer l'horloge. Le SCN se projette sur un ensemble de zones de l'hypothalamus, du tronc cérébral et du mésencéphale impliquées dans la mise en œuvre des cycles veille-sommeil.

Un élément important du système est la formation réticulaire, un groupe de grappes de neurones dispersées de manière diffuse à travers le noyau du cerveau inférieur.

Les neurones réticulaires envoient des signaux au thalamus, qui à son tour envoie des signaux de contrôle du niveau d'activité à chaque partie du cortex.

Les dommages à la formation réticulaire peuvent produire un état permanent de coma.Le sommeil implique de grands changements dans l'activité cérébrale.

Jusque dans les années 1950, on croyait généralement que le cerveau s'éteignait essentiellement pendant le sommeil, mais on sait maintenant que c'est loin d'être vrai. l'activité se poursuit, mais les schémas deviennent très différents.

Il existe deux types de sommeil : le sommeil paradoxal (avec rêve) et le sommeil NREM (non-REM, généralement sans rêve), qui se répètent selon des schémas légèrement variables tout au long d'un épisode de sommeil.

Trois grands types de schémas d'activité cérébrale distincts peuvent être mesurés : REM, NREM léger et NREM profond.

Pendant le sommeil profond NREM, également appelé sommeil à ondes lentes, l'activité dans le cortex prend la forme de grandes ondes synchronisées, alors qu'à l'état de veille, elle est bruyante et désynchronisée.

Les niveaux des neurotransmetteurs norépinéphrine et sérotonine chutent pendant le sommeil lent et tombent presque à zéro pendant le sommeil paradoxal; les niveaux d'acétylcholine montrent le schéma inverse.


=== Homéostasie ===


Pour tout animal, la survie nécessite le maintien d'une variété de paramètres d'état corporel dans une plage de variation limitée : ceux-ci incluent la température, la teneur en eau, la concentration en sel dans le sang, les niveaux de glucose dans le sang, le niveau d'oxygène dans le sang, etc.

La capacité d'un animal à réguler l'environnement interne de son corps - le milieu intérieur, comme l'appelait le physiologiste pionnier Claude Bernard - est connue sous le nom d'homéostasie (en grec pour "se tenir immobile").

Le maintien de l'homéostasie est une fonction cruciale du cerveau.

Le principe de base qui sous-tend l'homéostasie est la rétroaction négative : chaque fois qu'un paramètre s'écarte de son point de consigne, les capteurs génèrent un signal d'erreur qui évoque une réponse qui fait revenir le paramètre vers sa valeur optimale. (Ce principe est largement utilisé en ingénierie, par exemple dans le contrôle de la température à l'aide d'un thermostat.)
Chez les vertébrés, la partie du cerveau qui joue le plus grand rôle est l'hypothalamus, une petite région à la base du cerveau antérieur dont la taille ne reflète ni sa complexité ni l'importance de sa fonction.

L'hypothalamus est un ensemble de petits noyaux, dont la plupart sont impliqués dans les fonctions biologiques de base.

Certaines de ces fonctions sont liées à l'excitation ou aux interactions sociales telles que la sexualité, l'agressivité ou les comportements maternels ; mais beaucoup d'entre eux se rapportent à l'homéostasie.

Plusieurs noyaux hypothalamiques reçoivent des informations de capteurs situés dans la paroi des vaisseaux sanguins, transmettant des informations sur la température, le niveau de sodium, le niveau de glucose, le niveau d'oxygène dans le sang et d'autres paramètres.

Ces noyaux hypothalamiques envoient des signaux de sortie aux zones motrices qui peuvent générer des actions pour corriger les déficiences.

Certains des extrants vont également à la glande pituitaire, une minuscule glande attachée au cerveau directement sous l'hypothalamus.

L'hypophyse sécrète des hormones dans la circulation sanguine, où elles circulent dans tout le corps et induisent des changements dans l'activité cellulaire.


=== Motivations ===


Les animaux individuels doivent exprimer des comportements favorisant la survie, tels que la recherche de nourriture, d'eau, d'un abri et d'un compagnon.

Le système de motivation dans le cerveau surveille l'état actuel de satisfaction de ces objectifs et active les comportements pour répondre à tous les besoins qui surviennent.

Le système de motivation fonctionne en grande partie par un mécanisme de récompense-punition.

Lorsqu'un comportement particulier est suivi de conséquences favorables, le mécanisme de récompense dans le cerveau est activé, ce qui induit des changements structurels à l'intérieur du cerveau qui provoquent la répétition du même comportement plus tard, chaque fois qu'une situation similaire se présente.

À l'inverse, lorsqu'un comportement est suivi de conséquences défavorables, le mécanisme de punition du cerveau est activé, induisant des changements structurels qui entraînent la suppression du comportement lorsque des situations similaires se présentent à l'avenir. La plupart des organismes étudiés à ce jour utilisent un mécanisme de récompense-punition : par exemple , les vers et les insectes peuvent modifier leur comportement pour rechercher des sources de nourriture ou pour éviter les dangers.

Chez les vertébrés, le système récompense-punition est mis en œuvre par un ensemble spécifique de structures cérébrales, au cœur desquelles se trouvent les ganglions de la base, un ensemble de zones interconnectées à la base du cerveau antérieur.

Les noyaux gris centraux sont le site central où les décisions sont prises : les noyaux gris centraux exercent un contrôle inhibiteur soutenu sur la plupart des systèmes moteurs du cerveau ; lorsque cette inhibition est levée, un système moteur est autorisé à exécuter l'action pour laquelle il est programmé.

Les récompenses et les punitions fonctionnent en modifiant la relation entre les entrées que les ganglions de la base reçoivent et les signaux de décision qui sont émis.

Le mécanisme de récompense est mieux compris que le mécanisme de punition, car son rôle dans l'abus de drogues l'a amené à être étudié de manière très intensive.

La recherche a montré que le neurotransmetteur dopamine joue un rôle central : les drogues addictives telles que la cocaïne, l'amphétamine et la nicotine provoquent soit une augmentation des niveaux de dopamine, soit une augmentation des effets de la dopamine à l'intérieur du cerveau.


=== Apprentissage et mémoire ===

Presque tous les animaux sont capables de modifier leur comportement à la suite de l'expérience, même les types de vers les plus primitifs.

Parce que le comportement est déterminé par l'activité cérébrale, les changements de comportement doivent en quelque sorte correspondre aux changements à l'intérieur du cerveau.

Déjà à la fin du XIXe siècle, des théoriciens comme Santiago Ramón y Cajal soutenaient que l'explication la plus plausible est que l'apprentissage et la mémoire s'expriment par des changements dans les connexions synaptiques entre les neurones.

Jusqu'en 1970, cependant, les preuves expérimentales à l'appui de l'hypothèse de la plasticité synaptique manquaient.

En 1971, Tim Bliss et Terje Lømo ont publié un article sur un phénomène maintenant appelé potentialisation à long terme : l'article a montré des preuves claires de changements synaptiques induits par l'activité qui ont duré au moins plusieurs jours.

Depuis lors, les progrès techniques ont rendu ces types d'expériences beaucoup plus faciles à réaliser, et des milliers d'études ont été réalisées qui ont clarifié le mécanisme du changement synaptique et découvert d'autres types de changement synaptique induit par l'activité dans diverses zones du cerveau, y compris le cortex cérébral, l'hippocampe, les ganglions de la base et le cervelet.

Le facteur neurotrophique dérivé du cerveau (BDNF) et l'activité physique semblent jouer un rôle bénéfique dans le processus. Les neuroscientifiques distinguent actuellement plusieurs types d'apprentissage et de mémoire qui sont mis en œuvre par le cerveau de manière distincte :

La mémoire de travail est la capacité du cerveau à maintenir une représentation temporaire des informations sur la tâche dans laquelle un animal est actuellement engagé.

On pense que ce type de mémoire dynamique est médié par la formation d'assemblages cellulaires - des groupes de neurones activés qui maintiennent leur activité en se stimulant constamment les uns les autres.
La mémoire épisodique est la capacité à se souvenir des détails d'événements spécifiques.

Ce type de mémoire peut durer toute une vie.

De nombreuses preuves impliquent que l'hippocampe joue un rôle crucial : les personnes gravement endommagées à l'hippocampe présentent parfois une amnésie, c'est-à-dire une incapacité à former de nouveaux souvenirs épisodiques durables.
La mémoire sémantique est la capacité d'apprendre des faits et des relations.

Ce type de mémoire est probablement stocké en grande partie dans le cortex cérébral, médié par des changements dans les connexions entre les cellules qui représentent des types spécifiques d'informations.
L'apprentissage instrumental est la capacité des récompenses et des punitions à modifier le comportement.

Il est mis en œuvre par un réseau d'aires cérébrales centrées sur les ganglions de la base.
L'apprentissage moteur est la capacité d'affiner les schémas de mouvement du corps par la pratique, ou plus généralement par la répétition.

Plusieurs zones cérébrales sont impliquées, dont le cortex prémoteur, les ganglions de la base et surtout le cervelet, qui fonctionne comme une grande banque de mémoire pour les micro-ajustements des paramètres du mouvement.


== Recherche ==


Le domaine des neurosciences englobe toutes les approches qui cherchent à comprendre le cerveau et le reste du système nerveux.

La psychologie cherche à comprendre l'esprit et le comportement, et la neurologie est la discipline médicale qui diagnostique et traite les maladies du système nerveux.

Le cerveau est également l'organe le plus important étudié en psychiatrie, la branche de la médecine qui étudie, prévient et traite les troubles mentaux.

Les sciences cognitives cherchent à unifier les neurosciences et la psychologie avec d'autres domaines qui s'intéressent au cerveau, tels que l'informatique (intelligence artificielle et domaines similaires) et la philosophie. La plus ancienne méthode d'étude du cerveau est anatomique, et jusqu'au milieu du 20ème siècle , une grande partie des progrès des neurosciences est venue du développement de meilleurs colorants cellulaires et de meilleurs microscopes.

Les neuroanatomistes étudient la structure à grande échelle du cerveau ainsi que la structure microscopique des neurones et de leurs composants, en particulier les synapses.

Entre autres outils, ils utilisent une pléthore de colorants qui révèlent la structure neuronale, la chimie et la connectivité.

Ces dernières années, le développement des techniques d'immunomarquage a permis l'étude des neurones qui expriment des ensembles spécifiques de gènes.

En outre, la neuroanatomie fonctionnelle utilise des techniques d'imagerie médicale pour corréler les variations de la structure du cerveau humain avec les différences de cognition ou de comportement. Les neurophysiologistes étudient les propriétés chimiques, pharmacologiques et électriques du cerveau : leurs principaux outils sont les médicaments et les appareils d'enregistrement.

Des milliers de médicaments développés expérimentalement affectent le système nerveux, certains de manière très spécifique.

Les enregistrements de l'activité cérébrale peuvent être réalisés à l'aide d'électrodes, soit collées au cuir chevelu comme dans les études EEG, soit implantées à l'intérieur du cerveau des animaux pour des enregistrements extracellulaires, qui peuvent détecter les potentiels d'action générés par des neurones individuels.

Étant donné que le cerveau ne contient pas de récepteurs de la douleur, il est possible d'utiliser ces techniques pour enregistrer l'activité cérébrale d'animaux éveillés et se comportant sans causer de détresse.

Les mêmes techniques ont parfois été utilisées pour étudier l'activité cérébrale chez des patients humains souffrant d'épilepsie réfractaire, dans les cas où il y avait une nécessité médicale d'implanter des électrodes pour localiser la zone cérébrale responsable des crises d'épilepsie.

Des techniques d'imagerie fonctionnelle telles que l'IRMf sont également utilisées pour étudier l'activité cérébrale ; ces techniques ont été principalement utilisées avec des sujets humains, car elles nécessitent qu'un sujet conscient reste immobile pendant de longues périodes de temps, mais elles ont le grand avantage d'être non invasives.

Une autre approche de la fonction cérébrale consiste à examiner les conséquences des dommages à des zones cérébrales spécifiques.

Même s'il est protégé par le crâne et les méninges, entouré de liquide céphalo-rachidien et isolé de la circulation sanguine par la barrière hémato-encéphalique, la nature délicate du cerveau le rend vulnérable à de nombreuses maladies et à plusieurs types de dommages.

Chez l'homme, les effets des accidents vasculaires cérébraux et d'autres types de lésions cérébrales ont été une source clé d'informations sur le fonctionnement du cerveau.

Parce qu'il n'y a pas de capacité à contrôler expérimentalement la nature des dommages, cependant, ces informations sont souvent difficiles à interpréter.

Dans les études animales, impliquant le plus souvent des rats, il est possible d'utiliser des électrodes ou des produits chimiques injectés localement pour produire des schémas précis de dommages, puis d'examiner les conséquences sur le comportement. Les neurosciences computationnelles englobent deux approches : premièrement, l'utilisation d'ordinateurs pour étudier le cerveau ; deuxièmement, l'étude de la façon dont les cerveaux effectuent des calculs.

D'une part, il est possible d'écrire un programme informatique pour simuler le fonctionnement d'un groupe de neurones en utilisant des systèmes d'équations décrivant leur activité électrochimique ; ces simulations sont connues sous le nom de réseaux de neurones biologiquement réalistes.

D'autre part, il est possible d'étudier des algorithmes de calcul neuronal en simulant, ou en analysant mathématiquement, les opérations d'"unités" simplifiées qui ont certaines des propriétés des neurones, mais qui font abstraction d'une grande partie de leur complexité biologique.

Les fonctions computationnelles du cerveau sont étudiées à la fois par des informaticiens et des neuroscientifiques. La modélisation neurogénétique computationnelle concerne l'étude et le développement de modèles neuronaux dynamiques pour modéliser les fonctions cérébrales en ce qui concerne les gènes et les interactions dynamiques entre les gènes.
Ces dernières années ont vu l'augmentation des applications des techniques génétiques et génomiques à l'étude du cerveau et l'accent mis sur les rôles des facteurs neurotrophiques et de l'activité physique dans la neuroplasticité.

Les sujets les plus courants sont les souris, en raison de la disponibilité des outils techniques.

Il est maintenant possible avec une relative facilité d'"inactiver" ou de faire muter une grande variété de gènes, puis d'examiner les effets sur la fonction cérébrale.

Des approches plus sophistiquées sont également utilisées : par exemple, en utilisant la recombinaison Cre-Lox, il est possible d'activer ou de désactiver des gènes dans des parties spécifiques du cerveau, à des moments précis.


=== Historique ===


Le cerveau le plus ancien à avoir été découvert se trouvait en Arménie dans le complexe de grottes Areni-1.

Le cerveau, dont l'âge est estimé à plus de 5 000 ans, a été retrouvé dans le crâne d'une jeune fille de 12 à 14 ans.

Bien que les cerveaux aient été ratatinés, ils ont été bien conservés en raison du climat trouvé à l'intérieur de la grotte. Les premiers philosophes étaient divisés quant à savoir si le siège de l'âme se trouvait dans le cerveau ou dans le cœur.

Aristote favorisait le cœur et pensait que la fonction du cerveau était simplement de refroidir le sang.

Démocrite, l'inventeur de la théorie atomique de la matière, a plaidé pour une âme en trois parties, avec l'intellect dans la tête, l'émotion dans le cœur et la luxure près du foie.

L'auteur inconnu de De la maladie sacrée, un traité médical du Corpus hippocratique, s'est prononcé sans équivoque en faveur du cerveau en écrivant :

Les hommes doivent savoir que de rien d'autre que du cerveau viennent les joies, les délices, les rires et les jeux, et les chagrins, les chagrins, le découragement et les lamentations. ...

Et par le même organe nous devenons fous et délirants, et les peurs et les terreurs nous assaillent, les unes la nuit, les autres le jour, et les rêves et les errances intempestives, et les soucis qui ne conviennent pas, et l'ignorance des circonstances présentes, la désuétude et l'inhabileté .

Toutes ces choses que nous subissons du cerveau, quand il n'est pas sain...
Sur la maladie sacrée, attribuée à Hippocrate

Le médecin romain Galen a également plaidé pour l'importance du cerveau et a théorisé en profondeur sur la façon dont cela pourrait fonctionner.

Galien a tracé les relations anatomiques entre le cerveau, les nerfs et les muscles, démontrant que tous les muscles du corps sont connectés au cerveau par un réseau ramifié de nerfs.

Il a postulé que les nerfs activaient les muscles mécaniquement en transportant une substance mystérieuse qu'il appelait pneumata psychikon, généralement traduit par "esprits animaux".

Les idées de Galien étaient largement connues au Moyen Âge, mais peu de progrès ont été accomplis jusqu'à la Renaissance, lorsque l'étude anatomique détaillée a repris, combinée aux spéculations théoriques de René Descartes et de ceux qui l'ont suivi.

Descartes, comme Galien, pensait le système nerveux en termes hydrauliques.

Il pensait que les fonctions cognitives les plus élevées étaient assurées par une res cogitans non physique, mais que la majorité des comportements humains, et tous les comportements animaux, pouvaient être expliqués de manière mécaniste. Le premier véritable progrès vers une compréhension moderne de la fonction nerveuse, cependant, provenait des enquêtes de Luigi Galvani (1737–1798), qui découvrit qu'un choc d'électricité statique appliqué à un nerf exposé d'une grenouille morte pouvait provoquer la contraction de sa patte.

Depuis lors, chaque avancée majeure dans la compréhension a suivi plus ou moins directement le développement d'une nouvelle technique d'investigation.

Jusqu'aux premières années du XXe siècle, les avancées les plus importantes provenaient des nouvelles méthodes de coloration des cellules.

Particulièrement critique a été l'invention de la coloration de Golgi, qui (lorsqu'elle est correctement utilisée) ne colore qu'une petite fraction des neurones, mais les colore dans leur intégralité, y compris le corps cellulaire, les dendrites et les axones.

Sans une telle tache, le tissu cérébral au microscope apparaît comme un enchevêtrement impénétrable de fibres protoplasmiques, dans lequel il est impossible de déterminer une structure.

Entre les mains de Camillo Golgi, et surtout du neuroanatomiste espagnol Santiago Ramón y Cajal, la nouvelle coloration a révélé des centaines de types distincts de neurones, chacun avec sa propre structure dendritique et son schéma de connectivité.

Dans la première moitié du 20e siècle, les progrès de l'électronique ont permis d'étudier les propriétés électriques des cellules nerveuses, aboutissant aux travaux d'Alan Hodgkin, Andrew Huxley et d'autres sur la biophysique du potentiel d'action, et aux travaux de Bernard Katz et d'autres. sur l'électrochimie de la synapse.

Ces études ont complété le tableau anatomique par une conception du cerveau comme une entité dynamique.

Reflétant la nouvelle compréhension, en 1942, Charles Sherrington a visualisé le fonctionnement du cerveau se réveillant du sommeil :

La grande nappe la plus haute de la masse, celle où à peine une lumière avait scintillé ou bougé, devient maintenant un champ étincelant de points clignotants rythmiques avec des trains d'étincelles se déplaçant çà et là.

Le cerveau se réveille et avec lui l'esprit revient.

C'est comme si la Voie lactée entrait dans une danse cosmique.

Rapidement, la masse de la tête devient un métier enchanté où des millions de navettes clignotantes tissent un motif de dissolution, toujours un motif significatif mais jamais durable ; une harmonie changeante de sous-modèles.
—Sherrington, 1942, L'homme sur sa nature
L'invention des ordinateurs électroniques dans les années 1940, ainsi que le développement de la théorie mathématique de l'information, ont conduit à la prise de conscience que les cerveaux peuvent potentiellement être compris comme des systèmes de traitement de l'information.

Ce concept a formé la base du domaine de la cybernétique et a finalement donné naissance au domaine maintenant connu sous le nom de neuroscience computationnelle.

Les premières tentatives de cybernétique étaient quelque peu rudimentaires en ce sens qu'elles traitaient le cerveau essentiellement comme un ordinateur numérique déguisé, comme par exemple dans le livre de John von Neumann de 1958, The Computer and the Brain.

Au fil des ans, cependant, l'accumulation d'informations sur les réponses électriques des cellules cérébrales enregistrées à partir d'animaux en comportement a progressivement déplacé les concepts théoriques dans le sens d'un réalisme croissant. L'une des premières contributions les plus influentes était un article de 1959 intitulé cerveau : l'article a examiné les réponses visuelles des neurones de la rétine et du tectum optique des grenouilles, et est arrivé à la conclusion que certains neurones du tectum de la grenouille sont câblés pour combiner les réponses élémentaires d'une manière qui les fait fonctionner comme des « percepteurs d'insectes ». ".

Quelques années plus tard, David Hubel et Torsten Wiesel ont découvert des cellules dans le cortex visuel primaire des singes qui s'activent lorsque des arêtes vives traversent des points spécifiques du champ de vision - une découverte pour laquelle ils ont remporté un prix Nobel.

Des études de suivi dans les zones visuelles d'ordre supérieur ont trouvé des cellules qui détectent la disparité binoculaire, la couleur, le mouvement et les aspects de la forme, avec des zones situées à des distances croissantes du cortex visuel primaire montrant des réponses de plus en plus complexes.

D'autres recherches sur des zones cérébrales non liées à la vision ont révélé des cellules avec une grande variété de corrélats de réponse, certaines liées à la mémoire, d'autres à des types abstraits de cognition tels que l'espace. Les théoriciens ont travaillé pour comprendre ces modèles de réponse en construisant des modèles mathématiques de neurones et de neurones. réseaux, qui peuvent être simulés à l'aide d'ordinateurs.

Certains modèles utiles sont abstraits, se concentrant sur la structure conceptuelle des algorithmes neuronaux plutôt que sur les détails de leur mise en œuvre dans le cerveau ; d'autres modèles tentent d'incorporer des données sur les propriétés biophysiques de vrais neurones.

Cependant, aucun modèle à quelque niveau que ce soit n'est encore considéré comme une description pleinement valable de la fonction cérébrale.

La difficulté essentielle est que le calcul sophistiqué par les réseaux de neurones nécessite un traitement distribué dans lequel des centaines ou des milliers de neurones travaillent en coopération - les méthodes actuelles d'enregistrement de l'activité cérébrale ne sont capables d'isoler les potentiels d'action que de quelques dizaines de neurones à la fois. De plus, même des neurones uniques semblent être complexes et capables d'effectuer des calculs.

Ainsi, les modèles cérébraux qui ne reflètent pas cela sont trop abstraits pour être représentatifs du fonctionnement cérébral ; les modèles qui tentent de capturer cela sont très coûteux en calcul et sans doute insolubles avec les ressources de calcul actuelles.

Cependant, le Human Brain Project tente de construire un modèle informatique réaliste et détaillé de l'ensemble du cerveau humain.

La sagesse de cette approche a été publiquement contestée, avec des scientifiques de haut niveau des deux côtés de l'argument.
Dans la seconde moitié du XXe siècle, les développements de la chimie, de la microscopie électronique, de la génétique, de l'informatique, de l'imagerie cérébrale fonctionnelle et d'autres domaines ont progressivement ouvert de nouvelles fenêtres sur la structure et le fonctionnement du cerveau.

Aux États-Unis, les années 1990 ont été officiellement désignées comme la "Décennie du cerveau" pour commémorer les progrès réalisés dans la recherche sur le cerveau et pour promouvoir le financement de ces recherches. Au 21e siècle, ces tendances se sont poursuivies et plusieurs nouvelles approches sont apparues. en évidence, y compris l'enregistrement multiélectrode, qui permet d'enregistrer l'activité de nombreuses cellules cérébrales en même temps ; le génie génétique, qui permet de modifier expérimentalement les composants moléculaires du cerveau ; la génomique, qui permet de corréler les variations de la structure cérébrale avec les variations des propriétés de l'ADN et la neuroimagerie.


== Société et culture ==



=== Comme nourriture ===


Les cerveaux d'animaux sont utilisés comme nourriture dans de nombreuses cuisines.


=== Dans les rituels ===

Certaines preuves archéologiques suggèrent que les rituels de deuil des Néandertaliens européens impliquaient également la consommation du cerveau. Les Fore de Papouasie-Nouvelle-Guinée sont connus pour manger des cerveaux humains.

Dans les rituels funéraires, les proches des morts mangeaient le cerveau du défunt pour créer un sentiment d'immortalité.

Une maladie à prion appelée kuru a été attribuée à cela.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brain
