

CEREBELLUM


The cerebellum (Latin for "little brain") is a major feature of the hindbrain of all vertebrates. 

Although usually smaller than the cerebrum, in some animals such as the mormyrid fishes it may be as large as or even larger. 

In humans, the cerebellum plays an important role in motor control. 

It may also be involved in some cognitive functions such as attention and language as well as emotional control such as regulating fear and pleasure responses, but its movement-related functions are the most solidly established. 

The human cerebellum does not initiate movement, but contributes to coordination, precision, and accurate timing: it receives input from sensory systems of the spinal cord and from other parts of the brain, and integrates these inputs to fine-tune motor activity. 

Cerebellar damage produces disorders in fine movement, equilibrium, posture, and motor learning in humans.Anatomically, the human cerebellum has the appearance of a separate structure attached to the bottom of the brain, tucked underneath the cerebral hemispheres. 

Its cortical surface is covered with finely spaced parallel grooves, in striking contrast to the broad irregular convolutions of the cerebral cortex. 

These parallel grooves conceal the fact that the cerebellar cortex is actually a continuous thin layer of tissue tightly folded in the style of an accordion. 

Within this thin layer are several types of neurons with a highly regular arrangement, the most important being Purkinje cells and granule cells. 

This complex neural organization gives rise to a massive signal-processing capability, but almost all of the output from the cerebellar cortex passes through a set of small deep nuclei lying in the white matter interior of the cerebellum.In addition to its direct role in motor control, the cerebellum is necessary for several types of motor learning, most notably learning to adjust to changes in sensorimotor relationships. 

Several theoretical models have been developed to explain sensorimotor calibration in terms of synaptic plasticity within the cerebellum. 

These models derive from those formulated by David Marr and James Albus, based on the observation that each cerebellar Purkinje cell receives two dramatically different types of input: one comprises thousands of weak inputs from the parallel fibers of the granule cells; the other is an extremely strong input from a single climbing fiber. 

The basic concept of the Marr–Albus theory is that the climbing fiber serves as a "teaching signal", which induces a long-lasting change in the strength of parallel fiber inputs. 

Observations of long-term depression in parallel fiber inputs have provided some support for theories of this type, but their validity remains controversial.


== Structure ==


At the level of gross anatomy, the cerebellum consists of a tightly folded layer of cortex, with white matter underneath and a fluid-filled ventricle at the base. 

Four deep cerebellar nuclei are embedded in the white matter. 

Each part of the cortex consists of the same small set of neuronal elements, laid out in a highly stereotyped geometry. 

At an intermediate level, the cerebellum and its auxiliary structures can be separated into several hundred or thousand independently functioning modules called "microzones" or "microcompartments".


=== Gross anatomy ===


The cerebellum is located in the posterior cranial fossa. 

The fourth ventricle, pons and medulla are in front of the cerebellum. 

It is separated from the overlying cerebrum by a layer of leathery dura mater, the tentorium cerebelli; all of its connections with other parts of the brain travel through the pons. 

Anatomists classify the cerebellum as part of the metencephalon, which also includes the pons; the metencephalon is the upper part of the rhombencephalon or "hindbrain". 

Like the cerebral cortex, the cerebellum is divided into two cerebellar hemispheres; it also contains a narrow midline zone (the vermis). 

A set of large folds is, by convention, used to divide the overall structure into 10 smaller "lobules". 

Because of its large number of tiny granule cells, the cerebellum contains more neurons than the total from the rest of the brain, but takes up only 10% of the total brain volume. 

The number of neurons in the cerebellum is related to the number of neurons in the neocortex. 

There are about 3.6 times as many neurons in the cerebellum as in the neocortex, a ratio that is conserved across many different mammalian species.The unusual surface appearance of the cerebellum conceals the fact that most of its volume is made up of a very tightly folded layer of gray matter: the cerebellar cortex. 

Each ridge or gyrus in this layer is called a folium. 

It is estimated that, if the human cerebellar cortex were completely unfolded, it would give rise to a layer of neural tissue about 1 meter long and averaging 5 centimeters wide—a total surface area of about 500 square cm, packed within a volume of dimensions 6 cm × 5 cm × 10 cm. 

Underneath the gray matter of the cortex lies white matter, made up largely of myelinated nerve fibers running to and from the cortex. 

Embedded within the white matter—which is sometimes called the arbor vitae (tree of life) because of its branched, tree-like appearance in cross-section—are four deep cerebellar nuclei, composed of gray matter.Connecting the cerebellum to different parts of the nervous system are three paired cerebellar peduncles. 

These are the superior cerebellar peduncle, the middle cerebellar peduncle and the inferior cerebellar peduncle, named by their position relative to the vermis. 

The superior cerebellar peduncle is mainly an output to the cerebral cortex, carrying efferent fibers via thalamic nuclei to upper motor neurons in the cerebral cortex. 

The fibers arise from the deep cerebellar nuclei. 

The middle cerebellar peduncle is connected to the pons and receives all of its input from the pons mainly from the pontine nuclei. 

The input to the pons is from the cerebral cortex and is relayed from the pontine nuclei via transverse pontine fibers to the cerebellum. 

The middle peduncle is the largest of the three and its afferent fibers are grouped into three separate fascicles taking their inputs to different parts of the cerebellum. 

The inferior cerebellar peduncle receives input from afferent fibers from the vestibular nuclei, spinal cord and the tegmentum. 

Output from the inferior peduncle is via efferent fibers to the vestibular nuclei and the reticular formation. 

The whole of the cerebellum receives modulatory input from the inferior olivary nucleus via the inferior cerebellar peduncle.


==== Subdivisions ====

Based on the surface appearance, three lobes can be distinguished within the cerebellum: the anterior lobe (above the primary fissure), the posterior lobe (below the primary fissure), and the flocculonodular lobe (below the posterior fissure). 

These lobes divide the cerebellum from rostral to caudal (in humans, top to bottom). 

In terms of function, however, there is a more important distinction along the medial-to-lateral dimension. 

Leaving out the flocculonodular lobe, which has distinct connections and functions, the cerebellum can be parsed functionally into a medial sector called the spinocerebellum and a larger lateral sector called the cerebrocerebellum. 

A narrow strip of protruding tissue along the midline is called the cerebellar vermis. (Vermis is Latin for "worm".)The smallest region, the flocculonodular lobe, is often called the vestibulocerebellum. 

It is the oldest part in evolutionary terms (archicerebellum) and participates mainly in balance and spatial orientation; its primary connections are with the vestibular nuclei, although it also receives visual and other sensory input. 

Damage to this region causes disturbances of balance and gait.The medial zone of the anterior and posterior lobes constitutes the spinocerebellum, also known as paleocerebellum. 

This sector of the cerebellum functions mainly to fine-tune body and limb movements. 

It receives proprioceptive input from the dorsal columns of the spinal cord (including the spinocerebellar tract) and from the cranial trigeminal nerve, as well as from visual and auditory systems. 

It sends fibers to deep cerebellar nuclei that, in turn, project to both the cerebral cortex and the brain stem, thus providing modulation of descending motor systems.The lateral zone, which in humans is by far the largest part, constitutes the cerebrocerebellum, also known as neocerebellum. 

It receives input exclusively from the cerebral cortex (especially the parietal lobe) via the pontine nuclei (forming cortico-ponto-cerebellar pathways), and sends output mainly to the ventrolateral thalamus (in turn connected to motor areas of the premotor cortex and primary motor area of the cerebral cortex) and to the red nucleus. 

There is disagreement about the best way to describe the functions of the lateral cerebellum: It is thought to be involved in planning movement that is about to occur, in evaluating sensory information for action, and in a number of purely cognitive functions, such as determining the verb which best fits with a certain noun (as in "sit" for "chair").


=== Microanatomy ===

Two types of neuron play dominant roles in the cerebellar circuit: Purkinje cells and granule cells. 

Three types of axons also play dominant roles: mossy fibers and climbing fibers (which enter the cerebellum from outside), and parallel fibers (which are the axons of granule cells). 

There are two main pathways through the cerebellar circuit, originating from mossy fibers and climbing fibers, both eventually terminating in the deep cerebellar nuclei.Mossy fibers project directly to the deep nuclei, but also give rise to the following pathway: mossy fibers → granule cells → parallel fibers → Purkinje cells → deep nuclei. 

Climbing fibers project to Purkinje cells and also send collaterals directly to the deep nuclei. 

The mossy fiber and climbing fiber inputs each carry fiber-specific information; the cerebellum also receives dopaminergic, serotonergic, noradrenergic, and cholinergic inputs that presumably perform global modulation.The cerebellar cortex is divided into three layers. 

At the bottom lies the thick granular layer, densely packed with granule cells, along with interneurons, mainly Golgi cells but also including Lugaro cells and unipolar brush cells. 

In the middle lies the Purkinje layer, a narrow zone that contains the cell bodies of Purkinje cells and Bergmann glial cells. 

At the top lies the molecular layer, which contains the flattened dendritic trees of Purkinje cells, along with the huge array of parallel fibers penetrating the Purkinje cell dendritic trees at right angles. 

This outermost layer of the cerebellar cortex also contains two types of inhibitory interneuron: stellate cells and basket cells. 

Both stellate and basket cells form GABAergic synapses onto Purkinje cell dendrites.


==== Molecular layer ====
The top, outermost layer of the cerebellar cortex is the molecular layer. 

This layer contains the flattened dendritic trees of Purkinje cells, and the huge array of parallel fibers, from the granular layer, that penetrate the Purkinje cell dendritic trees at right angles. 

The molecular layer also contains two types of inhibitory interneuron: stellate cells and basket cells. 

Both stellate and basket cells form GABAergic synapses onto Purkinje cell dendrites.


==== Purkinje layer ====

Purkinje cells are among the most distinctive neurons in the brain, and one of the earliest types to be recognized—they were first described by the Czech anatomist Jan Evangelista Purkyně in 1837. 

They are distinguished by the shape of their dendritic tree: The dendrites branch very profusely, but are severely flattened in a plane perpendicular to the cerebellar folds. 

Thus, the dendrites of a Purkinje cell form a dense planar net, through which parallel fibers pass at right angles. 

The dendrites are covered with dendritic spines, each of which receives synaptic input from a parallel fiber. 

Purkinje cells receive more synaptic inputs than any other type of cell in the brain—estimates of the number of spines on a single human Purkinje cell run as high as 200,000. 

The large, spherical cell bodies of Purkinje cells are packed into a narrow layer (one cell thick) of the cerebellar cortex, called the Purkinje layer. 

After emitting collaterals that affect nearby parts of the cortex, their axons travel into the deep cerebellar nuclei, where they make on the order of 1,000 contacts each with several types of nuclear cells, all within a small domain. 

Purkinje cells use GABA as their neurotransmitter, and therefore exert inhibitory effects on their targets.Purkinje cells form the heart of the cerebellar circuit, and their large size and distinctive activity patterns have made it relatively easy to study their response patterns in behaving animals using extracellular recording techniques. 

Purkinje cells normally emit action potentials at a high rate even in the absence of the synaptic input. 

In awake, behaving animals, mean rates averaging around 40 Hz are typical. 

The spike trains show a mixture of what are called simple and complex spikes. 

A simple spike is a single action potential followed by a refractory period of about 10 ms; a complex spike is a stereotyped sequence of action potentials with very short inter-spike intervals and declining amplitudes. 

Physiological studies have shown that complex spikes (which occur at baseline rates around 1 Hz and never at rates much higher than 10 Hz) are reliably associated with climbing fiber activation, while simple spikes are produced by a combination of baseline activity and parallel fiber input. 

Complex spikes are often followed by a pause of several hundred milliseconds during which simple spike activity is suppressed.A specific, recognizable feature of Purkinje neurons is the expression of calbindin. 

Calbindin staining of rat brain after unilateral chronic sciatic nerve injury suggests that Purkinje neurons may be newly generated in the adult brain, initiating the organization of new cerebellar lobules.


==== Granular layer ====

Cerebellar granule cells, in contrast to Purkinje cells, are among the smallest neurons in the brain. 

They are also the most numerous neurons in the brain: In humans, estimates of their total number average around 50 billion, which means that about 3/4 of the brain's neurons are cerebellar granule cells. 

Their cell bodies are packed into a thick layer at the bottom of the cerebellar cortex. 

A granule cell emits only four to five dendrites, each of which ends in an enlargement called a dendritic claw. 

These enlargements are sites of excitatory input from mossy fibers and inhibitory input from Golgi cells.The thin, unmyelinated axons of granule cells rise vertically to the upper (molecular) layer of the cortex, where they split in two, with each branch traveling horizontally to form a parallel fiber; the splitting of the vertical branch into two horizontal branches gives rise to a distinctive "T" shape. 

A human parallel fiber runs for an average of 3 mm in each direction from the split, for a total length of about 6 mm (about 1/10 of the total width of the cortical layer). 

As they run along, the parallel fibers pass through the dendritic trees of Purkinje cells, contacting one of every 3–5 that they pass, making a total of 80–100 synaptic connections with Purkinje cell dendritic spines. 

Granule cells use glutamate as their neurotransmitter, and therefore exert excitatory effects on their targets.

Granule cells receive all of their input from mossy fibers, but outnumber them by 200 to 1 (in humans). 

Thus, the information in the granule cell population activity state is the same as the information in the mossy fibers, but recoded in a much more expansive way. 

Because granule cells are so small and so densely packed, it is difficult to record their spike activity in behaving animals, so there is little data to use as a basis for theorizing. 

The most popular concept of their function was proposed in 1969 by David Marr, who suggested that they could encode combinations of mossy fiber inputs. 

The idea is that with each granule cell receiving input from only 4–5 mossy fibers, a granule cell would not respond if only a single one of its inputs were active, but would respond if more than one were active. 

This combinatorial coding scheme would potentially allow the cerebellum to make much finer distinctions between input patterns than the mossy fibers alone would permit.


==== Mossy fibers ====
Mossy fibers enter the granular layer from their points of origin, many arising from the pontine nuclei, others from the spinal cord, vestibular nuclei etc. 

In the human cerebellum, the total number of mossy fibers has been estimated at about 200 million. 

These fibers form excitatory synapses with the granule cells and the cells of the deep cerebellar nuclei. 

Within the granular layer, a mossy fiber generates a series of enlargements called rosettes. 

The contacts between mossy fibers and granule cell dendrites take place within structures called glomeruli. 

Each glomerulus has a mossy fiber rosette at its center, and up to 20 granule cell dendritic claws contacting it. 

Terminals from Golgi cells infiltrate the structure and make inhibitory synapses onto the granule cell dendrites. 

The entire assemblage is surrounded by a sheath of glial cells. 

Each mossy fiber sends collateral branches to several cerebellar folia, generating a total of 20–30 rosettes; thus a single mossy fiber makes contact with an estimated 400–600 granule cells.


==== Climbing fibers ====
Purkinje cells also receive input from the inferior olivary nucleus on the contralateral side of the brainstem via climbing fibers. 

Although the inferior olive lies in the medulla oblongata and receives input from the spinal cord, brainstem and cerebral cortex, its output goes entirely to the cerebellum. 

A climbing fiber gives off collaterals to the deep cerebellar nuclei before entering the cerebellar cortex, where it splits into about 10 terminal branches, each of which gives input to a single Purkinje cell. 

In striking contrast to the 100,000-plus inputs from parallel fibers, each Purkinje cell receives input from exactly one climbing fiber; but this single fiber "climbs" the dendrites of the Purkinje cell, winding around them and making a total of up to 300 synapses as it goes. 

The net input is so strong that a single action potential from a climbing fiber is capable of producing an extended complex spike in the Purkinje cell: a burst of several spikes in a row, with diminishing amplitude, followed by a pause during which activity is suppressed. 

The climbing fiber synapses cover the cell body and proximal dendrites; this zone is devoid of parallel fiber inputs.Climbing fibers fire at low rates, but a single climbing fiber action potential induces a burst of several action potentials in a target Purkinje cell (a complex spike). 

The contrast between parallel fiber and climbing fiber inputs to Purkinje cells (over 100,000 of one type versus exactly one of the other type) is perhaps the most provocative feature of cerebellar anatomy, and has motivated much of the theorizing. 

In fact, the function of climbing fibers is the most controversial topic concerning the cerebellum. 

There are two schools of thought, one following Marr and Albus in holding that climbing fiber input serves primarily as a teaching signal, the other holding that its function is to shape cerebellar output directly. 

Both views have been defended in great length in numerous publications. 

In the words of one review, "In trying to synthesize the various hypotheses on the function of the climbing fibers, one has the sense of looking at a drawing by Escher. 

Each point of view seems to account for a certain collection of findings, but when one attempts to put the different views together, a coherent picture of what the climbing fibers are doing does not appear. 

For the majority of researchers, the climbing fibers signal errors in motor performance, either in the usual manner of discharge frequency modulation or as a single announcement of an 'unexpected event'. 

For other investigators, the message lies in the degree of ensemble synchrony and rhythmicity among a population of climbing fibers."


==== Deep nuclei ====

The deep nuclei of the cerebellum are clusters of gray matter lying within the white matter at the core of the cerebellum. 

They are, with the minor exception of the nearby vestibular nuclei, the sole sources of output from the cerebellum. 

These nuclei receive collateral projections from mossy fibers and climbing fibers as well as inhibitory input from the Purkinje cells of the cerebellar cortex. 

The four nuclei (dentate, globose, emboliform, and fastigial) each communicate with different parts of the brain and cerebellar cortex. (The globose and the emboliform nuclei are also referred to as combined in the interposed nucleus). 

The fastigial and interposed nuclei belong to the spinocerebellum. 

The dentate nucleus, which in mammals is much larger than the others, is formed as a thin, convoluted layer of gray matter, and communicates exclusively with the lateral parts of the cerebellar cortex. 

The flocculus of the flocculonodular lobe is the only part of the cerebellar cortex that does not project to the deep nuclei—its output goes to the vestibular nuclei instead.The majority of neurons in the deep nuclei have large cell bodies and spherical dendritic trees with a radius of about 400 μm, and use glutamate as their neurotransmitter. 

These cells project to a variety of targets outside the cerebellum. 

Intermixed with them are a lesser number of small cells, which use GABA as a neurotransmitter and project exclusively to the inferior olivary nucleus, the source of climbing fibers. 

Thus, the nucleo-olivary projection provides an inhibitory feedback to match the excitatory projection of climbing fibers to the nuclei. 

There is evidence that each small cluster of nuclear cells projects to the same cluster of olivary cells that send climbing fibers to it; there is strong and matching topography in both directions.When a Purkinje cell axon enters one of the deep nuclei, it branches to make contact with both large and small nuclear cells, but the total number of cells contacted is only about 35 (in cats). 

Conversely, a single deep nuclear cell receives input from approximately 860 Purkinje cells (again in cats).


==== Compartments ====

From the viewpoint of gross anatomy, the cerebellar cortex appears to be a homogeneous sheet of tissue, and, from the viewpoint of microanatomy, all parts of this sheet appear to have the same internal structure. 

There are, however, a number of respects in which the structure of the cerebellum is compartmentalized. 

There are large compartments that are generally known as zones; these can be divided into smaller compartments known as microzones.The first indications of compartmental structure came from studies of the receptive fields of cells in various parts of the cerebellar cortex. 

Each body part maps to specific points in the cerebellum, but there are numerous repetitions of the basic map, forming an arrangement that has been called "fractured somatotopy". 

A clearer indication of compartmentalization is obtained by immunostaining the cerebellum for certain types of protein. 

The best-known of these markers are called "zebrins", because staining for them gives rise to a complex pattern reminiscent of the stripes on a zebra. 

The stripes generated by zebrins and other compartmentalization markers are oriented perpendicular to the cerebellar folds—that is, they are narrow in the mediolateral direction, but much more extended in the longitudinal direction. 

Different markers generate different sets of stripes, the widths and lengths vary as a function of location, but they all have the same general shape.Oscarsson in the late 1970s proposed that these cortical zones can be partitioned into smaller units called microzones. 

A microzone is defined as a group of Purkinje cells all having the same somatotopic receptive field. 

Microzones were found to contain on the order of 1000 Purkinje cells each, arranged in a long, narrow strip, oriented perpendicular to the cortical folds. 

Thus, as the adjoining diagram illustrates, Purkinje cell dendrites are flattened in the same direction as the microzones extend, while parallel fibers cross them at right angles.It is not only receptive fields that define the microzone structure: The climbing fiber input from the inferior olivary nucleus is equally important. 

The branches of a climbing fiber (usually numbering about 10) usually activate Purkinje cells belonging to the same microzone. 

Moreover, olivary neurons that send climbing fibers to the same microzone tend to be coupled by gap junctions, which synchronize their activity, causing Purkinje cells within a microzone to show correlated complex spike activity on a millisecond time scale. 

Also, the Purkinje cells belonging to a microzone all send their axons to the same small cluster of output cells within the deep cerebellar nuclei. 

Finally, the axons of basket cells are much longer in the longitudinal direction than in the mediolateral direction, causing them to be confined largely to a single microzone. 

The consequence of all this structure is that cellular interactions within a microzone are much stronger than interactions between different microzones.In 2005, Richard Apps and Martin Garwicz summarized evidence that microzones themselves form part of a larger entity they call a multizonal microcomplex. 

Such a microcomplex includes several spatially separated cortical microzones, all of which project to the same group of deep cerebellar neurons, plus a group of coupled olivary neurons that project to all of the included microzones as well as to the deep nuclear area.


=== Blood supply ===

The cerebellum is provided with blood from three paired major arteries: the superior cerebellar artery (SCA), the anterior inferior cerebellar artery (AICA), and the posterior inferior cerebellar artery (PICA). 

The SCA supplies the upper region of the cerebellum. 

It divides at the upper surface and branches into the pia mater where the branches anastomose with those of the anterior and posterior inferior cerebellar arteries. 

The AICA supplies the front part of the undersurface of the cerebellum. 

The PICA arrives at the undersurface, where it divides into a medial branch and a lateral branch. 

The medial branch continues backward to the cerebellar notch between the two hemispheres of the cerebellum; while the lateral branch supplies the under surface of the cerebellum, as far as its lateral border, where it anastomoses with the AICA and the SCA.


== Function ==

The strongest clues to the function of the cerebellum have come from examining the consequences of damage to it. 

Animals and humans with cerebellar dysfunction show, above all, problems with motor control, on the same side of the body as the damaged part of the cerebellum. 

They continue to be able to generate motor activity but lose precision, producing erratic, uncoordinated, or incorrectly timed movements. 

A standard test of cerebellar function is to reach with the tip of the finger for a target at arm's length: A healthy person will move the fingertip in a rapid straight trajectory, whereas a person with cerebellar damage will reach slowly and erratically, with many mid-course corrections. 

Deficits in non-motor functions are more difficult to detect. 

Thus, the general conclusion reached decades ago is that the basic function of the cerebellum is to calibrate the detailed form of a movement, not to initiate movements or to decide which movements to execute.Prior to the 1990s the function of the cerebellum was almost universally believed to be purely motor-related, but newer findings have brought that view into question. 

Functional imaging studies have shown cerebellar activation in relation to language, attention, and mental imagery; correlation studies have shown interactions between the cerebellum and non-motor areas of the cerebral cortex; and a variety of non-motor symptoms have been recognized in people with damage that appears to be confined to the cerebellum. 

In particular, the cerebellar cognitive affective syndrome or Schmahmann's syndrome has been described in adults and children. 

Estimates based on functional mapping of the cerebellum using functional MRI suggest that more than half of the cerebellar cortex is interconnected with association zones of the cerebral cortex.Kenji Doya has argued that the cerebellum's function is best understood not in terms of the behaviors it affects, but the neural computations it performs; the cerebellum consists of a large number of more or less independent modules, all with the same geometrically regular internal structure, and therefore all, it is presumed, performing the same computation. 

If the input and output connections of a module are with motor areas (as many are), then the module will be involved in motor behavior; but, if the connections are with areas involved in non-motor cognition, the module will show other types of behavioral correlates. 

Thus the cerebellum has been implicated in the regulation of many differing functional traits such as affection, emotion and behavior. 

The cerebellum, Doya proposes, is best understood as predictive action selection based on "internal models" of the environment or a device for supervised learning, in contrast to the basal ganglia, which perform reinforcement learning, and the cerebral cortex, which performs unsupervised learning.


=== Principles ===

The comparative simplicity and regularity of the cerebellar anatomy led to an early hope that it might imply a similar simplicity of computational function, as expressed in one of the first books on cerebellar electrophysiology, The Cerebellum as a Neuronal Machine by John C. 

Eccles, Masao Ito, and János Szentágothai. 

Although a full understanding of cerebellar function has remained elusive, at least four principles have been identified as important: (1) feedforward processing, (2) divergence and convergence, (3) modularity, and (4) plasticity.

Feedforward processing: The cerebellum differs from most other parts of the brain (especially the cerebral cortex) in that the signal processing is almost entirely feedforward—that is, signals move unidirectionally through the system from input to output, with very little recurrent internal transmission. 

The small amount of recurrence that does exist consists of mutual inhibition; there are no mutually excitatory circuits. 

This feedforward mode of operation means that the cerebellum, in contrast to the cerebral cortex, cannot generate self-sustaining patterns of neural activity. 

Signals enter the circuit, are processed by each stage in sequential order, and then leave. 

As Eccles, Ito, and Szentágothai wrote, "This elimination in the design of all possibility of reverberatory chains of neuronal excitation is undoubtedly a great advantage in the performance of the cerebellum as a computer, because what the rest of the nervous system requires from the cerebellum is presumably not some output expressing the operation of complex reverberatory circuits in the cerebellum but rather a quick and clear response to the input of any particular set of information."
Divergence and convergence: In the human cerebellum, information from 200 million mossy fiber inputs is expanded to 40 billion granule cells, whose parallel fiber outputs then converge onto 15 million Purkinje cells. 

Because of the way that they are lined up longitudinally, the 1000 or so Purkinje cells belonging to a microzone may receive input from as many as 100 million parallel fibers, and focus their own output down to a group of less than 50 deep nuclear cells. 

Thus, the cerebellar network receives a modest number of inputs, processes them very extensively through its rigorously structured internal network, and sends out the results via a very limited number of output cells.
Modularity: The cerebellar system is functionally divided into more or less independent modules, which probably number in the hundreds to thousands. 

All modules have a similar internal structure, but different inputs and outputs. 

A module (a multizonal microcompartment in the terminology of Apps and Garwicz) consists of a small cluster of neurons in the inferior olivary nucleus, a set of long narrow strips of Purkinje cells in the cerebellar cortex (microzones), and a small cluster of neurons in one of the deep cerebellar nuclei. 

Different modules share input from mossy fibers and parallel fibers, but in other respects they appear to function independently—the output of one module does not appear to significantly influence the activity of other modules.
Plasticity: The synapses between parallel fibers and Purkinje cells, and the synapses between mossy fibers and deep nuclear cells, are both susceptible to modification of their strength. 

In a single cerebellar module, input from as many as a billion parallel fibers converges onto a group of less than 50 deep nuclear cells, and the influence of each parallel fiber on those nuclear cells is adjustable. 

This arrangement gives tremendous flexibility for fine-tuning the relationship between the cerebellar inputs and outputs.


=== Learning ===

There is considerable evidence that the cerebellum plays an essential role in some types of motor learning. 

The tasks where the cerebellum most clearly comes into play are those in which it is necessary to make fine adjustments to the way an action is performed. 

There has, however, been much dispute about whether learning takes place within the cerebellum itself, or whether it merely serves to provide signals that promote learning in other brain structures. 

Most theories that assign learning to the circuitry of the cerebellum are derived from the ideas of David Marr and James Albus, who postulated that climbing fibers provide a teaching signal that induces synaptic modification in parallel fiber–Purkinje cell synapses. 

Marr assumed that climbing fiber input would cause synchronously activated parallel fiber inputs to be strengthened. 

Most subsequent cerebellar-learning models, however, have followed Albus in assuming that climbing fiber activity would be an error signal, and would cause synchronously activated parallel fiber inputs to be weakened. 

Some of these later models, such as the Adaptive Filter model of Fujita made attempts to understand cerebellar function in terms of optimal control theory.
The idea that climbing fiber activity functions as an error signal has been examined in many experimental studies, with some supporting it but others casting doubt. 

In a pioneering study by Gilbert and Thach from 1977, Purkinje cells from monkeys learning a reaching task showed increased complex spike activity—which is known to reliably indicate activity of the cell's climbing fiber input—during periods when performance was poor. 

Several studies of motor learning in cats observed complex spike activity when there was a mismatch between an intended movement and the movement that was actually executed. 

Studies of the vestibulo–ocular reflex (which stabilizes the visual image on the retina when the head turns) found that climbing fiber activity indicated "retinal slip", although not in a very straightforward way.One of the most extensively studied cerebellar learning tasks is the eyeblink conditioning paradigm, in which a neutral conditioned stimulus (CS) such as a tone or a light is repeatedly paired with an unconditioned stimulus (US), such as an air puff, that elicits a blink response. 

After such repeated presentations of the CS and US, the CS will eventually elicit a blink before the US, a conditioned response or CR. 

Experiments showed that lesions localized either to a specific part of the interposed nucleus (one of the deep cerebellar nuclei) or to a few specific points in the cerebellar cortex would abolish learning of a conditionally timed blink response. 

If cerebellar outputs are pharmacologically inactivated while leaving the inputs and intracellular circuits intact, learning takes place even while the animal fails to show any response, whereas, if intracerebellar circuits are disrupted, no learning takes place—these facts taken together make a strong case that the learning, indeed, occurs inside the cerebellum.


=== Theories and computational models ===


The large base of knowledge about the anatomical structure and behavioral functions of the cerebellum have made it a fertile ground for theorizing—there are perhaps more theories of the function of the cerebellum than of any other part of the brain. 

The most basic distinction among them is between "learning theories" and "performance theories"—that is, theories that make use of synaptic plasticity within the cerebellum to account for its role in learning, versus theories that account for aspects of ongoing behavior on the basis of cerebellar signal processing. 

Several theories of both types have been formulated as mathematical models and simulated using computers.Perhaps the earliest "performance" theory was the "delay line" hypothesis of Valentino Braitenberg. 

The original theory put forth by Braitenberg and Roger Atwood in 1958 proposed that slow propagation of signals along parallel fibers imposes predictable delays that allow the cerebellum to detect time relationships within a certain window. 

Experimental data did not support the original form of the theory, but Braitenberg continued to argue for modified versions. 

The hypothesis that the cerebellum functions essentially as a timing system has also been advocated by Richard Ivry. 

Another influential "performance" theory is the Tensor network theory of Pellionisz and Llinás, which provided an advanced mathematical formulation of the idea that the fundamental computation performed by the cerebellum is to transform sensory into motor coordinates.Theories in the "learning" category almost all derive from publications by Marr and Albus. 

Marr's 1969 paper proposed that the cerebellum is a device for learning to associate elemental movements encoded by climbing fibers with mossy fiber inputs that encode the sensory context. 

Albus proposed in 1971 that a cerebellar Purkinje cell functions as a perceptron, a neurally inspired abstract learning device. 

The most basic difference between the Marr and Albus theories is that Marr assumed that climbing fiber activity would cause parallel fiber synapses to be strengthened, whereas Albus proposed that they would be weakened. 

Albus also formulated his version as a software algorithm he called a CMAC (Cerebellar Model Articulation Controller), which has been tested in a number of applications.


== Clinical significance ==


Damage to the cerebellum often causes motor-related symptoms, the details of which depend on the part of the cerebellum involved and how it is damaged. 

Damage to the flocculonodular lobe may show up as a loss of equilibrium and in particular an altered, irregular walking gait, with a wide stance caused by difficulty in balancing. 

Damage to the lateral zone typically causes problems in skilled voluntary and planned movements which can cause errors in the force, direction, speed and amplitude of movements. 

Other manifestations include hypotonia (decreased muscle tone), dysarthria (problems with speech articulation), dysmetria (problems judging distances or ranges of movement), dysdiadochokinesia (inability to perform rapid alternating movements such as walking), impaired check reflex or rebound phenomenon, and intention tremor (involuntary movement caused by alternating contractions of opposing muscle groups). 

Damage to the midline portion may disrupt whole-body movements, whereas damage localized more laterally is more likely to disrupt fine movements of the hands or limbs. 

Damage to the upper part of the cerebellum tends to cause gait impairments and other problems with leg coordination; damage to the lower part is more likely to cause uncoordinated or poorly aimed movements of the arms and hands, as well as difficulties in speed. 

This complex of motor symptoms is called ataxia.
To identify cerebellar problems, neurological examination includes assessment of gait (a broad-based gait being indicative of ataxia), finger-pointing tests and assessment of posture. 

If cerebellar dysfunction is indicated, a magnetic resonance imaging scan can be used to obtain a detailed picture of any structural alterations that may exist.The list of medical problems that can produce cerebellar damage is long, including stroke, hemorrhage, swelling of the brain (cerebral edema), tumors, alcoholism, physical trauma such as gunshot wounds or explosives, and chronic degenerative conditions such as olivopontocerebellar atrophy. 

Some forms of migraine headache may also produce temporary dysfunction of the cerebellum, of variable severity. 

Infection can result in cerebellar damage in such conditions as the prion diseases and Miller Fisher syndrome, a variant of Guillain–Barré syndrome.


=== Aging ===

The human cerebellum changes with age. 

These changes may differ from those of other parts of the brain.
The cerebellum is the youngest brain region (and body part) in centenarians according to an epigenetic biomarker of tissue age known as epigenetic clock: it is about 15 years younger than expected in a centenarian. 

Further, gene expression patterns in the human cerebellum show less age-related alteration than that in the cerebral cortex.
Some studies have reported reductions in numbers of cells or volume of tissue, but the amount of data relating to this question is not very large.


=== Developmental and degenerative disorders ===


Congenital malformation, hereditary disorders, and acquired conditions can affect cerebellar structure and, consequently, cerebellar function. 

Unless the causative condition is reversible, the only possible treatment is to help people live with their problems. 

Visualization of the fetal cerebellum by ultrasound scan at 18 to 20 weeks of pregnancy can be used to screen for fetal neural tube defects with a sensitivity rate of up to 99%.In normal development, endogenous sonic hedgehog signaling stimulates rapid proliferation of cerebellar granule neuron progenitors (CGNPs) in the external granule layer (EGL). 

Cerebellar development occurs during late embryogenesis and the early postnatal period, with CGNP proliferation in the EGL peaking during early development (postnatal day 7 in the mouse). 

As CGNPs terminally differentiate into cerebellar granule cells (also called cerebellar granule neurons, CGNs), they migrate to the internal granule layer (IGL), forming the mature cerebellum (by post-natal day 20 in the mouse). 

Mutations that abnormally activate Sonic hedgehog signaling predispose to cancer of the cerebellum (medulloblastoma) in humans with Gorlin Syndrome and in genetically engineered mouse models.Congenital malformation or underdevelopment (hypoplasia) of the cerebellar vermis is a characteristic of both Dandy–Walker syndrome and Joubert syndrome. 

In very rare cases, the entire cerebellum may be absent. 

The inherited neurological disorders Machado–Joseph disease, ataxia telangiectasia, and Friedreich's ataxia cause progressive neurodegeneration linked to cerebellar loss. 

Congenital brain malformations outside the cerebellum can, in turn, cause herniation of cerebellar tissue, as seen in some forms of Arnold–Chiari malformation.Other conditions that are closely linked to cerebellar degeneration include the idiopathic progressive neurological disorders multiple system atrophy and Ramsay Hunt syndrome type I, and the autoimmune disorder paraneoplastic cerebellar degeneration, in which tumors elsewhere in the body elicit an autoimmune response that causes neuronal loss in the cerebellum. 

Cerebellar atrophy can result from an acute deficiency of vitamin B1 (thiamine) as seen in beriberi and in Wernicke–Korsakoff syndrome, or vitamin E deficiency.Cerebellar atrophy has been observed in many other neurological disorders including Huntington's disease, multiple sclerosis, essential tremor, progressive myoclonus epilepsy, and Niemann–Pick disease. 

Cerebellar atrophy can also occur as a result of exposure to toxins including heavy metals or pharmaceutical or recreational drugs.


=== Pain ===

There is a general consensus that the cerebellum is involved in pain processing. 

The cerebellum receives pain input from both descending cortico-cerebellar pathways and ascending spino-cerebellar pathways, through the pontine nuclei and inferior olives. 

Some of this information is transferred to the motor system inducing a conscious motor avoidance of pain, graded according to pain intensity.
These direct pain inputs, as well as indirect inputs, are thought to induce long-term pain avoidance behavior that results in chronic posture changes and consequently, in functional and anatomical remodeling of vestibular and proprioceptive nuclei. 

As a result, chronic neuropathic pain can induce macroscopic anatomical remodeling of the hindbrain, including the cerebellum. 

The magnitude of this remodeling and the induction of neuron progenitor markers suggest the contribution of adult neurogenesis to these changes.


== Comparative anatomy and evolution ==


The circuits in the cerebellum are similar across all classes of vertebrates, including fish, reptiles, birds, and mammals. 

There is also an analogous brain structure in cephalopods with well-developed brains, such as octopuses. 

This has been taken as evidence that the cerebellum performs functions important to all animal species with a brain.
There is considerable variation in the size and shape of the cerebellum in different vertebrate species. 

In amphibians, it is little developed, and in lampreys, and hagfish, the cerebellum is barely distinguishable from the brain-stem. 

Although the spinocerebellum is present in these groups, the primary structures are small, paired-nuclei corresponding to the vestibulocerebellum. 

The cerebellum is a bit larger in reptiles, considerably larger in birds, and larger yet in mammals. 

The large paired and convoluted lobes found in humans are typical of mammals, but the cerebellum is, in general, a single median lobe in other groups, and is either smooth or only slightly grooved. 

In mammals, the neocerebellum is the major part of the cerebellum by mass, but, in other vertebrates, it is typically the spinocerebellum.The cerebellum of cartilaginous and bony fishes is extraordinarily large and complex. 

In at least one important respect, it differs in internal structure from the mammalian cerebellum: The fish cerebellum does not contain discrete deep cerebellar nuclei. 

Instead, the primary targets of Purkinje cells are a distinct type of cell distributed across the cerebellar cortex, a type not seen in mammals. 

In mormyrid fish (a family of weakly electrosensitive freshwater fish), the cerebellum is considerably larger than the rest of the brain. 

The largest part of it is a special structure called the valvula, which has an unusually regular architecture and receives much of its input from the electrosensory system.The hallmark of the mammalian cerebellum is an expansion of the lateral lobes, whose main interactions are with the neocortex. 

As monkeys evolved into great apes, the expansion of the lateral lobes continued, in tandem with the expansion of the frontal lobes of the neocortex. 

In ancestral hominids, and in Homo sapiens until the middle Pleistocene period, the cerebellum continued to expand, but the frontal lobes expanded more rapidly. 

The most recent period of human evolution, however, may actually have been associated with an increase in the relative size of the cerebellum, as the neocortex reduced its size somewhat while the cerebellum expanded. 

The size of the human cerebellum, compared to the rest of the brain, has been increasing in size while the cerebrum decreased in size With both the development and implementation of motor tasks, visual-spatial skills and learning taking place in the cerebellum, the growth of the cerebellum is thought to have some form of correlation to greater human cognitive abilities. 

The lateral hemispheres of the cerebellum are now 2.7 times greater in both humans and apes than they are in monkeys. 

These changes in the cerebellum size cannot be explained by greater muscle mass. 

They show that either the development of the cerebellum is tightly linked to that of the rest of the brain or that neural activities taking place in the cerebellum were important during Hominidae evolution. 

Due to the cerebellum's role in cognitive functions, the increase in its size may have played a role in cognitive expansion.


=== Cerebellum-like structures ===

Most vertebrate species have a cerebellum and one or more cerebellum-like structures, brain areas that resemble the cerebellum in terms of cytoarchitecture and neurochemistry. 

The only cerebellum-like structure found in mammals is the dorsal cochlear nucleus (DCN), one of the two primary sensory nuclei that receive input directly from the auditory nerve. 

The DCN is a layered structure, with the bottom layer containing granule cells similar to those of the cerebellum, giving rise to parallel fibers that rise to the superficial layer and travel across it horizontally. 

The superficial layer contains a set of GABAergic neurons called cartwheel cells that resemble Purkinje cells anatomically and chemically—they receive parallel fiber input, but do not have any inputs that resemble climbing fibers. 

The output neurons of the DCN are pyramidal cells. 

They are glutamatergic, but also resemble Purkinje cells in some respects—they have spiny, flattened superficial dendritic trees that receive parallel fiber input, but they also have basal dendrites that receive input from auditory nerve fibers, which travel across the DCN in a direction at right angles to the parallel fibers. 

The DCN is most highly developed in rodents and other small animals, and is considerably reduced in primates. 

Its function is not well understood; the most popular speculations relate it to spatial hearing in one way or another.Most species of fish and amphibians possess a lateral line system that senses pressure waves in water. 

One of the brain areas that receives primary input from the lateral line organ, the medial octavolateral nucleus, has a cerebellum-like structure, with granule cells and parallel fibers. 

In electrosensitive fish, the input from the electrosensory system goes to the dorsal octavolateral nucleus, which also has a cerebellum-like structure. 

In ray-finned fishes (by far the largest group), the optic tectum has a layer—the marginal layer—that is cerebellum-like.All of these cerebellum-like structures appear to be primarily sensory-related rather than motor-related. 

All of them have granule cells that give rise to parallel fibers that connect to Purkinje-like neurons with modifiable synapses, but none have climbing fibers comparable to those of the cerebellum—instead they receive direct input from peripheral sensory organs. 

None has a demonstrated function, but the most influential speculation is that they serve to transform sensory inputs in some sophisticated way, perhaps to compensate for changes in body posture. 

In fact, James M. 

Bower and others have argued, partly on the basis of these structures and partly on the basis of cerebellar studies, that the cerebellum itself is fundamentally a sensory structure, and that it contributes to motor control by moving the body in a way that controls the resulting sensory signals. 

Despite Bower's viewpoint, there is also strong evidence that the cerebellum directly influences motor output in mammals.


== History ==



=== Descriptions ===

Even the earliest anatomists were able to recognize the cerebellum by its distinctive appearance. 

Aristotle and Herophilus (quoted in Galen) called it the παρεγκεφαλίς (parenkephalis), as opposed to the ἐγκέφαλος (enkephalos) or brain proper. 

Galen's extensive description is the earliest that survives. 

He speculated that the cerebellum was the source of motor nerves.Further significant developments did not come until the Renaissance. 

Vesalius discussed the cerebellum briefly, and the anatomy was described more thoroughly by Thomas Willis in 1664. 

More anatomical work was done during the 18th century, but it was not until early in the 19th century that the first insights into the function of the cerebellum were obtained. 

Luigi Rolando in 1809 established the key finding that damage to the cerebellum results in motor disturbances. 

Jean Pierre Flourens in the first half of the 19th century carried out detailed experimental work, which revealed that animals with cerebellar damage can still move, but with a loss of coordination (strange movements, awkward gait, and muscular weakness), and that recovery after the lesion can be nearly complete unless the lesion is very extensive. 

By the beginning of the 20th century, it was widely accepted that the primary function of the cerebellum relates to motor control; the first half of the 20th century produced several detailed descriptions of the clinical symptoms associated with cerebellar disease in humans.


=== Etymology ===

The name cerebellum is a diminutive of cerebrum (brain); it can be translated literally as little brain. 

The Latin name is a direct translation of the Ancient Greek παρεγκεφαλίς (parenkephalis), which was used in the works of Aristotle, the first known writer to describe the structure. 

No other name is used in the English-language literature, but historically a variety of Greek or Latin-derived names have been used, including cerebrum parvum, encephalion, encranion, cerebrum posterius, and parencephalis.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cerebellum
;;;ES;;;



CEREBELO


El cerebelo (en latín, "pequeño cerebro") es una característica importante del cerebro posterior de todos los vertebrados.

Aunque suele ser más pequeño que el cerebro, en algunos animales, como los peces mormíridos, puede ser tan grande o incluso mayor.

En los humanos, el cerebelo juega un papel importante en el control motor.

También puede estar involucrado en algunas funciones cognitivas, como la atención y el lenguaje, así como en el control emocional, como la regulación de las respuestas de miedo y placer, pero sus funciones relacionadas con el movimiento son las más sólidamente establecidas.

El cerebelo humano no inicia el movimiento, pero contribuye a la coordinación, la precisión y la sincronización exacta: recibe información de los sistemas sensoriales de la médula espinal y de otras partes del cerebro, e integra esta información para afinar la actividad motora.

El daño cerebeloso produce trastornos en el movimiento fino, el equilibrio, la postura y el aprendizaje motor en los humanos. Anatómicamente, el cerebelo humano tiene la apariencia de una estructura separada unida a la parte inferior del cerebro, metida debajo de los hemisferios cerebrales.

Su superficie cortical está cubierta con surcos paralelos finamente espaciados, en marcado contraste con las amplias circunvoluciones irregulares de la corteza cerebral.

Estos surcos paralelos ocultan el hecho de que la corteza cerebelosa es en realidad una fina capa continua de tejido plegado apretadamente al estilo de un acordeón.

Dentro de esta fina capa se encuentran varios tipos de neuronas con una disposición muy regular, siendo las más importantes las células de Purkinje y las células granulares.

Esta compleja organización neuronal da lugar a una enorme capacidad de procesamiento de señales, pero casi toda la salida de la corteza cerebelosa pasa a través de un conjunto de pequeños núcleos profundos que se encuentran en el interior de la materia blanca del cerebelo. Además de su papel directo en la función motora control, el cerebelo es necesario para varios tipos de aprendizaje motor, sobre todo para aprender a adaptarse a los cambios en las relaciones sensoriomotoras.

Se han desarrollado varios modelos teóricos para explicar la calibración sensoriomotora en términos de plasticidad sináptica dentro del cerebelo.

Estos modelos se derivan de los formulados por David Marr y James Albus, basados ​​en la observación de que cada célula de Purkinje del cerebelo recibe dos tipos de entradas radicalmente diferentes: una comprende miles de entradas débiles de las fibras paralelas de las células granulares; el otro es una entrada extremadamente fuerte de una sola fibra trepadora.

El concepto básico de la teoría de Marr-Albus es que la fibra trepadora sirve como una "señal de enseñanza", que induce un cambio duradero en la fuerza de las entradas de fibra paralelas.

Las observaciones de la depresión a largo plazo en las entradas de fibras paralelas han brindado cierto apoyo a las teorías de este tipo, pero su validez sigue siendo controvertida.


== Estructura ==


A nivel de la anatomía macroscópica, el cerebelo consta de una capa de corteza plegada con fuerza, con sustancia blanca debajo y un ventrículo lleno de líquido en la base.

Cuatro núcleos cerebelosos profundos están incrustados en la sustancia blanca.

Cada parte de la corteza consta del mismo pequeño conjunto de elementos neuronales, dispuestos en una geometría muy estereotipada.

En un nivel intermedio, el cerebelo y sus estructuras auxiliares se pueden separar en varios cientos o miles de módulos que funcionan de forma independiente llamados "microzonas" o "microcompartimentos".


=== Anatomía macroscópica ===


El cerebelo se encuentra en la fosa craneal posterior.

El cuarto ventrículo, la protuberancia y el bulbo raquídeo se encuentran frente al cerebelo.

Está separado del cerebro suprayacente por una capa de duramadre coriácea, la tienda del cerebelo; todas sus conexiones con otras partes del cerebro viajan a través de la protuberancia.

Los anatomistas clasifican el cerebelo como parte del metencéfalo, que también incluye la protuberancia; el metencéfalo es la parte superior del rombencéfalo o "rombencéfalo".

Al igual que la corteza cerebral, el cerebelo se divide en dos hemisferios cerebelosos; también contiene una zona estrecha en la línea media (el vermis).

Por convención, se utiliza un conjunto de pliegues grandes para dividir la estructura general en 10 "lóbulos" más pequeños.

Debido a su gran cantidad de diminutas células granulares, el cerebelo contiene más neuronas que el resto del cerebro, pero ocupa solo el 10% del volumen total del cerebro.

El número de neuronas en el cerebelo está relacionado con el número de neuronas en la neocorteza.

Hay alrededor de 3,6 veces más neuronas en el cerebelo que en la neocorteza, una proporción que se conserva en muchas especies de mamíferos diferentes. La apariencia inusual de la superficie del cerebelo oculta el hecho de que la mayor parte de su volumen está formado por capa de sustancia gris: la corteza cerebelosa.

Cada cresta o giro en esta capa se llama folium.

Se estima que, si la corteza cerebelosa humana estuviera completamente desplegada, daría lugar a una capa de tejido neural de aproximadamente 1 metro de largo y un promedio de 5 centímetros de ancho, una superficie total de aproximadamente 500 cm cuadrados, empaquetada dentro de un volumen de dimensiones 6 cm × 5 cm × 10 cm.

Debajo de la materia gris de la corteza se encuentra la materia blanca, compuesta en gran parte por fibras nerviosas mielinizadas que van y vienen de la corteza.

Incrustados dentro de la materia blanca, que a veces se denomina arbor vitae (árbol de la vida) debido a su apariencia ramificada, similar a un árbol en la sección transversal, hay cuatro núcleos cerebelosos profundos, compuestos de materia gris. Conectando el cerebelo a diferentes partes de el sistema nervioso son tres pedúnculos cerebelosos pares.

Estos son el pedúnculo cerebeloso superior, el pedúnculo cerebeloso medio y el pedúnculo cerebeloso inferior, denominados así por su posición relativa al vermis.

El pedúnculo cerebeloso superior es principalmente una salida a la corteza cerebral, transportando fibras eferentes a través de núcleos talámicos a las neuronas motoras superiores en la corteza cerebral.

Las fibras surgen de los núcleos cerebelosos profundos.

El pedúnculo cerebeloso medio está conectado a la protuberancia y recibe toda su información de la protuberancia principalmente de los núcleos pontinos.

La entrada a la protuberancia proviene de la corteza cerebral y se transmite desde los núcleos pontinos a través de fibras pontinas transversas hasta el cerebelo.

El pedúnculo medio es el más grande de los tres y sus fibras aferentes se agrupan en tres fascículos separados que llevan sus entradas a diferentes partes del cerebelo.

El pedúnculo cerebeloso inferior recibe impulsos de fibras aferentes de los núcleos vestibulares, la médula espinal y el tegmento.

La salida del pedúnculo inferior es a través de fibras eferentes a los núcleos vestibulares y la formación reticular.

Todo el cerebelo recibe información moduladora del núcleo olivar inferior a través del pedúnculo cerebeloso inferior.


==== Subdivisiones ====

Según la apariencia de la superficie, se pueden distinguir tres lóbulos dentro del cerebelo: el lóbulo anterior (por encima de la fisura primaria), el lóbulo posterior (por debajo de la fisura primaria) y el lóbulo floculonodular (por debajo de la fisura posterior).

Estos lóbulos dividen el cerebelo de rostral a caudal (en humanos, de arriba a abajo).

Sin embargo, en términos de función, hay una distinción más importante a lo largo de la dimensión de medial a lateral.

Dejando de lado el lóbulo floculonodular, que tiene distintas conexiones y funciones, el cerebelo se puede analizar funcionalmente en un sector medial llamado espinocerebelo y un sector lateral más grande llamado cerebrocerebelo.

Una franja estrecha de tejido que sobresale a lo largo de la línea media se denomina vermis cerebeloso. (Vermis significa "gusano" en latín). La región más pequeña, el lóbulo floculonodular, a menudo se denomina vestibulocerebelo.

Es la parte más antigua en términos evolutivos (archicerebellum) y participa principalmente en el equilibrio y la orientación espacial; sus conexiones principales son con los núcleos vestibulares, aunque también recibe información visual y sensorial.

El daño a esta región provoca alteraciones del equilibrio y la marcha. La zona medial de los lóbulos anterior y posterior constituye el espinocerebelo, también conocido como paleocerebelo.

Este sector del cerebelo funciona principalmente para afinar los movimientos del cuerpo y las extremidades.

Recibe información propioceptiva de las columnas dorsales de la médula espinal (incluido el tracto espinocerebeloso) y del nervio trigémino craneal, así como de los sistemas visual y auditivo.

Envía fibras a los núcleos cerebelosos profundos que, a su vez, se proyectan tanto a la corteza cerebral como al tronco del encéfalo, proporcionando así la modulación de los sistemas motores descendentes. conocido como neocerebelo.

Recibe información exclusivamente de la corteza cerebral (especialmente del lóbulo parietal) a través de los núcleos pontinos (que forman vías córtico-ponto-cerebelosas) y envía información principalmente al tálamo ventrolateral (a su vez conectado a las áreas motoras de la corteza premotora y motora primaria). área de la corteza cerebral) y al núcleo rojo.

Existe desacuerdo sobre la mejor manera de describir las funciones del cerebelo lateral: se cree que está involucrado en la planificación del movimiento que está a punto de ocurrir, en la evaluación de la información sensorial para la acción y en una serie de funciones puramente cognitivas, como determinar el verbo que mejor encaja con un determinado sustantivo (como en "sit" para "chair").


=== Microanatomía ===

Dos tipos de neuronas desempeñan funciones dominantes en el circuito cerebeloso: las células de Purkinje y las células granulares.

Tres tipos de axones también desempeñan funciones dominantes: fibras musgosas y fibras trepadoras (que ingresan al cerebelo desde el exterior) y fibras paralelas (que son los axones de las células granulares).

Hay dos vías principales a través del circuito cerebeloso, que se originan en las fibras musgosas y las fibras trepadoras, y ambas terminan eventualmente en los núcleos cerebelosos profundos. Las fibras musgosas se proyectan directamente a los núcleos profundos, pero también dan lugar a la siguiente vía: fibras musgosas → células granulares → fibras paralelas → células de Purkinje → núcleos profundos.

Las fibras trepadoras se proyectan hacia las células de Purkinje y también envían colaterales directamente a los núcleos profundos.

Las entradas de fibra musgosa y fibra trepadora contienen información específica de la fibra; el cerebelo también recibe entradas dopaminérgicas, serotoninérgicas, noradrenérgicas y colinérgicas que presumiblemente realizan una modulación global. La corteza cerebelosa se divide en tres capas.

En la parte inferior se encuentra la capa granular gruesa, densamente empaquetada con células granulares, junto con interneuronas, principalmente células de Golgi, pero también incluye células de Lugaro y células en cepillo unipolares.

En el medio se encuentra la capa de Purkinje, una zona estrecha que contiene los cuerpos celulares de las células de Purkinje y las células gliales de Bergmann.

En la parte superior se encuentra la capa molecular, que contiene los árboles dendríticos aplanados de las células de Purkinje, junto con la gran variedad de fibras paralelas que penetran en los árboles dendríticos de las células de Purkinje en ángulo recto.

Esta capa más externa de la corteza cerebelosa también contiene dos tipos de interneuronas inhibitorias: células estrelladas y células en canasta.

Tanto las células estrelladas como las cestas forman sinapsis GABAérgicas en las dendritas de las células de Purkinje.


==== Capa molecular ====
La capa superior y más externa de la corteza cerebelosa es la capa molecular.

Esta capa contiene los árboles dendríticos aplanados de las células de Purkinje y la gran variedad de fibras paralelas, de la capa granular, que penetran los árboles dendríticos de las células de Purkinje en ángulo recto.

La capa molecular también contiene dos tipos de interneuronas inhibidoras: células estrelladas y células en cesta.

Tanto las células estrelladas como las cestas forman sinapsis GABAérgicas en las dendritas de las células de Purkinje.


==== Capa de Purkinje ====

Las células de Purkinje se encuentran entre las neuronas más distintivas del cerebro y son uno de los primeros tipos en ser reconocidos: fueron descritas por primera vez por el anatomista checo Jan Evangelista Purkyně en 1837.

Se distinguen por la forma de su árbol dendrítico: las dendritas se ramifican muy profusamente, pero están severamente aplanadas en un plano perpendicular a los pliegues cerebelosos.

Así, las dendritas de una célula de Purkinje forman una red plana densa, a través de la cual pasan fibras paralelas en ángulo recto.

Las dendritas están cubiertas de espinas dendríticas, cada una de las cuales recibe información sináptica de una fibra paralela.

Las células de Purkinje reciben más entradas sinápticas que cualquier otro tipo de célula en el cerebro: las estimaciones de la cantidad de espinas en una sola célula de Purkinje humana llegan a 200,000.

Los grandes cuerpos celulares esféricos de las células de Purkinje están empaquetados en una capa estrecha (una célula de grosor) de la corteza cerebelosa, llamada capa de Purkinje.

Después de emitir colaterales que afectan partes cercanas de la corteza, sus axones viajan hacia los núcleos cerebelosos profundos, donde hacen del orden de 1000 contactos cada uno con varios tipos de células nucleares, todo dentro de un pequeño dominio.

Las células de Purkinje usan GABA como su neurotransmisor y, por lo tanto, ejercen efectos inhibitorios sobre sus objetivos. Las células de Purkinje forman el corazón del circuito cerebeloso, y su gran tamaño y patrones de actividad distintivos han hecho que sea relativamente fácil estudiar sus patrones de respuesta en animales que se comportan usando extracelulares. técnicas de grabación.

Las células de Purkinje normalmente emiten potenciales de acción a un ritmo elevado incluso en ausencia de entrada sináptica.

En animales despiertos que se comportan, son típicas las frecuencias medias que promedian alrededor de 40 Hz.

Los trenes de picos muestran una mezcla de lo que se llama picos simples y complejos.

Un pico simple es un potencial de acción único seguido de un período refractario de unos 10 ms; un pico complejo es una secuencia estereotipada de potenciales de acción con intervalos entre picos muy cortos y amplitudes decrecientes.

Los estudios fisiológicos han demostrado que los picos complejos (que se producen a frecuencias basales de alrededor de 1 Hz y nunca a frecuencias muy superiores a 10 Hz) se asocian de forma fiable con la activación de las fibras trepadoras, mientras que los picos simples se producen mediante una combinación de actividad basal y entrada paralela de fibras.

Los picos complejos a menudo van seguidos de una pausa de varios cientos de milisegundos durante los cuales se suprime la actividad de los picos simples. Una característica específica y reconocible de las neuronas de Purkinje es la expresión de calbindina.

La tinción con calbindina del cerebro de rata después de una lesión crónica unilateral del nervio ciático sugiere que las neuronas de Purkinje pueden generarse recientemente en el cerebro adulto, iniciando la organización de nuevos lóbulos cerebelosos.


==== Capa granular ====

Las células granulares del cerebelo, a diferencia de las células de Purkinje, se encuentran entre las neuronas más pequeñas del cerebro.

También son las neuronas más numerosas del cerebro: en los humanos, las estimaciones de su número total promedian alrededor de 50 mil millones, lo que significa que aproximadamente 3/4 de las neuronas del cerebro son células granulares del cerebelo.

Sus cuerpos celulares están empaquetados en una capa gruesa en la parte inferior de la corteza cerebelosa.

Una célula granular emite solo de cuatro a cinco dendritas, cada una de las cuales termina en un agrandamiento llamado garra dendrítica.

Estos agrandamientos son sitios de entrada excitatoria de las fibras musgosas y entrada inhibidora de las células de Golgi. Los axones delgados y amielínicos de las células granulares se elevan verticalmente hacia la capa superior (molecular) de la corteza, donde se dividen en dos, con cada rama viajando horizontalmente a formar una fibra paralela; la división de la rama vertical en dos ramas horizontales da lugar a una forma de "T" distintiva.

Una fibra paralela humana corre un promedio de 3 mm en cada dirección desde la división, para una longitud total de aproximadamente 6 mm (aproximadamente 1/10 del ancho total de la capa cortical).

A medida que avanzan, las fibras paralelas pasan a través de los árboles dendríticos de las células de Purkinje, contactando una de cada 3 a 5 que pasan, haciendo un total de 80 a 100 conexiones sinápticas con las espinas dendríticas de las células de Purkinje.

Las células granulares utilizan glutamato como neurotransmisor y, por lo tanto, ejercen efectos excitadores sobre sus objetivos.

Las células granulares reciben toda su información de las fibras musgosas, pero las superan en número en una proporción de 200 a 1 (en humanos).

Por lo tanto, la información en el estado de actividad de la población de células granulares es la misma que la información en las fibras musgosas, pero se recodifica de una manera mucho más expansiva.

Debido a que las células granulares son tan pequeñas y están tan densamente empaquetadas, es difícil registrar su actividad de picos en el comportamiento de los animales, por lo que hay pocos datos para usar como base para teorizar.

El concepto más popular de su función fue propuesto en 1969 por David Marr, quien sugirió que podían codificar combinaciones de entradas de fibra musgosa.

La idea es que con cada celda granular que recibe información de solo 4 o 5 fibras musgosas, una celda granular no respondería si solo una de sus entradas estuviera activa, pero respondería si más de una estuviera activa.

Este esquema de codificación combinatoria permitiría potencialmente que el cerebelo hiciera distinciones mucho más finas entre los patrones de entrada de lo que permitirían las fibras musgosas por sí solas.


==== Fibras musgosas ====
Las fibras musgosas entran en la capa granular desde sus puntos de origen, muchas de las cuales surgen de los núcleos pontinos, otras de la médula espinal, núcleos vestibulares, etc.

En el cerebelo humano, el número total de fibras musgosas se ha estimado en unos 200 millones.

Estas fibras forman sinapsis excitatorias con las células granulares y las células de los núcleos cerebelosos profundos.

Dentro de la capa granular, una fibra musgosa genera una serie de agrandamientos llamados rosetas.

Los contactos entre las fibras musgosas y las dendritas de las células granulares tienen lugar dentro de estructuras llamadas glomérulos.

Cada glomérulo tiene una roseta de fibra musgosa en su centro y hasta 20 garras dendríticas de células granulares en contacto con él.

Los terminales de las células de Golgi se infiltran en la estructura y hacen sinapsis inhibitorias sobre las dendritas de las células granulares.

Todo el conjunto está rodeado por una vaina de células gliales.

Cada fibra musgosa envía ramas colaterales a varias hojas cerebelosas, generando un total de 20 a 30 rosetas; por lo tanto, una sola fibra musgosa entra en contacto con aproximadamente 400 a 600 células granulares.


==== Fibras trepadoras ====
Las células de Purkinje también reciben información del núcleo olivar inferior en el lado contralateral del tronco encefálico a través de fibras trepadoras.

Aunque la oliva inferior se encuentra en el bulbo raquídeo y recibe información de la médula espinal, el tronco encefálico y la corteza cerebral, su salida se dirige por completo al cerebelo.

Una fibra trepadora emite colaterales a los núcleos cerebelosos profundos antes de entrar en la corteza cerebelosa, donde se divide en unas 10 ramas terminales, cada una de las cuales da entrada a una única célula de Purkinje.

En marcado contraste con las más de 100 000 entradas de fibras paralelas, cada célula de Purkinje recibe entrada de exactamente una fibra trepadora; pero esta única fibra "trepa" por las dendritas de la célula de Purkinje, enrollándose alrededor de ellas y formando un total de hasta 300 sinapsis a medida que avanza.

La entrada neta es tan fuerte que un solo potencial de acción de una fibra trepadora es capaz de producir un pico complejo extendido en la célula de Purkinje: un estallido de varios picos seguidos, con amplitud decreciente, seguido de una pausa durante la cual se suprime la actividad. .

Las sinapsis de las fibras trepadoras cubren el cuerpo celular y las dendritas proximales; esta zona está desprovista de entradas paralelas de fibras. Las fibras trepadoras se disparan a velocidades bajas, pero un solo potencial de acción de fibra trepadora induce una ráfaga de varios potenciales de acción en una célula de Purkinje diana (un pico complejo).

El contraste entre las entradas de fibras paralelas y fibras trepadoras a las células de Purkinje (más de 100 000 de un tipo versus exactamente una del otro tipo) es quizás la característica más provocativa de la anatomía del cerebelo y ha motivado gran parte de la teoría.

De hecho, la función de las fibras trepadoras es el tema más controvertido del cerebelo.

Hay dos escuelas de pensamiento, una que sigue a Marr y Albus al sostener que la entrada de fibras trepadoras sirve principalmente como una señal de enseñanza, la otra sostiene que su función es dar forma directamente a la salida del cerebelo.

Ambos puntos de vista han sido defendidos extensamente en numerosas publicaciones.

En palabras de una reseña, "Al tratar de sintetizar las diversas hipótesis sobre la función de las fibras trepadoras, uno tiene la sensación de mirar un dibujo de Escher.

Cada punto de vista parece dar cuenta de una cierta colección de hallazgos, pero cuando uno intenta juntar los diferentes puntos de vista, no aparece una imagen coherente de lo que están haciendo las fibras trepadoras.

Para la mayoría de los investigadores, las fibras trepadoras señalan errores en el rendimiento motor, ya sea en la forma habitual de modulación de frecuencia de descarga o como un anuncio único de un "evento inesperado".

Para otros investigadores, el mensaje radica en el grado de sincronía y ritmicidad del conjunto entre una población de fibras trepadoras".


==== Núcleos profundos ====

Los núcleos profundos del cerebelo son grupos de materia gris que se encuentran dentro de la materia blanca en el centro del cerebelo.

Son, con la pequeña excepción de los núcleos vestibulares cercanos, las únicas fuentes de salida del cerebelo.

Estos núcleos reciben proyecciones colaterales de fibras musgosas y fibras trepadoras, así como impulsos inhibidores de las células de Purkinje de la corteza cerebelosa.

Cada uno de los cuatro núcleos (dentado, globoso, emboliforme y fastigial) se comunica con diferentes partes del cerebro y la corteza cerebelosa. (Los núcleos globoso y emboliforme también se conocen como combinados en el núcleo interpuesto).

Los núcleos fastigial e interpuesto pertenecen al espinocerebelo.

El núcleo dentado, que en los mamíferos es mucho más grande que los demás, se forma como una capa delgada y enrevesada de sustancia gris y se comunica exclusivamente con las partes laterales de la corteza cerebelosa.

El flóculo del lóbulo floculonodular es la única parte de la corteza cerebelosa que no se proyecta a los núcleos profundos; en cambio, su salida va a los núcleos vestibulares. La mayoría de las neuronas en los núcleos profundos tienen cuerpos celulares grandes y árboles dendríticos esféricos con un radio de aproximadamente 400 μm, y usan glutamato como su neurotransmisor.

Estas células se proyectan a una variedad de objetivos fuera del cerebelo.

Entremezclados con ellos hay un número menor de células pequeñas, que utilizan GABA como neurotransmisor y se proyectan exclusivamente al núcleo olivar inferior, fuente de fibras trepadoras.

Por lo tanto, la proyección nucleoolivar proporciona una retroalimentación inhibitoria para igualar la proyección excitatoria de las fibras trepadoras hacia los núcleos.

Hay pruebas de que cada pequeño grupo de células nucleares se proyecta al mismo grupo de células olivares que le envían fibras trepadoras; hay una topografía fuerte y coincidente en ambas direcciones. Cuando un axón de una célula de Purkinje ingresa a uno de los núcleos profundos, se ramifica para hacer contacto con células nucleares grandes y pequeñas, pero el número total de células contactadas es solo de unas 35 (en gatos) .

Por el contrario, una sola célula nuclear profunda recibe información de aproximadamente 860 células de Purkinje (nuevamente en gatos).


==== Compartimentos ====

Desde el punto de vista de la anatomía macroscópica, la corteza cerebelosa parece ser una lámina homogénea de tejido y, desde el punto de vista de la microanatomía, todas las partes de esta lámina parecen tener la misma estructura interna.

Hay, sin embargo, una serie de aspectos en los que se compartimenta la estructura del cerebelo.

Hay grandes compartimentos que generalmente se conocen como zonas; estos se pueden dividir en compartimentos más pequeños conocidos como microzonas. Los primeros indicios de la estructura compartimental provienen de estudios de los campos receptivos de las células en varias partes de la corteza cerebelosa.

Cada parte del cuerpo se asigna a puntos específicos del cerebelo, pero hay numerosas repeticiones del mapa básico, formando una disposición que se ha denominado "somatotopía fracturada".

Se obtiene una indicación más clara de la compartimentación mediante la inmunotinción del cerebelo para ciertos tipos de proteínas.

Los más conocidos de estos marcadores se denominan "cebrinas", porque la tinción de ellos da lugar a un patrón complejo que recuerda a las rayas de una cebra.

Las franjas generadas por las cebrinas y otros marcadores de compartimentación están orientadas perpendicularmente a los pliegues del cerebelo, es decir, son estrechas en dirección mediolateral, pero mucho más extendidas en dirección longitudinal.

Diferentes marcadores generan diferentes conjuntos de rayas, los anchos y largos varían en función de la ubicación, pero todos tienen la misma forma general. Oscarsson, a fines de la década de 1970, propuso que estas zonas corticales se pueden dividir en unidades más pequeñas llamadas microzonas.

Una microzona se define como un grupo de células de Purkinje que tienen todas el mismo campo receptivo somatotópico.

Se encontró que las microzonas contenían del orden de 1000 células de Purkinje cada una, dispuestas en una tira larga y estrecha, orientada perpendicularmente a los pliegues corticales.

Por lo tanto, como ilustra el diagrama adjunto, las dendritas de las células de Purkinje se aplanan en la misma dirección en que se extienden las microzonas, mientras que las fibras paralelas las cruzan en ángulo recto. el núcleo olivar es igualmente importante.

Las ramas de una fibra trepadora (que suelen ser unas 10) suelen activar células de Purkinje pertenecientes a la misma microzona.

Además, las neuronas olivares que envían fibras trepadoras a la misma microzona tienden a acoplarse mediante uniones gap, que sincronizan su actividad, lo que hace que las células de Purkinje dentro de una microzona muestren una actividad de picos compleja correlacionada en una escala de tiempo de milisegundos.

Además, todas las células de Purkinje que pertenecen a una microzona envían sus axones al mismo pequeño grupo de células de salida dentro de los núcleos cerebelosos profundos.

Finalmente, los axones de las células en cesta son mucho más largos en la dirección longitudinal que en la dirección mediolateral, lo que hace que estén confinados en gran parte a una sola microzona.

La consecuencia de toda esta estructura es que las interacciones celulares dentro de una microzona son mucho más fuertes que las interacciones entre diferentes microzonas. En 2005, Richard Apps y Martin Garwicz resumieron la evidencia de que las propias microzonas forman parte de una entidad más grande que llaman microcomplejo multizonal.

Dicho microcomplejo incluye varias microzonas corticales espacialmente separadas, todas las cuales se proyectan al mismo grupo de neuronas cerebelosas profundas, más un grupo de neuronas olivares acopladas que se proyectan a todas las microzonas incluidas, así como al área nuclear profunda.


=== Suministro de sangre ===

El cerebelo recibe sangre de tres arterias principales emparejadas: la arteria cerebelosa superior (SCA), la arteria cerebelosa inferior anterior (AICA) y la arteria cerebelosa inferior posterior (PICA).

El SCA suministra la región superior del cerebelo.

Se divide en la superficie superior y se ramifica en la piamadre, donde las ramas se anastomosan con las de las arterias cerebelosas anterior y posteroinferior.

El AICA suministra la parte frontal de la superficie inferior del cerebelo.

La PICA llega a la superficie inferior, donde se divide en una rama medial y una rama lateral.

La rama medial continúa hacia atrás hasta la muesca cerebelosa entre los dos hemisferios del cerebelo; mientras que la rama lateral irriga la superficie inferior del cerebelo, hasta su borde lateral, donde se anastomosa con la AICA y la SCA.


== Función ==

Las pistas más sólidas sobre la función del cerebelo provienen del examen de las consecuencias del daño que sufre.

Los animales y humanos con disfunción cerebelosa muestran, sobre todo, problemas con el control motor, en el mismo lado del cuerpo que la parte dañada del cerebelo.

Continúan siendo capaces de generar actividad motora pero pierden precisión, produciendo movimientos erráticos, descoordinados o sincronizados incorrectamente.

Una prueba estándar de la función cerebelosa es alcanzar con la punta del dedo un objetivo a la distancia del brazo: una persona sana moverá la punta del dedo en una trayectoria rápida y recta, mientras que una persona con daño en el cerebelo alcanzará lenta y erráticamente, con muchas distancias medias. -correcciones de curso.

Los déficits en las funciones no motoras son más difíciles de detectar.

Por lo tanto, la conclusión general a la que se llegó hace décadas es que la función básica del cerebelo es calibrar la forma detallada de un movimiento, no iniciar movimientos o decidir qué movimientos ejecutar. Antes de la década de 1990, la función del cerebelo era casi universalmente Se cree que está puramente relacionado con el motor, pero los hallazgos más recientes han cuestionado esa opinión.

Los estudios de imágenes funcionales han mostrado activación del cerebelo en relación con el lenguaje, la atención y las imágenes mentales; los estudios de correlación han mostrado interacciones entre el cerebelo y las áreas no motoras de la corteza cerebral; y se han reconocido una variedad de síntomas no motores en personas con daño que parece limitarse al cerebelo.

En particular, el síndrome afectivo cognitivo cerebeloso o síndrome de Schmahmann se ha descrito en adultos y niños.

Las estimaciones basadas en el mapeo funcional del cerebelo usando MRI funcional sugieren que más de la mitad de la corteza cerebelosa está interconectada con zonas de asociación de la corteza cerebral. Kenji Doya ha argumentado que la función del cerebelo se entiende mejor no en términos de los comportamientos que afecta, pero los cálculos neuronales que realiza; el cerebelo consta de un gran número de módulos más o menos independientes, todos con la misma estructura interna geométricamente regular y, por lo tanto, se supone que todos realizan el mismo cálculo.

Si las conexiones de entrada y salida de un módulo son con áreas de motor (como lo son muchas), entonces el módulo estará involucrado en el comportamiento del motor; pero, si las conexiones son con áreas involucradas en la cognición no motora, el módulo mostrará otros tipos de correlatos de comportamiento.

Así, el cerebelo se ha implicado en la regulación de muchos rasgos funcionales diferentes, como el afecto, la emoción y el comportamiento.

El cerebelo, propone Doya, se entiende mejor como una selección de acción predictiva basada en "modelos internos" del entorno o un dispositivo para el aprendizaje supervisado, en contraste con los ganglios basales, que realizan el aprendizaje por refuerzo, y la corteza cerebral, que realiza el aprendizaje no supervisado. .


=== Principios ===

La relativa simplicidad y regularidad de la anatomía del cerebelo condujo a una temprana esperanza de que podría implicar una simplicidad similar de función computacional, como se expresa en uno de los primeros libros sobre electrofisiología del cerebelo, The Cerebellum as a Neuronal Machine de John C.

Eccles, Masao Ito, and János Szentágothai.

Aunque una comprensión completa de la función del cerebelo sigue siendo difícil de alcanzar, al menos cuatro principios se han identificado como importantes: (1) procesamiento de avance, (2) divergencia y convergencia, (3) modularidad y (4) plasticidad.

Procesamiento de realimentación: el cerebelo difiere de la mayoría de las otras partes del cerebro (especialmente la corteza cerebral) en que el procesamiento de la señal es casi completamente de realimentación, es decir, las señales se mueven unidireccionalmente a través del sistema desde la entrada hasta la salida, con muy poca transmisión interna recurrente.

La pequeña cantidad de recurrencia que existe consiste en inhibición mutua; no hay circuitos mutuamente excitadores.

Este modo de operación feedforward significa que el cerebelo, en contraste con la corteza cerebral, no puede generar patrones autosostenidos de actividad neuronal.

Las señales ingresan al circuito, son procesadas por cada etapa en orden secuencial y luego salen.

Como escribieron Eccles, Ito y Szentágothai, "Esta eliminación en el diseño de toda posibilidad de cadenas reverberatorias de excitación neuronal es sin duda una gran ventaja en el desempeño del cerebelo como computadora, porque lo que el resto del sistema nervioso requiere del Presumiblemente, el cerebelo no es una salida que exprese la operación de circuitos de reverberación complejos en el cerebelo, sino una respuesta rápida y clara a la entrada de cualquier conjunto particular de información".
Divergencia y convergencia: en el cerebelo humano, la información de 200 millones de entradas de fibra musgosa se expande a 40 mil millones de células granulares, cuyas salidas de fibra paralelas luego convergen en 15 millones de células de Purkinje.

Debido a la forma en que están alineadas longitudinalmente, las aproximadamente 1000 células de Purkinje que pertenecen a una microzona pueden recibir información de hasta 100 millones de fibras paralelas y concentrar su propia salida en un grupo de menos de 50 células nucleares profundas.

Por tanto, la red cerebelosa recibe un número modesto de entradas, las procesa de forma muy extensa a través de su red interna rigurosamente estructurada y envía los resultados a través de un número muy limitado de células de salida.
Modularidad: el sistema cerebeloso se divide funcionalmente en módulos más o menos independientes, que probablemente se cuentan entre cientos y miles.

Todos los módulos tienen una estructura interna similar, pero diferentes entradas y salidas.

Un módulo (un microcompartimento multizonal en la terminología de Apps y Garwicz) consta de un pequeño grupo de neuronas en el núcleo olivar inferior, un conjunto de tiras largas y estrechas de células de Purkinje en la corteza cerebelosa (microzonas) y un pequeño grupo de neuronas en uno de los núcleos cerebelosos profundos.

Diferentes módulos comparten la entrada de fibras musgosas y fibras paralelas, pero en otros aspectos parecen funcionar de forma independiente: la salida de un módulo no parece influir significativamente en la actividad de otros módulos.
Plasticidad: las sinapsis entre fibras paralelas y células de Purkinje, y las sinapsis entre fibras musgosas y células nucleares profundas, son susceptibles de modificación de su fuerza.

En un solo módulo cerebeloso, la entrada de hasta mil millones de fibras paralelas converge en un grupo de menos de 50 células nucleares profundas, y la influencia de cada fibra paralela en esas células nucleares es ajustable.

Este arreglo brinda una gran flexibilidad para ajustar la relación entre las entradas y salidas del cerebelo.


=== Aprendiendo ===

Existe considerable evidencia de que el cerebelo juega un papel esencial en algunos tipos de aprendizaje motor.

Las tareas en las que el cerebelo entra en juego con mayor claridad son aquellas en las que es necesario realizar ajustes finos en la forma en que se realiza una acción.

Sin embargo, ha habido mucha controversia sobre si el aprendizaje tiene lugar dentro del propio cerebelo o si simplemente sirve para proporcionar señales que promuevan el aprendizaje en otras estructuras cerebrales.

La mayoría de las teorías que asignan el aprendizaje a los circuitos del cerebelo se derivan de las ideas de David Marr y James Albus, quienes postularon que las fibras trepadoras proporcionan una señal de enseñanza que induce la modificación sináptica en las sinapsis paralelas de fibras y células de Purkinje.

Marr asumió que la entrada de fibra ascendente haría que se fortalecieran las entradas de fibra paralelas activadas sincrónicamente.

Sin embargo, la mayoría de los modelos posteriores de aprendizaje del cerebelo han seguido a Albus al suponer que la actividad de las fibras trepadoras sería una señal de error y haría que las entradas de fibras paralelas activadas sincrónicamente se debilitaran.

Algunos de estos modelos posteriores, como el modelo de filtro adaptativo de Fujita, intentaron comprender la función del cerebelo en términos de la teoría del control óptimo.
La idea de que la actividad de las fibras trepadoras funciona como una señal de error ha sido examinada en muchos estudios experimentales, algunos la apoyan pero otros la ponen en duda.

En un estudio pionero de Gilbert y Thach de 1977, las células de Purkinje de monos que aprendieron una tarea de alcance mostraron una mayor actividad de picos complejos, que se sabe que indica de manera confiable la actividad de la entrada de fibra trepadora de la célula, durante los períodos en los que el rendimiento era bajo.

Varios estudios de aprendizaje motor en gatos observaron una actividad de picos compleja cuando había una falta de coincidencia entre un movimiento previsto y el movimiento que realmente se ejecutó.

Los estudios del reflejo vestíbulo-ocular (que estabiliza la imagen visual en la retina cuando gira la cabeza) encontraron que la actividad de las fibras trepadoras indicaba un "deslizamiento retinal", aunque no de una manera muy directa. Una de las tareas de aprendizaje del cerebelo más estudiadas es el paradigma del condicionamiento del parpadeo, en el que un estímulo condicionado neutro (CS), como un tono o una luz, se combina repetidamente con un estímulo no condicionado (EE), como una bocanada de aire, que provoca una respuesta de parpadeo.

Después de tales presentaciones repetidas de CS y US, CS eventualmente provocará un parpadeo antes de US, una respuesta condicionada o CR.

Los experimentos demostraron que las lesiones localizadas en una parte específica del núcleo interpuesto (uno de los núcleos cerebelosos profundos) o en unos pocos puntos específicos en la corteza cerebelosa anularían el aprendizaje de una respuesta de parpadeo condicionalmente cronometrada.

Si las salidas del cerebelo se inactivan farmacológicamente mientras se dejan intactas las entradas y los circuitos intracelulares, el aprendizaje tiene lugar incluso cuando el animal no muestra ninguna respuesta, mientras que, si se interrumpen los circuitos intracerebelosos, no tiene lugar el aprendizaje. el aprendizaje, de hecho, ocurre dentro del cerebelo.


=== Teorías y modelos computacionales ===


La gran base de conocimientos sobre la estructura anatómica y las funciones conductuales del cerebelo lo han convertido en un terreno fértil para teorizar: quizás haya más teorías sobre la función del cerebelo que sobre cualquier otra parte del cerebro.

La distinción más básica entre ellas es entre "teorías del aprendizaje" y "teorías del desempeño", es decir, teorías que hacen uso de la plasticidad sináptica dentro del cerebelo para dar cuenta de su papel en el aprendizaje, frente a teorías que dan cuenta de aspectos del comportamiento en curso en el base del procesamiento de señales del cerebelo.

Varias teorías de ambos tipos se han formulado como modelos matemáticos y se han simulado usando computadoras. Quizás la primera teoría del "rendimiento" fue la hipótesis de la "línea de retraso" de Valentino Braitenberg.

La teoría original presentada por Braitenberg y Roger Atwood en 1958 proponía que la propagación lenta de señales a lo largo de fibras paralelas impone retrasos predecibles que permiten que el cerebelo detecte relaciones de tiempo dentro de una determinada ventana.

Los datos experimentales no respaldaron la forma original de la teoría, pero Braitenberg continuó abogando por versiones modificadas.

La hipótesis de que el cerebelo funciona esencialmente como un sistema de sincronización también ha sido defendida por Richard Ivry.

Otra teoría influyente del "desempeño" es la teoría de la red Tensor de Pellionisz y Llinás, que proporcionó una formulación matemática avanzada de la idea de que el cálculo fundamental realizado por el cerebelo es transformar las coordenadas sensoriales en motoras. Las teorías en la categoría de "aprendizaje" casi todas se derivan de las publicaciones de Marr y Albus.

El artículo de Marr de 1969 propuso que el cerebelo es un dispositivo para aprender a asociar movimientos elementales codificados por fibras trepadoras con entradas de fibras musgosas que codifican el contexto sensorial.

Albus propuso en 1971 que una célula de Purkinje del cerebelo funciona como un perceptrón, un dispositivo de aprendizaje abstracto inspirado en los nervios.

La diferencia más básica entre las teorías de Marr y Albus es que Marr asumió que la actividad de las fibras trepadoras haría que las sinapsis de las fibras paralelas se fortalecieran, mientras que Albus propuso que se debilitarían.

Albus también formuló su versión como un algoritmo de software que llamó CMAC (Controlador de articulación del modelo cerebeloso), que ha sido probado en varias aplicaciones.


== Importancia clínica ==


El daño al cerebelo a menudo causa síntomas relacionados con el motor, cuyos detalles dependen de la parte del cerebelo involucrada y de cómo está dañada.

El daño del lóbulo floculonodular puede manifestarse como una pérdida del equilibrio y, en particular, una marcha alterada e irregular, con una postura amplia causada por la dificultad para mantener el equilibrio.

El daño a la zona lateral generalmente causa problemas en los movimientos planificados y voluntarios hábiles que pueden causar errores en la fuerza, dirección, velocidad y amplitud de los movimientos.

Otras manifestaciones incluyen hipotonía (disminución del tono muscular), disartria (problemas con la articulación del habla), dismetría (problemas para juzgar distancias o rangos de movimiento), disdiadococinesia (incapacidad para realizar movimientos alternos rápidos como caminar), reflejo de control alterado o fenómeno de rebote y temblor de intención (movimiento involuntario causado por contracciones alternas de grupos de músculos opuestos).

El daño en la porción de la línea media puede interrumpir los movimientos de todo el cuerpo, mientras que el daño localizado más lateralmente es más probable que interrumpa los movimientos finos de las manos o las extremidades.

El daño a la parte superior del cerebelo tiende a causar alteraciones en la marcha y otros problemas con la coordinación de las piernas; es más probable que el daño en la parte inferior cause movimientos descoordinados o mal dirigidos de los brazos y las manos, así como dificultades en la velocidad.

Este complejo de síntomas motores se denomina ataxia.
Para identificar problemas del cerebelo, el examen neurológico incluye la evaluación de la marcha (una marcha de base amplia es indicativa de ataxia), pruebas de señalar con el dedo y evaluación de la postura.

Si se indica una disfunción cerebelosa, se puede usar una resonancia magnética para obtener una imagen detallada de cualquier alteración estructural que pueda existir. edema cerebral), tumores, alcoholismo, traumatismos físicos como heridas de bala o explosivos, y enfermedades crónico degenerativas como la atrofia olivopontocerebelosa.

Algunas formas de migraña también pueden producir una disfunción temporal del cerebelo, de gravedad variable.

La infección puede resultar en daño cerebeloso en condiciones como las enfermedades priónicas y el síndrome de Miller Fisher, una variante del síndrome de Guillain-Barré.


=== Envejecimiento ===

El cerebelo humano cambia con la edad.

Estos cambios pueden diferir de los de otras partes del cerebro.
El cerebelo es la región del cerebro (y parte del cuerpo) más joven en los centenarios según un biomarcador epigenético de la edad del tejido conocido como reloj epigenético: es unos 15 años más joven de lo esperado en un centenario.

Además, los patrones de expresión génica en el cerebelo humano muestran menos alteraciones relacionadas con la edad que en la corteza cerebral.
Algunos estudios han informado reducciones en el número de células o el volumen de tejido, pero la cantidad de datos relacionados con esta pregunta no es muy grande.


=== Trastornos del desarrollo y degenerativos ===


Las malformaciones congénitas, los trastornos hereditarios y las condiciones adquiridas pueden afectar la estructura del cerebelo y, en consecuencia, la función del cerebelo.

A menos que la condición causante sea reversible, el único tratamiento posible es ayudar a las personas a vivir con sus problemas.

La visualización del cerebelo fetal mediante ecografía entre las 18 y 20 semanas de embarazo se puede utilizar para detectar defectos del tubo neural fetal con una tasa de sensibilidad de hasta el 99 %. progenitores (CGNP) en la capa granular externa (EGL).

El desarrollo del cerebelo ocurre durante la embriogénesis tardía y el período postnatal temprano, con un pico de proliferación de CGNP en el EGL durante el desarrollo temprano (día 7 postnatal en el ratón).

A medida que las CGNP se diferencian terminalmente en células granulares del cerebelo (también llamadas neuronas granulares del cerebelo, CGN), migran a la capa granular interna (IGL), formando el cerebelo maduro (al día 20 después del nacimiento en el ratón).

Las mutaciones que activan de manera anormal la señalización de Sonic hedgehog predisponen al cáncer de cerebelo (meduloblastoma) en humanos con síndrome de Gorlin y en modelos de ratones modificados genéticamente. La malformación congénita o subdesarrollo (hipoplasia) del vermis cerebeloso es una característica tanto del síndrome de Dandy-Walker como de Joubert síndrome.

En casos muy raros, puede faltar todo el cerebelo.

Los trastornos neurológicos hereditarios, la enfermedad de Machado-Joseph, la ataxia telangiectasia y la ataxia de Friedreich causan una neurodegeneración progresiva relacionada con la pérdida del cerebelo.

Las malformaciones cerebrales congénitas fuera del cerebelo pueden, a su vez, causar la hernia del tejido cerebeloso, como se observa en algunas formas de malformación de Arnold-Chiari. Otras afecciones que están estrechamente relacionadas con la degeneración del cerebelo incluyen los trastornos neurológicos progresivos idiopáticos, la atrofia multisistémica y el síndrome de Ramsay Hunt. tipo I, y el trastorno autoinmune degeneración cerebelosa paraneoplásica, en el cual los tumores en otras partes del cuerpo provocan una respuesta autoinmune que causa pérdida neuronal en el cerebelo.

La atrofia cerebelosa puede resultar de una deficiencia aguda de vitamina B1 (tiamina) como se observa en el beriberi y en el síndrome de Wernicke-Korsakoff, o deficiencia de vitamina E. La atrofia cerebelosa se ha observado en muchos otros trastornos neurológicos, incluida la enfermedad de Huntington, la esclerosis múltiple, el temblor esencial, epilepsia mioclónica progresiva y enfermedad de Niemann-Pick.

La atrofia cerebelosa también puede ocurrir como resultado de la exposición a toxinas, incluidos metales pesados ​​o drogas farmacéuticas o recreativas.


=== Dolor ===

Existe un consenso general de que el cerebelo está involucrado en el procesamiento del dolor.

El cerebelo recibe impulsos dolorosos tanto de las vías corticocerebelosas descendentes como de las vías espinocerebelosas ascendentes, a través de los núcleos pontinos y las olivas inferiores.

Parte de esta información se transfiere al sistema motor induciendo una evitación motora consciente del dolor, graduada según la intensidad del dolor.
Se cree que estas señales de dolor directas, así como las indirectas, inducen un comportamiento de evitación del dolor a largo plazo que da como resultado cambios de postura crónicos y, en consecuencia, una remodelación funcional y anatómica de los núcleos vestibular y propioceptivo.

Como resultado, el dolor neuropático crónico puede inducir una remodelación anatómica macroscópica del cerebro posterior, incluido el cerebelo.

La magnitud de esta remodelación y la inducción de marcadores de progenitores neuronales sugieren la contribución de la neurogénesis adulta a estos cambios.


== Anatomía comparada y evolución ==


Los circuitos en el cerebelo son similares en todas las clases de vertebrados, incluidos peces, reptiles, aves y mamíferos.

También existe una estructura cerebral análoga en cefalópodos con cerebros bien desarrollados, como los pulpos.

Esto se ha tomado como evidencia de que el cerebelo realiza funciones importantes para todas las especies animales con cerebro.
Existe una variación considerable en el tamaño y la forma del cerebelo en diferentes especies de vertebrados.

En los anfibios, está poco desarrollado, y en las lampreas y los mixinos, el cerebelo apenas se distingue del tronco encefálico.

Aunque el espinocerebelo está presente en estos grupos, las estructuras primarias son pequeños núcleos pareados correspondientes al vestibulocerebelo.

El cerebelo es un poco más grande en los reptiles, considerablemente más grande en las aves y aún más grande en los mamíferos.

Los lóbulos grandes emparejados y contorneados que se encuentran en los humanos son típicos de los mamíferos, pero el cerebelo es, en general, un solo lóbulo mediano en otros grupos, y es liso o solo ligeramente acanalado.

En los mamíferos, el neocerebelo es la mayor parte del cerebelo en masa, pero en otros vertebrados es típicamente el espinocerebelo. El cerebelo de los peces cartilaginosos y óseos es extraordinariamente grande y complejo.

En al menos un aspecto importante, difiere en su estructura interna del cerebelo de los mamíferos: el cerebelo de los peces no contiene núcleos cerebelosos profundos discretos.

En cambio, los objetivos primarios de las células de Purkinje son un tipo distinto de célula distribuida a lo largo de la corteza cerebelosa, un tipo que no se ve en los mamíferos.

En los peces mormíridos (una familia de peces de agua dulce débilmente electrosensibles), el cerebelo es considerablemente más grande que el resto del cerebro.

La parte más grande es una estructura especial llamada válvula, que tiene una arquitectura inusualmente regular y recibe gran parte de su información del sistema electrosensorial. El sello distintivo del cerebelo de los mamíferos es una expansión de los lóbulos laterales, cuyas principales interacciones son con el neocorteza

A medida que los monos se convirtieron en grandes simios, continuó la expansión de los lóbulos laterales, junto con la expansión de los lóbulos frontales de la neocorteza.

En los homínidos ancestrales y en el Homo sapiens hasta el Pleistoceno medio, el cerebelo continuó expandiéndose, pero los lóbulos frontales se expandieron más rápidamente.

Sin embargo, el período más reciente de la evolución humana puede haber estado asociado con un aumento en el tamaño relativo del cerebelo, ya que la neocorteza redujo un poco su tamaño mientras el cerebelo se expandía.

El tamaño del cerebelo humano, en comparación con el resto del cerebro, ha ido aumentando mientras que el cerebro ha disminuido. Tanto el desarrollo como la implementación de tareas motoras, las habilidades visoespaciales y el aprendizaje tienen lugar en el cerebelo, el crecimiento del cerebelo se cree que tiene alguna forma de correlación con mayores capacidades cognitivas humanas.

Los hemisferios laterales del cerebelo son ahora 2,7 veces más grandes tanto en humanos como en simios que en monos.

Estos cambios en el tamaño del cerebelo no pueden explicarse por una mayor masa muscular.

Muestran que el desarrollo del cerebelo está estrechamente relacionado con el del resto del cerebro o que las actividades neuronales que tienen lugar en el cerebelo fueron importantes durante la evolución de los homínidos.

Debido al papel del cerebelo en las funciones cognitivas, el aumento de su tamaño puede haber jugado un papel en la expansión cognitiva.


=== Estructuras similares al cerebelo ===

La mayoría de las especies de vertebrados tienen un cerebelo y una o más estructuras similares al cerebelo, áreas del cerebro que se asemejan al cerebelo en términos de citoarquitectura y neuroquímica.

La única estructura similar al cerebelo que se encuentra en los mamíferos es el núcleo coclear dorsal (DCN), uno de los dos núcleos sensoriales primarios que reciben información directamente del nervio auditivo.

El DCN es una estructura en capas, con la capa inferior que contiene células granulares similares a las del cerebelo, dando lugar a fibras paralelas que se elevan a la capa superficial y viajan a través de ella horizontalmente.

La capa superficial contiene un conjunto de neuronas GABAérgicas llamadas células en rueda de carro que se asemejan anatómica y químicamente a las células de Purkinje: reciben entradas de fibras paralelas, pero no tienen entradas que se parezcan a las fibras trepadoras.

Las neuronas de salida de la DCN son células piramidales.

Son glutamatérgicas, pero también se parecen a las células de Purkinje en algunos aspectos: tienen árboles dendríticos superficiales aplanados y espinosos que reciben impulsos de fibras paralelos, pero también tienen dendritas basales que reciben impulsos de las fibras del nervio auditivo, que viajan a través del NCD en una dirección en ángulos rectos a las fibras paralelas.

El DCN está más desarrollado en roedores y otros animales pequeños, y está considerablemente reducido en primates.

Su función no se comprende bien; las especulaciones más populares lo relacionan con la audición espacial de una forma u otra. La mayoría de las especies de peces y anfibios poseen un sistema de línea lateral que detecta ondas de presión en el agua.

Una de las áreas del cerebro que recibe información primaria del órgano de la línea lateral, el núcleo octavolateral medial, tiene una estructura similar al cerebelo, con células granulares y fibras paralelas.

En los peces electrosensibles, la entrada del sistema electrosensorial va al núcleo octavolateral dorsal, que también tiene una estructura similar al cerebelo.

En los peces con aletas radiadas (con mucho, el grupo más grande), el techo óptico tiene una capa, la capa marginal, que es similar al cerebelo. Todas estas estructuras similares al cerebelo parecen estar principalmente relacionadas con los sentidos más que con el motor.

Todos ellos tienen células granulares que dan lugar a fibras paralelas que se conectan a neuronas tipo Purkinje con sinapsis modificables, pero ninguno tiene fibras trepadoras comparables a las del cerebelo; en cambio, reciben información directa de los órganos sensoriales periféricos.

Ninguno tiene una función demostrada, pero la especulación más influyente es que sirven para transformar las entradas sensoriales de alguna manera sofisticada, tal vez para compensar los cambios en la postura del cuerpo.

De hecho, James M.

Bower y otros han argumentado, en parte sobre la base de estas estructuras y en parte sobre la base de estudios del cerebelo, que el cerebelo en sí mismo es fundamentalmente una estructura sensorial y que contribuye al control motor al mover el cuerpo de una manera que controla el resultado. señales sensoriales.

A pesar del punto de vista de Bower, también hay pruebas sólidas de que el cerebelo influye directamente en la actividad motora de los mamíferos.


== Historia ==



=== Descripciones ===

Incluso los primeros anatomistas pudieron reconocer el cerebelo por su apariencia distintiva.

Aristóteles y Herófilo (citado en Galeno) lo llamaron παρεγκεφαλίς (parenkephalis), en oposición a ἐγκέφαλος (enkephalos) o cerebro propiamente dicho.

La extensa descripción de Galen es la más antigua que se conserva.

Especuló que el cerebelo era la fuente de los nervios motores. No se produjeron más desarrollos significativos hasta el Renacimiento.

Vesalius discutió brevemente el cerebelo, y Thomas Willis describió la anatomía más a fondo en 1664.

Se realizaron más trabajos anatómicos durante el siglo XVIII, pero no fue hasta principios del siglo XIX que se obtuvieron los primeros conocimientos sobre la función del cerebelo.

Luigi Rolando en 1809 estableció el hallazgo clave de que el daño al cerebelo produce alteraciones motoras.

Jean Pierre Flourens en la primera mitad del siglo XIX llevó a cabo un detallado trabajo experimental, que reveló que los animales con daño cerebeloso aún pueden moverse, pero con pérdida de coordinación (movimientos extraños, marcha torpe y debilidad muscular), y que la recuperación después de la lesión puede ser casi completa a menos que la lesión sea muy extensa.

A principios del siglo XX, se aceptaba ampliamente que la función principal del cerebelo se relaciona con el control motor; la primera mitad del siglo XX produjo varias descripciones detalladas de los síntomas clínicos asociados con la enfermedad cerebelosa en humanos.


=== Etimología ===

El nombre cerebellum es un diminutivo de cerebrum (cerebro); se puede traducir literalmente como cerebro pequeño.

El nombre en latín es una traducción directa del griego antiguo παρεγκεφαλίς (parenkephalis), que se utilizó en las obras de Aristóteles, el primer escritor conocido que describió la estructura.

No se usa ningún otro nombre en la literatura en inglés, pero históricamente se han usado una variedad de nombres derivados del griego o del latín, incluidos cerebrum parvum, encephalion, encranion, cerebrum posterius y parencephalis.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cerebelo

;;;PT;;;



CEREBELO


O cerebelo (latim para "pequeno cérebro") é uma característica importante do rombencéfalo de todos os vertebrados.

Embora geralmente menor que o cérebro, em alguns animais, como os peixes mormirídeos, pode ser tão grande ou até maior.

Em humanos, o cerebelo desempenha um papel importante no controle motor.

Também pode estar envolvido em algumas funções cognitivas, como atenção e linguagem, bem como controle emocional, como regular as respostas de medo e prazer, mas suas funções relacionadas ao movimento são as mais solidamente estabelecidas.

O cerebelo humano não inicia o movimento, mas contribui para a coordenação, precisão e tempo exato: recebe informações dos sistemas sensoriais da medula espinhal e de outras partes do cérebro e integra essas entradas para ajustar a atividade motora.

A lesão cerebelar produz distúrbios nos movimentos finos, equilíbrio, postura e aprendizagem motora em humanos.

Sua superfície cortical é coberta por sulcos paralelos finamente espaçados, em contraste marcante com as amplas circunvoluções irregulares do córtex cerebral.

Esses sulcos paralelos escondem o fato de que o córtex cerebelar é na verdade uma fina camada contínua de tecido bem dobrado no estilo de um acordeão.

Dentro dessa fina camada estão vários tipos de neurônios com um arranjo altamente regular, sendo os mais importantes as células de Purkinje e as células granulares.

Essa organização neural complexa dá origem a uma enorme capacidade de processamento de sinal, mas quase toda a saída do córtex cerebelar passa por um conjunto de pequenos núcleos profundos situados no interior da substância branca do cerebelo. controle, o cerebelo é necessário para vários tipos de aprendizagem motora, principalmente aprender a se ajustar às mudanças nas relações sensório-motoras.

Vários modelos teóricos foram desenvolvidos para explicar a calibração sensório-motora em termos de plasticidade sináptica dentro do cerebelo.

Esses modelos derivam daqueles formulados por David Marr e James Albus, baseados na observação de que cada célula cerebelar de Purkinje recebe dois tipos dramaticamente diferentes de entrada: um compreende milhares de entradas fracas das fibras paralelas das células granulares; o outro é uma entrada extremamente forte de uma única fibra de escalada.

O conceito básico da teoria de Marr-Albus é que a fibra de escalada serve como um "sinal de ensino", que induz uma mudança duradoura na força das entradas de fibra paralela.

Observações de depressão de longo prazo em entradas de fibras paralelas forneceram algum suporte para teorias desse tipo, mas sua validade permanece controversa.


== Estrutura ==


No nível da anatomia macroscópica, o cerebelo consiste em uma camada de córtex bem dobrada, com substância branca por baixo e um ventrículo cheio de líquido na base.

Quatro núcleos cerebelares profundos estão embutidos na substância branca.

Cada parte do córtex consiste no mesmo pequeno conjunto de elementos neuronais, dispostos em uma geometria altamente estereotipada.

Em um nível intermediário, o cerebelo e suas estruturas auxiliares podem ser separados em várias centenas ou milhares de módulos de funcionamento independente chamados "microzonas" ou "microcompartimentos".


=== Anatomia geral ===


O cerebelo está localizado na fossa posterior do crânio.

O quarto ventrículo, ponte e medula estão na frente do cerebelo.

É separado do cérebro sobrejacente por uma camada de dura-máter coriácea, o tentório do cerebelo; todas as suas conexões com outras partes do cérebro viajam pela ponte.

Os anatomistas classificam o cerebelo como parte do metencéfalo, que também inclui a ponte; o metencéfalo é a parte superior do rombencéfalo ou "rombencéfalo".

Como o córtex cerebral, o cerebelo é dividido em dois hemisférios cerebelares; ele também contém uma zona de linha média estreita (o vermis).

Um conjunto de grandes dobras é, por convenção, usado para dividir a estrutura geral em 10 "lóbulos" menores.

Devido ao seu grande número de pequenas células granulares, o cerebelo contém mais neurônios do que o total do resto do cérebro, mas ocupa apenas 10% do volume total do cérebro.

O número de neurônios no cerebelo está relacionado ao número de neurônios no neocórtex.

Existem cerca de 3,6 vezes mais neurônios no cerebelo do que no neocórtex, uma proporção que é conservada em muitas espécies diferentes de mamíferos. camada de substância cinzenta: o córtex cerebelar.

Cada crista ou giro nesta camada é chamado de fólio.

Estima-se que, se o córtex cerebelar humano fosse completamente desdobrado, daria origem a uma camada de tecido neural com cerca de 1 metro de comprimento e uma média de 5 centímetros de largura – uma área de superfície total de cerca de 500 cm quadrados, compactada dentro de um volume de dimensões. 6cm × 5cm × 10cm.

Debaixo da substância cinzenta do córtex está a substância branca, composta em grande parte por fibras nervosas mielinizadas que vão e saem do córtex.

Embutidos na substância branca - que às vezes é chamada de arbor vitae (árvore da vida) por causa de sua aparência ramificada e semelhante a uma árvore em seção transversal - estão quatro núcleos cerebelares profundos, compostos de substância cinzenta. Conectando o cerebelo a diferentes partes do cerebelo o sistema nervoso são três pedúnculos cerebelares emparelhados.

Estes são o pedúnculo cerebelar superior, o pedúnculo cerebelar médio e o pedúnculo cerebelar inferior, denominados por sua posição em relação ao vermis.

O pedúnculo cerebelar superior é principalmente uma saída para o córtex cerebral, transportando fibras eferentes via núcleos talâmicos para os neurônios motores superiores no córtex cerebral.

As fibras originam-se dos núcleos cerebelares profundos.

O pedúnculo cerebelar médio está conectado à ponte e recebe toda a sua entrada da ponte principalmente dos núcleos pontinos.

A entrada para a ponte vem do córtex cerebral e é retransmitida dos núcleos pontinos através de fibras pontinas transversais para o cerebelo.

O pedúnculo médio é o maior dos três e suas fibras aferentes são agrupadas em três fascículos separados levando suas entradas para diferentes partes do cerebelo.

O pedúnculo cerebelar inferior recebe aferências de fibras aferentes dos núcleos vestibulares, medula espinhal e tegmento.

A saída do pedúnculo inferior é via fibras eferentes para os núcleos vestibulares e a formação reticular.

Todo o cerebelo recebe aferências modulatórias do núcleo olivar inferior através do pedúnculo cerebelar inferior.


==== Subdivisões ====

Com base na aparência da superfície, três lobos podem ser distinguidos dentro do cerebelo: o lobo anterior (acima da fissura primária), o lobo posterior (abaixo da fissura primária) e o lobo floculonodular (abaixo da fissura posterior).

Esses lobos dividem o cerebelo de rostral para caudal (nos humanos, de cima para baixo).

Em termos de função, no entanto, há uma distinção mais importante ao longo da dimensão medial-lateral.

Deixando de fora o lobo floculonodular, que tem conexões e funções distintas, o cerebelo pode ser analisado funcionalmente em um setor medial chamado espinocerebelo e um setor lateral maior chamado cerebrocerebelo.

Uma faixa estreita de tecido saliente ao longo da linha média é chamada de vermis cerebelar. (Vermis é latim para "verme".) A menor região, o lobo floculonodular, é frequentemente chamada de vestibulocerebelo.

É a parte mais antiga em termos evolutivos (arquicerebelo) e participa principalmente do equilíbrio e orientação espacial; suas conexões primárias são com os núcleos vestibulares, embora também receba estímulos visuais e outros estímulos sensoriais.

A lesão dessa região causa distúrbios do equilíbrio e da marcha. A zona medial dos lobos anterior e posterior constitui o espinocerebelo, também conhecido como paleocerebelo.

Este setor do cerebelo funciona principalmente para ajustar os movimentos do corpo e dos membros.

Ele recebe informações proprioceptivas das colunas dorsais da medula espinhal (incluindo o trato espinocerebelar) e do nervo trigêmeo craniano, bem como dos sistemas visual e auditivo.

Envia fibras para os núcleos cerebelares profundos que, por sua vez, projetam-se tanto para o córtex cerebral quanto para o tronco encefálico, proporcionando modulação dos sistemas motores descendentes. conhecido como neocerebelo.

Ele recebe informações exclusivamente do córtex cerebral (especialmente do lobo parietal) através dos núcleos pontinos (formando vias córtico-ponto-cerebelares) e envia saídas principalmente para o tálamo ventrolateral (por sua vez conectado a áreas motoras do córtex pré-motor e motor primário). área do córtex cerebral) e para o núcleo vermelho.

Há discordância sobre a melhor maneira de descrever as funções do cerebelo lateral: acredita-se que ele esteja envolvido no planejamento do movimento que está prestes a ocorrer, na avaliação da informação sensorial para ação e em várias funções puramente cognitivas, como determinar o verbo que melhor se encaixa com um certo substantivo (como em "sentar" para "cadeira").


=== Microanatomia ===

Dois tipos de neurônios desempenham papéis dominantes no circuito cerebelar: células de Purkinje e células granulares.

Três tipos de axônios também desempenham papéis dominantes: fibras musgosas e fibras trepadeiras (que entram no cerebelo por fora) e fibras paralelas (que são os axônios das células granulares).

Existem duas vias principais através do circuito cerebelar, originando-se das fibras musgosas e das fibras trepadeiras, ambas terminando eventualmente nos núcleos cerebelares profundos. → fibras paralelas → células de Purkinje → núcleos profundos.

As fibras trepadeiras projetam-se para as células de Purkinje e também enviam colaterais diretamente para os núcleos profundos.

As entradas de fibra musgosa e fibra trepadeira carregam informações específicas da fibra; o cerebelo também recebe aferências dopaminérgicas, serotoninérgicas, noradrenérgicas e colinérgicas que presumivelmente realizam a modulação global. O córtex cerebelar é dividido em três camadas.

Na parte inferior encontra-se a camada granular espessa, densamente empacotada com células granulares, juntamente com interneurônios, principalmente células de Golgi, mas também incluindo células de Lugaro e células em escova unipolar.

No meio encontra-se a camada de Purkinje, uma zona estreita que contém os corpos celulares das células de Purkinje e das células da glia de Bergmann.

No topo está a camada molecular, que contém as árvores dendríticas achatadas das células de Purkinje, juntamente com a enorme variedade de fibras paralelas que penetram nas árvores dendríticas das células de Purkinje em ângulos retos.

Essa camada mais externa do córtex cerebelar também contém dois tipos de interneurônios inibitórios: células estreladas e células em cesta.

Ambas as células estreladas e cesta formam sinapses GABAérgicas em dendritos das células de Purkinje.


==== Camada molecular ====
A camada superior e mais externa do córtex cerebelar é a camada molecular.

Essa camada contém as árvores dendríticas achatadas das células de Purkinje e a enorme variedade de fibras paralelas, da camada granular, que penetram nas árvores dendríticas das células de Purkinje em ângulos retos.

A camada molecular também contém dois tipos de interneurônios inibitórios: células estreladas e células em cesta.

Ambas as células estreladas e cesta formam sinapses GABAérgicas em dendritos das células de Purkinje.


==== Camada de Purkinje ====

As células de Purkinje estão entre os neurônios mais distintos do cérebro e um dos primeiros tipos a serem reconhecidos – elas foram descritas pela primeira vez pelo anatomista tcheco Jan Evangelista Purkyně em 1837.

Eles se distinguem pela forma de sua árvore dendrítica: os dendritos se ramificam muito profusamente, mas são severamente achatados em um plano perpendicular às pregas cerebelares.

Assim, os dendritos de uma célula de Purkinje formam uma densa rede planar, através da qual as fibras paralelas passam em ângulos retos.

Os dendritos são cobertos por espinhos dendríticos, cada um dos quais recebe entrada sináptica de uma fibra paralela.

As células de Purkinje recebem mais entradas sinápticas do que qualquer outro tipo de célula no cérebro – as estimativas do número de espinhas em uma única célula de Purkinje humana chegam a 200.000.

Os grandes corpos celulares esféricos das células de Purkinje são empacotados em uma camada estreita (uma célula de espessura) do córtex cerebelar, chamada camada de Purkinje.

Depois de emitir colaterais que afetam partes próximas do córtex, seus axônios viajam para os núcleos cerebelares profundos, onde fazem cerca de 1.000 contatos cada um com vários tipos de células nucleares, todas dentro de um pequeno domínio.

As células de Purkinje usam GABA como seu neurotransmissor e, portanto, exercem efeitos inibitórios sobre seus alvos. técnicas de gravação.

As células de Purkinje normalmente emitem potenciais de ação em alta taxa, mesmo na ausência da entrada sináptica.

Em animais acordados e se comportando, as taxas médias em torno de 40 Hz são típicas.

Os trens de espigões mostram uma mistura do que são chamados de espigões simples e complexos.

Um pico simples é um único potencial de ação seguido por um período refratário de cerca de 10 ms; um pico complexo é uma sequência estereotipada de potenciais de ação com intervalos entre picos muito curtos e amplitudes decrescentes.

Estudos fisiológicos mostraram que picos complexos (que ocorrem em taxas de linha de base em torno de 1 Hz e nunca em taxas muito superiores a 10 Hz) são associados de forma confiável à ativação de fibras trepadeiras, enquanto picos simples são produzidos por uma combinação de atividade de linha de base e entrada paralela de fibras.

Os picos complexos são frequentemente seguidos por uma pausa de várias centenas de milissegundos durante a qual a atividade de pico simples é suprimida. Uma característica específica e reconhecível dos neurônios de Purkinje é a expressão de calbindina.

A coloração com calbindina de cérebro de rato após lesão unilateral crônica do nervo ciático sugere que os neurônios de Purkinje podem ser recém-gerados no cérebro adulto, iniciando a organização de novos lóbulos cerebelares.


==== Camada granular ====

As células granulares cerebelares, em contraste com as células de Purkinje, estão entre os menores neurônios do cérebro.

Eles também são os neurônios mais numerosos do cérebro: em humanos, as estimativas de seu número total são em média em torno de 50 bilhões, o que significa que cerca de 3/4 dos neurônios do cérebro são células granulares cerebelares.

Seus corpos celulares são empacotados em uma camada espessa na parte inferior do córtex cerebelar.

Uma célula granular emite apenas quatro a cinco dendritos, cada um dos quais termina em um alargamento chamado garra dendrítica.

Esses alargamentos são locais de estímulos excitatórios das fibras musgosas e estímulos inibitórios das células de Golgi. formar uma fibra paralela; a divisão do ramo vertical em dois ramos horizontais dá origem a uma forma distinta de "T".

Uma fibra paralela humana corre por uma média de 3 mm em cada direção da divisão, para um comprimento total de cerca de 6 mm (cerca de 1/10 da largura total da camada cortical).

À medida que correm, as fibras paralelas passam pelas árvores dendríticas das células de Purkinje, entrando em contato com uma em cada 3 a 5 por onde passam, perfazendo um total de 80 a 100 conexões sinápticas com os espinhos dendríticos das células de Purkinje.

As células granulares usam o glutamato como seu neurotransmissor e, portanto, exercem efeitos excitatórios em seus alvos.

As células granulares recebem toda a sua entrada de fibras musgosas, mas superam-nas em 200 para 1 (em humanos).

Assim, a informação no estado de atividade da população de células granulares é a mesma que a informação nas fibras musgosas, mas recodificado de uma forma muito mais expansiva.

Como as células granulares são tão pequenas e tão densamente compactadas, é difícil registrar sua atividade de pico em animais em comportamento, portanto, há poucos dados para usar como base para a teorização.

O conceito mais popular de sua função foi proposto em 1969 por David Marr, que sugeriu que eles poderiam codificar combinações de entradas de fibra musgosa.

A ideia é que, com cada célula granular recebendo entrada de apenas 4 a 5 fibras musgosas, uma célula granular não responderia se apenas uma de suas entradas estivesse ativa, mas responderia se mais de uma estivesse ativa.

Esse esquema de codificação combinatória potencialmente permitiria ao cerebelo fazer distinções muito mais sutis entre os padrões de entrada do que as fibras musgosas sozinhas permitiriam.


==== Fibras musgosas ====
As fibras musgosas entram na camada granular a partir de seus pontos de origem, muitas originando-se dos núcleos pontinos, outras da medula espinhal, núcleos vestibulares, etc.

No cerebelo humano, o número total de fibras musgosas foi estimado em cerca de 200 milhões.

Essas fibras formam sinapses excitatórias com as células granulares e as células dos núcleos cerebelares profundos.

Dentro da camada granular, uma fibra musgosa gera uma série de ampliações chamadas rosetas.

Os contatos entre as fibras musgosas e os dendritos das células granulares ocorrem dentro de estruturas chamadas glomérulos.

Cada glomérulo tem uma roseta de fibra musgosa em seu centro e até 20 garras dendríticas de células granulares em contato com ele.

Os terminais das células de Golgi se infiltram na estrutura e fazem sinapses inibitórias nos dendritos das células granulares.

Todo o conjunto é cercado por uma bainha de células gliais.

Cada fibra musgosa envia ramos colaterais para várias folias cerebelares, gerando um total de 20 a 30 rosetas; assim, uma única fibra musgosa entra em contato com cerca de 400-600 células granulares.


==== Fibras de escalada ====
As células de Purkinje também recebem informações do núcleo olivar inferior no lado contralateral do tronco encefálico por meio de fibras trepadeiras.

Embora a oliva inferior esteja na medula oblonga e receba informações da medula espinhal, tronco cerebral e córtex cerebral, sua saída vai inteiramente para o cerebelo.

Uma fibra trepadeira emite colaterais para os núcleos cerebelares profundos antes de entrar no córtex cerebelar, onde se divide em cerca de 10 ramos terminais, cada um dos quais dá entrada a uma única célula de Purkinje.

Em contraste marcante com as mais de 100.000 entradas de fibras paralelas, cada célula de Purkinje recebe entrada de exatamente uma fibra trepadeira; mas essa única fibra "sobe" os dendritos da célula de Purkinje, enrolando-se em torno deles e fazendo um total de até 300 sinapses.

A entrada líquida é tão forte que um único potencial de ação de uma fibra trepadeira é capaz de produzir um pico complexo estendido na célula de Purkinje: uma explosão de vários picos seguidos, com amplitude decrescente, seguido por uma pausa durante a qual a atividade é suprimida .

As sinapses das fibras trepadeiras cobrem o corpo celular e os dendritos proximais; esta zona é desprovida de entradas de fibras paralelas. As fibras trepadeiras disparam em baixas taxas, mas um único potencial de ação da fibra trepante induz uma explosão de vários potenciais de ação em uma célula alvo de Purkinje (um pico complexo).

O contraste entre fibras paralelas e fibras de escalada nas células de Purkinje (mais de 100.000 de um tipo versus exatamente um do outro tipo) é talvez a característica mais provocativa da anatomia cerebelar e motivou grande parte da teorização.

De fato, a função das fibras trepadeiras é o tópico mais controverso no que diz respeito ao cerebelo.

Existem duas escolas de pensamento, uma seguindo Marr e Albus ao sustentar que a entrada de fibra de escalada serve principalmente como um sinal de ensino, a outra sustenta que sua função é moldar a saída cerebelar diretamente.

Ambos os pontos de vista têm sido amplamente defendidos em inúmeras publicações.

Nas palavras de uma revisão, "Ao tentar sintetizar as várias hipóteses sobre a função das fibras trepadeiras, tem-se a sensação de olhar para um desenho de Escher.

Cada ponto de vista parece dar conta de uma certa coleção de achados, mas quando se tenta juntar as diferentes visões, não aparece uma imagem coerente do que as fibras trepadeiras estão fazendo.

Para a maioria dos pesquisadores, as fibras trepadeiras sinalizam erros no desempenho motor, seja na forma usual de modulação da frequência de descarga ou como um único anúncio de um 'evento inesperado'.

Para outros pesquisadores, a mensagem está no grau de sincronia e ritmicidade do conjunto entre uma população de fibras de escalada."


==== Núcleos profundos ====

Os núcleos profundos do cerebelo são aglomerados de substância cinzenta que se encontram dentro da substância branca no centro do cerebelo.

Eles são, com a menor exceção dos núcleos vestibulares próximos, as únicas fontes de saída do cerebelo.

Esses núcleos recebem projeções colaterais de fibras musgosas e fibras trepadeiras, bem como estímulos inibitórios das células de Purkinje do córtex cerebelar.

Os quatro núcleos (dentado, globoso, emboliforme e fastigial) comunicam-se cada um com diferentes partes do cérebro e do córtex cerebelar. (Os núcleos globoso e emboliforme também são referidos como combinados no núcleo interposto).

Os núcleos fastigial e interposto pertencem ao espinocerebelo.

O núcleo denteado, que nos mamíferos é muito maior que os demais, é formado como uma camada fina e convoluta de substância cinzenta e comunica-se exclusivamente com as partes laterais do córtex cerebelar.

O flóculo do lobo floculonodular é a única parte do córtex cerebelar que não se projeta para os núcleos profundos – sua saída vai para os núcleos vestibulares. raio de cerca de 400 μm, e usam glutamato como seu neurotransmissor.

Essas células se projetam para uma variedade de alvos fora do cerebelo.

Entre eles estão um número menor de células pequenas, que usam o GABA como neurotransmissor e se projetam exclusivamente para o núcleo olivar inferior, fonte das fibras trepadeiras.

Assim, a projeção nucleo-olivar fornece um feedback inibitório para combinar a projeção excitatória das fibras trepadeiras para os núcleos.

Há evidências de que cada pequeno aglomerado de células nucleares se projeta para o mesmo aglomerado de células olivares que enviam fibras trepadeiras para ele; há topografia forte e compatível em ambas as direções. Quando um axônio de uma célula de Purkinje entra em um dos núcleos profundos, ele se ramifica para fazer contato com células nucleares grandes e pequenas, mas o número total de células contatadas é de apenas 35 (em gatos) .

Por outro lado, uma única célula nuclear profunda recebe entrada de aproximadamente 860 células de Purkinje (novamente em gatos).


==== Compartimentos ====

Do ponto de vista da anatomia macroscópica, o córtex cerebelar parece ser uma lâmina homogênea de tecido e, do ponto de vista da microanatomia, todas as partes dessa lâmina parecem ter a mesma estrutura interna.

Há, no entanto, vários aspectos em que a estrutura do cerebelo é compartimentada.

Existem grandes compartimentos que são geralmente conhecidos como zonas; estas podem ser divididas em compartimentos menores conhecidos como microzonas. As primeiras indicações de estrutura compartimental vieram de estudos dos campos receptivos das células em várias partes do córtex cerebelar.

Cada parte do corpo mapeia para pontos específicos no cerebelo, mas há inúmeras repetições do mapa básico, formando um arranjo que tem sido chamado de "somatotopia fraturada".

Uma indicação mais clara de compartimentalização é obtida por imunocoloração do cerebelo para certos tipos de proteína.

Os mais conhecidos desses marcadores são chamados de "zebrins", porque a coloração para eles dá origem a um padrão complexo que lembra as listras de uma zebra.

As listras geradas pelas zebrinas e outros marcadores de compartimentalização são orientadas perpendicularmente às pregas cerebelares, ou seja, são estreitas na direção mediolateral, mas muito mais estendidas na direção longitudinal.

Diferentes marcadores geram diferentes conjuntos de faixas, as larguras e comprimentos variam em função da localização, mas todos têm a mesma forma geral. Oscarsson, no final da década de 1970, propôs que essas zonas corticais pudessem ser particionadas em unidades menores chamadas microzonas.

Uma microzona é definida como um grupo de células de Purkinje, todas com o mesmo campo receptivo somatotópico.

As microzonas continham cerca de 1.000 células de Purkinje cada, dispostas em uma faixa longa e estreita, orientada perpendicularmente às dobras corticais.

Assim, como ilustra o diagrama ao lado, os dendritos das células de Purkinje são achatados na mesma direção em que as microzonas se estendem, enquanto as fibras paralelas as cruzam em ângulos retos. núcleo olivar é igualmente importante.

Os ramos de uma fibra trepadeira (geralmente cerca de 10) geralmente ativam as células de Purkinje pertencentes à mesma microzona.

Além disso, os neurônios olivares que enviam fibras de escalada para a mesma microzona tendem a ser acoplados por junções comunicantes, que sincronizam sua atividade, fazendo com que as células de Purkinje dentro de uma microzona mostrem atividade de pico complexa correlacionada em uma escala de tempo de milissegundos.

Além disso, todas as células de Purkinje pertencentes a uma microzona enviam seus axônios para o mesmo pequeno aglomerado de células de saída dentro dos núcleos cerebelares profundos.

Finalmente, os axônios das células em cesta são muito mais longos na direção longitudinal do que na direção mediolateral, fazendo com que fiquem confinados em grande parte a uma única microzona.

A consequência de toda essa estrutura é que as interações celulares dentro de uma microzona são muito mais fortes do que as interações entre diferentes microzonas.

Esse microcomplexo inclui várias microzonas corticais espacialmente separadas, todas as quais se projetam para o mesmo grupo de neurônios cerebelares profundos, além de um grupo de neurônios olivares acoplados que se projetam para todas as microzonas incluídas, bem como para a área nuclear profunda.


=== Suprimento sanguíneo ===

O cerebelo recebe sangue de três artérias principais pareadas: a artéria cerebelar superior (SCA), a artéria cerebelar inferior anterior (AICA) e a artéria cerebelar inferior posterior (PICA).

O SCA supre a região superior do cerebelo.

Divide-se na superfície superior e se ramifica na pia-máter, onde os ramos se anastomosam com os das artérias cerebelares inferiores anterior e posterior.

A AICA supre a parte frontal da superfície inferior do cerebelo.

A PICA chega à superfície inferior, onde se divide em um ramo medial e um ramo lateral.

O ramo medial continua para trás até a incisura cerebelar entre os dois hemisférios do cerebelo; enquanto o ramo lateral supre a face inferior do cerebelo, até sua borda lateral, onde se anastomosa com a AICA e a SCA.


== Função ==

As pistas mais fortes para a função do cerebelo vieram do exame das consequências de danos a ele.

Animais e humanos com disfunção cerebelar apresentam, sobretudo, problemas de controle motor, no mesmo lado do corpo que a parte danificada do cerebelo.

Eles continuam a ser capazes de gerar atividade motora, mas perdem a precisão, produzindo movimentos erráticos, descoordenados ou cronometrados incorretamente.

Um teste padrão da função cerebelar é alcançar com a ponta do dedo um alvo no comprimento do braço: uma pessoa saudável moverá a ponta do dedo em uma trajetória rápida e reta, enquanto uma pessoa com lesão cerebelar alcançará lenta e irregularmente, com muitos movimentos -correções de curso.

Déficits nas funções não motoras são mais difíceis de detectar.

Assim, a conclusão geral alcançada décadas atrás é que a função básica do cerebelo é calibrar a forma detalhada de um movimento, não iniciar movimentos ou decidir quais movimentos executar. Acredita-se que seja puramente relacionado ao motor, mas descobertas mais recentes trouxeram essa visão em questão.

Estudos de imagem funcional mostraram ativação cerebelar em relação à linguagem, atenção e imagens mentais; estudos de correlação mostraram interações entre o cerebelo e áreas não motoras do córtex cerebral; e uma variedade de sintomas não motores foram reconhecidos em pessoas com danos que parecem estar confinados ao cerebelo.

Em particular, a síndrome afetiva cognitiva cerebelar ou síndrome de Schmahmann foi descrita em adultos e crianças.

Estimativas baseadas no mapeamento funcional do cerebelo usando ressonância magnética funcional sugerem que mais da metade do córtex cerebelar está interconectado com zonas de associação do córtex cerebral. mas as computações neurais que ele realiza; o cerebelo consiste em um grande número de módulos mais ou menos independentes, todos com a mesma estrutura interna geometricamente regular e, portanto, todos, presume-se, realizando a mesma computação.

Se as conexões de entrada e saída de um módulo estiverem com áreas de motor (como muitas), então o módulo estará envolvido no comportamento do motor; mas, se as conexões forem com áreas envolvidas na cognição não motora, o módulo mostrará outros tipos de correlatos comportamentais.

Assim, o cerebelo tem sido implicado na regulação de muitos traços funcionais diferentes, como afeto, emoção e comportamento.

O cerebelo, propõe Doya, é melhor entendido como seleção de ação preditiva baseada em "modelos internos" do ambiente ou um dispositivo para aprendizado supervisionado, em contraste com os gânglios da base, que realizam aprendizado por reforço, e o córtex cerebral, que realiza aprendizado não supervisionado .


=== Princípios ===

A simplicidade comparativa e a regularidade da anatomia cerebelar levaram a uma esperança inicial de que pudesse implicar uma simplicidade semelhante de função computacional, conforme expresso em um dos primeiros livros sobre eletrofisiologia cerebelar, The Cerebellum as a Neuronal Machine, de John C.

Eccles, Masao Ito, and János Szentágothai.

Embora uma compreensão completa da função cerebelar tenha permanecido elusiva, pelo menos quatro princípios foram identificados como importantes: (1) processamento antecipado, (2) divergência e convergência, (3) modularidade e (4) plasticidade.

Processamento feedforward: O cerebelo difere da maioria das outras partes do cérebro (especialmente o córtex cerebral) em que o processamento do sinal é quase inteiramente feedforward – ou seja, os sinais se movem unidirecionalmente através do sistema da entrada para a saída, com muito pouca transmissão interna recorrente.

A pequena quantidade de recorrência que existe consiste em inibição mútua; não há circuitos mutuamente excitatórios.

Esse modo de operação feedforward significa que o cerebelo, em contraste com o córtex cerebral, não pode gerar padrões autossustentáveis ​​de atividade neural.

Os sinais entram no circuito, são processados ​​por cada estágio em ordem sequencial e depois saem.

Como Eccles, Ito e Szentágothai escreveram: "Esta eliminação no desenho de toda possibilidade de cadeias reverberativas de excitação neuronal é, sem dúvida, uma grande vantagem no desempenho do cerebelo como um computador, porque o que o resto do sistema nervoso requer do O cerebelo não é presumivelmente uma saída que expressa a operação de circuitos reverberatórios complexos no cerebelo, mas sim uma resposta rápida e clara à entrada de qualquer conjunto específico de informações".
Divergência e convergência: No cerebelo humano, as informações de 200 milhões de entradas de fibras musgosas são expandidas para 40 bilhões de células granulares, cujas saídas de fibras paralelas convergem para 15 milhões de células de Purkinje.

Devido à maneira como estão alinhadas longitudinalmente, as cerca de 1.000 células de Purkinje pertencentes a uma microzona podem receber entrada de até 100 milhões de fibras paralelas e concentrar sua própria saída em um grupo de menos de 50 células nucleares profundas.

Assim, a rede cerebelar recebe um número modesto de entradas, processa-as amplamente por meio de sua rede interna rigorosamente estruturada e envia os resultados por meio de um número muito limitado de células de saída.
Modularidade: O sistema cerebelar é funcionalmente dividido em módulos mais ou menos independentes, que provavelmente são de centenas a milhares.

Todos os módulos têm uma estrutura interna semelhante, mas entradas e saídas diferentes.

Um módulo (um microcompartimento multizonal na terminologia de Apps e Garwicz) consiste em um pequeno aglomerado de neurônios no núcleo olivar inferior, um conjunto de tiras longas e estreitas de células de Purkinje no córtex cerebelar (microzonas) e um pequeno aglomerado de neurônios em um dos núcleos cerebelares profundos.

Módulos diferentes compartilham a entrada de fibras com musgo e fibras paralelas, mas em outros aspectos eles parecem funcionar de forma independente – a saída de um módulo não parece influenciar significativamente a atividade de outros módulos.
Plasticidade: As sinapses entre as fibras paralelas e as células de Purkinje, e as sinapses entre as fibras musgosas e as células nucleares profundas, são ambas suscetíveis à modificação de sua força.

Em um único módulo cerebelar, a entrada de até um bilhão de fibras paralelas converge para um grupo de menos de 50 células nucleares profundas, e a influência de cada fibra paralela nessas células nucleares é ajustável.

Esse arranjo oferece uma tremenda flexibilidade para ajustar a relação entre as entradas e saídas do cerebelo.


=== Aprendendo ===

Há evidências consideráveis ​​de que o cerebelo desempenha um papel essencial em alguns tipos de aprendizagem motora.

As tarefas em que o cerebelo mais claramente entra em ação são aquelas em que é necessário fazer ajustes finos na maneira como uma ação é executada.

No entanto, tem havido muita controvérsia sobre se o aprendizado ocorre dentro do próprio cerebelo ou se serve apenas para fornecer sinais que promovem o aprendizado em outras estruturas cerebrais.

A maioria das teorias que atribuem o aprendizado aos circuitos do cerebelo são derivadas das ideias de David Marr e James Albus, que postularam que as fibras trepadeiras fornecem um sinal de ensino que induz a modificação sináptica em sinapses paralelas de fibras-células de Purkinje.

Marr assumiu que a entrada de fibra ascendente faria com que as entradas de fibra paralela ativadas de forma síncrona fossem reforçadas.

A maioria dos modelos subsequentes de aprendizado cerebelar, no entanto, seguiram Albus ao assumir que a atividade da fibra ascendente seria um sinal de erro e faria com que as entradas de fibra paralela ativadas de forma síncrona fossem enfraquecidas.

Alguns desses modelos posteriores, como o modelo de Filtro Adaptativo de Fujita, tentaram entender a função cerebelar em termos de teoria de controle ótimo.
A ideia de que a atividade da fibra de escalada funciona como um sinal de erro foi examinada em muitos estudos experimentais, com alguns apoiando-a, mas outros lançando dúvidas.

Em um estudo pioneiro de Gilbert e Thach de 1977, as células de Purkinje de macacos aprendendo uma tarefa de alcance mostraram aumento da atividade de pico complexo - que é conhecido por indicar de forma confiável a atividade da entrada de fibra de escalada da célula - durante períodos em que o desempenho era ruim.

Vários estudos de aprendizagem motora em gatos observaram atividade de pico complexa quando havia uma incompatibilidade entre um movimento pretendido e o movimento que foi realmente executado.

Estudos do reflexo vestíbulo-ocular (que estabiliza a imagem visual na retina quando a cabeça gira) descobriram que a atividade das fibras de escalada indicava "deslizamento retiniano", embora não de uma maneira muito direta. o paradigma de condicionamento de piscar de olhos, no qual um estímulo condicionado neutro (CS), como um tom ou uma luz, é repetidamente emparelhado com um estímulo incondicionado (US), como um sopro de ar, que provoca uma resposta de piscar.

Após essas apresentações repetidas do CS e US, o CS eventualmente provocará um piscar de olhos diante do US, uma resposta condicionada ou CR.

Experimentos mostraram que lesões localizadas em uma parte específica do núcleo interposto (um dos núcleos cerebelares profundos) ou em alguns pontos específicos no córtex cerebelar aboliriam o aprendizado de uma resposta de piscar condicionalmente cronometrada.

Se as saídas cerebelares são inativadas farmacologicamente, deixando as entradas e os circuitos intracelulares intactos, o aprendizado ocorre mesmo quando o animal não mostra qualquer resposta, enquanto que, se os circuitos intracerebelares são interrompidos, não ocorre nenhum aprendizado – esses fatos juntos tornam um forte argumento de que a aprendizagem, de fato, ocorre dentro do cerebelo.


=== Teorias e modelos computacionais ===


A grande base de conhecimento sobre a estrutura anatômica e as funções comportamentais do cerebelo o tornaram um terreno fértil para teorizações – talvez haja mais teorias sobre a função do cerebelo do que sobre qualquer outra parte do cérebro.

A distinção mais básica entre elas é entre "teorias de aprendizagem" e "teorias de desempenho" - isto é, teorias que fazem uso da plasticidade sináptica dentro do cerebelo para explicar seu papel na aprendizagem, versus teorias que explicam aspectos do comportamento em andamento no cérebro. base do processamento do sinal cerebelar.

Várias teorias de ambos os tipos foram formuladas como modelos matemáticos e simuladas usando computadores. Talvez a primeira teoria de "desempenho" tenha sido a hipótese da "linha de atraso" de Valentino Braitenberg.

A teoria original apresentada por Braitenberg e Roger Atwood em 1958 propôs que a propagação lenta de sinais ao longo de fibras paralelas impõe atrasos previsíveis que permitem ao cerebelo detectar relações de tempo dentro de uma determinada janela.

Dados experimentais não apoiaram a forma original da teoria, mas Braitenberg continuou a defender versões modificadas.

A hipótese de que o cerebelo funciona essencialmente como um sistema de tempo também foi defendida por Richard Ivry.

Outra teoria de "desempenho" influente é a teoria da rede Tensor de Pellionisz e Llinás, que forneceu uma formulação matemática avançada da ideia de que a computação fundamental realizada pelo cerebelo é transformar coordenadas sensoriais em motoras. Teorias na categoria "aprendizagem" quase todas derivam de publicações de Marr e Albus.

O artigo de Marr de 1969 propôs que o cerebelo é um dispositivo para aprender a associar movimentos elementares codificados por fibras de escalada com entradas de fibras musgosas que codificam o contexto sensorial.

Albus propôs em 1971 que uma célula cerebelar de Purkinje funciona como um perceptron, um dispositivo de aprendizado abstrato inspirado neuralmente.

A diferença mais básica entre as teorias de Marr e Albus é que Marr assumiu que a atividade das fibras ascendentes faria com que as sinapses das fibras paralelas fossem fortalecidas, enquanto Albus propôs que elas seriam enfraquecidas.

Albus também formulou sua versão como um algoritmo de software que ele chamou de CMAC (Cerebellar Model Articulation Controller), que foi testado em várias aplicações.


== Significado clínico ==


Danos ao cerebelo geralmente causam sintomas relacionados ao motor, cujos detalhes dependem da parte do cerebelo envolvida e de como ele é danificado.

A lesão do lobo floculonodular pode se manifestar como uma perda de equilíbrio e, em particular, uma marcha alterada e irregular, com uma postura ampla causada pela dificuldade de equilíbrio.

Danos na zona lateral geralmente causam problemas em movimentos voluntários e planejados qualificados que podem causar erros na força, direção, velocidade e amplitude dos movimentos.

Outras manifestações incluem hipotonia (diminuição do tônus ​​muscular), disartria (problemas com a articulação da fala), dismetria (problemas em julgar distâncias ou amplitudes de movimento), disdiadococinesia (incapacidade de realizar movimentos alternados rápidos, como caminhar), reflexo de checagem prejudicado ou fenômeno de rebote e tremor de intenção (movimento involuntário causado por contrações alternadas de grupos musculares opostos).

Danos na porção da linha média podem atrapalhar os movimentos de todo o corpo, enquanto danos localizados mais lateralmente são mais propensos a atrapalhar os movimentos finos das mãos ou membros.

Danos na parte superior do cerebelo tendem a causar deficiências na marcha e outros problemas com a coordenação das pernas; danos na parte inferior são mais propensos a causar movimentos descoordenados ou mal direcionados dos braços e mãos, bem como dificuldades de velocidade.

Esse complexo de sintomas motores é chamado de ataxia.
Para identificar problemas cerebelares, o exame neurológico inclui avaliação da marcha (uma marcha ampla que indica ataxia), testes de apontar o dedo e avaliação da postura.

Se houver indicação de disfunção cerebelar, uma ressonância magnética pode ser usada para obter uma imagem detalhada de quaisquer alterações estruturais que possam existir. edema cerebral), tumores, alcoolismo, traumas físicos, como ferimentos por arma de fogo ou explosivos, e doenças crônico-degenerativas, como atrofia olivopontocerebelar.

Algumas formas de enxaqueca também podem produzir disfunção temporária do cerebelo, de gravidade variável.

A infecção pode resultar em danos cerebelares em condições como as doenças priônicas e a síndrome de Miller Fisher, uma variante da síndrome de Guillain-Barré.


=== Envelhecimento ===

O cerebelo humano muda com a idade.

Essas alterações podem diferir das de outras partes do cérebro.
O cerebelo é a região do cérebro mais jovem (e parte do corpo) em centenários de acordo com um biomarcador epigenético de idade do tecido conhecido como relógio epigenético: é cerca de 15 anos mais jovem do que o esperado em um centenário.

Além disso, os padrões de expressão gênica no cerebelo humano mostram menos alterações relacionadas à idade do que no córtex cerebral.
Alguns estudos relataram reduções no número de células ou no volume de tecido, mas a quantidade de dados relativos a essa questão não é muito grande.


=== Distúrbios do desenvolvimento e degenerativos ===


Malformações congênitas, distúrbios hereditários e condições adquiridas podem afetar a estrutura cerebelar e, consequentemente, a função cerebelar.

A menos que a condição causadora seja reversível, o único tratamento possível é ajudar as pessoas a conviver com seus problemas.

A visualização do cerebelo fetal por ultrassonografia em 18 a 20 semanas de gravidez pode ser usada para rastrear defeitos do tubo neural fetal com uma taxa de sensibilidade de até 99%. progenitores (CGNPs) na camada externa de grânulos (EGL).

O desenvolvimento cerebelar ocorre durante a embriogênese tardia e o período pós-natal precoce, com a proliferação de CGNP no EGL atingindo o pico durante o desenvolvimento inicial (dia 7 pós-natal no camundongo).

À medida que os CGNPs se diferenciam terminalmente em células granulares cerebelares (também chamadas de neurônios granulares cerebelares, CGNs), eles migram para a camada granular interna (IGL), formando o cerebelo maduro (no dia 20 pós-natal no camundongo).

Mutações que ativam anormalmente a sinalização Sonic hedgehog predispõem ao câncer do cerebelo (meduloblastoma) em humanos com Síndrome de Gorlin e em modelos de camundongos geneticamente modificados. síndrome.

Em casos muito raros, todo o cerebelo pode estar ausente.

Os distúrbios neurológicos hereditários doença de Machado-Joseph, ataxia telangiectasia e ataxia de Friedreich causam neurodegeneração progressiva ligada à perda cerebelar.

Malformações cerebrais congênitas fora do cerebelo podem, por sua vez, causar herniação do tecido cerebelar, como visto em algumas formas de malformação de Arnold-Chiari. tipo I, e a doença autoimune degeneração cerebelar paraneoplásica, na qual tumores em outras partes do corpo provocam uma resposta autoimune que causa perda neuronal no cerebelo.

A atrofia cerebelar pode resultar de uma deficiência aguda de vitamina B1 (tiamina), como visto no beribéri e na síndrome de Wernicke-Korsakoff, ou deficiência de vitamina E. A atrofia cerebelar foi observada em muitos outros distúrbios neurológicos, incluindo doença de Huntington, esclerose múltipla, tremor essencial, epilepsia mioclônica progressiva e doença de Niemann-Pick.

A atrofia cerebelar também pode ocorrer como resultado da exposição a toxinas, incluindo metais pesados ​​ou drogas farmacêuticas ou recreativas.


=== Dor ===

Existe um consenso geral de que o cerebelo está envolvido no processamento da dor.

O cerebelo recebe a entrada de dor de ambas as vias córtico-cerebelares descendentes e vias espinocerebelares ascendentes, através dos núcleos pontinos e olivas inferiores.

Algumas dessas informações são transferidas para o sistema motor induzindo uma evitação motora consciente da dor, graduada de acordo com a intensidade da dor.
Acredita-se que essas entradas diretas de dor, bem como indiretas, induzem um comportamento de evitação da dor a longo prazo que resulta em alterações posturais crônicas e, consequentemente, em remodelação funcional e anatômica dos núcleos vestibulares e proprioceptivos.

Como resultado, a dor neuropática crônica pode induzir a remodelação anatômica macroscópica do rombencéfalo, incluindo o cerebelo.

A magnitude dessa remodelação e a indução de marcadores progenitores de neurônios sugerem a contribuição da neurogênese adulta para essas alterações.


== Anatomia comparada e evolução ==


Os circuitos no cerebelo são semelhantes em todas as classes de vertebrados, incluindo peixes, répteis, aves e mamíferos.

Há também uma estrutura cerebral análoga em cefalópodes com cérebros bem desenvolvidos, como polvos.

Isso foi tomado como evidência de que o cerebelo desempenha funções importantes para todas as espécies animais com cérebro.
Há uma variação considerável no tamanho e forma do cerebelo em diferentes espécies de vertebrados.

Nos anfíbios, é pouco desenvolvido, e nas lampreias e peixes-bruxa, o cerebelo é pouco distinguível do tronco cerebral.

Embora o espinocerebelo esteja presente nesses grupos, as estruturas primárias são pequenos núcleos pareados que correspondem ao vestibulocerebelo.

O cerebelo é um pouco maior nos répteis, consideravelmente maior nas aves e ainda maior nos mamíferos.

Os grandes lobos pareados e convolutos encontrados em humanos são típicos de mamíferos, mas o cerebelo é, em geral, um único lobo mediano em outros grupos e é liso ou apenas levemente sulcado.

Nos mamíferos, o neocerebelo é a maior parte do cerebelo em massa, mas, em outros vertebrados, é tipicamente o espinocerebelo. O cerebelo de peixes cartilaginosos e ósseos é extraordinariamente grande e complexo.

Em pelo menos um aspecto importante, difere na estrutura interna do cerebelo dos mamíferos: o cerebelo dos peixes não contém núcleos cerebelares profundos discretos.

Em vez disso, os alvos primários das células de Purkinje são um tipo distinto de célula distribuída pelo córtex cerebelar, um tipo não visto em mamíferos.

Em peixes mormirídeos (uma família de peixes de água doce fracamente eletrossensíveis), o cerebelo é consideravelmente maior que o resto do cérebro.

A maior parte dele é uma estrutura especial chamada valvula, que tem uma arquitetura incomumente regular e recebe grande parte de sua entrada do sistema eletrossensorial. neocórtex.

À medida que os macacos evoluíram para grandes símios, a expansão dos lobos laterais continuou, em conjunto com a expansão dos lobos frontais do neocórtex.

Nos hominídeos ancestrais e no Homo sapiens até o Pleistoceno médio, o cerebelo continuou a se expandir, mas os lobos frontais se expandiram mais rapidamente.

O período mais recente da evolução humana, no entanto, pode realmente ter sido associado a um aumento no tamanho relativo do cerebelo, pois o neocórtex reduziu seu tamanho enquanto o cerebelo se expandia.

O tamanho do cerebelo humano, em comparação com o resto do cérebro, tem aumentado de tamanho, enquanto o cérebro diminuiu de tamanho Com o desenvolvimento e a implementação de tarefas motoras, habilidades viso-espaciais e aprendizagem ocorrendo no cerebelo, o crescimento do cerebelo é pensado para ter alguma forma de correlação com maiores habilidades cognitivas humanas.

Os hemisférios laterais do cerebelo são agora 2,7 vezes maiores em humanos e macacos do que em macacos.

Essas mudanças no tamanho do cerebelo não podem ser explicadas por uma maior massa muscular.

Eles mostram que ou o desenvolvimento do cerebelo está intimamente ligado ao do resto do cérebro ou que as atividades neurais que ocorrem no cerebelo foram importantes durante a evolução dos Hominídeos.

Devido ao papel do cerebelo nas funções cognitivas, o aumento de seu tamanho pode ter desempenhado um papel na expansão cognitiva.


=== Estruturas semelhantes ao cerebelo ===

A maioria das espécies de vertebrados tem um cerebelo e uma ou mais estruturas semelhantes ao cerebelo, áreas cerebrais que se assemelham ao cerebelo em termos de citoarquitetura e neuroquímica.

A única estrutura semelhante ao cerebelo encontrada em mamíferos é o núcleo coclear dorsal (DCN), um dos dois núcleos sensoriais primários que recebem informações diretamente do nervo auditivo.

O DCN é uma estrutura em camadas, com a camada inferior contendo células granulares semelhantes às do cerebelo, dando origem a fibras paralelas que sobem para a camada superficial e a percorrem horizontalmente.

A camada superficial contém um conjunto de neurônios GABAérgicos chamados de células de roda que se assemelham anatomicamente e quimicamente às células de Purkinje – elas recebem estímulos de fibras paralelas, mas não têm nenhum estímulo que se assemelhe a fibras de escalada.

Os neurônios de saída do DCN são células piramidais.

Eles são glutamatérgicos, mas também se assemelham às células de Purkinje em alguns aspectos – eles têm árvores dendríticas superficiais achatadas e espinhosas que recebem estímulos de fibras paralelas, mas também têm dendritos basais que recebem estímulos de fibras nervosas auditivas, que viajam através do DCN em uma direção em ângulos retos com as fibras paralelas.

O DCN é mais desenvolvido em roedores e outros pequenos animais, e é consideravelmente reduzido em primatas.

Sua função não é bem compreendida; as especulações mais populares a relacionam de uma forma ou de outra à audição espacial. A maioria das espécies de peixes e anfíbios possui um sistema de linha lateral que detecta ondas de pressão na água.

Uma das áreas do cérebro que recebe aferência primária do órgão da linha lateral, o núcleo octavolateral medial, tem uma estrutura semelhante ao cerebelo, com células granulares e fibras paralelas.

Em peixes eletrossensíveis, a entrada do sistema eletrossensorial vai para o núcleo octavolateral dorsal, que também possui uma estrutura semelhante ao cerebelo.

Em peixes com nadadeiras raiadas (de longe o maior grupo), o tecto óptico tem uma camada – a camada marginal – que é semelhante ao cerebelo.

Todos eles têm células granulares que dão origem a fibras paralelas que se conectam a neurônios do tipo Purkinje com sinapses modificáveis, mas nenhum tem fibras de escalada comparáveis ​​às do cerebelo - em vez disso, eles recebem informações diretas de órgãos sensoriais periféricos.

Nenhum tem uma função demonstrada, mas a especulação mais influente é que eles servem para transformar entradas sensoriais de alguma forma sofisticada, talvez para compensar mudanças na postura corporal.

Na verdade, James M.

Bower e outros argumentaram, em parte com base nessas estruturas e em parte com base em estudos cerebelares, que o próprio cerebelo é fundamentalmente uma estrutura sensorial e que contribui para o controle motor ao mover o corpo de uma maneira que controla o fluxo resultante. sinais sensoriais.

Apesar do ponto de vista de Bower, também há fortes evidências de que o cerebelo influencia diretamente a produção motora em mamíferos.


== História ==



=== Descrições ===

Mesmo os primeiros anatomistas foram capazes de reconhecer o cerebelo por sua aparência distinta.

Aristóteles e Herófilo (citado em Galeno) chamaram-no de παρεγκεφαλίς (parenkephalis), em oposição ao ἐγκέφαλος (enkephalos) ou cérebro propriamente dito.

A extensa descrição de Galeno é a mais antiga que sobrevive.

Ele especulou que o cerebelo era a fonte dos nervos motores. Outros desenvolvimentos significativos não vieram até o Renascimento.

Vesalius discutiu brevemente o cerebelo, e a anatomia foi descrita mais detalhadamente por Thomas Willis em 1664.

Mais trabalhos anatômicos foram feitos durante o século 18, mas não foi até o início do século 19 que os primeiros insights sobre a função do cerebelo foram obtidos.

Luigi Rolando, em 1809, estabeleceu a principal descoberta de que danos ao cerebelo resultam em distúrbios motores.

Jean Pierre Flourens na primeira metade do século XIX realizou um trabalho experimental detalhado, que revelou que os animais com lesão cerebelar ainda podem se mover, mas com perda de coordenação (movimentos estranhos, andar desajeitado e fraqueza muscular), e que a recuperação após a lesão pode estar quase completa, a menos que a lesão seja muito extensa.

No início do século 20, era amplamente aceito que a função primária do cerebelo estava relacionada ao controle motor; a primeira metade do século 20 produziu várias descrições detalhadas dos sintomas clínicos associados à doença cerebelar em humanos.


=== Etimologia ===

O nome cerebelo é um diminutivo de cérebro (cérebro); pode ser traduzido literalmente como pequeno cérebro.

O nome latino é uma tradução direta do grego antigo παρεγκεφαλίς (parenkephalis), que foi usado nas obras de Aristóteles, o primeiro escritor conhecido a descrever a estrutura.

Nenhum outro nome é usado na literatura de língua inglesa, mas historicamente uma variedade de nomes derivados do grego ou do latim foram usados, incluindo cerebrum parvum, encephalion, encranion, cerebrum posterius e parencephalis.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cerebellum

;;;FR;;;



CERVELET


Le cervelet (latin pour "petit cerveau") est une caractéristique majeure du cerveau postérieur de tous les vertébrés.

Bien que généralement plus petit que le cerveau, chez certains animaux tels que les poissons mormyridés, il peut être aussi grand ou même plus grand.

Chez l'homme, le cervelet joue un rôle important dans le contrôle moteur.

Il peut également être impliqué dans certaines fonctions cognitives telles que l'attention et le langage ainsi que dans le contrôle émotionnel comme la régulation des réponses de peur et de plaisir, mais ses fonctions liées au mouvement sont les plus solidement établies.

Le cervelet humain n'initie pas le mouvement, mais contribue à la coordination, à la précision et à la synchronisation précise : il reçoit des informations des systèmes sensoriels de la moelle épinière et d'autres parties du cerveau, et intègre ces informations pour affiner l'activité motrice.

Les lésions cérébelleuses produisent des troubles du mouvement fin, de l'équilibre, de la posture et de l'apprentissage moteur chez l'homme. Anatomiquement, le cervelet humain a l'apparence d'une structure distincte attachée au bas du cerveau, nichée sous les hémisphères cérébraux.

Sa surface corticale est recouverte de sillons parallèles finement espacés, en contraste saisissant avec les larges circonvolutions irrégulières du cortex cérébral.

Ces rainures parallèles cachent le fait que le cortex cérébelleux est en fait une fine couche continue de tissu étroitement pliée à la manière d'un accordéon.

Au sein de cette fine couche se trouvent plusieurs types de neurones à disposition très régulière, les plus importants étant les cellules de Purkinje et les cellules granulaires.

Cette organisation neuronale complexe donne lieu à une énorme capacité de traitement du signal, mais la quasi-totalité de la sortie du cortex cérébelleux passe par un ensemble de petits noyaux profonds situés à l'intérieur de la matière blanche du cervelet. En plus de son rôle direct dans le moteur contrôle, le cervelet est nécessaire pour plusieurs types d'apprentissage moteur, notamment pour apprendre à s'adapter aux changements des relations sensorimotrices.

Plusieurs modèles théoriques ont été développés pour expliquer la calibration sensorimotrice en termes de plasticité synaptique au sein du cervelet.

Ces modèles dérivent de ceux formulés par David Marr et James Albus, basés sur l'observation que chaque cellule de Purkinje cérébelleuse reçoit deux types d'entrée radicalement différents : l'un comprend des milliers d'entrées faibles provenant des fibres parallèles des cellules granulaires ; l'autre est une entrée extrêmement forte d'une seule fibre grimpante.

Le concept de base de la théorie de Marr-Albus est que la fibre grimpante sert de «signal d'enseignement», ce qui induit un changement durable de la force des entrées de fibre parallèles.

Les observations de la dépression à long terme dans les apports parallèles de fibres ont apporté un certain soutien aux théories de ce type, mais leur validité reste controversée.


== Structure ==


Au niveau de l'anatomie générale, le cervelet se compose d'une couche de cortex étroitement pliée, avec de la matière blanche en dessous et un ventricule rempli de liquide à la base.

Quatre noyaux cérébelleux profonds sont intégrés dans la substance blanche.

Chaque partie du cortex est constituée du même petit ensemble d'éléments neuronaux, disposés dans une géométrie très stéréotypée.

A un niveau intermédiaire, le cervelet et ses structures auxiliaires peuvent être séparés en plusieurs centaines ou milliers de modules fonctionnant indépendamment appelés "microzones" ou "microcompartiments".


=== Anatomie brute ===


Le cervelet est situé dans la fosse crânienne postérieure.

Le quatrième ventricule, le pont et la moelle sont devant le cervelet.

Il est séparé du cerveau sus-jacent par une couche de dure-mère coriace, la tente du cervelet ; toutes ses connexions avec d'autres parties du cerveau voyagent à travers le pons.

Les anatomistes classent le cervelet dans le cadre du métencéphale, qui comprend également le pont ; le métencéphale est la partie supérieure du rhombencéphale ou « cerveau postérieur ».

Comme le cortex cérébral, le cervelet est divisé en deux hémisphères cérébelleux ; il contient également une zone médiane étroite (le vermis).

Un ensemble de grands plis est, par convention, utilisé pour diviser la structure globale en 10 "lobules" plus petits.

En raison de son grand nombre de minuscules cellules granulaires, le cervelet contient plus de neurones que le total du reste du cerveau, mais n'occupe que 10 % du volume total du cerveau.

Le nombre de neurones dans le cervelet est lié au nombre de neurones dans le néocortex.

Il y a environ 3,6 fois plus de neurones dans le cervelet que dans le néocortex, un rapport qui est conservé dans de nombreuses espèces de mammifères différentes. L'aspect inhabituel de la surface du cervelet cache le fait que la majeure partie de son volume est constituée d'un couche de matière grise : le cortex cérébelleux.

Chaque crête ou gyrus de cette couche est appelée folium.

On estime que, si le cortex cérébelleux humain était complètement déplié, il donnerait naissance à une couche de tissu neural d'environ 1 mètre de long et d'une largeur moyenne de 5 centimètres - une surface totale d'environ 500 cm carrés, emballée dans un volume de dimensions 6 cm × 5 cm × 10 cm.

Sous la matière grise du cortex se trouve la substance blanche, composée en grande partie de fibres nerveuses myélinisées allant et venant du cortex.

Incorporés dans la matière blanche, parfois appelée arbor vitae (arbre de vie) en raison de son apparence ramifiée et arborescente en coupe transversale, se trouvent quatre noyaux cérébelleux profonds, composés de matière grise.reliant le cervelet à différentes parties de le système nerveux est composé de trois pédoncules cérébelleux appariés.

Ce sont le pédoncule cérébelleux supérieur, le pédoncule cérébelleux moyen et le pédoncule cérébelleux inférieur, nommés par leur position par rapport au vermis.

Le pédoncule cérébelleux supérieur est principalement une sortie vers le cortex cérébral, transportant des fibres efférentes via les noyaux thalamiques vers les motoneurones supérieurs du cortex cérébral.

Les fibres proviennent des noyaux cérébelleux profonds.

Le pédoncule cérébelleux moyen est relié au pont et reçoit tous ses apports du pont principalement des noyaux pontiques.

L'apport au pont provient du cortex cérébral et est relayé par les noyaux pontiques via des fibres pontiques transversales jusqu'au cervelet.

Le pédoncule moyen est le plus grand des trois et ses fibres afférentes sont regroupées en trois faisceaux distincts prenant leurs entrées dans différentes parties du cervelet.

Le pédoncule cérébelleux inférieur reçoit l'apport des fibres afférentes des noyaux vestibulaires, de la moelle épinière et du tegmentum.

La sortie du pédoncule inférieur se fait via des fibres efférentes vers les noyaux vestibulaires et la formation réticulaire.

L'ensemble du cervelet reçoit un apport modulateur du noyau olivaire inférieur via le pédoncule cérébelleux inférieur.


==== Subdivisions ====

Sur la base de l'aspect de surface, trois lobes peuvent être distingués dans le cervelet : le lobe antérieur (au-dessus de la fissure primaire), le lobe postérieur (en dessous de la fissure primaire) et le lobe floculonodulaire (en dessous de la fissure postérieure).

Ces lobes divisent le cervelet du rostral au caudal (chez l'homme, de haut en bas).

En termes de fonction, cependant, il existe une distinction plus importante le long de la dimension médiale à latérale.

En laissant de côté le lobe flocculonodulaire, qui a des connexions et des fonctions distinctes, le cervelet peut être analysé fonctionnellement en un secteur médial appelé spinocérébellum et un secteur latéral plus large appelé cérébrocervelet.

Une bande étroite de tissu saillant le long de la ligne médiane est appelée le vermis cérébelleux. (Vermis est le mot latin pour "ver".) La plus petite région, le lobe flocculonodulaire, est souvent appelée le vestibulocerebellum.

C'est la partie la plus ancienne sur le plan évolutif (archicerebellum) et participe principalement à l'équilibre et à l'orientation spatiale ; ses principales connexions sont avec les noyaux vestibulaires, bien qu'il reçoive également des entrées visuelles et sensorielles.

Les dommages à cette région provoquent des troubles de l'équilibre et de la marche. La zone médiale des lobes antérieur et postérieur constitue le spinocerebellum, également appelé paléocervelet.

Ce secteur du cervelet fonctionne principalement pour affiner les mouvements du corps et des membres.

Il reçoit des informations proprioceptives des colonnes dorsales de la moelle épinière (y compris le tractus spinocérébelleux) et du nerf trijumeau crânien, ainsi que des systèmes visuel et auditif.

Il envoie des fibres aux noyaux cérébelleux profonds qui, à leur tour, se projettent à la fois dans le cortex cérébral et dans le tronc cérébral, assurant ainsi la modulation des systèmes moteurs descendants. La zone latérale, qui chez l'homme est de loin la plus grande partie, constitue le cervelet cérébral, également connu sous le nom de néocervelet.

Il reçoit l'entrée exclusivement du cortex cérébral (en particulier le lobe pariétal) via les noyaux pontiques (formant les voies cortico-ponto-cérébelleuses), et envoie la sortie principalement au thalamus ventrolatéral (à son tour connecté aux aires motrices du cortex prémoteur et moteur primaire zone du cortex cérébral) et au noyau rouge.

Il existe un désaccord sur la meilleure façon de décrire les fonctions du cervelet latéral : on pense qu'il est impliqué dans la planification du mouvement qui est sur le point de se produire, dans l'évaluation des informations sensorielles pour l'action, et dans un certain nombre de fonctions purement cognitives, telles que la détermination le verbe qui correspond le mieux à un certain nom (comme dans "assis" pour "chaise").


=== Microanatomie ===

Deux types de neurones jouent un rôle dominant dans le circuit cérébelleux : les cellules de Purkinje et les cellules granulaires.

Trois types d'axones jouent également des rôles dominants : les fibres moussues et les fibres grimpantes (qui pénètrent dans le cervelet par l'extérieur) et les fibres parallèles (qui sont les axones des cellules granulaires).

Il existe deux voies principales à travers le circuit cérébelleux, provenant des fibres moussues et des fibres grimpantes, toutes deux se terminant finalement dans les noyaux cérébelleux profonds. Les fibres moussues se projettent directement vers les noyaux profonds, mais donnent également naissance à la voie suivante : fibres moussues → cellules granulaires → fibres parallèles → cellules de Purkinje → noyaux profonds.

Les fibres grimpantes se projettent vers les cellules de Purkinje et envoient également des collatéraux directement aux noyaux profonds.

Les entrées fibre moussue et fibre grimpante transportent chacune des informations spécifiques à la fibre; le cervelet reçoit également des entrées dopaminergiques, sérotoninergiques, noradrénergiques et cholinergiques qui effectuent vraisemblablement une modulation globale. Le cortex cérébelleux est divisé en trois couches.

Au fond se trouve l'épaisse couche granuleuse, densément remplie de cellules granulaires, ainsi que d'interneurones, principalement des cellules de Golgi, mais comprenant également des cellules de Lugaro et des cellules de brosse unipolaires.

Au milieu se trouve la couche de Purkinje, une zone étroite qui contient les corps cellulaires des cellules de Purkinje et des cellules gliales de Bergmann.

Au sommet se trouve la couche moléculaire, qui contient les arbres dendritiques aplatis des cellules de Purkinje, ainsi que l'immense réseau de fibres parallèles pénétrant les arbres dendritiques des cellules de Purkinje à angle droit.

Cette couche la plus externe du cortex cérébelleux contient également deux types d'interneurones inhibiteurs : les cellules étoilées et les cellules panier.

Les cellules étoilées et en panier forment des synapses GABAergiques sur les dendrites des cellules de Purkinje.


==== Couche moléculaire ====
La couche supérieure et la plus externe du cortex cérébelleux est la couche moléculaire.

Cette couche contient les arbres dendritiques aplatis des cellules de Purkinje et l'immense réseau de fibres parallèles, de la couche granuleuse, qui pénètrent à angle droit dans les arbres dendritiques des cellules de Purkinje.

La couche moléculaire contient également deux types d'interneurones inhibiteurs : les cellules étoilées et les cellules paniers.

Les cellules étoilées et en panier forment des synapses GABAergiques sur les dendrites des cellules de Purkinje.


==== Couche Purkinje ====

Les cellules de Purkinje sont parmi les neurones les plus distinctifs du cerveau et l'un des premiers types à être reconnus - elles ont été décrites pour la première fois par l'anatomiste tchèque Jan Evangelista Purkyně en 1837.

Elles se distinguent par la forme de leur arbre dendritique : Les dendrites se ramifient très abondamment, mais sont sévèrement aplaties dans un plan perpendiculaire aux plis cérébelleux.

Ainsi, les dendrites d'une cellule de Purkinje forment un réseau planaire dense, à travers lequel des fibres parallèles passent à angle droit.

Les dendrites sont recouvertes d'épines dendritiques, dont chacune reçoit une entrée synaptique d'une fibre parallèle.

Les cellules de Purkinje reçoivent plus d'entrées synaptiques que tout autre type de cellule dans le cerveau - les estimations du nombre d'épines sur une seule cellule de Purkinje humaine atteignent 200 000.

Les grands corps cellulaires sphériques des cellules de Purkinje sont regroupés dans une couche étroite (une cellule d'épaisseur) du cortex cérébelleux, appelée couche de Purkinje.

Après avoir émis des collatéraux qui affectent les parties voisines du cortex, leurs axones voyagent dans les noyaux cérébelleux profonds, où ils établissent de l'ordre de 1 000 contacts chacun avec plusieurs types de cellules nucléaires, le tout dans un petit domaine.

Les cellules de Purkinje utilisent le GABA comme neurotransmetteur et exercent donc des effets inhibiteurs sur leurs cibles. techniques d'enregistrement.

Les cellules de Purkinje émettent normalement des potentiels d'action à un taux élevé même en l'absence de l'entrée synaptique.

Chez les animaux éveillés et qui se comportent bien, des fréquences moyennes d'environ 40 Hz sont typiques.

Les trains de pointes montrent un mélange de ce qu'on appelle des pointes simples et complexes.

Un pic simple est un potentiel d'action unique suivi d'une période réfractaire d'environ 10 ms ; un pic complexe est une séquence stéréotypée de potentiels d'action avec des intervalles inter-pics très courts et des amplitudes décroissantes.

Des études physiologiques ont montré que les pointes complexes (qui se produisent à des taux de base d'environ 1 Hz et jamais à des taux bien supérieurs à 10 Hz) sont associées de manière fiable à l'activation des fibres grimpantes, tandis que les pointes simples sont produites par une combinaison d'activité de base et d'entrée de fibres parallèles.

Les pointes complexes sont souvent suivies d'une pause de plusieurs centaines de millisecondes au cours de laquelle l'activité de pointe simple est supprimée. Une caractéristique spécifique et reconnaissable des neurones de Purkinje est l'expression de la calbindine.

La coloration à la calbindine du cerveau de rat après une lésion chronique unilatérale du nerf sciatique suggère que les neurones de Purkinje peuvent être nouvellement générés dans le cerveau adulte, initiant l'organisation de nouveaux lobules cérébelleux.


==== Couche granulaire ====

Les cellules granulaires cérébelleuses, contrairement aux cellules de Purkinje, sont parmi les plus petits neurones du cerveau.

Ce sont aussi les neurones les plus nombreux dans le cerveau : chez l'homme, on estime leur nombre total à environ 50 milliards, ce qui signifie qu'environ 3/4 des neurones du cerveau sont des cellules granulaires cérébelleuses.

Leurs corps cellulaires sont emballés dans une couche épaisse au bas du cortex cérébelleux.

Une cellule granulaire n'émet que quatre à cinq dendrites, chacune se terminant par un élargissement appelé griffe dendritique.

Ces élargissements sont des sites d'entrée excitatrice des fibres moussues et d'entrée inhibitrice des cellules de Golgi. Les axones fins et non myélinisés des cellules granulaires montent verticalement jusqu'à la couche supérieure (moléculaire) du cortex, où ils se divisent en deux, chaque branche se déplaçant former une fibre parallèle ; la séparation de la branche verticale en deux branches horizontales donne lieu à une forme en "T" distinctive.

Une fibre parallèle humaine s'étend sur une moyenne de 3 mm dans chaque direction à partir de la scission, pour une longueur totale d'environ 6 mm (environ 1/10 de la largeur totale de la couche corticale).

Au fur et à mesure qu'elles courent, les fibres parallèles traversent les arbres dendritiques des cellules de Purkinje, contactant une sur 3 à 5 qu'elles traversent, créant un total de 80 à 100 connexions synaptiques avec les épines dendritiques des cellules de Purkinje.

Les cellules granulaires utilisent le glutamate comme neurotransmetteur et exercent donc des effets excitateurs sur leurs cibles.

Les cellules granulaires reçoivent tous leurs apports des fibres moussues, mais les dépassent en nombre de 200 à 1 (chez l'homme).

Ainsi, les informations dans l'état d'activité de la population de cellules granulaires sont les mêmes que les informations dans les fibres moussues, mais recodées d'une manière beaucoup plus expansive.

Parce que les cellules granulaires sont si petites et si denses, il est difficile d'enregistrer leur activité de pointe chez les animaux qui se comportent, il y a donc peu de données à utiliser comme base pour théoriser.

Le concept le plus populaire de leur fonction a été proposé en 1969 par David Marr, qui a suggéré qu'ils pouvaient coder des combinaisons d'entrées de fibres moussues.

L'idée est qu'avec chaque cellule granulaire recevant des entrées de seulement 4 à 5 fibres moussues, une cellule granulaire ne répondrait pas si une seule de ses entrées était active, mais répondrait si plus d'une était active.

Ce schéma de codage combinatoire permettrait potentiellement au cervelet de faire des distinctions beaucoup plus fines entre les modèles d'entrée que ne le permettraient les fibres moussues seules.


==== Fibres moussues ====
Les fibres moussues pénètrent dans la couche granuleuse à partir de leurs points d'origine, beaucoup provenant des noyaux pontiques, d'autres de la moelle épinière, des noyaux vestibulaires, etc.

Dans le cervelet humain, le nombre total de fibres moussues a été estimé à environ 200 millions.

Ces fibres forment des synapses excitatrices avec les cellules granulaires et les cellules des noyaux cérébelleux profonds.

Au sein de la couche granuleuse, une fibre moussue génère une série d'élargissements appelés rosettes.

Les contacts entre les fibres moussues et les dendrites des cellules granulaires ont lieu dans des structures appelées glomérules.

Chaque glomérule a une rosette de fibres moussues en son centre et jusqu'à 20 griffes dendritiques de cellules granulaires qui le contactent.

Les terminaux des cellules de Golgi infiltrent la structure et forment des synapses inhibitrices sur les dendrites des cellules granulaires.

L'assemblage entier est entouré d'une gaine de cellules gliales.

Chaque fibre moussue envoie des branches collatérales à plusieurs feuilles cérébelleuses, générant un total de 20 à 30 rosettes ; ainsi, une seule fibre moussue entre en contact avec environ 400 à 600 cellules granulaires.


==== Fibres grimpantes ====
Les cellules de Purkinje reçoivent également un apport du noyau olivaire inférieur du côté controlatéral du tronc cérébral via des fibres grimpantes.

Bien que l'olive inférieure se situe dans le bulbe rachidien et reçoive l'apport de la moelle épinière, du tronc cérébral et du cortex cérébral, sa sortie va entièrement au cervelet.

Une fibre grimpante émet des collatéraux vers les noyaux cérébelleux profonds avant d'entrer dans le cortex cérébelleux, où elle se divise en environ 10 branches terminales, dont chacune donne une entrée à une seule cellule de Purkinje.

Contrairement aux plus de 100 000 entrées des fibres parallèles, chaque cellule de Purkinje reçoit l'entrée d'exactement une fibre grimpante ; mais cette fibre unique « grimpe » les dendrites de la cellule de Purkinje, s'enroulant autour d'elles et formant un total de jusqu'à 300 synapses au fur et à mesure.

L'apport net est si fort qu'un seul potentiel d'action d'une fibre grimpante est capable de produire un pic complexe étendu dans la cellule de Purkinje : une rafale de plusieurs pics d'affilée, avec une amplitude décroissante, suivie d'une pause pendant laquelle l'activité est supprimée. .

Les synapses des fibres grimpantes recouvrent le corps cellulaire et les dendrites proximales ; cette zone est dépourvue d'entrées de fibres parallèles. Les fibres grimpantes se déclenchent à faible vitesse, mais un seul potentiel d'action de fibre grimpante induit une salve de plusieurs potentiels d'action dans une cellule de Purkinje cible (un pic complexe).

Le contraste entre les entrées de fibres parallèles et de fibres grimpantes dans les cellules de Purkinje (plus de 100 000 d'un type contre exactement un de l'autre type) est peut-être la caractéristique la plus provocante de l'anatomie cérébelleuse et a motivé une grande partie de la théorie.

En fait, la fonction des fibres grimpantes est le sujet le plus controversé concernant le cervelet.

Il existe deux écoles de pensée, l'une suivant Marr et Albus en soutenant que l'entrée de la fibre grimpante sert principalement de signal d'enseignement, l'autre soutenant que sa fonction est de façonner directement la sortie cérébelleuse.

Ces deux points de vue ont été longuement défendus dans de nombreuses publications.

Selon les termes d'une revue, "En essayant de synthétiser les différentes hypothèses sur la fonction des fibres grimpantes, on a l'impression de regarder un dessin d'Escher.

Chaque point de vue semble rendre compte d'un certain ensemble de résultats, mais lorsque l'on tente de rassembler les différents points de vue, une image cohérente de ce que font les fibres grimpantes n'apparaît pas.

Pour la majorité des chercheurs, les fibres grimpantes signalent des erreurs dans les performances motrices, soit de la manière habituelle de la modulation de la fréquence de décharge, soit comme une seule annonce d'un "événement inattendu".

Pour d'autres chercheurs, le message réside dans le degré de synchronie et de rythmicité de l'ensemble parmi une population de fibres grimpantes."


==== Noyaux profonds ====

Les noyaux profonds du cervelet sont des amas de matière grise situés dans la substance blanche au cœur du cervelet.

Ils sont, à l'exception mineure des noyaux vestibulaires voisins, les seules sources de sortie du cervelet.

Ces noyaux reçoivent des projections collatérales des fibres moussues et des fibres grimpantes ainsi que des apports inhibiteurs des cellules de Purkinje du cortex cérébelleux.

Les quatre noyaux (denté, globuleux, emboliforme et fastigial) communiquent chacun avec différentes parties du cerveau et du cortex cérébelleux. (Les noyaux globuleux et emboliforme sont également appelés combinés dans le noyau interposé).

Les noyaux fastigiaux et interposés appartiennent au spinocervelet.

Le noyau denté, qui chez les mammifères est beaucoup plus gros que les autres, se présente sous la forme d'une fine couche alambiquée de matière grise et communique exclusivement avec les parties latérales du cortex cérébelleux.

Le flocculus du lobe floculonodulaire est la seule partie du cortex cérébelleux qui ne se projette pas vers les noyaux profonds - sa sortie va plutôt vers les noyaux vestibulaires. La majorité des neurones des noyaux profonds ont de grands corps cellulaires et des arbres dendritiques sphériques avec un rayon d'environ 400 μm, et utilisent le glutamate comme neurotransmetteur.

Ces cellules projettent vers une variété de cibles à l'extérieur du cervelet.

Entremêlées avec elles se trouvent un nombre moindre de petites cellules, qui utilisent le GABA comme neurotransmetteur et se projettent exclusivement vers le noyau olivaire inférieur, la source des fibres grimpantes.

Ainsi, la projection nucléo-olivaire fournit une rétroaction inhibitrice pour faire correspondre la projection excitatrice des fibres grimpantes aux noyaux.

Il est prouvé que chaque petit groupe de cellules nucléaires se projette sur le même groupe de cellules olivaires qui lui envoient des fibres grimpantes; il y a une topographie forte et correspondante dans les deux sens. Lorsqu'un axone de cellule de Purkinje pénètre dans l'un des noyaux profonds, il se ramifie pour entrer en contact avec les grandes et les petites cellules nucléaires, mais le nombre total de cellules contactées n'est que d'environ 35 (chez les chats) .

Inversement, une seule cellule nucléaire profonde reçoit l'apport d'environ 860 cellules de Purkinje (toujours chez les chats).


==== Compartiments ====

Du point de vue de l'anatomie générale, le cortex cérébelleux apparaît comme une feuille de tissu homogène et, du point de vue de la microanatomie, toutes les parties de cette feuille semblent avoir la même structure interne.

Il existe cependant un certain nombre d'aspects dans lesquels la structure du cervelet est compartimentée.

Il existe de grands compartiments généralement appelés zones ; ceux-ci peuvent être divisés en compartiments plus petits connus sous le nom de microzones. Les premières indications de la structure compartimentale sont venues d'études des champs récepteurs des cellules dans diverses parties du cortex cérébelleux.

Chaque partie du corps correspond à des points spécifiques du cervelet, mais il existe de nombreuses répétitions de la carte de base, formant un arrangement appelé « somatotopie fracturée ».

Une indication plus claire de la compartimentation est obtenue par immunomarquage du cervelet pour certains types de protéines.

Les plus connus de ces marqueurs sont appelés « zébrins », car leur coloration donne lieu à un motif complexe rappelant les rayures d'un zèbre.

Les bandes générées par les zébrines et autres marqueurs de compartimentation sont orientées perpendiculairement aux plis cérébelleux, c'est-à-dire qu'elles sont étroites dans le sens médiolatéral, mais beaucoup plus étendues dans le sens longitudinal.

Différents marqueurs génèrent différents ensembles de rayures, les largeurs et les longueurs varient en fonction de l'emplacement, mais ils ont tous la même forme générale. Oscarsson à la fin des années 1970 a proposé que ces zones corticales puissent être divisées en unités plus petites appelées microzones.

Une microzone est définie comme un groupe de cellules de Purkinje ayant toutes le même champ récepteur somatotopique.

Les microzones se sont avérées contenir de l'ordre de 1000 cellules de Purkinje chacune, disposées en une bande longue et étroite, orientée perpendiculairement aux plis corticaux.

Ainsi, comme l'illustre le schéma ci-joint, les dendrites des cellules de Purkinje sont aplaties dans le même sens que les microzones s'étendent, tandis que des fibres parallèles les traversent à angle droit. Il n'y a pas que les champs récepteurs qui définissent la structure des microzones : l'apport de fibres noyau olivaire est tout aussi important.

Les branches d'une fibre grimpante (généralement au nombre d'environ 10) activent généralement les cellules de Purkinje appartenant à la même microzone.

De plus, les neurones olivaires qui envoient des fibres grimpantes dans la même microzone ont tendance à être couplés par des jonctions lacunaires, qui synchronisent leur activité, ce qui amène les cellules de Purkinje dans une microzone à montrer une activité de pointe complexe corrélée sur une échelle de temps de la milliseconde.

De plus, les cellules de Purkinje appartenant à une microzone envoient toutes leurs axones au même petit groupe de cellules de sortie au sein des noyaux cérébelleux profonds.

Enfin, les axones des cellules du panier sont beaucoup plus longs dans le sens longitudinal que dans le sens médiolatéral, ce qui les confine en grande partie à une seule microzone.

La conséquence de toute cette structure est que les interactions cellulaires au sein d'une microzone sont beaucoup plus fortes que les interactions entre différentes microzones. En 2005, Richard Apps et Martin Garwicz ont résumé les preuves que les microzones elles-mêmes font partie d'une entité plus large qu'ils appellent un microcomplexe multizonal.

Un tel microcomplexe comprend plusieurs microzones corticales spatialement séparées, qui se projettent toutes vers le même groupe de neurones cérébelleux profonds, plus un groupe de neurones olivaires couplés qui se projettent vers toutes les microzones incluses ainsi que vers la zone nucléaire profonde.


=== Approvisionnement en sang ===

Le cervelet est alimenté en sang par trois artères majeures appariées : l'artère cérébelleuse supérieure (SCA), l'artère cérébelleuse antéro-inférieure (AICA) et l'artère cérébelleuse postérieure inférieure (PICA).

Le SCA alimente la région supérieure du cervelet.

Il se divise à la surface supérieure et se ramifie dans la pie-mère où les branches s'anastomosent avec celles des artères cérébelleuses antérieures et postérieures inférieures.

L'AICA fournit la partie avant de la surface inférieure du cervelet.

Le PICA arrive à la surface inférieure, où il se divise en une branche médiale et une branche latérale.

La branche médiale continue vers l'arrière jusqu'à l'encoche cérébelleuse entre les deux hémisphères du cervelet ; tandis que la branche latérale alimente la surface inférieure du cervelet, jusqu'à son bord latéral, où elle s'anastomose avec l'AICA et le SCA.


== Fonction ==

Les indices les plus solides sur la fonction du cervelet proviennent de l'examen des conséquences de ses dommages.

Les animaux et les humains atteints de dysfonctionnement cérébelleux présentent surtout des problèmes de contrôle moteur, du même côté du corps que la partie endommagée du cervelet.

Ils continuent à être capables de générer une activité motrice mais perdent en précision, produisant des mouvements erratiques, non coordonnés ou mal chronométrés.

Un test standard de la fonction cérébelleuse consiste à atteindre avec le bout du doigt une cible à bout de bras : une personne en bonne santé déplacera le bout du doigt dans une trajectoire droite rapide, tandis qu'une personne atteinte de lésions cérébelleuses atteindra lentement et de manière erratique, avec de nombreux moyens - corrections de parcours.

Les déficits des fonctions non motrices sont plus difficiles à détecter.

Ainsi, la conclusion générale atteinte il y a des décennies est que la fonction de base du cervelet est de calibrer la forme détaillée d'un mouvement, et non d'initier des mouvements ou de décider quels mouvements exécuter. Avant les années 1990, la fonction du cervelet était presque universellement que l'on croyait purement liés au moteur, mais de nouvelles découvertes ont remis en question ce point de vue.

Des études d'imagerie fonctionnelle ont montré une activation cérébelleuse en relation avec le langage, l'attention et l'imagerie mentale ; des études de corrélation ont montré des interactions entre le cervelet et les aires non motrices du cortex cérébral ; et une variété de symptômes non moteurs ont été reconnus chez les personnes présentant des lésions qui semblent confinées au cervelet.

En particulier, le syndrome affectif cognitif cérébelleux ou syndrome de Schmahmann a été décrit chez l'adulte et l'enfant.

Les estimations basées sur la cartographie fonctionnelle du cervelet à l'aide de l'IRM fonctionnelle suggèrent que plus de la moitié du cortex cérébelleux est interconnecté avec les zones d'association du cortex cérébral. Kenji Doya a soutenu que la fonction du cervelet est mieux comprise non pas en termes de comportements qu'il affecte, mais les calculs neuronaux qu'il effectue ; le cervelet est constitué d'un grand nombre de modules plus ou moins indépendants, ayant tous la même structure interne géométriquement régulière, et donc tous, suppose-t-on, effectuant le même calcul.

Si les connexions d'entrée et de sortie d'un module sont avec des zones de moteur (comme beaucoup le sont), alors le module sera impliqué dans le comportement du moteur ; mais, si les connexions sont avec des zones impliquées dans la cognition non motrice, le module montrera d'autres types de corrélats comportementaux.

Ainsi, le cervelet a été impliqué dans la régulation de nombreux traits fonctionnels différents tels que l'affection, l'émotion et le comportement.

Le cervelet, propose Doya, est mieux compris comme une sélection d'action prédictive basée sur des "modèles internes" de l'environnement ou un dispositif d'apprentissage supervisé, contrairement aux ganglions de la base, qui effectuent un apprentissage par renforcement, et au cortex cérébral, qui effectue un apprentissage non supervisé. .


=== Principes ===

La simplicité et la régularité relatives de l'anatomie cérébelleuse ont conduit à espérer que cela pourrait impliquer une simplicité similaire de la fonction de calcul, comme exprimé dans l'un des premiers livres sur l'électrophysiologie cérébelleuse, The Cerebellum as a Neuronal Machine de John C.

Eccles, Masao Ito et János Szentágothai.

Bien qu'une compréhension complète de la fonction cérébelleuse soit restée insaisissable, au moins quatre principes ont été identifiés comme importants : (1) le traitement par anticipation, (2) la divergence et la convergence, (3) la modularité et (4) la plasticité.

Traitement prédictif : Le cervelet diffère de la plupart des autres parties du cerveau (en particulier le cortex cérébral) en ce que le traitement du signal est presque entièrement prédictif, c'est-à-dire que les signaux se déplacent de manière unidirectionnelle à travers le système de l'entrée à la sortie, avec très peu de transmission interne récurrente.

La petite quantité de récidive qui existe consiste en une inhibition mutuelle; il n'y a pas de circuits mutuellement excitateurs.

Ce mode de fonctionnement prédictif signifie que le cervelet, contrairement au cortex cérébral, ne peut pas générer de schémas d'activité neuronale auto-entretenus.

Les signaux entrent dans le circuit, sont traités par chaque étage dans un ordre séquentiel, puis partent.

Comme l'ont écrit Eccles, Ito et Szentágothai, "Cette élimination dans la conception de toute possibilité de chaînes réverbérantes d'excitation neuronale est sans aucun doute un grand avantage dans la performance du cervelet en tant qu'ordinateur, car ce que le reste du système nerveux exige du système le cervelet n'est vraisemblablement pas une sortie exprimant le fonctionnement de circuits réverbérants complexes dans le cervelet, mais plutôt une réponse rapide et claire à l'entrée d'un ensemble particulier d'informations."
Divergence et convergence : Dans le cervelet humain, les informations provenant de 200 millions d'entrées de fibres moussues sont étendues à 40 milliards de cellules granulaires, dont les sorties de fibres parallèles convergent ensuite vers 15 millions de cellules de Purkinje.

En raison de la façon dont elles sont alignées longitudinalement, les quelque 1 000 cellules de Purkinje appartenant à une microzone peuvent recevoir des entrées de jusqu'à 100 millions de fibres parallèles et concentrer leur propre sortie sur un groupe de moins de 50 cellules nucléaires profondes.

Ainsi, le réseau cérébelleux reçoit un nombre modeste d'entrées, les traite très largement à travers son réseau interne rigoureusement structuré, et envoie les résultats via un nombre très limité de cellules de sortie.
Modularité : Le système cérébelleux est fonctionnellement divisé en modules plus ou moins indépendants, qui se comptent probablement par centaines voire par milliers.

Tous les modules ont une structure interne similaire, mais des entrées et des sorties différentes.

Un module (un microcompartiment multizonal dans la terminologie d'Apps et de Garwicz) consiste en un petit groupe de neurones dans le noyau olivaire inférieur, un ensemble de longues bandes étroites de cellules de Purkinje dans le cortex cérébelleux (microzones) et un petit groupe de neurones dans l'un des noyaux cérébelleux profonds.

Différents modules partagent l'entrée des fibres moussues et des fibres parallèles, mais à d'autres égards, ils semblent fonctionner indépendamment - la sortie d'un module ne semble pas influencer de manière significative l'activité des autres modules.
Plasticité : Les synapses entre les fibres parallèles et les cellules de Purkinje, et les synapses entre les fibres moussues et les cellules nucléaires profondes, sont toutes deux susceptibles de modifier leur force.

Dans un seul module cérébelleux, l'entrée d'un milliard de fibres parallèles converge vers un groupe de moins de 50 cellules nucléaires profondes, et l'influence de chaque fibre parallèle sur ces cellules nucléaires est réglable.

Cet agencement donne une énorme flexibilité pour affiner la relation entre les entrées et les sorties du cervelet.


=== Apprentissage ===

Il existe des preuves considérables que le cervelet joue un rôle essentiel dans certains types d'apprentissage moteur.

Les tâches où le cervelet entre le plus clairement en jeu sont celles où il est nécessaire d'ajuster finement la façon d'effectuer une action.

Cependant, il y a eu beaucoup de controverse quant à savoir si l'apprentissage a lieu dans le cervelet lui-même, ou s'il sert simplement à fournir des signaux qui favorisent l'apprentissage dans d'autres structures cérébrales.

La plupart des théories qui attribuent l'apprentissage aux circuits du cervelet sont dérivées des idées de David Marr et James Albus, qui ont postulé que les fibres grimpantes fournissent un signal d'enseignement qui induit une modification synaptique dans les synapses parallèles fibre-cellule de Purkinje.

Marr a supposé que l'entrée de fibre montante entraînerait le renforcement des entrées de fibre parallèle activées de manière synchrone.

Cependant, la plupart des modèles d'apprentissage cérébelleux ultérieurs ont suivi Albus en supposant que l'activité des fibres grimpantes serait un signal d'erreur et entraînerait l'affaiblissement des entrées de fibres parallèles activées de manière synchrone.

Certains de ces derniers modèles, tels que le modèle de filtre adaptatif de Fujita, ont tenté de comprendre la fonction cérébelleuse en termes de théorie du contrôle optimal.
L'idée que l'activité des fibres grimpantes fonctionne comme un signal d'erreur a été examinée dans de nombreuses études expérimentales, certaines la soutenant mais d'autres mettant en doute.

Dans une étude pionnière de Gilbert et Thach de 1977, les cellules de Purkinje de singes apprenant une tâche d'atteinte ont montré une activité de pointe complexe accrue - qui est connue pour indiquer de manière fiable l'activité de l'apport de fibres grimpantes de la cellule - pendant les périodes où les performances étaient médiocres.

Plusieurs études sur l'apprentissage moteur chez les chats ont observé une activité de pointe complexe lorsqu'il y avait un décalage entre un mouvement prévu et le mouvement réellement exécuté.

Des études sur le réflexe vestibulo-oculaire (qui stabilise l'image visuelle sur la rétine lorsque la tête tourne) ont montré que l'activité des fibres grimpantes indiquait un "glissement rétinien", mais pas de manière très simple. L'une des tâches d'apprentissage cérébelleuses les plus étudiées est le paradigme de conditionnement du clignement des yeux, dans lequel un stimulus conditionné neutre (SC) tel qu'un ton ou une lumière est associé à plusieurs reprises à un stimulus inconditionné (US), tel qu'une bouffée d'air, qui provoque une réponse de clignement.

Après de telles présentations répétées du CS et des États-Unis, le CS finira par provoquer un clin d'œil avant les États-Unis, une réponse conditionnée ou CR.

Des expériences ont montré que des lésions localisées soit à une partie spécifique du noyau interposé (l'un des noyaux cérébelleux profonds) soit à quelques points spécifiques du cortex cérébelleux aboliraient l'apprentissage d'une réponse de clignement conditionnellement chronométrée.

Si les sorties cérébelleuses sont pharmacologiquement inactivées tout en laissant les entrées et les circuits intracellulaires intacts, l'apprentissage a lieu même si l'animal ne montre aucune réponse, alors que, si les circuits intracérébelleux sont perturbés, aucun apprentissage n'a lieu - ces faits pris ensemble plaident en faveur du fait que l'apprentissage, en effet, se fait à l'intérieur du cervelet.


=== Théories et modèles informatiques ===


La vaste base de connaissances sur la structure anatomique et les fonctions comportementales du cervelet en a fait un terrain fertile pour la théorie - il existe peut-être plus de théories sur la fonction du cervelet que sur toute autre partie du cerveau.

La distinction la plus fondamentale entre elles est entre les « théories de l'apprentissage » et les « théories de la performance », c'est-à-dire les théories qui utilisent la plasticité synaptique dans le cervelet pour expliquer son rôle dans l'apprentissage, par opposition aux théories qui tiennent compte des aspects du comportement continu sur le base du traitement du signal cérébelleux.

Plusieurs théories des deux types ont été formulées sous forme de modèles mathématiques et simulées à l'aide d'ordinateurs. Peut-être que la première théorie de "performance" était l'hypothèse de "ligne à retard" de Valentino Braitenberg.

La théorie originale avancée par Braitenberg et Roger Atwood en 1958 proposait que la propagation lente des signaux le long de fibres parallèles impose des retards prévisibles qui permettent au cervelet de détecter les relations temporelles dans une certaine fenêtre.

Les données expérimentales n'ont pas soutenu la forme originale de la théorie, mais Braitenberg a continué à plaider pour des versions modifiées.

L'hypothèse selon laquelle le cervelet fonctionne essentiellement comme un système de chronométrage a également été défendue par Richard Ivry.

Une autre théorie influente de la "performance" est la théorie du réseau tenseur de Pellionisz et Llinás, qui a fourni une formulation mathématique avancée de l'idée que le calcul fondamental effectué par le cervelet consiste à transformer les coordonnées sensorielles en coordonnées motrices. Les théories de la catégorie "apprentissage" sont presque toutes proviennent des publications de Marr et Albus.

L'article de Marr de 1969 a proposé que le cervelet soit un dispositif pour apprendre à associer des mouvements élémentaires codés par des fibres grimpantes avec des entrées de fibres moussues qui codent le contexte sensoriel.

Albus a proposé en 1971 qu'une cellule cérébelleuse de Purkinje fonctionne comme un perceptron, un dispositif d'apprentissage abstrait inspiré par les neurones.

La différence la plus fondamentale entre les théories de Marr et d'Albus est que Marr a supposé que l'activité des fibres grimpantes entraînerait le renforcement des synapses de fibres parallèles, alors qu'Albus a proposé qu'elles seraient affaiblies.

Albus a également formulé sa version sous la forme d'un algorithme logiciel qu'il a appelé CMAC (Cerebellar Model Articulation Controller), qui a été testé dans un certain nombre d'applications.


== Signification clinique ==


Les dommages au cervelet provoquent souvent des symptômes liés à la motricité, dont les détails dépendent de la partie du cervelet impliquée et de la manière dont elle est endommagée.

L'atteinte du lobe floculonodulaire peut se traduire par une perte d'équilibre et notamment une marche altérée et irrégulière, avec un appui large dû à une difficulté d'équilibre.

Les dommages à la zone latérale entraînent généralement des problèmes dans les mouvements volontaires et planifiés qualifiés qui peuvent entraîner des erreurs dans la force, la direction, la vitesse et l'amplitude des mouvements.

D'autres manifestations comprennent l'hypotonie (diminution du tonus musculaire), la dysarthrie (problèmes d'articulation de la parole), la dysmétrie (problèmes d'évaluation des distances ou des amplitudes de mouvement), la dysdiadochokinésie (incapacité à effectuer des mouvements alternés rapides tels que la marche), une altération du réflexe de contrôle ou un phénomène de rebond, et tremblement intentionnel (mouvement involontaire provoqué par des contractions alternées de groupes musculaires opposés).

Les dommages à la partie médiane peuvent perturber les mouvements de tout le corps, tandis que les dommages localisés plus latéralement sont plus susceptibles de perturber les mouvements fins des mains ou des membres.

Les dommages à la partie supérieure du cervelet ont tendance à causer des troubles de la marche et d'autres problèmes de coordination des jambes. les dommages à la partie inférieure sont plus susceptibles de provoquer des mouvements non coordonnés ou mal ciblés des bras et des mains, ainsi que des difficultés de vitesse.

Ce complexe de symptômes moteurs est appelé ataxie.
Pour identifier les problèmes cérébelleux, l'examen neurologique comprend une évaluation de la démarche (une démarche large indiquant une ataxie), des tests de pointage du doigt et une évaluation de la posture.

Si un dysfonctionnement cérébelleux est indiqué, une imagerie par résonance magnétique peut être utilisée pour obtenir une image détaillée de toute altération structurelle pouvant exister. œdème cérébral), les tumeurs, l'alcoolisme, les traumatismes physiques tels que les blessures par balle ou les explosifs, et les affections dégénératives chroniques telles que l'atrophie olivopontocérébelleuse.

Certaines formes de céphalées migraineuses peuvent également produire un dysfonctionnement temporaire du cervelet, de gravité variable.

L'infection peut entraîner des lésions cérébelleuses dans des conditions telles que les maladies à prions et le syndrome de Miller Fisher, une variante du syndrome de Guillain-Barré.


=== Vieillissement ===

Le cervelet humain change avec l'âge.

Ces changements peuvent différer de ceux des autres parties du cerveau.
Le cervelet est la région du cerveau (et la partie du corps) la plus jeune chez les centenaires selon un biomarqueur épigénétique de l'âge tissulaire appelé horloge épigénétique : il est d'environ 15 ans plus jeune que prévu chez un centenaire.

En outre, les modèles d'expression génique dans le cervelet humain montrent moins d'altérations liées à l'âge que celles du cortex cérébral.
Certaines études ont rapporté des réductions du nombre de cellules ou du volume de tissu, mais la quantité de données relatives à cette question n'est pas très importante.


=== Troubles du développement et dégénératifs ===


Les malformations congénitales, les troubles héréditaires et les conditions acquises peuvent affecter la structure cérébelleuse et, par conséquent, la fonction cérébelleuse.

À moins que la condition causale ne soit réversible, le seul traitement possible est d'aider les gens à vivre avec leurs problèmes.

La visualisation du cervelet fœtal par échographie à 18 à 20 semaines de grossesse peut être utilisée pour dépister les malformations du tube neural fœtal avec un taux de sensibilité allant jusqu'à 99%. Dans le développement normal, la signalisation sonique endogène du hérisson stimule la prolifération rapide du neurone granulaire cérébelleux progéniteurs (CGNP) dans la couche de granules externe (EGL).

Le développement cérébelleux se produit au cours de l'embryogenèse tardive et au début de la période postnatale, la prolifération du CGNP dans l'EGL culminant au début du développement (jour postnatal 7 chez la souris).

Au fur et à mesure que les CGNP se différencient en cellules granulaires cérébelleuses (également appelées neurones granulaires cérébelleux, CGN), ils migrent vers la couche granulaire interne (IGL), formant le cervelet mature (au 20e jour postnatal chez la souris).

Les mutations qui activent anormalement la signalisation Sonic hedgehog prédisposent au cancer du cervelet (médulloblastome) chez les humains atteints du syndrome de Gorlin et dans les modèles de souris génétiquement modifiées. La malformation congénitale ou le sous-développement (hypoplasie) du vermis cérébelleux est une caractéristique du syndrome de Dandy-Walker et de Joubert syndrome.

Dans de très rares cas, le cervelet entier peut être absent.

Les troubles neurologiques héréditaires, la maladie de Machado-Joseph, l'ataxie télangiectasie et l'ataxie de Friedreich provoquent une neurodégénérescence progressive liée à la perte cérébelleuse.

Les malformations cérébrales congénitales en dehors du cervelet peuvent, à leur tour, provoquer une hernie du tissu cérébelleux, comme on le voit dans certaines formes de malformation d'Arnold-Chiari. D'autres affections étroitement liées à la dégénérescence cérébelleuse comprennent les troubles neurologiques progressifs idiopathiques, l'atrophie multisystématisée et le syndrome de Ramsay Hunt. type I, et la dégénérescence cérébelleuse paranéoplasique de la maladie auto-immune, dans laquelle des tumeurs ailleurs dans le corps provoquent une réponse auto-immune qui provoque une perte neuronale dans le cervelet.

L'atrophie cérébelleuse peut résulter d'une carence aiguë en vitamine B1 (thiamine) comme on le voit dans le béribéri et dans le syndrome de Wernicke-Korsakoff, ou une carence en vitamine E. L'atrophie cérébelleuse a été observée dans de nombreux autres troubles neurologiques, notamment la maladie de Huntington, la sclérose en plaques, le tremblement essentiel, l'épilepsie myoclonique progressive et la maladie de Niemann-Pick.

L'atrophie cérébelleuse peut également survenir à la suite d'une exposition à des toxines, notamment des métaux lourds ou des drogues pharmaceutiques ou récréatives.


=== Douleur ===

Il existe un consensus général sur le fait que le cervelet est impliqué dans le traitement de la douleur.

Le cervelet reçoit la douleur des voies cortico-cérébelleuses descendantes et des voies spino-cérébelleuses ascendantes, à travers les noyaux pontiques et les olives inférieures.

Certaines de ces informations sont transférées au système moteur induisant un évitement moteur conscient de la douleur, gradué en fonction de l'intensité de la douleur.
On pense que ces entrées directes de douleur, ainsi que les entrées indirectes, induisent un comportement d'évitement de la douleur à long terme qui entraîne des changements de posture chroniques et, par conséquent, un remodelage fonctionnel et anatomique des noyaux vestibulaires et proprioceptifs.

En conséquence, la douleur neuropathique chronique peut induire un remodelage anatomique macroscopique du cerveau postérieur, y compris le cervelet.

L'ampleur de ce remodelage et l'induction de marqueurs progéniteurs neuronaux suggèrent la contribution de la neurogenèse adulte à ces changements.


== Anatomie comparée et évolution ==


Les circuits du cervelet sont similaires dans toutes les classes de vertébrés, y compris les poissons, les reptiles, les oiseaux et les mammifères.

Il existe également une structure cérébrale analogue chez les céphalopodes au cerveau bien développé, comme les pieuvres.

Cela a été considéré comme la preuve que le cervelet remplit des fonctions importantes pour toutes les espèces animales dotées d'un cerveau.
Il existe des variations considérables dans la taille et la forme du cervelet chez différentes espèces de vertébrés.

Chez les amphibiens, il est peu développé, et chez les lamproies et les myxines, le cervelet se distingue à peine du tronc cérébral.

Bien que le spinocerebellum soit présent dans ces groupes, les structures primaires sont de petits noyaux appariés correspondant au vestibulocerebellum.

Le cervelet est un peu plus gros chez les reptiles, considérablement plus gros chez les oiseaux et encore plus gros chez les mammifères.

Les grands lobes appariés et alambiqués trouvés chez l'homme sont typiques des mammifères, mais le cervelet est, en général, un seul lobe médian dans d'autres groupes, et est soit lisse, soit légèrement rainuré.

Chez les mammifères, le néocervelet est la majeure partie du cervelet en masse, mais, chez d'autres vertébrés, c'est généralement le spinocerebellum. Le cervelet des poissons cartilagineux et osseux est extraordinairement grand et complexe.

À au moins un égard important, sa structure interne diffère du cervelet des mammifères : le cervelet du poisson ne contient pas de noyaux cérébelleux profonds discrets.

Au lieu de cela, les principales cibles des cellules de Purkinje sont un type distinct de cellules réparties dans le cortex cérébelleux, un type non observé chez les mammifères.

Chez les poissons mormyridés (une famille de poissons d'eau douce faiblement électrosensibles), le cervelet est considérablement plus gros que le reste du cerveau.

La plus grande partie de celui-ci est une structure spéciale appelée valvule, qui a une architecture inhabituellement régulière et reçoit une grande partie de son apport du système électrosensoriel. La caractéristique du cervelet des mammifères est une expansion des lobes latéraux, dont les principales interactions sont avec le néocortex.

Au fur et à mesure que les singes évoluaient en grands singes, l'expansion des lobes latéraux s'est poursuivie, parallèlement à l'expansion des lobes frontaux du néocortex.

Chez les hominidés ancestraux et chez Homo sapiens jusqu'au Pléistocène moyen, le cervelet a continué à se développer, mais les lobes frontaux se sont développés plus rapidement.

La période la plus récente de l'évolution humaine, cependant, peut en fait avoir été associée à une augmentation de la taille relative du cervelet, car le néocortex a quelque peu réduit sa taille tandis que le cervelet se dilatait.

La taille du cervelet humain, par rapport au reste du cerveau, a augmenté en taille tandis que le cerveau a diminué en taille Avec le développement et la mise en œuvre des tâches motrices, des compétences visuo-spatiales et de l'apprentissage qui se déroulent dans le cervelet, la croissance On pense que le cervelet a une certaine forme de corrélation avec de plus grandes capacités cognitives humaines.

Les hémisphères latéraux du cervelet sont maintenant 2,7 fois plus grands chez les humains et les singes que chez les singes.

Ces changements dans la taille du cervelet ne peuvent pas être expliqués par une plus grande masse musculaire.

Ils montrent que soit le développement du cervelet est étroitement lié à celui du reste du cerveau, soit que les activités neuronales se déroulant dans le cervelet étaient importantes au cours de l'évolution des hominidés.

En raison du rôle du cervelet dans les fonctions cognitives, l'augmentation de sa taille peut avoir joué un rôle dans l'expansion cognitive.


=== Structures de type cervelet ===

La plupart des espèces de vertébrés ont un cervelet et une ou plusieurs structures de type cervelet, des zones cérébrales qui ressemblent au cervelet en termes de cytoarchitecture et de neurochimie.

La seule structure de type cervelet trouvée chez les mammifères est le noyau cochléaire dorsal (DCN), l'un des deux noyaux sensoriels primaires qui reçoivent l'entrée directement du nerf auditif.

Le DCN est une structure en couches, la couche inférieure contenant des cellules granulaires similaires à celles du cervelet, donnant naissance à des fibres parallèles qui montent jusqu'à la couche superficielle et la traversent horizontalement.

La couche superficielle contient un ensemble de neurones GABAergiques appelés cellules de la roue de charrette qui ressemblent anatomiquement et chimiquement aux cellules de Purkinje - elles reçoivent une entrée de fibres parallèles, mais n'ont aucune entrée qui ressemble à des fibres grimpantes.

Les neurones de sortie du DCN sont des cellules pyramidales.

Ils sont glutamatergiques, mais ressemblent également à certains égards aux cellules de Purkinje - ils ont des arbres dendritiques superficiels épineux et aplatis qui reçoivent des fibres parallèles, mais ils ont également des dendrites basales qui reçoivent des fibres nerveuses auditives, qui traversent le DCN dans une direction à perpendiculaires aux fibres parallèles.

Le DCN est le plus développé chez les rongeurs et autres petits animaux, et est considérablement réduit chez les primates.

Sa fonction n'est pas bien comprise ; les spéculations les plus populaires le relient à l'ouïe spatiale d'une manière ou d'une autre. La plupart des espèces de poissons et d'amphibiens possèdent un système de lignes latérales qui détecte les ondes de pression dans l'eau.

L'une des zones cérébrales qui reçoit l'apport principal de l'organe de la ligne latérale, le noyau octavolatéral médial, a une structure semblable à celle du cervelet, avec des cellules granulaires et des fibres parallèles.

Chez les poissons électrosensibles, l'entrée du système électrosensoriel va au noyau octavolatéral dorsal, qui a également une structure de type cervelet.

Chez les poissons à nageoires rayonnées (de loin le groupe le plus important), le tectum optique a une couche - la couche marginale - qui ressemble au cervelet. Toutes ces structures de type cervelet semblent être principalement liées aux sens plutôt qu'au moteur.

Tous ont des cellules granulaires qui donnent naissance à des fibres parallèles qui se connectent à des neurones de type Purkinje avec des synapses modifiables, mais aucun n'a de fibres grimpantes comparables à celles du cervelet - au lieu de cela, ils reçoivent une entrée directe des organes sensoriels périphériques.

Aucun n'a de fonction démontrée, mais la spéculation la plus influente est qu'ils servent à transformer les entrées sensorielles d'une manière sophistiquée, peut-être pour compenser les changements de posture corporelle.

En effet, James M.

Bower et d'autres ont soutenu, en partie sur la base de ces structures et en partie sur la base d'études cérébelleuses, que le cervelet lui-même est fondamentalement une structure sensorielle, et qu'il contribue au contrôle moteur en déplaçant le corps d'une manière qui contrôle le résultat. signaux sensoriels.

Malgré le point de vue de Bower, il existe également des preuves solides que le cervelet influence directement la production motrice chez les mammifères.


== Historique ==



=== Descriptions ===

Même les premiers anatomistes étaient capables de reconnaître le cervelet par son aspect distinctif.

Aristote et Hérophile (cités dans Galien) l'appelaient le παρεγκεφαλίς (parenkephalis), par opposition au ἐγκέφαλος (enkephalos) ou cerveau proprement dit.

La description détaillée de Galen est la plus ancienne qui subsiste.

Il a émis l'hypothèse que le cervelet était la source des nerfs moteurs. D'autres développements significatifs n'ont pas eu lieu avant la Renaissance.

Vésale a brièvement discuté du cervelet et l'anatomie a été décrite plus en détail par Thomas Willis en 1664.

D'autres travaux anatomiques ont été effectués au 18e siècle, mais ce n'est qu'au début du 19e siècle que les premières connaissances sur la fonction du cervelet ont été obtenues.

Luigi Rolando en 1809 a établi la découverte clé selon laquelle les dommages au cervelet entraînent des troubles moteurs.

Jean Pierre Flourens dans la première moitié du XIXe siècle a mené des travaux expérimentaux détaillés, qui ont révélé que les animaux atteints de lésions cérébelleuses peuvent encore bouger, mais avec une perte de coordination (mouvements étranges, démarche maladroite et faiblesse musculaire), et que la récupération après la lésion peut être presque complète à moins que la lésion ne soit très étendue.

Au début du 20e siècle, il était largement admis que la fonction principale du cervelet était liée au contrôle moteur ; la première moitié du 20e siècle a produit plusieurs descriptions détaillées des symptômes cliniques associés à la maladie cérébelleuse chez l'homme.


=== Étymologie ===

Le nom cervelet est un diminutif de cerebrum (cerveau); il peut être traduit littéralement par petit cerveau.

Le nom latin est une traduction directe du grec ancien παρεγκεφαλίς (parenkephalis), qui a été utilisé dans les travaux d'Aristote, le premier écrivain connu à décrire la structure.

Aucun autre nom n'est utilisé dans la littérature de langue anglaise, mais historiquement, une variété de noms dérivés du grec ou du latin ont été utilisés, notamment cerebrum parvum, encephalion, encranion, cerebrum posterius et parencephalis.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cervelet
