

DESCENDING COLON/
LARGE INTESTINE


The large intestine, also known as the large bowel, is the last part of the gastrointestinal tract and of the digestive system in vertebrates. 

Water is absorbed here and the remaining waste material is stored as feces before being removed by defecation.

The colon is the largest portion of the large intestine, so many mentions of the large intestine and colon overlap in meaning whenever precision is not the focus. 

Most sources define the large intestine as the combination of the cecum, colon, rectum, and anal canal. 

Some other sources exclude the anal canal.In humans, the large intestine begins in the right iliac region of the pelvis, just at or below the waist, where it is joined to the end of the small intestine at the cecum, via the ileocecal valve. 

It then continues as the colon ascending the abdomen, across the width of the abdominal cavity as the transverse colon, and then descending to the rectum and its endpoint at the anal canal. 

Overall, in humans, the large intestine is about 1.5 metres (5 ft) long, which is about one-fifth of the whole length of the gastrointestinal tract.


== Structure ==

The colon is the last part of the digestive system. 

It has a segmented appearance due to a series of saccules called haustra. 

It extracts water and salt from solid wastes before they are eliminated from the body and is the site in which flora-aided (largely bacterial) fermentation of unabsorbed material occurs. 

Unlike the small intestine, the colon does not play a major role in absorption of foods and nutrients. 

About 1.5 litres or 45 ounces of water arrives in the colon each day.

The length of the average adult human colon is 65 inches or 166 cm (range of 80 to 313 cm) for males, and 61 inches or 155 cm (range of 80 to 214 cm) for females.


=== Sections ===


In mammals, the colon consists of six sections: the cecum, the ascending colon, the transverse colon, the descending colon, the sigmoid colon, and the rectum.Sections of the colon are:

-The cecum including the appendix
-The ascending colon
-The transverse colon including the colic flexures and transverse mesocolon
-The descending colon
-The sigmoid colon – the s-shaped region of the large intestine
-The rectum

The parts of the colon are either intraperitoneal or behind it in the retroperitoneum. 

Retroperitoneal organs, in general, do not have a complete covering of peritoneum, so they are fixed in location. 

Intraperitoneal organs are completely surrounded by peritoneum and are therefore mobile. 

Of the colon, the ascending colon, descending colon and rectum are retroperitoneal, while the cecum, appendix, transverse colon and sigmoid colon are intraperitoneal. 

This is important as it affects which organs can be easily accessed during surgery, such as a laparotomy.

In terms of diameter, the cecum is the widest, averaging slightly less than 9 cm in healthy individuals, and the transverse colon averages less than 6 cm in diameter. 

The descending and sigmoid colon are slightly smaller, with the sigmoid colon averaging 4–5 cm (1.6–2.0 in) in diameter. 

Diameters larger than certain thresholds for each colonic section can be diagnostic for megacolon.


==== Cecum and appendix ====

The cecum is the first section of the colon and involved in the digestion, while the appendix which develops embryologically from it, is a structure of the colon, not involved in digestion and considered to be part of the gut-associated lymphoid tissue. 

The function of the appendix is uncertain, but some sources believe that the appendix has a role in housing a sample of the colon's microflora, and is able to help to repopulate the colon with bacteria if the microflora has been damaged during the course of an immune reaction. 

The appendix has also been shown to have a high concentration of lymphatic cells.


==== Ascending colon ====

The ascending colon is the first of four main sections of the large intestine. 

It is connected to the small intestine by a section of bowel called the cecum. 

The ascending colon runs upwards through the abdominal cavity toward the transverse colon for approximately eight inches (20 cm).

One of the main functions of the colon is to remove the water and other key nutrients from waste material and recycle it. 

As the waste material exits the small intestine through the ileocecal valve, it will move into the cecum and then to the ascending colon where this process of extraction starts. 

The waste material is pumped upwards toward the transverse colon by peristalsis. 

The ascending colon is sometimes attached to the appendix via Gerlach's valve. 

In ruminants, the ascending colon is known as the spiral colon.
Taking into account all ages and sexes, colon cancer occurs here most often (41%).


==== Transverse colon ====

The transverse colon is the part of the colon from the hepatic flexure, also known as the right colic, (the turn of the colon by the liver) to the splenic flexure also known as the left colic, (the turn of the colon by the spleen). 

The transverse colon hangs off the stomach, attached to it by a large fold of peritoneum called the greater omentum. 

On the posterior side, the transverse colon is connected to the posterior abdominal wall by a mesentery known as the transverse mesocolon.

The transverse colon is encased in peritoneum, and is therefore mobile (unlike the parts of the colon immediately before and after it).

The proximal two-thirds of the transverse colon is perfused by the middle colic artery, a branch of the superior mesenteric artery (SMA), while the latter third is supplied by branches of the inferior mesenteric artery (IMA). 

The "watershed" area between these two blood supplies, which represents the embryologic division between the midgut and hindgut, is an area sensitive to ischemia.


==== Descending colon ====

The descending colon is the part of the colon from the splenic flexure to the beginning of the sigmoid colon. 

One function of the descending colon in the digestive system is to store feces that will be emptied into the rectum. 

It is retroperitoneal in two-thirds of humans. 

In the other third, it has a (usually short) mesentery. 

The arterial supply comes via the left colic artery. 

The descending colon is also called the distal gut, as it is further along the gastrointestinal tract than the proximal gut. 

Gut flora are very dense in this region.


==== Sigmoid colon ====

The sigmoid colon is the part of the large intestine after the descending colon and before the rectum. 

The name sigmoid means S-shaped (see sigmoid; cf. sigmoid sinus). 

The walls of the sigmoid colon are muscular and contract to increase the pressure inside the colon, causing the stool to move into the rectum.

The sigmoid colon is supplied with blood from several branches (usually between 2 and 6) of the sigmoid arteries, a branch of the IMA. 

The IMA terminates as the superior rectal artery.
Sigmoidoscopy is a common diagnostic technique used to examine the sigmoid colon.


==== Rectum ====

The rectum is the last section of the large intestine. 

It holds the formed feces awaiting elimination via defecation.
It is about 12 cm long.


=== Appearance ===

The cecum – the first part of the large intestine
Taeniae coli – three bands of smooth muscle
Haustra – bulges caused by contraction of taeniae coli
Epiploic appendages – small fat accumulations on the visceraThe taenia coli run the length of the large intestine. 

Because the taenia coli are shorter than the large bowel itself, the colon becomes sacculated, forming the haustra of the colon which are the shelf-like intraluminal projections.


=== Blood supply ===

Arterial supply to the colon comes from branches of the superior mesenteric artery (SMA) and inferior mesenteric artery (IMA). 

Flow between these two systems communicates via the marginal artery of the colon that runs parallel to the colon for its entire length. 

Historically, a structure variously identified as the arc of Riolan or meandering mesenteric artery (of Moskowitz) was thought to connect the proximal SMA to the proximal IMA. 

This variably present structure would be important if either vessel were occluded. 

However, at least one review of the literature questions the existence of this vessel, with some experts calling for the abolition of these terms from future medical literature.Venous drainage usually mirrors colonic arterial supply, with the inferior mesenteric vein draining into the splenic vein, and the superior mesenteric vein joining the splenic vein to form the hepatic portal vein that then enters the liver.


=== Lymphatic drainage ===

Lymphatic drainage from the ascending colon and proximal two-thirds of the transverse colon is to the colic lymph nodes and the superior mesenteric lymph nodes, which drain into the cisterna chyli. 

The lymph from the distal one-third of the transverse colon, the descending colon, the sigmoid colon, and the upper rectum drain into the inferior mesenteric and colic lymph nodes. 

The lower rectum to the anal canal above the pectinate line drain to the internal iliac nodes. 

The anal canal below the pectinate line drains into the superficial inguinal nodes. 

The pectinate line only roughly marks this transition.


=== Nerve supply ===

Sympathetic supply : Superior & inferior mesenteric ganglia
Parasympathetic supply : Vagus & pelvic nerves


=== Development ===


=== Variation ===

One variation on the normal anatomy of the colon occurs when extra loops form, resulting in a colon that is up to five metres longer than normal. 

This condition, referred to as redundant colon, typically has no direct major health consequences, though rarely volvulus occurs, resulting in obstruction and requiring immediate medical attention. 

A significant indirect health consequence is that use of a standard adult colonoscope is difficult and in some cases impossible when a redundant colon is present, though specialized variants on the instrument (including the pediatric variant) are useful in overcoming this problem.


== Microanatomy ==


=== Colonic crypts ===


The wall of the large intestine is lined with simple columnar epithelium with invaginations. 

The invaginations are called the intestinal glands or colonic crypts.

The colon crypts are shaped like microscopic thick walled test tubes with a central hole down the length of the tube (the crypt lumen). 

Four tissue sections are shown here, two cut across the long axes of the crypts and two cut parallel to the long axes. 

In these images the cells have been stained by immunohistochemistry to show a brown-orange color if the cells produce a mitochondrial protein called cytochrome c oxidase subunit I (CCOI). 

The nuclei of the cells (located at the outer edges of the cells lining the walls of the crypts) are stained blue-gray with haematoxylin. 

As seen in panels C and D, crypts are about 75 to about 110 cells long. 

Baker et al. found that the average crypt circumference is 23 cells. 

Thus, by the images shown here, there are an average of about 1,725 to 2,530 cells per colonic crypt. 

Nooteboom et al. measuring the number of cells in a small number of crypts reported a range of 1,500 to 4,900 cells per colonic crypt. 

Cells are produced at the crypt base and migrate upward along the crypt axis before being shed into the colonic lumen days later. 

There are 5 to 6 stem cells at the bases of the crypts.

As estimated from the image in panel A, there are about 100 colonic crypts per square millimeter of the colonic epithelium. 

Since the average length of the human colon is 160.5 cm and the average inner circumference of the colon is 6.2 cm, the inner surface epithelial area of the human colon has an average area of about 995 cm2, which includes 9,950,000 (close to 10 million) crypts.

In the four tissue sections shown here, many of the intestinal glands have cells with a mitochondrial DNA mutation in the CCOI gene and appear mostly white, with their main color being the blue-gray staining of the nuclei. 

As seen in panel B, a portion of the stem cells of three crypts appear to have a mutation in CCOI, so that 40% to 50% of the cells arising from those stem cells form a white segment in the cross cut area.

Overall, the percent of crypts deficient for CCOI is less than 1% before age 40, but then increases linearly with age. 

Colonic crypts deficient for CCOI in women reaches, on average, 18% in women and 23% in men by 80–84 years of age.Crypts of the colon can reproduce by fission, as seen in panel C, where a crypt is fissioning to form two crypts, and in panel B where at least one crypt appears to be fissioning. 

Most crypts deficient in CCOI are in clusters of crypts (clones of crypts) with two or more CCOI-deficient crypts adjacent to each other (see panel D).


==== Mucosa ====

About 150 of the many thousands of protein coding genes expressed in the large intestine, some are specific to the mucous membrane in different regions and include CEACAM7.


== Function ==


The large intestine absorbs water and any remaining absorbable nutrients from the food before sending the indigestible matter to the rectum. 

The colon absorbs vitamins that are created by the colonic bacteria, such as thiamine, riboflavin, and vitamin K (especially important as the daily ingestion of vitamin K is not normally enough to maintain adequate blood coagulation). 

It also compacts feces, and stores fecal matter in the rectum until it can be discharged via the anus in defecation.

The large intestine also secretes K+ and Cl-. 

Chloride secretion increases in cystic fibrosis.
Recycling of various nutrients takes place in colon. 

Examples include fermentation of carbohydrates, short chain fatty acids, and urea cycling.

The appendix contains a small amount of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue which gives the appendix an undetermined role in immunity. 

However, the appendix is known to be important in fetal life as it contains endocrine cells that release biogenic amines and peptide hormones important for homeostasis during early growth and development. 

The appendix can be removed with no apparent damage or consequence to the patient.By the time the chyme has reached this tube, most nutrients and 90% of the water have been absorbed by the body. 

At this point some electrolytes like sodium, magnesium, and chloride are left as well as indigestible parts of ingested food (e.g., a large part of ingested amylose, starch which has been shielded from digestion heretofore, and dietary fiber, which is largely indigestible carbohydrate in either soluble or insoluble form). 

As the chyme moves through the large intestine, most of the remaining water is removed, while the chyme is mixed with mucus and bacteria (known as gut flora), and becomes feces. 

The ascending colon receives fecal material as a liquid. 

The muscles of the colon then move the watery waste material forward and slowly absorb all the excess water, causing the stools to gradually solidify as they move along into the descending colon.

The bacteria break down some of the fiber for their own nourishment and create acetate, propionate, and butyrate as waste products, which in turn are used by the cell lining of the colon for nourishment. 

No protein is made available. 

In humans, perhaps 10% of the undigested carbohydrate thus becomes available, though this may vary with diet; in other animals, including other apes and primates, who have proportionally larger colons, more is made available, thus permitting a higher portion of plant material in the diet. 

The large intestine produces no digestive enzymes — chemical digestion is completed in the small intestine before the chyme reaches the large intestine. 

The pH in the colon varies between 5.5 and 7 (slightly acidic to neutral).


=== Standing gradient osmosis ===

Water absorption at the colon typically proceeds against a transmucosal osmotic pressure gradient. 

The standing gradient osmosis is the reabsorption of water against the osmotic gradient in the intestines. 

Cells occupying the intestinal lining pump sodium ions into the intercellular space, raising the osmolarity of the intercellular fluid. 

This hypertonic fluid creates an osmotic pressure that drives water into the lateral intercellular spaces by osmosis via tight junctions and adjacent cells, which then in turn moves across the basement membrane and into the capillaries, while more sodium ions are pumped again into the intercellular fluid. 

Although water travels down an osmotic gradient in each individual step, overall, water usually travels against the osmotic gradient due to the pumping of sodium ions into the intercellular fluid. 

This allows the large intestine to absorb water despite the blood in capillaries being hypotonic compared to the fluid within the intestinal lumen.


=== Gut flora ===

The large intestine houses over 700 species of bacteria that perform a variety of functions, as well as fungi, protozoa, and archaea. 

Species diversity varies by geography and diet. 

The microbes in a human distal gut often number in the vicinity of 100 trillion, and can weigh around 200 grams (0.44 pounds). 

This mass of mostly symbiotic microbes has recently been called the latest human organ to be "discovered" or in other words, the "forgotten organ".The large intestine absorbs some of the products formed by the bacteria inhabiting this region. 

Undigested polysaccharides (fiber) are metabolized to short-chain fatty acids by bacteria in the large intestine and absorbed by passive diffusion. 

The bicarbonate that the large intestine secretes helps to neutralize the increased acidity resulting from the formation of these fatty acids.

These bacteria also produce large amounts of vitamins, especially vitamin K and biotin (a B vitamin), for absorption into the blood. 

Although this source of vitamins, in general, provides only a small part of the daily requirement, it makes a significant contribution when dietary vitamin intake is low. 

An individual who depends on absorption of vitamins formed by bacteria in the large intestine may become vitamin-deficient if treated with antibiotics that inhibit the vitamin producing species of bacteria as well as the intended disease-causing bacteria.

Other bacterial products include gas (flatus), which is a mixture of nitrogen and carbon dioxide, with small amounts of the gases hydrogen, methane, and hydrogen sulfide. 

Bacterial fermentation of undigested polysaccharides produces these. 

Some of the fecal odor is due to indoles, metabolized from the amino acid tryptophan. 

The normal flora is also essential in the development of certain tissues, including the cecum and lymphatics.

They are also involved in the production of cross-reactive antibodies. 

These are antibodies produced by the immune system against the normal flora, that are also effective against related pathogens, thereby preventing infection or invasion.

The two most prevalent phyla of the colon are firmicutes and bacteroidetes. 

The ratio between the two seems to vary widely as reported by the Human Microbiome Project. 

Bacteroides are implicated in the initiation of colitis and colon cancer. 

Bifidobacteria are also abundant, and are often described as 'friendly bacteria'.A mucus layer protects the large intestine from attacks from colonic commensal bacteria.


== Clinical significance ==


=== Disease ===

Following are the most common diseases or disorders of the colon:


=== Colonoscopy ===

Colonoscopy is the endoscopic examination of the large intestine and the distal part of the small bowel with a CCD camera or a fiber optic camera on a flexible tube passed through the anus. 

It can provide a visual diagnosis (e.g. ulceration, polyps) and grants the opportunity for biopsy or removal of suspected colorectal cancer lesions. 

Colonoscopy can remove polyps as small as one millimetre or less. 

Once polyps are removed, they can be studied with the aid of a microscope to determine if they are precancerous or not. 

It takes 15 years or less for a polyp to turn cancerous.
Colonoscopy is similar to sigmoidoscopy—the difference being related to which parts of the colon each can examine. 

A colonoscopy allows an examination of the entire colon (1200–1500 mm in length). 

A sigmoidoscopy allows an examination of the distal portion (about 600 mm) of the colon, which may be sufficient because benefits to cancer survival of colonoscopy have been limited to the detection of lesions in the distal portion of the colon.

A sigmoidoscopy is often used as a screening procedure for a full colonoscopy, often done in conjunction with a stool-based test such as a fecal occult blood test (FOBT), fecal immunochemical test (FIT), or multi-target stool DNA test (Cologuard) or blood-based test, SEPT9 DNA methylation test (Epi proColon). 

About 5% of these screened patients are referred to colonoscopy.

Virtual colonoscopy, which uses 2D and 3D imagery reconstructed from computed tomography (CT) scans or from nuclear magnetic resonance (MR) scans, is also possible, as a totally non-invasive medical test, although it is not standard and still under investigation regarding its diagnostic abilities. 

Furthermore, virtual colonoscopy does not allow for therapeutic maneuvers such as polyp/tumour removal or biopsy nor visualization of lesions smaller than 5 millimeters. 

If a growth or polyp is detected using CT colonography, a standard colonoscopy would still need to be performed. 

Additionally, surgeons have lately been using the term pouchoscopy to refer to a colonoscopy of the ileo-anal pouch.


== Other animals ==

The large intestine is truly distinct only in tetrapods, in which it is almost always separated from the small intestine by an ileocaecal valve. 

In most vertebrates, however, it is a relatively short structure running directly to the anus, although noticeably wider than the small intestine. 

Although the caecum is present in most amniotes, only in mammals does the remainder of the large intestine develop into a true colon.

In some small mammals, the colon is straight, as it is in other tetrapods, but, in the majority of mammalian species, it is divided into ascending and descending portions; a distinct transverse colon is typically present only in primates. 

However, the taeniae coli and accompanying haustra are not found in either carnivorans or ruminants. 

The rectum of mammals (other than monotremes) is derived from the cloaca of other vertebrates, and is, therefore, not truly homologous with the "rectum" found in these species.

In fish, there is no true large intestine, but simply a short rectum connecting the end of the digestive part of the gut to the cloaca. 

In sharks, this includes a rectal gland that secretes salt to help the animal maintain osmotic balance with the seawater. 

The gland somewhat resembles a caecum in structure but is not a homologous structure.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Large_intestine
;;;ES;;;



COLON DESCENDENTE/
INTESTINO GRUESO


El intestino grueso, también conocido como intestino grueso, es la última parte del tracto gastrointestinal y del sistema digestivo en los vertebrados.

El agua se absorbe aquí y el material de desecho restante se almacena como heces antes de eliminarse mediante la defecación.

El colon es la porción más grande del intestino grueso, por lo que muchas menciones del intestino grueso y el colon se superponen en significado cuando la precisión no es el enfoque.

La mayoría de las fuentes definen el intestino grueso como la combinación del ciego, el colon, el recto y el canal anal.

Algunas otras fuentes excluyen el canal anal. En los seres humanos, el intestino grueso comienza en la región ilíaca derecha de la pelvis, justo en la cintura o debajo de ella, donde se une al final del intestino delgado en el ciego, a través de la válvula ileocecal. .

Luego continúa como el colon ascendiendo por el abdomen, a lo ancho de la cavidad abdominal como el colon transverso, y luego desciende hasta el recto y su punto final en el canal anal.

En general, en los humanos, el intestino grueso mide aproximadamente 1,5 metros (5 pies) de largo, que es aproximadamente una quinta parte de la longitud total del tracto gastrointestinal.


== Estructura ==

El colon es la última parte del sistema digestivo.

Tiene un aspecto segmentado debido a una serie de sáculos llamados haustra.

Extrae el agua y la sal de los desechos sólidos antes de que sean eliminados del cuerpo y es el sitio en el que se produce la fermentación del material no absorbido asistida por la flora (principalmente bacteriana).

A diferencia del intestino delgado, el colon no juega un papel importante en la absorción de alimentos y nutrientes.

Alrededor de 1,5 litros o 45 onzas de agua llegan al colon cada día.

La longitud del colon humano promedio en un adulto es de 65 pulgadas o 166 cm (rango de 80 a 313 cm) para los hombres y de 61 pulgadas o 155 cm (rango de 80 a 214 cm) para las mujeres.


=== Secciones ===


En los mamíferos, el colon consta de seis secciones: el ciego, el colon ascendente, el colon transverso, el colon descendente, el colon sigmoide y el recto. Las secciones del colon son:

-El ciego incluyendo el apéndice
-El colon ascendente
-El colon transverso, incluidos los ángulos cólicos y el mesocolon transverso.
-El colon descendente
-El colon sigmoide - la región en forma de s del intestino grueso
-El recto

Las partes del colon son intraperitoneales o detrás de él en el retroperitoneo.

Los órganos retroperitoneales, en general, no tienen una cubierta completa de peritoneo, por lo que se encuentran fijos en su ubicación.

Los órganos intraperitoneales están completamente rodeados por peritoneo y, por lo tanto, son móviles.

Del colon, el colon ascendente, el colon descendente y el recto son retroperitoneales, mientras que el ciego, el apéndice, el colon transverso y el colon sigmoide son intraperitoneales.

Esto es importante ya que afecta a qué órganos se puede acceder fácilmente durante la cirugía, como una laparotomía.

En términos de diámetro, el ciego es el más ancho, con un promedio de poco menos de 9 cm en individuos sanos, y el colon transverso tiene un promedio de menos de 6 cm de diámetro.

El colon descendente y el sigmoide son un poco más pequeños, y el colon sigmoide tiene un diámetro promedio de 4 a 5 cm (1,6 a 2,0 pulgadas).

Los diámetros mayores que ciertos umbrales para cada sección del colon pueden ser diagnósticos de megacolon.


==== Ciego y apéndice ====

El ciego es la primera sección del colon y está involucrado en la digestión, mientras que el apéndice que se desarrolla embriológicamente a partir de él, es una estructura del colon, no está involucrado en la digestión y se considera parte del tejido linfoide asociado al intestino.

La función del apéndice es incierta, pero algunas fuentes creen que el apéndice tiene un papel en el alojamiento de una muestra de la microflora del colon y puede ayudar a repoblar el colon con bacterias si la microflora ha sido dañada durante el curso de un sistema inmunológico. reacción.

También se ha demostrado que el apéndice tiene una alta concentración de células linfáticas.


==== Colon ascendente ====

El colon ascendente es la primera de las cuatro secciones principales del intestino grueso.

Está conectado al intestino delgado por una sección del intestino llamada ciego.

El colon ascendente corre hacia arriba a través de la cavidad abdominal hacia el colon transverso por aproximadamente ocho pulgadas (20 cm).

Una de las funciones principales del colon es eliminar el agua y otros nutrientes clave del material de desecho y reciclarlo.

A medida que el material de desecho sale del intestino delgado a través de la válvula ileocecal, se trasladará al ciego y luego al colon ascendente donde comienza este proceso de extracción.

El material de desecho se bombea hacia el colon transverso por peristalsis.

El colon ascendente a veces se une al apéndice a través de la válvula de Gerlach.

En los rumiantes, el colon ascendente se conoce como colon espiral.
Teniendo en cuenta todas las edades y sexos, el cáncer de colon se presenta aquí con mayor frecuencia (41%).


==== colon transverso ====

El colon transverso es la parte del colon desde el ángulo hepático, también conocido como cólico derecho (el giro del colon por el hígado) hasta el ángulo esplénico, también conocido como cólico izquierdo (el giro del colon por el hígado). bazo).

El colon transverso cuelga del estómago, unido a él por un gran pliegue de peritoneo llamado epiplón mayor.

En el lado posterior, el colon transverso está conectado a la pared abdominal posterior por un mesenterio conocido como mesocolon transverso.

El colon transverso está encerrado en el peritoneo y, por lo tanto, es móvil (a diferencia de las partes del colon inmediatamente anteriores y posteriores).

Los dos tercios proximales del colon transverso están perfundidos por la arteria cólica media, una rama de la arteria mesentérica superior (SMA), mientras que el último tercio está irrigado por ramas de la arteria mesentérica inferior (AMI).

El área de la "línea divisoria de aguas" entre estos dos suministros de sangre, que representa la división embriológica entre el intestino medio y el intestino posterior, es un área sensible a la isquemia.


==== Dos puntos descendentes ====

El colon descendente es la parte del colon desde el ángulo esplénico hasta el comienzo del colon sigmoide.

Una de las funciones del colon descendente en el sistema digestivo es almacenar las heces que se verterán en el recto.

Es retroperitoneal en dos tercios de los humanos.

En el otro tercio, tiene un mesenterio (generalmente corto).

El suministro arterial proviene de la arteria cólica izquierda.

El colon descendente también se denomina intestino distal, ya que se encuentra más a lo largo del tracto gastrointestinal que el intestino proximal.

La flora intestinal es muy densa en esta región.


==== colon sigmoide ====

El colon sigmoide es la parte del intestino grueso después del colon descendente y antes del recto.

El nombre sigmoideo significa en forma de S (ver sigmoideo; cf. seno sigmoideo).

Las paredes del colon sigmoide son musculosas y se contraen para aumentar la presión dentro del colon, lo que hace que las heces se muevan hacia el recto.

El colon sigmoide recibe sangre de varias ramas (generalmente entre 2 y 6) de las arterias sigmoideas, una rama de la AMI.

La AMI termina como la arteria rectal superior.
La sigmoidoscopia es una técnica de diagnóstico común utilizada para examinar el colon sigmoide.


==== Recto ====

El recto es la última sección del intestino grueso.

Contiene las heces formadas en espera de eliminación a través de la defecación.
Mide unos 12 cm de largo.


=== Apariencia ===

El ciego: la primera parte del intestino grueso
Taeniae coli: tres bandas de músculo liso
Haustra - protuberancias causadas por la contracción de taeniae coli
Apéndices epiploicos: pequeñas acumulaciones de grasa en las vísceras. La tenia coli corre a lo largo del intestino grueso.

Debido a que las tenias coli son más cortas que el intestino grueso en sí, el colon se sacula, formando los haustras del colon, que son las proyecciones intraluminales en forma de plataforma.


=== Suministro de sangre ===

El suministro arterial al colon proviene de ramas de la arteria mesentérica superior (SMA) y la arteria mesentérica inferior (AMI).

El flujo entre estos dos sistemas se comunica a través de la arteria marginal del colon que discurre paralela al colon en toda su longitud.

Históricamente, se pensó que una estructura identificada diversamente como el arco de Riolan o la arteria mesentérica serpenteante (de Moskowitz) conectaba la SMA proximal con la AMI proximal.

Esta estructura de presencia variable sería importante si cualquiera de los vasos estuviera ocluido.

Sin embargo, al menos una revisión de la literatura cuestiona la existencia de este vaso, y algunos expertos piden la abolición de estos términos de la futura literatura médica. El drenaje venoso generalmente refleja el suministro arterial colónico, con la vena mesentérica inferior drenando en la vena esplénica, y la vena mesentérica superior que se une a la vena esplénica para formar la vena porta hepática que luego ingresa al hígado.


=== Drenaje linfático ===

El drenaje linfático desde el colon ascendente y los dos tercios proximales del colon transverso se dirige a los ganglios linfáticos cólicos y a los ganglios linfáticos mesentéricos superiores, que drenan en la cisterna del quilo.

La linfa del tercio distal del colon transverso, el colon descendente, el colon sigmoide y el recto superior drenan en los ganglios linfáticos mesentéricos inferiores y cólicos.

El recto inferior al canal anal por encima de la línea pectínea drena a los ganglios ilíacos internos.

El canal anal por debajo de la línea pectínea drena en los ganglios inguinales superficiales.

La línea pectinada solo marca aproximadamente esta transición.


=== Suministro nervioso ===

Suministro simpático: ganglios mesentéricos superior e inferior
Suministro parasimpático: nervios vago y pélvico


=== Desarrollo ===


=== Variación ===

Una variación de la anatomía normal del colon ocurre cuando se forman bucles adicionales, lo que da como resultado un colon que es hasta cinco metros más largo de lo normal.

Esta condición, conocida como colon redundante, generalmente no tiene consecuencias directas importantes para la salud, aunque rara vez se produce un vólvulo, lo que provoca una obstrucción y requiere atención médica inmediata.

Una consecuencia indirecta significativa para la salud es que el uso de un colonoscopio estándar para adultos es difícil y, en algunos casos, imposible cuando hay un colon redundante, aunque las variantes especializadas del instrumento (incluida la variante pediátrica) son útiles para superar este problema.


== Microanatomía ==


=== Criptas colónicas ===


La pared del intestino grueso está revestida de epitelio cilíndrico simple con invaginaciones.

Las invaginaciones se denominan glándulas intestinales o criptas colónicas.

Las criptas del colon tienen forma de tubos de ensayo microscópicos de paredes gruesas con un orificio central a lo largo del tubo (la luz de la cripta).

Aquí se muestran cuatro secciones de tejido, dos cortadas a través de los ejes largos de las criptas y dos cortadas paralelas a los ejes largos.

En estas imágenes, las células han sido teñidas por inmunohistoquímica para mostrar un color marrón anaranjado si las células producen una proteína mitocondrial llamada citocromo c oxidasa subunidad I (CCOI).

Los núcleos de las células (ubicados en los bordes exteriores de las células que recubren las paredes de las criptas) se tiñen de gris azulado con hematoxilina.

Como se ve en los paneles C y D, las criptas tienen entre 75 y 110 celdas de largo.

panadero et al. encontró que la circunferencia promedio de la cripta es de 23 celdas.

Por lo tanto, según las imágenes que se muestran aquí, hay un promedio de alrededor de 1725 a 2530 células por cripta colónica.

Nooteboom et al. medir el número de células en un pequeño número de criptas informó un rango de 1500 a 4900 células por cripta colónica.

Las células se producen en la base de la cripta y migran hacia arriba a lo largo del eje de la cripta antes de arrojarse a la luz del colon días después.

Hay de 5 a 6 células madre en las bases de las criptas.

Como se estima a partir de la imagen del panel A, hay unas 100 criptas colónicas por milímetro cuadrado del epitelio colónico.

Dado que la longitud promedio del colon humano es de 160,5 cm y la circunferencia interna promedio del colon es de 6,2 cm, el área epitelial de la superficie interna del colon humano tiene un área promedio de aproximadamente 995 cm2, que incluye 9 950 000 (cerca de 10 millones) criptas.

En las cuatro secciones de tejido que se muestran aquí, muchas de las glándulas intestinales tienen células con una mutación de ADN mitocondrial en el gen CCOI y aparecen en su mayoría blancas, siendo su color principal la tinción azul grisácea de los núcleos.

Como se ve en el panel B, una parte de las células madre de tres criptas parece tener una mutación en CCOI, de modo que entre el 40 % y el 50 % de las células que surgen de esas células madre forman un segmento blanco en el área de corte transversal.

En general, el porcentaje de criptas deficientes para CCOI es inferior al 1 % antes de los 40 años, pero luego aumenta linealmente con la edad.

Las criptas colónicas deficientes para CCOI en mujeres alcanzan, en promedio, 18% en mujeres y 23% en hombres entre los 80 y 84 años de edad. Las criptas del colon pueden reproducirse por fisión, como se ve en el panel C, donde una cripta se fisiona para forman dos criptas, y en el panel B donde al menos una cripta parece estar fisionándose.

La mayoría de las criptas deficientes en CCOI están en grupos de criptas (clones de criptas) con dos o más criptas deficientes en CCOI adyacentes entre sí (ver panel D).


==== Mucosa ====

Alrededor de 150 de los muchos miles de genes que codifican proteínas expresados ​​en el intestino grueso, algunos son específicos de la membrana mucosa en diferentes regiones e incluyen CEACAM7.


== Función ==


El intestino grueso absorbe el agua y los nutrientes absorbibles restantes de los alimentos antes de enviar la materia no digerible al recto.

El colon absorbe las vitaminas creadas por las bacterias del colon, como la tiamina, la riboflavina y la vitamina K (especialmente importante ya que la ingestión diaria de vitamina K normalmente no es suficiente para mantener una coagulación sanguínea adecuada).

También compacta las heces y almacena la materia fecal en el recto hasta que pueda eliminarse por el ano durante la defecación.

El intestino grueso también secreta K+ y Cl-.

La secreción de cloruro aumenta en la fibrosis quística.
El reciclaje de varios nutrientes tiene lugar en el colon.

Los ejemplos incluyen la fermentación de carbohidratos, ácidos grasos de cadena corta y el ciclo de la urea.

El apéndice contiene una pequeña cantidad de tejido linfoide asociado a la mucosa que le da al apéndice un papel indeterminado en la inmunidad.

Sin embargo, se sabe que el apéndice es importante en la vida fetal, ya que contiene células endocrinas que liberan aminas biogénicas y hormonas peptídicas importantes para la homeostasis durante el crecimiento y desarrollo tempranos.

El apéndice se puede extirpar sin daño aparente ni consecuencias para el paciente. Cuando el quimo llega a este tubo, el cuerpo ha absorbido la mayoría de los nutrientes y el 90% del agua.

En este punto, quedan algunos electrolitos como el sodio, el magnesio y el cloruro, así como partes no digeribles de los alimentos ingeridos (p. ej., una gran parte de la amilosa ingerida, el almidón que se ha protegido de la digestión hasta ahora y la fibra dietética, que es en gran medida un carbohidrato no digerible). en forma soluble o insoluble).

A medida que el quimo se mueve a través del intestino grueso, la mayor parte del agua restante se elimina, mientras que el quimo se mezcla con moco y bacterias (conocidas como flora intestinal) y se convierte en heces.

El colon ascendente recibe materia fecal en forma líquida.

Los músculos del colon luego mueven el material de desecho acuoso hacia adelante y absorben lentamente todo el exceso de agua, lo que hace que las heces se solidifiquen gradualmente a medida que avanzan hacia el colon descendente.

Las bacterias descomponen parte de la fibra para su propia alimentación y crean acetato, propionato y butirato como productos de desecho, que a su vez son utilizados por el revestimiento celular del colon para su alimentación.

No hay proteína disponible.

En los seres humanos, quizás el 10% de los carbohidratos no digeridos queda disponible, aunque esto puede variar con la dieta; en otros animales, incluidos otros simios y primates, que tienen colones proporcionalmente más grandes, hay más disponibles, lo que permite una mayor porción de material vegetal en la dieta.

El intestino grueso no produce enzimas digestivas: la digestión química se completa en el intestino delgado antes de que el quimo llegue al intestino grueso.

El pH en el colon varía entre 5,5 y 7 (ligeramente ácido a neutro).


=== Ósmosis de gradiente permanente ===

La absorción de agua en el colon normalmente procede en contra de un gradiente de presión osmótica transmucosa.

La ósmosis de gradiente permanente es la reabsorción de agua contra el gradiente osmótico en los intestinos.

Las células que ocupan el revestimiento intestinal bombean iones de sodio al espacio intercelular, elevando la osmolaridad del líquido intercelular.

Este líquido hipertónico crea una presión osmótica que impulsa el agua hacia los espacios intercelulares laterales por ósmosis a través de uniones estrechas y células adyacentes, que luego se mueve a través de la membrana basal y hacia los capilares, mientras que se bombean más iones de sodio nuevamente al líquido intercelular.

Aunque el agua viaja a favor de un gradiente osmótico en cada paso individual, en general, el agua generalmente viaja en contra del gradiente osmótico debido al bombeo de iones de sodio en el líquido intercelular.

Esto permite que el intestino grueso absorba agua a pesar de que la sangre en los capilares sea hipotónica en comparación con el líquido dentro de la luz intestinal.


=== Flora intestinal ===

El intestino grueso alberga más de 700 especies de bacterias que realizan una variedad de funciones, así como hongos, protozoos y arqueas.

La diversidad de especies varía según la geografía y la dieta.

Los microbios en un intestino distal humano a menudo suman alrededor de 100 billones y pueden pesar alrededor de 200 gramos (0,44 libras).

Esta masa de microbios, en su mayoría simbióticos, ha sido llamada recientemente el último órgano humano en ser "descubierto" o, en otras palabras, el "órgano olvidado". El intestino grueso absorbe algunos de los productos formados por las bacterias que habitan en esta región.

Los polisacáridos no digeridos (fibra) son metabolizados a ácidos grasos de cadena corta por bacterias en el intestino grueso y absorbidos por difusión pasiva.

El bicarbonato que segrega el intestino grueso ayuda a neutralizar el aumento de acidez resultante de la formación de estos ácidos grasos.

Estas bacterias también producen grandes cantidades de vitaminas, especialmente vitamina K y biotina (una vitamina B), para su absorción en la sangre.

Aunque esta fuente de vitaminas, en general, proporciona solo una pequeña parte del requerimiento diario, hace una contribución significativa cuando la ingesta de vitaminas en la dieta es baja.

Una persona que depende de la absorción de vitaminas formadas por bacterias en el intestino grueso puede volverse deficiente en vitaminas si se trata con antibióticos que inhiben las especies de bacterias productoras de vitaminas, así como las bacterias causantes de enfermedades.

Otros productos bacterianos incluyen gas (flatus), que es una mezcla de nitrógeno y dióxido de carbono, con pequeñas cantidades de hidrógeno, metano y sulfuro de hidrógeno.

La fermentación bacteriana de polisacáridos no digeridos los produce.

Parte del olor fecal se debe a los indoles, metabolizados a partir del aminoácido triptófano.

La flora normal también es esencial en el desarrollo de ciertos tejidos, incluidos el ciego y los linfáticos.

También están involucrados en la producción de anticuerpos de reacción cruzada.

Estos son anticuerpos producidos por el sistema inmunológico contra la flora normal, que también son efectivos contra patógenos relacionados, previniendo así la infección o invasión.

Los dos filos más prevalentes del colon son firmicutes y bacteroidetes.

La proporción entre los dos parece variar ampliamente según lo informado por el Proyecto Microbioma Humano.

Bacteroides están implicados en el inicio de la colitis y el cáncer de colon.

Las bifidobacterias también son abundantes y, a menudo, se describen como "bacterias amigables". Una capa de moco protege el intestino grueso de los ataques de las bacterias comensales del colon.


== Importancia clínica ==


=== Enfermedad ===

Las siguientes son las enfermedades o trastornos más comunes del colon:


=== Colonoscopia ===

La colonoscopia es el examen endoscópico del intestino grueso y la parte distal del intestino delgado con una cámara CCD o una cámara de fibra óptica en un tubo flexible que se pasa por el ano.

Puede proporcionar un diagnóstico visual (p. ej., ulceración, pólipos) y otorga la oportunidad de realizar una biopsia o extirpar las lesiones sospechosas de cáncer colorrectal.

La colonoscopia puede extirpar pólipos tan pequeños como un milímetro o menos.

Una vez que se eliminan los pólipos, se pueden estudiar con la ayuda de un microscopio para determinar si son precancerosos o no.

Se necesitan 15 años o menos para que un pólipo se vuelva canceroso.
La colonoscopia es similar a la sigmoidoscopia: la diferencia está relacionada con las partes del colon que cada uno puede examinar.

Una colonoscopia permite un examen de todo el colon (1200–1500 mm de longitud).

Una sigmoidoscopia permite un examen de la porción distal (alrededor de 600 mm) del colon, lo que puede ser suficiente porque los beneficios de la colonoscopia para la supervivencia del cáncer se han limitado a la detección de lesiones en la porción distal del colon.

Una sigmoidoscopia a menudo se usa como un procedimiento de detección para una colonoscopia completa, a menudo se realiza junto con una prueba basada en heces, como una prueba de sangre oculta en heces (FOBT), una prueba inmunoquímica fecal (FIT) o una prueba de ADN en heces de objetivos múltiples ( Cologuard) o prueba en sangre, prueba de metilación del ADN SEPT9 (Epi proColon).

Alrededor del 5% de estos pacientes evaluados son derivados a una colonoscopia.

La colonoscopia virtual, que utiliza imágenes en 2D y 3D reconstruidas a partir de tomografías computarizadas (TC) o de resonancias magnéticas nucleares (RM), también es posible, como prueba médica totalmente no invasiva, aunque no es estándar y aún está bajo investigación con respecto a sus capacidades diagnósticas.

Además, la colonoscopia virtual no permite maniobras terapéuticas como la extirpación de pólipos/tumores o biopsia ni la visualización de lesiones menores de 5 milímetros.

Si se detecta un crecimiento o un pólipo mediante una colonografía por TC, aún sería necesario realizar una colonoscopia estándar.

Además, los cirujanos han estado utilizando últimamente el término bolsa para referirse a una colonoscopia de la bolsa ileoanal.


== Otros animales ==

El intestino grueso es realmente distinto solo en los tetrápodos, en los que casi siempre está separado del intestino delgado por una válvula ileocecal.

En la mayoría de los vertebrados, sin embargo, es una estructura relativamente corta que va directamente al ano, aunque notablemente más ancha que el intestino delgado.

Aunque el ciego está presente en la mayoría de los amniotas, solo en los mamíferos el resto del intestino grueso se convierte en un verdadero colon.

En algunos pequeños mamíferos, el colon es recto, como lo es en otros tetrápodos, pero, en la mayoría de las especies de mamíferos, está dividido en porciones ascendentes y descendentes; un colon transverso distinto típicamente está presente solo en primates.

Sin embargo, la taeniae coli y los haustras que la acompañan no se encuentran ni en los carnívoros ni en los rumiantes.

El recto de los mamíferos (excepto los monotremas) se deriva de la cloaca de otros vertebrados y, por lo tanto, no es verdaderamente homólogo con el "recto" que se encuentra en estas especies.

En los peces, no existe un verdadero intestino grueso, sino simplemente un recto corto que conecta el extremo de la parte digestiva del intestino con la cloaca.

En los tiburones, esto incluye una glándula rectal que secreta sal para ayudar al animal a mantener el equilibrio osmótico con el agua de mar.

La glándula se parece un poco a un ciego en estructura pero no es una estructura homóloga.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Intestino_grueso

;;;PT;;;



CÓLON DESCENDENTE/
INTESTINO GROSSO


O intestino grosso, também conhecido como intestino grosso, é a última parte do trato gastrointestinal e do sistema digestivo em vertebrados.

A água é absorvida aqui e o material residual restante é armazenado como fezes antes de ser removido pela defecação.

O cólon é a maior porção do intestino grosso, então muitas menções ao intestino grosso e ao cólon se sobrepõem em significado sempre que a precisão não é o foco.

A maioria das fontes define o intestino grosso como a combinação do ceco, cólon, reto e canal anal.

Algumas outras fontes excluem o canal anal. Em humanos, o intestino grosso começa na região ilíaca direita da pelve, logo abaixo ou na cintura, onde se une ao final do intestino delgado no ceco, através da válvula ileocecal .

Ele então continua como cólon subindo pelo abdome, através da largura da cavidade abdominal como cólon transverso, e então descendo para o reto e seu ponto final no canal anal.

No geral, em humanos, o intestino grosso tem cerca de 1,5 metros (5 pés) de comprimento, que é cerca de um quinto de todo o comprimento do trato gastrointestinal.


== Estrutura ==

O cólon é a última parte do sistema digestivo.

Tem uma aparência segmentada devido a uma série de sáculos chamados haustra.

Ele extrai água e sal de resíduos sólidos antes de serem eliminados do corpo e é o local em que ocorre a fermentação auxiliada pela flora (principalmente bacteriana) de material não absorvido.

Ao contrário do intestino delgado, o cólon não desempenha um papel importante na absorção de alimentos e nutrientes.

Cerca de 1,5 litros ou 45 onças de água chega ao cólon todos os dias.

O comprimento médio do cólon humano adulto é de 65 polegadas ou 166 cm (intervalo de 80 a 313 cm) para machos e 61 polegadas ou 155 cm (intervalo de 80 a 214 cm) para fêmeas.


=== Seções ===


Nos mamíferos, o cólon consiste em seis seções: ceco, cólon ascendente, cólon transverso, cólon descendente, cólon sigmóide e reto. As seções do cólon são:

-O ceco incluindo o apêndice
-O cólon ascendente
-O cólon transverso, incluindo as flexuras cólicas e o mesocólon transverso
-O cólon descendente
-O cólon sigmóide - a região em forma de S do intestino grosso
-O reto

As partes do cólon são intraperitoneais ou atrás dele no retroperitônio.

Os órgãos retroperitoneais, em geral, não possuem uma cobertura completa do peritônio, por isso são fixados no local.

Os órgãos intraperitoneais são completamente circundados por peritônio e, portanto, são móveis.

Do cólon, o cólon ascendente, cólon descendente e reto são retroperitoneais, enquanto o ceco, apêndice, cólon transverso e cólon sigmóide são intraperitoneais.

Isso é importante, pois afeta quais órgãos podem ser facilmente acessados ​​durante a cirurgia, como uma laparotomia.

Em termos de diâmetro, o ceco é o mais largo, tendo em média pouco menos de 9 cm em indivíduos saudáveis, e o cólon transverso tem em média menos de 6 cm de diâmetro.

O cólon descendente e sigmóide são ligeiramente menores, com o cólon sigmóide com média de 4 a 5 cm (1,6 a 2,0 pol.) de diâmetro.

Diâmetros maiores que certos limites para cada seção do cólon podem ser diagnósticos de megacólon.


==== Ceco e apêndice ====

O ceco é a primeira seção do cólon e envolvida na digestão, enquanto o apêndice que se desenvolve embriologicamente a partir dele, é uma estrutura do cólon, não envolvida na digestão e considerada parte do tecido linfóide associado ao intestino.

A função do apêndice é incerta, mas algumas fontes acreditam que o apêndice tem um papel em abrigar uma amostra da microflora do cólon e é capaz de ajudar a repovoar o cólon com bactérias se a microflora tiver sido danificada durante o curso de uma infecção imunológica. reação.

O apêndice também demonstrou ter uma alta concentração de células linfáticas.


==== Dois pontos ascendentes ====

O cólon ascendente é a primeira das quatro seções principais do intestino grosso.

Ele está conectado ao intestino delgado por uma seção do intestino chamada ceco.

O cólon ascendente corre para cima através da cavidade abdominal em direção ao cólon transverso por aproximadamente 20 cm.

Uma das principais funções do cólon é remover a água e outros nutrientes essenciais dos resíduos e reciclá-los.

À medida que o material residual sai do intestino delgado através da válvula ileocecal, ele se move para o ceco e depois para o cólon ascendente, onde esse processo de extração começa.

O material residual é bombeado para cima em direção ao cólon transverso pelo peristaltismo.

O cólon ascendente às vezes está ligado ao apêndice através da válvula de Gerlach.

Nos ruminantes, o cólon ascendente é conhecido como cólon espiral.
Levando em conta todas as idades e sexos, o câncer de cólon ocorre aqui com mais frequência (41%).


==== Cólon transverso ====

O cólon transverso é a parte do cólon desde a flexura hepática, também conhecida como cólica direita, (a volta do cólon pelo fígado) até a flexura esplênica também conhecida como cólica esquerda (a volta do cólon pelo fígado) baço).

O cólon transverso pende do estômago, ligado a ele por uma grande dobra de peritônio chamada omento maior.

No lado posterior, o cólon transverso está conectado à parede abdominal posterior por um mesentério conhecido como mesocólon transverso.

O cólon transverso está envolto em peritônio e, portanto, é móvel (diferentemente das partes do cólon imediatamente antes e depois dele).

Os dois terços proximais do cólon transverso são perfundidos pela artéria cólica média, ramo da artéria mesentérica superior (AMS), enquanto o último terço é suprido por ramos da artéria mesentérica inferior (AMI).

A área "divisor de águas" entre esses dois suprimentos sanguíneos, que representa a divisão embriológica entre o intestino médio e posterior, é uma área sensível à isquemia.


==== Dois pontos descendentes ====

O cólon descendente é a parte do cólon desde a flexura esplênica até o início do cólon sigmóide.

Uma função do cólon descendente no sistema digestivo é armazenar fezes que serão esvaziadas no reto.

É retroperitoneal em dois terços dos humanos.

No outro terço, possui um mesentério (geralmente curto).

O suprimento arterial vem através da artéria cólica esquerda.

O cólon descendente também é chamado de intestino distal, pois está mais ao longo do trato gastrointestinal do que o intestino proximal.

A flora intestinal é muito densa nesta região.


==== Cólon sigmóide ====

O cólon sigmóide é a parte do intestino grosso após o cólon descendente e antes do reto.

O nome sigmóide significa em forma de S (ver sigmóide; cf. seio sigmóide).

As paredes do cólon sigmóide são musculares e se contraem para aumentar a pressão dentro do cólon, fazendo com que as fezes se movam para o reto.

O cólon sigmóide é suprido com sangue de vários ramos (geralmente entre 2 e 6) das artérias sigmóides, um ramo da AMI.

A AMI termina como a artéria retal superior.
A sigmoidoscopia é uma técnica de diagnóstico comum usada para examinar o cólon sigmóide.


==== Reto ====

O reto é a última seção do intestino grosso.

Ele mantém as fezes formadas aguardando eliminação por defecação.
Tem cerca de 12 cm de comprimento.


=== Aparência ===

O ceco - a primeira parte do intestino grosso
Taeniae coli - três bandas de músculo liso
Haustra - protuberâncias causadas pela contração de taeniae coli
Apêndices epiplóicos – pequenos acúmulos de gordura nas vísceras A taenia coli percorre toda a extensão do intestino grosso.

Como a ténia coli é mais curta que o próprio intestino grosso, o cólon torna-se saculado, formando a haustra do cólon, que são as projeções intraluminais em forma de prateleira.


=== Suprimento sanguíneo ===

O suprimento arterial para o cólon vem de ramos da artéria mesentérica superior (SMA) e da artéria mesentérica inferior (AMI).

O fluxo entre esses dois sistemas se comunica através da artéria marginal do cólon que corre paralela ao cólon em toda a sua extensão.

Historicamente, pensava-se que uma estrutura variadamente identificada como o arco de Riolan ou artéria mesentérica meandrante (de Moskowitz) conectava a SMA proximal à AMI proximal.

Esta estrutura presente variável seria importante se qualquer um dos vasos estivesse ocluído.

No entanto, pelo menos uma revisão da literatura questiona a existência desse vaso, com alguns especialistas pedindo a abolição desses termos da literatura médica futura. A drenagem venosa geralmente reflete o suprimento arterial do cólon, com a veia mesentérica inferior drenando para a veia esplênica, e a veia mesentérica superior unindo-se à veia esplênica para formar a veia porta hepática que então entra no fígado.


=== Drenagem linfática ===

A drenagem linfática do cólon ascendente e dois terços proximais do cólon transverso é para os linfonodos cólicos e os linfonodos mesentéricos superiores, que drenam para a cisterna do quilo.

A linfa do terço distal do cólon transverso, do cólon descendente, do cólon sigmóide e do reto superior drena para os linfonodos mesentéricos inferiores e cólicos.

O reto inferior para o canal anal acima da linha pectinada drena para os linfonodos ilíacos internos.

O canal anal abaixo da linha pectinada drena para os linfonodos inguinais superficiais.

A linha pectinada marca apenas aproximadamente essa transição.


=== Suprimento nervoso ===

Suprimento simpático: gânglios mesentéricos superior e inferior
Suprimento parassimpático: nervos vago e pélvico


=== Desenvolvimento ===


=== Variação ===

Uma variação na anatomia normal do cólon ocorre quando laços extras se formam, resultando em um cólon que é até cinco metros mais longo que o normal.

Essa condição, chamada de cólon redundante, normalmente não tem consequências diretas para a saúde, embora raramente ocorra volvo, resultando em obstrução e exigindo atenção médica imediata.

Uma consequência indireta significativa para a saúde é que o uso de um colonoscópio adulto padrão é difícil e, em alguns casos, impossível quando um cólon redundante está presente, embora variantes especializadas no instrumento (incluindo a variante pediátrica) sejam úteis para superar esse problema.


== Microanatomia ==


=== Criptas colônicas ===


A parede do intestino grosso é revestida por epitélio colunar simples com invaginações.

As invaginações são chamadas de glândulas intestinais ou criptas colônicas.

As criptas do cólon têm a forma de tubos de ensaio microscópicos de paredes grossas com um orifício central ao longo do comprimento do tubo (o lúmen da cripta).

Quatro seções de tecido são mostradas aqui, duas cortadas nos eixos longos das criptas e duas cortadas paralelas aos eixos longos.

Nestas imagens, as células foram coradas por imuno-histoquímica para mostrar uma cor marrom-alaranjada se as células produzirem uma proteína mitocondrial chamada citocromo c oxidase subunidade I (CCOI).

Os núcleos das células (localizados nas bordas externas das células que revestem as paredes das criptas) são corados de azul acinzentado com hematoxilina.

Como visto nos painéis C e D, as criptas têm cerca de 75 a cerca de 110 células de comprimento.

Baker et ai. descobriram que a circunferência média da cripta é de 23 células.

Assim, pelas imagens aqui apresentadas, há uma média de cerca de 1.725 a 2.530 células por cripta colônica.

Nooteboom et al. medir o número de células em um pequeno número de criptas relatou um intervalo de 1.500 a 4.900 células por cripta colônica.

As células são produzidas na base da cripta e migram para cima ao longo do eixo da cripta antes de serem lançadas no lúmen do cólon dias depois.

Existem 5 a 6 células estaminais nas bases das criptas.

Conforme estimado a partir da imagem do painel A, existem cerca de 100 criptas colônicas por milímetro quadrado do epitélio colônico.

Como o comprimento médio do cólon humano é de 160,5 cm e a circunferência interna média do cólon é de 6,2 cm, a área epitelial da superfície interna do cólon humano tem uma área média de cerca de 995 cm2, que inclui 9.950.000 (perto de 10 milhões) criptas.

Nas quatro seções de tecido mostradas aqui, muitas das glândulas intestinais têm células com uma mutação do DNA mitocondrial no gene CCOI e aparecem principalmente brancas, com sua cor principal sendo a coloração azul-cinza dos núcleos.

Como visto no painel B, uma porção das células-tronco de três criptas parecem ter uma mutação no CCOI, de modo que 40% a 50% das células oriundas dessas células-tronco formam um segmento branco na área de corte transversal.

No geral, a porcentagem de criptas deficientes para CCOI é inferior a 1% antes dos 40 anos, mas aumenta linearmente com a idade.

As criptas colônicas deficientes para CCOI em mulheres atingem, em média, 18% em mulheres e 23% em homens entre 80 e 84 anos de idade. formam duas criptas, e no painel B onde pelo menos uma cripta parece estar em fissão.

A maioria das criptas deficientes em CCOI estão em aglomerados de criptas (clones de criptas) com duas ou mais criptas deficientes em CCOI adjacentes umas às outras (veja o painel D).


==== Mucosa ====

Cerca de 150 dos muitos milhares de genes codificadores de proteínas expressos no intestino grosso, alguns são específicos da membrana mucosa em diferentes regiões e incluem CEACAM7.


== Função ==


O intestino grosso absorve água e quaisquer nutrientes absorvíveis remanescentes dos alimentos antes de enviar a matéria indigerível para o reto.

O cólon absorve vitaminas que são criadas pelas bactérias colônicas, como tiamina, riboflavina e vitamina K (especialmente importante porque a ingestão diária de vitamina K normalmente não é suficiente para manter a coagulação sanguínea adequada).

Também compacta as fezes e armazena matéria fecal no reto até que possa ser eliminada pelo ânus na defecação.

O intestino grosso também secreta K+ e Cl-.

A secreção de cloreto aumenta na fibrose cística.
A reciclagem de vários nutrientes ocorre no cólon.

Exemplos incluem fermentação de carboidratos, ácidos graxos de cadeia curta e ciclagem de uréia.

O apêndice contém uma pequena quantidade de tecido linfóide associado à mucosa que confere ao apêndice um papel indeterminado na imunidade.

No entanto, o apêndice é conhecido por ser importante na vida fetal, pois contém células endócrinas que liberam aminas biogênicas e hormônios peptídicos importantes para a homeostase durante o crescimento e desenvolvimento inicial.

O apêndice pode ser removido sem danos aparentes ou consequências para o paciente. No momento em que o quimo atinge este tubo, a maioria dos nutrientes e 90% da água já foram absorvidos pelo corpo.

Neste ponto, alguns eletrólitos como sódio, magnésio e cloreto são deixados, bem como partes não digeríveis dos alimentos ingeridos (por exemplo, uma grande parte da amilose ingerida, amido que foi protegido da digestão até agora e fibra dietética, que é basicamente carboidrato indigerível na forma solúvel ou insolúvel).

À medida que o quimo se move pelo intestino grosso, a maior parte da água restante é removida, enquanto o quimo é misturado com muco e bactérias (conhecido como flora intestinal) e se torna fezes.

O cólon ascendente recebe material fecal como um líquido.

Os músculos do cólon então movem o material residual aquoso para frente e absorvem lentamente todo o excesso de água, fazendo com que as fezes se solidifiquem gradualmente à medida que se movem para o cólon descendente.

As bactérias quebram parte da fibra para sua própria nutrição e criam acetato, propionato e butirato como produtos residuais, que por sua vez são usados ​​pelo revestimento celular do cólon para nutrição.

Nenhuma proteína é disponibilizada.

Em humanos, talvez 10% do carboidrato não digerido fica disponível, embora isso possa variar com a dieta; em outros animais, incluindo outros símios e primatas, que têm cólons proporcionalmente maiores, mais é disponibilizado, permitindo assim uma maior porção de material vegetal na dieta.

O intestino grosso não produz enzimas digestivas – a digestão química é completada no intestino delgado antes que o quimo chegue ao intestino grosso.

O pH no cólon varia entre 5,5 e 7 (ligeiramente ácido a neutro).


=== Osmose gradiente permanente ===

A absorção de água no cólon normalmente ocorre contra um gradiente de pressão osmótica transmucosa.

A osmose de gradiente permanente é a reabsorção de água contra o gradiente osmótico nos intestinos.

As células que ocupam o revestimento intestinal bombeiam íons de sódio para o espaço intercelular, aumentando a osmolaridade do líquido intercelular.

Este fluido hipertônico cria uma pressão osmótica que conduz a água para os espaços intercelulares laterais por osmose através de junções apertadas e células adjacentes, que então se movem através da membrana basal e para os capilares, enquanto mais íons de sódio são bombeados novamente para o fluido intercelular.

Embora a água viaje em um gradiente osmótico em cada etapa individual, em geral, a água geralmente viaja contra o gradiente osmótico devido ao bombeamento de íons sódio para o fluido intercelular.

Isso permite que o intestino grosso absorva água, apesar do sangue nos capilares ser hipotônico em comparação com o fluido dentro do lúmen intestinal.


=== Flora intestinal ===

O intestino grosso abriga mais de 700 espécies de bactérias que desempenham uma variedade de funções, além de fungos, protozoários e archaea.

A diversidade de espécies varia de acordo com a geografia e a dieta.

Os micróbios em um intestino distal humano geralmente chegam a cerca de 100 trilhões e podem pesar cerca de 200 gramas (0,44 libras).

Essa massa de micróbios majoritariamente simbióticos foi recentemente chamada de o mais recente órgão humano a ser "descoberto" ou, em outras palavras, o "órgão esquecido". O intestino grosso absorve alguns dos produtos formados pelas bactérias que habitam essa região.

Polissacarídeos não digeridos (fibras) são metabolizados em ácidos graxos de cadeia curta por bactérias no intestino grosso e absorvidos por difusão passiva.

O bicarbonato que o intestino grosso secreta ajuda a neutralizar o aumento da acidez resultante da formação desses ácidos graxos.

Essas bactérias também produzem grandes quantidades de vitaminas, especialmente vitamina K e biotina (uma vitamina B), para absorção no sangue.

Embora essa fonte de vitaminas, em geral, forneça apenas uma pequena parte da necessidade diária, ela contribui significativamente quando a ingestão de vitaminas na dieta é baixa.

Um indivíduo que depende da absorção de vitaminas formadas por bactérias no intestino grosso pode se tornar deficiente em vitaminas se tratado com antibióticos que inibem as espécies de bactérias produtoras de vitaminas, bem como as bactérias causadoras de doenças.

Outros produtos bacterianos incluem gás (flatus), que é uma mistura de nitrogênio e dióxido de carbono, com pequenas quantidades dos gases hidrogênio, metano e sulfeto de hidrogênio.

A fermentação bacteriana de polissacarídeos não digeridos os produz.

Parte do odor fecal é devido aos indóis, metabolizados a partir do aminoácido triptofano.

A flora normal também é essencial no desenvolvimento de certos tecidos, incluindo o ceco e os linfáticos.

Eles também estão envolvidos na produção de anticorpos de reação cruzada.

São anticorpos produzidos pelo sistema imunológico contra a flora normal, que também são eficazes contra patógenos relacionados, prevenindo infecções ou invasões.

Os dois filos mais prevalentes do cólon são firmicutes e bacteroidetes.

A proporção entre os dois parece variar amplamente, conforme relatado pelo Projeto Microbioma Humano.

Bacteroides estão implicados no início da colite e câncer de cólon.

As bifidobactérias também são abundantes e são frequentemente descritas como 'bactérias amigas'. Uma camada de muco protege o intestino grosso dos ataques de bactérias comensais do cólon.


== Significado clínico ==


=== Doença ===

A seguir estão as doenças ou distúrbios mais comuns do cólon:


=== Colonoscopia ===

A colonoscopia é o exame endoscópico do intestino grosso e da parte distal do intestino delgado com uma câmera CCD ou uma câmera de fibra óptica em um tubo flexível passado pelo ânus.

Ele pode fornecer um diagnóstico visual (por exemplo, ulceração, pólipos) e oferece a oportunidade de biópsia ou remoção de lesões suspeitas de câncer colorretal.

A colonoscopia pode remover pólipos tão pequenos quanto um milímetro ou menos.

Uma vez que os pólipos são removidos, eles podem ser estudados com o auxílio de um microscópio para determinar se são pré-cancerosos ou não.

Leva 15 anos ou menos para um pólipo se tornar canceroso.
A colonoscopia é semelhante à sigmoidoscopia - a diferença está relacionada a quais partes do cólon cada um pode examinar.

Uma colonoscopia permite um exame de todo o cólon (1200–1500 mm de comprimento).

A sigmoidoscopia permite um exame da porção distal (cerca de 600 mm) do cólon, o que pode ser suficiente porque os benefícios da colonoscopia para a sobrevivência ao câncer foram limitados à detecção de lesões na porção distal do cólon.

Uma sigmoidoscopia é frequentemente usada como um procedimento de triagem para uma colonoscopia completa, muitas vezes feita em conjunto com um teste baseado em fezes, como um teste de sangue oculto nas fezes (FOBT), teste imunoquímico fecal (FIT) ou teste de DNA de fezes com múltiplos alvos. Cologuard) ou teste baseado em sangue, teste de metilação de DNA SEPT9 (Epi proColon).

Cerca de 5% desses pacientes triados são encaminhados para colonoscopia.

A colonoscopia virtual, que utiliza imagens 2D e 3D reconstruídas a partir de tomografia computadorizada (TC) ou de ressonância magnética nuclear (RM), também é possível, como exame médico totalmente não invasivo, embora não seja padrão e ainda esteja sob investigação quanto suas habilidades diagnósticas.

Além disso, a colonoscopia virtual não permite manobras terapêuticas como remoção de pólipos/tumores ou biópsia, nem visualização de lesões menores que 5 milímetros.

Se um crescimento ou pólipo for detectado usando a colonografia por TC, uma colonoscopia padrão ainda precisará ser realizada.

Além disso, os cirurgiões têm usado ultimamente o termo pouchoscopy para se referir a uma colonoscopia da bolsa íleo-anal.


== Outros animais ==

O intestino grosso é verdadeiramente distinto apenas nos tetrápodes, nos quais é quase sempre separado do intestino delgado por uma válvula ileocecal.

Na maioria dos vertebrados, no entanto, é uma estrutura relativamente curta que corre diretamente para o ânus, embora visivelmente mais larga que o intestino delgado.

Embora o ceco esteja presente na maioria dos amniotas, apenas em mamíferos o restante do intestino grosso se desenvolve em um cólon verdadeiro.

Em alguns pequenos mamíferos, o cólon é reto, como em outros tetrápodes, mas, na maioria das espécies de mamíferos, é dividido em porções ascendentes e descendentes; um cólon transverso distinto está tipicamente presente apenas em primatas.

No entanto, a tênia coli e a haustra que a acompanha não são encontradas em carnívoros ou ruminantes.

O reto de mamíferos (exceto monotremados) é derivado da cloaca de outros vertebrados e, portanto, não é verdadeiramente homólogo ao "reto" encontrado nessas espécies.

Nos peixes, não há intestino grosso verdadeiro, mas simplesmente um reto curto conectando a extremidade da parte digestiva do intestino à cloaca.

Nos tubarões, isso inclui uma glândula retal que secreta sal para ajudar o animal a manter o equilíbrio osmótico com a água do mar.

A glândula se assemelha um pouco a um ceco em estrutura, mas não é uma estrutura homóloga.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Large_intestine

;;;FR;;;



CÔLON DESCENDANT/
GROS INTESTIN


Le gros intestin, également connu sous le nom de gros intestin, est la dernière partie du tractus gastro-intestinal et du système digestif chez les vertébrés.

L'eau est absorbée ici et les déchets restants sont stockés sous forme d'excréments avant d'être éliminés par défécation.

Le côlon est la plus grande partie du gros intestin, de sorte que de nombreuses mentions du gros intestin et du côlon se chevauchent chaque fois que la précision n'est pas au centre des préoccupations.

La plupart des sources définissent le gros intestin comme la combinaison du caecum, du côlon, du rectum et du canal anal.

Certaines autres sources excluent le canal anal. Chez l'homme, le gros intestin commence dans la région iliaque droite du bassin, juste au niveau ou en dessous de la taille, où il est relié à l'extrémité de l'intestin grêle au niveau du caecum, via la valve iléo-colique. .

Il continue ensuite en tant que côlon en remontant l'abdomen, sur toute la largeur de la cavité abdominale en tant que côlon transverse, puis en descendant vers le rectum et son extrémité au niveau du canal anal.

Dans l'ensemble, chez l'homme, le gros intestin mesure environ 1,5 mètre (5 pieds) de long, soit environ un cinquième de la longueur totale du tractus gastro-intestinal.


== Structure ==

Le côlon est la dernière partie du système digestif.

Il a un aspect segmenté en raison d'une série de saccules appelés haustra.

Il extrait l'eau et le sel des déchets solides avant qu'ils ne soient éliminés du corps et est le site dans lequel se produit la fermentation assistée par la flore (en grande partie bactérienne) des matières non absorbées.

Contrairement à l'intestin grêle, le côlon ne joue pas un rôle majeur dans l'absorption des aliments et des nutriments.

Environ 1,5 litres ou 45 onces d'eau arrivent dans le côlon chaque jour.

La longueur moyenne du côlon humain adulte est de 65 pouces ou 166 cm (intervalle de 80 à 313 cm) pour les hommes et de 61 pouces ou 155 cm (intervalle de 80 à 214 cm) pour les femmes.


=== Rubriques ===


Chez les mammifères, le côlon se compose de six sections : le caecum, le côlon ascendant, le côlon transverse, le côlon descendant, le côlon sigmoïde et le rectum. Les sections du côlon sont :

-Le caecum y compris l'appendice
-Le côlon ascendant
-Le côlon transverse comprenant les flexions coliques et le mésocôlon transverse
-Le côlon descendant
-Le côlon sigmoïde - la région en forme de S du gros intestin
-Le rectum

Les parties du côlon sont soit intrapéritonéales, soit en arrière dans le rétropéritoine.

Les organes rétropéritonéaux, en général, n'ont pas une couverture complète du péritoine, ils sont donc fixés en place.

Les organes intrapéritonéaux sont complètement entourés de péritoine et sont donc mobiles.

Du côlon, le côlon ascendant, le côlon descendant et le rectum sont rétropéritonéaux, tandis que le caecum, l'appendice, le côlon transverse et le côlon sigmoïde sont intrapéritonéaux.

Ceci est important car cela affecte les organes facilement accessibles pendant la chirurgie, comme une laparotomie.

En termes de diamètre, le caecum est le plus large, mesurant en moyenne un peu moins de 9 cm chez les individus sains, et le côlon transverse mesure en moyenne moins de 6 cm de diamètre.

Les côlons descendant et sigmoïde sont légèrement plus petits, le côlon sigmoïde mesurant en moyenne 4 à 5 cm (1,6 à 2,0 po) de diamètre.

Des diamètres supérieurs à certains seuils pour chaque section colique peuvent être diagnostiques pour le mégacôlon.


==== Caecum et annexe ====

Le caecum est la première section du côlon et impliqué dans la digestion, tandis que l'appendice qui se développe embryologiquement à partir de celui-ci est une structure du côlon, non impliquée dans la digestion et considérée comme faisant partie du tissu lymphoïde associé à l'intestin.

La fonction de l'appendice est incertaine, mais certaines sources pensent que l'appendice joue un rôle dans l'hébergement d'un échantillon de la microflore du côlon et qu'il est capable d'aider à repeupler le côlon avec des bactéries si la microflore a été endommagée au cours d'une réponse immunitaire. réaction.

Il a également été démontré que l'appendice a une forte concentration de cellules lymphatiques.


==== Deux-points ascendants ====

Le côlon ascendant est la première des quatre sections principales du gros intestin.

Il est relié à l'intestin grêle par une section de l'intestin appelée caecum.

Le côlon ascendant s'étend vers le haut à travers la cavité abdominale vers le côlon transverse sur environ huit pouces (20 cm).

L'une des principales fonctions du côlon est d'éliminer l'eau et les autres nutriments essentiels des déchets et de les recycler.

Au fur et à mesure que les déchets sortent de l'intestin grêle par la valve iléo-colique, ils se déplacent dans le caecum puis dans le côlon ascendant où ce processus d'extraction commence.

Les déchets sont pompés vers le haut vers le côlon transverse par péristaltisme.

Le côlon ascendant est parfois attaché à l'appendice via la valve de Gerlach.

Chez les ruminants, le côlon ascendant est appelé côlon spiralé.
Tous âges et sexes confondus, le cancer du côlon survient ici le plus souvent (41%).


==== Côlon transverse ====

Le côlon transverse est la partie du côlon allant de l'angle hépatique, également connu sous le nom de colique droite, (le tour du côlon par le foie) à l'angle splénique également connu sous le nom de colique gauche, (le tour du côlon par le rate).

Le côlon transverse pend de l'estomac, attaché à celui-ci par un grand pli de péritoine appelé le grand omentum.

Du côté postérieur, le côlon transverse est relié à la paroi abdominale postérieure par un mésentère appelé mésocôlon transverse.

Le côlon transverse est enfermé dans le péritoine, et est donc mobile (contrairement aux parties du côlon immédiatement avant et après lui).

Les deux tiers proximaux du côlon transverse sont perfusés par l'artère colique moyenne, une branche de l'artère mésentérique supérieure (SMA), tandis que le dernier tiers est alimenté par des branches de l'artère mésentérique inférieure (IMA).

La zone "bassin versant" entre ces deux réserves de sang, qui représente la division embryologique entre l'intestin moyen et l'intestin postérieur, est une zone sensible à l'ischémie.


==== Colon descendant ====

Le côlon descendant est la partie du côlon allant de l'angle splénique au début du côlon sigmoïde.

L'une des fonctions du côlon descendant dans le système digestif est de stocker les matières fécales qui seront évacuées dans le rectum.

Elle est rétropéritonéale chez les deux tiers des humains.

Dans l'autre tiers, il a un mésentère (généralement court).

L'apport artériel passe par l'artère colique gauche.

Le côlon descendant est également appelé intestin distal, car il se trouve plus loin dans le tractus gastro-intestinal que l'intestin proximal.

La flore intestinale est très dense dans cette région.


==== Côlon sigmoïde ====

Le côlon sigmoïde est la partie du gros intestin après le côlon descendant et avant le rectum.

Le nom sigmoïde signifie en forme de S (voir sigmoïde ; cf. sinus sigmoïde).

Les parois du côlon sigmoïde sont musclées et se contractent pour augmenter la pression à l'intérieur du côlon, provoquant le déplacement des selles dans le rectum.

Le côlon sigmoïde est alimenté en sang par plusieurs branches (généralement entre 2 et 6) des artères sigmoïdes, une branche de l'IMA.

L'AMI se termine par l'artère rectale supérieure.
La sigmoïdoscopie est une technique de diagnostic courante utilisée pour examiner le côlon sigmoïde.


==== Rectum ====

Le rectum est la dernière section du gros intestin.

Il contient les matières fécales formées en attente d'élimination par défécation.
Il mesure environ 12 cm de long.


=== Apparence ===

Le caecum - la première partie du gros intestin
Taeniae coli - trois bandes de muscle lisse
Haustra - renflements causés par la contraction de taeniae coli
Appendices épiploïques - petites accumulations de graisse sur les viscères Le taenia coli s'étend sur toute la longueur du gros intestin.

Parce que les taenia coli sont plus courts que le gros intestin lui-même, le côlon devient sacculé, formant les haustras du côlon qui sont les projections intraluminales en forme d'étagère.


=== Approvisionnement en sang ===

L'apport artériel au côlon provient des branches de l'artère mésentérique supérieure (SMA) et de l'artère mésentérique inférieure (IMA).

Le flux entre ces deux systèmes communique via l'artère marginale du côlon qui est parallèle au côlon sur toute sa longueur.

Historiquement, on pensait qu'une structure diversement identifiée comme l'arc de Riolan ou l'artère mésentérique sinueuse (de Moskowitz) reliait la SMA proximale à l'AMI proximale.

Cette structure présente de manière variable serait importante si l'un ou l'autre des vaisseaux était occlus.

Cependant, au moins une revue de la littérature remet en question l'existence de ce vaisseau, certains experts appelant à l'abolition de ces termes dans la future littérature médicale. Le drainage veineux reflète généralement l'apport artériel colique, la veine mésentérique inférieure se drainant dans la veine splénique, et la veine mésentérique supérieure rejoignant la veine splénique pour former la veine porte hépatique qui pénètre ensuite dans le foie.


=== Drainage lymphatique ===

Le drainage lymphatique du côlon ascendant et des deux tiers proximaux du côlon transverse se fait vers les ganglions lymphatiques coliques et les ganglions lymphatiques mésentériques supérieurs, qui se drainent dans la citerne chyli.

La lymphe du tiers distal du côlon transverse, du côlon descendant, du côlon sigmoïde et du rectum supérieur se draine dans les ganglions lymphatiques mésentériques inférieurs et coliques.

Le rectum inférieur vers le canal anal au-dessus de la ligne pectinée se draine vers les nœuds iliaques internes.

Le canal anal sous la ligne pectinée se déverse dans les ganglions inguinaux superficiels.

La ligne pectinée ne marque que grossièrement cette transition.


=== Innervation ===

Apport sympathique : Ganglions mésentériques supérieurs et inférieurs
Fourniture parasympathique : nerfs vagues et pelviens


=== Développement ===


=== Variante ===

Une variation de l'anatomie normale du côlon se produit lorsque des boucles supplémentaires se forment, ce qui donne un côlon jusqu'à cinq mètres plus long que la normale.

Cette condition, appelée côlon redondant, n'a généralement pas de conséquences majeures directes sur la santé, bien que le volvulus se produise rarement, entraînant une obstruction et nécessitant des soins médicaux immédiats.

Une conséquence indirecte importante sur la santé est que l'utilisation d'un coloscope adulte standard est difficile et dans certains cas impossible lorsqu'un côlon redondant est présent, bien que des variantes spécialisées de l'instrument (y compris la variante pédiatrique) soient utiles pour surmonter ce problème.


== Microanatomie ==


=== Cryptes coliques ===


La paroi du gros intestin est tapissée d'un épithélium cylindrique simple avec des invaginations.

Les invaginations sont appelées glandes intestinales ou cryptes coliques.

Les cryptes du côlon ont la forme de tubes à essai microscopiques à paroi épaisse avec un trou central sur toute la longueur du tube (la lumière de la crypte).

Quatre coupes de tissus sont présentées ici, deux coupées à travers les axes longs des cryptes et deux coupées parallèlement aux axes longs.

Dans ces images, les cellules ont été colorées par immunohistochimie pour montrer une couleur brun-orange si les cellules produisent une protéine mitochondriale appelée sous-unité I du cytochrome c oxydase (CCOI).

Les noyaux des cellules (situés sur les bords extérieurs des cellules tapissant les parois des cryptes) sont colorés en bleu-gris avec de l'hématoxyline.

Comme on le voit dans les panneaux C et D, les cryptes sont d'environ 75 à environ 110 cellules de long.

Baker et al. a constaté que la circonférence moyenne de la crypte est de 23 cellules.

Ainsi, d'après les images présentées ici, il y a en moyenne environ 1 725 à 2 530 cellules par crypte colique.

Nooteboom et al. la mesure du nombre de cellules dans un petit nombre de cryptes a rapporté une plage de 1 500 à 4 900 cellules par crypte colique.

Les cellules sont produites à la base de la crypte et migrent vers le haut le long de l'axe de la crypte avant d'être rejetées dans la lumière colique quelques jours plus tard.

Il y a 5 à 6 cellules souches à la base des cryptes.

Comme estimé à partir de l'image du panneau A, il y a environ 100 cryptes coliques par millimètre carré d'épithélium colique.

Étant donné que la longueur moyenne du côlon humain est de 160,5 cm et que la circonférence interne moyenne du côlon est de 6,2 cm, la surface épithéliale de la surface interne du côlon humain a une surface moyenne d'environ 995 cm2, qui comprend 9 950 000 (près de 10 millions) cryptes.

Dans les quatre coupes de tissus présentées ici, de nombreuses glandes intestinales ont des cellules avec une mutation de l'ADN mitochondrial dans le gène CCOI et apparaissent principalement blanches, leur couleur principale étant la coloration bleu-gris des noyaux.

Comme on le voit dans le panneau B, une partie des cellules souches de trois cryptes semblent avoir une mutation dans CCOI, de sorte que 40 % à 50 % des cellules issues de ces cellules souches forment un segment blanc dans la zone de coupe transversale.

Dans l'ensemble, le pourcentage de cryptes déficientes pour CCOI est inférieur à 1 % avant 40 ans, mais augmente ensuite de manière linéaire avec l'âge.

Les cryptes coliques déficientes en CCOI chez les femmes atteignent en moyenne 18 % chez les femmes et 23 % chez les hommes entre 80 et 84 ans. Les cryptes du côlon peuvent se reproduire par fission, comme le montre le panneau C, où une crypte forment deux cryptes, et dans le panneau B où au moins une crypte semble fissionner.

La plupart des cryptes déficientes en CCOI se trouvent dans des grappes de cryptes (clones de cryptes) avec deux ou plusieurs cryptes déficientes en CCOI adjacentes (voir panneau D).


==== Muqueuse ====

Environ 150 des milliers de gènes codant pour les protéines exprimés dans le gros intestin, certains sont spécifiques de la membrane muqueuse dans différentes régions et incluent CEACAM7.


== Fonction ==


Le gros intestin absorbe l'eau et tous les nutriments absorbables restants de la nourriture avant d'envoyer la matière indigeste au rectum.

Le côlon absorbe les vitamines créées par les bactéries du côlon, telles que la thiamine, la riboflavine et la vitamine K (particulièrement importantes car l'ingestion quotidienne de vitamine K n'est normalement pas suffisante pour maintenir une coagulation sanguine adéquate).

Il compacte également les matières fécales et stocke les matières fécales dans le rectum jusqu'à ce qu'elles puissent être évacuées via l'anus lors de la défécation.

Le gros intestin sécrète également du K+ et du Cl-.

La sécrétion de chlorure augmente dans la mucoviscidose.
Le recyclage de divers nutriments a lieu dans le côlon.

Les exemples incluent la fermentation des glucides, des acides gras à chaîne courte et le cycle de l'urée.

L'appendice contient une petite quantité de tissu lymphoïde associé à la muqueuse, ce qui confère à l'appendice un rôle indéterminé dans l'immunité.

Cependant, l'appendice est connu pour être important dans la vie fœtale car il contient des cellules endocrines qui libèrent des amines biogènes et des hormones peptidiques importantes pour l'homéostasie au début de la croissance et du développement.

L'appendice peut être retiré sans dommage apparent ni conséquence pour le patient. Au moment où le chyme a atteint ce tube, la plupart des nutriments et 90 % de l'eau ont été absorbés par le corps.

À ce stade, certains électrolytes comme le sodium, le magnésium et le chlorure sont laissés ainsi que les parties non digestibles des aliments ingérés (par exemple, une grande partie de l'amylose ingérée, de l'amidon qui a été protégé de la digestion jusqu'à présent et des fibres alimentaires, qui sont en grande partie des glucides non digestibles). sous forme soluble ou insoluble).

Au fur et à mesure que le chyme se déplace dans le gros intestin, la majeure partie de l'eau restante est éliminée, tandis que le chyme est mélangé avec du mucus et des bactéries (connues sous le nom de flore intestinale) et devient des matières fécales.

Le côlon ascendant reçoit les matières fécales sous forme liquide.

Les muscles du côlon déplacent ensuite les déchets aqueux vers l'avant et absorbent lentement tout l'excès d'eau, provoquant la solidification progressive des selles à mesure qu'elles se déplacent dans le côlon descendant.

Les bactéries décomposent une partie des fibres pour leur propre alimentation et créent de l'acétate, du propionate et du butyrate comme déchets, qui à leur tour sont utilisés par la paroi cellulaire du côlon pour se nourrir.

Aucune protéine n'est rendue disponible.

Chez l'homme, peut-être 10% des glucides non digérés deviennent ainsi disponibles, bien que cela puisse varier selon le régime alimentaire; chez d'autres animaux, y compris d'autres singes et primates, qui ont des côlons proportionnellement plus grands, plus est rendu disponible, permettant ainsi une plus grande partie de matériel végétal dans l'alimentation.

Le gros intestin ne produit pas d'enzymes digestives - la digestion chimique est terminée dans l'intestin grêle avant que le chyme n'atteigne le gros intestin.

Le pH dans le côlon varie entre 5,5 et 7 (légèrement acide à neutre).


=== Osmose à gradient permanent ===

L'absorption d'eau au niveau du côlon s'effectue généralement contre un gradient de pression osmotique transmuqueuse.

L'osmose à gradient debout est la réabsorption d'eau contre le gradient osmotique dans les intestins.

Les cellules occupant la muqueuse intestinale pompent les ions sodium dans l'espace intercellulaire, augmentant l'osmolarité du liquide intercellulaire.

Ce fluide hypertonique crée une pression osmotique qui entraîne l'eau dans les espaces intercellulaires latéraux par osmose via des jonctions serrées et des cellules adjacentes, qui à son tour se déplace à travers la membrane basale et dans les capillaires, tandis que davantage d'ions sodium sont pompés à nouveau dans le fluide intercellulaire.

Bien que l'eau se déplace vers le bas d'un gradient osmotique à chaque étape individuelle, dans l'ensemble, l'eau se déplace généralement à contre-courant du gradient osmotique en raison du pompage des ions sodium dans le liquide intercellulaire.

Cela permet au gros intestin d'absorber de l'eau bien que le sang dans les capillaires soit hypotonique par rapport au liquide dans la lumière intestinale.


=== Flore intestinale ===

Le gros intestin abrite plus de 700 espèces de bactéries qui remplissent diverses fonctions, ainsi que des champignons, des protozoaires et des archées.

La diversité des espèces varie selon la géographie et le régime alimentaire.

Les microbes dans un intestin distal humain sont souvent au nombre de 100 billions et peuvent peser environ 200 grammes (0,44 livre).

Cette masse de microbes, pour la plupart symbiotiques, a récemment été appelée le dernier organe humain à être "découvert" ou en d'autres termes, "l'organe oublié". Le gros intestin absorbe une partie des produits formés par les bactéries habitant cette région.

Les polysaccharides non digérés (fibres) sont métabolisés en acides gras à chaîne courte par les bactéries du gros intestin et absorbés par diffusion passive.

Le bicarbonate que le gros intestin sécrète aide à neutraliser l'augmentation de l'acidité résultant de la formation de ces acides gras.

Ces bactéries produisent également de grandes quantités de vitamines, en particulier de vitamine K et de biotine (une vitamine B), qui sont absorbées dans le sang.

Bien que cette source de vitamines ne fournisse en général qu'une petite partie des besoins quotidiens, elle apporte une contribution significative lorsque l'apport alimentaire en vitamines est faible.

Un individu qui dépend de l'absorption de vitamines formées par des bactéries dans le gros intestin peut devenir déficient en vitamines s'il est traité avec des antibiotiques qui inhibent les espèces de bactéries productrices de vitamines ainsi que les bactéries responsables de la maladie.

D'autres produits bactériens comprennent le gaz (flatus), qui est un mélange d'azote et de dioxyde de carbone, avec de petites quantités de gaz hydrogène, méthane et sulfure d'hydrogène.

La fermentation bactérienne de polysaccharides non digérés les produit.

Une partie de l'odeur fécale est due aux indoles, métabolisés à partir de l'acide aminé tryptophane.

La flore normale est également essentielle au développement de certains tissus, dont le caecum et les lymphatiques.

Ils sont également impliqués dans la production d'anticorps à réaction croisée.

Ce sont des anticorps produits par le système immunitaire contre la flore normale, qui sont également efficaces contre les pathogènes apparentés, empêchant ainsi l'infection ou l'invasion.

Les deux phyla les plus répandus du côlon sont les firmicutes et les bactéroïdes.

Le rapport entre les deux semble varier considérablement, comme le rapporte le Human Microbiome Project.

Les bactéroïdes sont impliqués dans l'initiation de la colite et du cancer du côlon.

Les bifidobactéries sont également abondantes et sont souvent qualifiées de « bactéries amies ». Une couche de mucus protège le gros intestin des attaques des bactéries commensales du côlon.


== Signification clinique ==


=== Maladie ===

Voici les maladies ou troubles les plus courants du côlon :


=== Coloscopie ===

La coloscopie est l'examen endoscopique du gros intestin et de la partie distale de l'intestin grêle avec une caméra CCD ou une caméra à fibre optique sur un tube flexible passé dans l'anus.

Il peut fournir un diagnostic visuel (par exemple, ulcération, polypes) et offre la possibilité d'une biopsie ou de l'ablation de lésions suspectes de cancer colorectal.

La coloscopie peut enlever des polypes aussi petits qu'un millimètre ou moins.

Une fois les polypes retirés, ils peuvent être étudiés à l'aide d'un microscope pour déterminer s'ils sont précancéreux ou non.

Il faut 15 ans ou moins pour qu'un polype devienne cancéreux.
La coloscopie est similaire à la sigmoïdoscopie, la différence étant liée aux parties du côlon que chacun peut examiner.

Une coloscopie permet d'examiner l'ensemble du côlon (1200–1500 mm de longueur).

Une sigmoïdoscopie permet un examen de la partie distale (environ 600 mm) du côlon, ce qui peut être suffisant car les avantages de la coloscopie pour la survie au cancer se sont limités à la détection de lésions dans la partie distale du côlon.

Une sigmoïdoscopie est souvent utilisée comme procédure de dépistage pour une coloscopie complète, souvent effectuée en conjonction avec un test basé sur les selles tel qu'un test de sang occulte fécal (RSOS), un test immunochimique fécal (TIF) ou un test ADN fécal multi-cible ( Cologuard) ou test sanguin, test de méthylation de l'ADN SEPT9 (Epi proColon).

Environ 5 % de ces patients dépistés sont référés à une coloscopie.

La coloscopie virtuelle, qui utilise des images 2D et 3D reconstruites à partir de tomodensitométries (CT) ou de résonance magnétique nucléaire (RM), est également possible, en tant que test médical totalement non invasif, bien qu'il ne soit pas standard et toujours à l'étude concernant ses capacités diagnostiques.

De plus, la coloscopie virtuelle ne permet pas de manœuvres thérapeutiques telles que l'ablation de polypes/tumeurs ou la biopsie, ni la visualisation de lésions inférieures à 5 millimètres.

Si une croissance ou un polype est détecté à l'aide de la colonographie CT, une coloscopie standard devra encore être effectuée.

De plus, les chirurgiens ont récemment utilisé le terme de poche pour désigner une coloscopie de la poche iléo-anale.


== Autres animaux ==

Le gros intestin n'est vraiment distinct que chez les tétrapodes, chez qui il est presque toujours séparé de l'intestin grêle par une valve iléo-cæcale.

Chez la plupart des vertébrés, cependant, il s'agit d'une structure relativement courte allant directement à l'anus, bien que sensiblement plus large que l'intestin grêle.

Bien que le caecum soit présent chez la plupart des amniotes, ce n'est que chez les mammifères que le reste du gros intestin se développe en un véritable côlon.

Chez certains petits mammifères, le côlon est droit, comme chez d'autres tétrapodes, mais, chez la majorité des espèces de mammifères, il est divisé en portions ascendante et descendante; un côlon transverse distinct n'est généralement présent que chez les primates.

Cependant, le taeniae coli et les haustra qui l'accompagnent ne se trouvent ni chez les carnivores ni chez les ruminants.

Le rectum des mammifères (autres que les monotrèmes) est dérivé du cloaque d'autres vertébrés et n'est donc pas vraiment homologue au «rectum» trouvé chez ces espèces.

Chez le poisson, il n'y a pas de véritable gros intestin, mais simplement un court rectum reliant l'extrémité de la partie digestive de l'intestin au cloaque.

Chez les requins, cela comprend une glande rectale qui sécrète du sel pour aider l'animal à maintenir l'équilibre osmotique avec l'eau de mer.

La glande ressemble quelque peu à un caecum dans sa structure mais n'est pas une structure homologue.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gros_intestin
