

HUMAN DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


The human digestive system consists of the gastrointestinal tract plus the accessory organs of digestion (the tongue, salivary glands, pancreas, liver, and gallbladder). 

Digestion involves the breakdown of food into smaller and smaller components, until they can be absorbed and assimilated into the body. 

The process of digestion has three stages: the cephalic phase, the gastric phase, and the intestinal phase.

The first stage, the cephalic phase of digestion, begins with gastric secretions in response to the sight and smell of food. 

This stage includes the mechanical breakdown of food by chewing, and the chemical breakdown by digestive enzymes, that takes place in the mouth.

Saliva contains digestive enzymes called amylase, and lingual lipase, secreted by the salivary glands and serous glands on the tongue. 

The enzymes start to break down the food in the mouth. 

Chewing, in which the food is mixed with saliva, begins the mechanical process of digestion. 

This produces a bolus which can be swallowed down the esophagus to enter the stomach.

The second stage of digestion then begins in the stomach with the gastric phase. 

Here the food is further broken down by mixing with gastric acid until it passes into the duodenum, the first part of the small intestine.

The third stage begins in the duodenum with the intestinal phase, where partially digested food is mixed with a number of enzymes produced by the pancreas. 

Digestion is helped by the chewing of food carried out by the muscles of mastication, the tongue, and the teeth, and also by the contractions of peristalsis, and segmentation. 

Gastric acid, and the production of mucus in the stomach, are essential for the continuation of digestion.

Peristalsis is the rhythmic contraction of muscles that begins in the esophagus and continues along the wall of the stomach and the rest of the gastrointestinal tract. 

This initially results in the production of chyme which when fully broken down in the small intestine is absorbed as chyle into the lymphatic system. 

Most of the digestion of food takes place in the small intestine. 

Water and some minerals are reabsorbed back into the blood in the colon of the large intestine. 

The waste products of digestion (feces) are defecated from the rectum via the anus.


== Components ==

There are several organs and other components involved in the digestion of food. 

The organs known as the accessory digestive organs are the liver, gall bladder and pancreas. 

Other components include the mouth, salivary glands, tongue, teeth and epiglottis.

The largest structure of the digestive system is the gastrointestinal tract (GI tract). 

This starts at the mouth and ends at the anus, covering a distance of about nine metres.

The largest part of the GI tract is the colon or large intestine. 

Water is absorbed here and the remaining waste matter is stored prior to defecation.

Most of the digestion of food takes place in the small intestine which is the longest part of the GI tract.

A major digestive organ is the stomach. 

Within its mucosa are millions of embedded gastric glands. 

Their secretions are vital to the functioning of the organ.

There are many specialised cells of the GI tract. 

These include the various cells of the gastric glands, taste cells, pancreatic duct cells, enterocytes and microfold cells.

Some parts of the digestive system are also part of the excretory system, including the large intestine.


=== Mouth ===

The mouth is the first part of the upper gastrointestinal tract and is equipped with several structures that begin the first processes of digestion. 

These include salivary glands, teeth and the tongue. 

The mouth consists of two regions; the vestibule and the oral cavity proper. 

The vestibule is the area between the teeth, lips and cheeks, and the rest is the oral cavity proper. 

Most of the oral cavity is lined with oral mucosa, a mucous membrane that produces a lubricating mucus, of which only a small amount is needed. 

Mucous membranes vary in structure in the different regions of the body but they all produce a lubricating mucus, which is either secreted by surface cells or more usually by underlying glands. 

The mucous membrane in the mouth continues as the thin mucosa which lines the bases of the teeth. 

The main component of mucus is a glycoprotein called mucin and the type secreted varies according to the region involved. 

Mucin is viscous, clear, and clinging. 

Underlying the mucous membrane in the mouth is a thin layer of smooth muscle tissue and the loose connection to the membrane gives it its great elasticity. 

It covers the cheeks, inner surfaces of the lips, and floor of the mouth, and the mucin produced is highly protective against tooth decay.

The roof of the mouth is termed the palate and it separates the oral cavity from the nasal cavity. 

The palate is hard at the front of the mouth since the overlying mucosa is covering a plate of bone; it is softer and more pliable at the back being made of muscle and connective tissue, and it can move to swallow food and liquids. 

The soft palate ends at the uvula. 

The surface of the hard palate allows for the pressure needed in eating food, to leave the nasal passage clear. 

The opening between the lips is termed the oral fissure, and the opening into the throat is called the fauces.

At either side of the soft palate are the palatoglossus muscles which also reach into regions of the tongue. 

These muscles raise the back of the tongue and also close both sides of the fauces to enable food to be swallowed.

Mucus helps in the mastication of food in its ability to soften and collect the food in the formation of the bolus.


==== Salivary glands ====

There are three pairs of main salivary glands and between 800 and 1,000 minor salivary glands, all of which mainly serve the digestive process, and also play an important role in the maintenance of dental health and general mouth lubrication, without which speech would be impossible. 

The main glands are all exocrine glands, secreting via ducts. 

All of these glands terminate in the mouth. 

The largest of these are the parotid glands—their secretion is mainly serous. 

The next pair are underneath the jaw, the submandibular glands, these produce both serous fluid and mucus. 

The serous fluid is produced by serous glands in these salivary glands which also produce lingual lipase. 

They produce about 70% of the oral cavity saliva. 

The third pair are the sublingual glands located underneath the tongue and their secretion is mainly mucous with a small percentage of saliva.

Within the oral mucosa, and also on the tongue, palates, and floor of the mouth, are the minor salivary glands; their secretions are mainly mucous and they are innervated by the facial nerve (CN7). 

The glands also secrete amylase a first stage in the breakdown of food acting on the carbohydrate in the food to transform the starch content into maltose. 

There are other serous glands on the surface of the tongue that encircle taste buds on the back part of the tongue and these also produce lingual lipase. 

Lipase is a digestive enzyme that catalyses the hydrolysis of lipids (fats). 

These glands are termed Von Ebner's glands which have also been shown to have another function in the secretion of histatins which offer an early defense (outside of the immune system) against microbes in food, when it makes contact with these glands on the tongue tissue. 

Sensory information can stimulate the secretion of saliva providing the necessary fluid for the tongue to work with and also to ease swallowing of the food.


===== Saliva =====

Saliva moistens and softens food, and along with the chewing action of the teeth, transforms the food into a smooth bolus. 

The bolus is further helped by the lubrication provided by the saliva in its passage from the mouth into the esophagus. 

Also of importance is the presence in saliva of the digestive enzymes amylase and lipase. 

Amylase starts to work on the starch in carbohydrates, breaking it down into the simple sugars of maltose and dextrose that can be further broken down in the small intestine. 

Saliva in the mouth can account for 30% of this initial starch digestion. 

Lipase starts to work on breaking down fats. 

Lipase is further produced in the pancreas where it is released to continue this digestion of fats. 

The presence of salivary lipase is of prime importance in young babies whose pancreatic lipase has yet to be developed.

As well as its role in supplying digestive enzymes, saliva has a cleansing action for the teeth and mouth. 

It also has an immunological role in supplying antibodies to the system, such as immunoglobulin A. 

This is seen to be key in preventing infections of the salivary glands, importantly that of parotitis.

Saliva also contains a glycoprotein called haptocorrin which is a binding protein to vitamin B12. 

It binds with the vitamin in order to carry it safely through the acidic content of the stomach. 

When it reaches the duodenum, pancreatic enzymes break down the glycoprotein and free the vitamin which then binds with intrinsic factor.


==== Tongue ====
Food enters the mouth where the first stage in the digestive process takes place, with the action of the tongue and the secretion of saliva. 

The tongue is a fleshy and muscular sensory organ, and the first sensory information is received via the taste buds in the papillae on its surface. 

If the taste is agreeable, the tongue will go into action, manipulating the food in the mouth which stimulates the secretion of saliva from the salivary glands. 

The liquid quality of the saliva will help in the softening of the food and its enzyme content will start to break down the food whilst it is still in the mouth. 

The first part of the food to be broken down is the starch of carbohydrates (by the enzyme amylase in the saliva).

The tongue is attached to the floor of the mouth by a ligamentous band called the frenum and this gives it great mobility for the manipulation of food (and speech); the range of manipulation is optimally controlled by the action of several muscles and limited in its external range by the stretch of the frenum. 

The tongue's two sets of muscles, are four intrinsic muscles that originate in the tongue and are involved with its shaping, and four extrinsic muscles originating in bone that are involved with its movement.


===== Taste =====

Taste is a form of chemoreception that takes place in the specialised taste receptors, contained in structures called taste buds in the mouth. 

Taste buds are mainly on the upper surface (dorsum) of the tongue. 

The function of taste perception is vital to help prevent harmful or rotten foods from being consumed. 

There are also taste buds on the epiglottis and upper part of the esophagus. 

The taste buds are innervated by a branch of the facial nerve the chorda tympani, and the glossopharyngeal nerve. 

Taste messages are sent via these cranial nerves to the brain. 

The brain can distinguish between the chemical qualities of the food. 

The five basic tastes are referred to as those of saltiness, sourness, bitterness, sweetness, and umami. 

The detection of saltiness and sourness enables the control of salt and acid balance. 

The detection of bitterness warns of poisons—many of a plant's defences are of poisonous compounds that are bitter. 

Sweetness guides to those foods that will supply energy; the initial breakdown of the energy-giving carbohydrates by salivary amylase creates the taste of sweetness since simple sugars are the first result. 

The taste of umami is thought to signal protein-rich food. 

Sour tastes are acidic which is often found in bad food. 

The brain has to decide very quickly whether the food should be eaten or not. 

It was the findings in 1991, describing the first olfactory receptors that helped to prompt the research into taste. 

The olfactory receptors are located on cell surfaces in the nose which bind to chemicals enabling the detection of smells. 

It is assumed that signals from taste receptors work together with those from the nose, to form an idea of complex food flavours.


==== Teeth ====

Teeth are complex structures made of materials specific to them. 

They are made of a bone-like material called dentin, which is covered by the hardest tissue in the body—enamel. 

Teeth have different shapes to deal with different aspects of mastication employed in tearing and chewing pieces of food into smaller and smaller pieces. 

This results in a much larger surface area for the action of digestive enzymes.

The teeth are named after their particular roles in the process of mastication—incisors are used for cutting or biting off pieces of food; canines, are used for tearing, premolars and molars are used for chewing and grinding. 

Mastication of the food with the help of saliva and mucus results in the formation of a soft bolus which can then be swallowed to make its way down the upper gastrointestinal tract to the stomach.
 
The digestive enzymes in saliva also help in keeping the teeth clean by breaking down any lodged food particles.


==== Epiglottis ====

The epiglottis is a flap of elastic cartilage attached to the entrance of the larynx. 

It is covered with a mucous membrane and there are taste buds on its lingual surface which faces into the mouth. 

Its laryngeal surface faces into the larynx. 

The epiglottis functions to guard the entrance of the glottis, the opening between the vocal folds. 

It is normally pointed upward during breathing with its underside functioning as part of the pharynx, but during swallowing, the epiglottis folds down to a more horizontal position, with its upper side functioning as part of the pharynx. 

In this manner it prevents food from going into the trachea and instead directs it to the esophagus, which is behind. 

During swallowing, the backward motion of the tongue forces the epiglottis over the glottis' opening to prevent any food that is being swallowed from entering the larynx which leads to the lungs; the larynx is also pulled upwards to assist this process. 

Stimulation of the larynx by ingested matter produces a strong cough reflex in order to protect the lungs.


=== Pharynx ===


The pharynx is a part of the conducting zone of the respiratory system and also a part of the digestive system. 

It is the part of the throat immediately behind the nasal cavity at the back of the mouth and above the esophagus and larynx. 

The pharynx is made up of three parts. 

The lower two parts—the oropharynx and the laryngopharynx are involved in the digestive system. 

The laryngopharynx connects to the esophagus and it serves as a passageway for both air and food. 

Air enters the larynx anteriorly but anything swallowed has priority and the passage of air is temporarily blocked. 

The pharynx is innervated by the pharyngeal plexus of the vagus nerve.: 1465  Muscles in the pharynx push the food into the esophagus. 

The pharynx joins the esophagus at the oesophageal inlet which is located behind the cricoid cartilage.


=== Esophagus ===


The esophagus, commonly known as the foodpipe or gullet, consists of a muscular tube through which food passes from the pharynx to the stomach. 

The esophagus is continuous with the laryngopharynx. 

It passes through the posterior mediastinum in the thorax and enters the stomach through a hole in the thoracic diaphragm—the esophageal hiatus, at the level of the tenth thoracic vertebra (T10). 

Its length averages 25 cm, varying with an individual's height. 

It is divided into cervical, thoracic and abdominal parts. 

The pharynx joins the esophagus at the esophageal inlet which is behind the cricoid cartilage.

At rest the esophagus is closed at both ends, by the upper and lower esophageal sphincters. 

The opening of the upper sphincter is triggered by the swallowing reflex so that food is allowed through. 

The sphincter also serves to prevent back flow from the esophagus into the pharynx. 

The esophagus has a mucous membrane and the epithelium which has a protective function is continuously replaced due to the volume of food that passes inside the esophagus. 

During swallowing, food passes from the mouth through the pharynx into the esophagus. 

The epiglottis folds down to a more horizontal position to direct the food into the esophagus, and away from the trachea.

Once in the esophagus, the bolus travels down to the stomach via rhythmic contraction and relaxation of muscles known as peristalsis. 

The lower esophageal sphincter is a muscular sphincter surrounding the lower part of the esophagus. 

The gastroesophageal junction between the esophagus and the stomach is controlled by the lower esophageal sphincter, which remains constricted at all times other than during swallowing and vomiting to prevent the contents of the stomach from entering the esophagus. 

As the esophagus does not have the same protection from acid as the stomach, any failure of this sphincter can lead to heartburn.


=== Diaphragm ===

The diaphragm is an important part of the body's digestive system. 

The muscular diaphragm separates the thoracic cavity from the abdominal cavity where most of the digestive organs are located. 

The suspensory muscle attaches the ascending duodenum to the diaphragm. 

This muscle is thought to be of help in the digestive system in that its attachment offers a wider angle to the duodenojejunal flexure for the easier passage of digesting material. 

The diaphragm also attaches to, and anchors the liver at its bare area. 

The esophagus enters the abdomen through a hole in the diaphragm at the level of T10.


=== Stomach ===


The stomach is a major organ of the gastrointestinal tract and digestive system. 

It is a consistently J-shaped organ joined to the esophagus at its upper end and to the duodenum at its lower end.

Gastric acid (informally gastric juice), produced in the stomach plays a vital role in the digestive process, and mainly contains hydrochloric acid and sodium chloride. 

A peptide hormone, gastrin, produced by G cells in the gastric glands, stimulates the production of gastric juice which activates the digestive enzymes. 

Pepsinogen is a precursor enzyme (zymogen) produced by the gastric chief cells, and gastric acid activates this to the enzyme pepsin which begins the digestion of proteins. 

As these two chemicals would damage the stomach wall, mucus is secreted by innumerable gastric glands in the stomach, to provide a slimy protective layer against the damaging effects of the chemicals on the inner layers of the stomach.

At the same time that protein is being digested, mechanical churning occurs through the action of peristalsis, waves of muscular contractions that move along the stomach wall. 

This allows the mass of food to further mix with the digestive enzymes. 

Gastric lipase secreted by the chief cells in the fundic glands in the gastric mucosa of the stomach, is an acidic lipase, in contrast with the alkaline pancreatic lipase. 

This breaks down fats to some degree though is not as efficient as the pancreatic lipase.

The pylorus, the lowest section of the stomach which attaches to the duodenum via the pyloric canal, contains countless glands which secrete digestive enzymes including gastrin. 

After an hour or two, a thick semi-liquid called chyme is produced. 

When the pyloric sphincter, or valve opens, chyme enters the duodenum where it mixes further with digestive enzymes from the pancreas, and then passes through the small intestine, where digestion continues.

The parietal cells in the fundus of the stomach, produce a glycoprotein called intrinsic factor which is essential for the absorption of vitamin B12. 

Vitamin B12 (cobalamin), is carried to, and through the stomach, bound to a glycoprotein secreted by the salivary glands - transcobalamin I also called haptocorrin, which protects the acid-sensitive vitamin from the acidic stomach contents. 

Once in the more neutral duodenum, pancreatic enzymes break down the protective glycoprotein. 

The freed vitamin B12 then binds to intrinsic factor which is then absorbed by the enterocytes in the ileum.
The stomach is a distensible organ and can normally expand to hold about one litre of food. 

This expansion is enabled by a series of gastric folds in the inner walls of the stomach. 

The stomach of a newborn baby will only be able to expand to retain about 30 ml.


=== Spleen ===


The spleen is the largest lymphoid organ in the body but has other functions. 

It breaks down both red and white blood cells that are spent. 

This is why it is sometimes known as the 'graveyard of red blood cells'. 

A product of this digestion is the pigment bilirubin, which is sent to the liver and secreted in the bile. 

Another product is iron, which is used in the formation of new blood cells in the bone marrow. 

Medicine treats the spleen solely as belonging to the lymphatic system, though it is acknowledged that the full range of its important functions is not yet understood.: 1751 


=== Liver ===


The liver is the second largest organ (after the skin) and is an accessory digestive gland which plays a role in the body's metabolism. 

The liver has many functions some of which are important to digestion. 

The liver can detoxify various metabolites; synthesise proteins and produce biochemicals needed for digestion. 

It regulates the storage of glycogen which it can form from glucose (glycogenesis). 

The liver can also synthesise glucose from certain amino acids. 

Its digestive functions are largely involved with the breaking down of carbohydrates. 

It also maintains protein metabolism in its synthesis and degradation. 

In lipid metabolism it synthesises cholesterol. 

Fats are also produced in the process of lipogenesis. 

The liver synthesises the bulk of lipoproteins. 

The liver is located in the upper right quadrant of the abdomen and below the diaphragm to which it is attached at one part, the bare area of the liver. 

This is to the right of the stomach and it overlies the gall bladder. 

The liver synthesises bile acids and lecithin to promote the digestion of fat.


==== Bile ====
Bile produced by the liver is made up of water (97%), bile salts, mucus and pigments, 1% fats and inorganic salts. 

Bilirubin is its major pigment. 

Bile acts partly as a surfactant which lowers the surface tension between either two liquids or a solid and a liquid and helps to emulsify the fats in the chyme. 

Food fat is dispersed by the action of bile into smaller units called micelles. 

The breaking down into micelles creates a much larger surface area for the pancreatic enzyme, lipase to work on. 

Lipase digests the triglycerides which are broken down into two fatty acids and a monoglyceride. 

These are then absorbed by villi on the intestinal wall. 

If fats are not absorbed in this way in the small intestine problems can arise later in the large intestine which is not equipped to absorb fats. 

Bile also helps in the absorption of vitamin K from the diet.

Bile is collected and delivered through the common hepatic duct. 

This duct joins with the cystic duct to connect in a common bile duct with the gallbladder.

Bile is stored in the gallbladder for release when food is discharged into the duodenum and also after a few hours.


==== Gallbladder ====

The gallbladder is a hollow part of the biliary tract that sits just beneath the liver, with the gallbladder body resting in a small depression. 

It is a small organ where the bile produced by the liver is stored, before being released into the small intestine. 

Bile flows from the liver through the bile ducts and into the gall bladder for storage. 

The bile is released in response to cholecystokinin (CCK) a peptide hormone released from the duodenum. 

The production of CCK (by endocrine cells of the duodenum) is stimulated by the presence of fat in the duodenum.It is divided into three sections, a fundus, body and neck. 

The neck tapers and connects to the biliary tract via the cystic duct, which then joins the common hepatic duct to form the common bile duct. 

At this junction is a mucosal fold called Hartmann's pouch, where gallstones commonly get stuck. 

The muscular layer of the body is of smooth muscle tissue that helps the gallbladder contract, so that it can discharge its bile into the bile duct. 

The gallbladder needs to store bile in a natural, semi-liquid form at all times. 

Hydrogen ions secreted from the inner lining of the gallbladder keep the bile acidic enough to prevent hardening. 

To dilute the bile, water and electrolytes from the digestion system are added. 

Also, salts attach themselves to cholesterol molecules in the bile to keep them from crystallising. 

If there is too much cholesterol or bilirubin in the bile, or if the gallbladder doesn't empty properly the systems can fail. 

This is how gallstones form when a small piece of calcium gets coated with either cholesterol or bilirubin and the bile crystallises and forms a gallstone. 

The main purpose of the gallbladder is to store and release bile, or gall. 

Bile is released into the small intestine in order to help in the digestion of fats by breaking down larger molecules into smaller ones. 

After the fat is absorbed, the bile is also absorbed and transported back to the liver for reuse.


=== Pancreas ===


The pancreas is a major organ functioning as an accessory digestive gland in the digestive system. 

It is both an endocrine gland and an exocrine gland. 

The endocrine part secretes insulin when the blood sugar becomes high; insulin moves glucose from the blood into the muscles and other tissues for use as energy. 

The endocrine part releases glucagon when the blood sugar is low; glucagon allows stored sugar to be broken down into glucose by the liver in order to re-balance the sugar levels. 

The pancreas produces and releases important digestive enzymes in the pancreatic juice that it delivers to the duodenum. 

The pancreas lies below and at the back of the stomach. 

It connects to the duodenum via the pancreatic duct which it joins near to the bile duct's connection where both the bile and pancreatic juice can act on the chyme that is released from the stomach into the duodenum. 

Aqueous pancreatic secretions from pancreatic duct cells contain bicarbonate ions which are alkaline and help with the bile to neutralise the acidic chyme that is churned out by the stomach.
The pancreas is also the main source of enzymes for the digestion of fats and proteins. 

Some of these are released in response to the production of CKK in the duodenum. 

(The enzymes that digest polysaccharides, by contrast, are primarily produced by the walls of the intestines.) 

The cells are filled with secretory granules containing the precursor digestive enzymes. 

The major proteases, the pancreatic enzymes which work on proteins, are trypsinogen and chymotrypsinogen. 

Elastase is also produced. 

Smaller amounts of lipase and amylase are secreted. 

The pancreas also secretes phospholipase A2, lysophospholipase, and cholesterol esterase. 

The precursor zymogens, are inactive variants of the enzymes; which avoids the onset of pancreatitis caused by autodegradation. 

Once released in the intestine, the enzyme enteropeptidase present in the intestinal mucosa activates trypsinogen by cleaving it to form trypsin; further cleavage results in chymotripsin.


=== Lower gastrointestinal tract ===


The lower gastrointestinal tract (GI), includes the small intestine and all of the large intestine. 

The intestine is also called the bowel or the gut. 

The lower GI starts at the pyloric sphincter of the stomach and finishes at the anus. 

The small intestine is subdivided into the duodenum, the jejunum and the ileum. 

The cecum marks the division between the small and large intestine. 

The large intestine includes the rectum and anal canal.


==== Small intestine ====

Partially digested food starts to arrive in the small intestine as semi-liquid chyme, one hour after it is eaten. 

The stomach is half empty after an average of 1.2 hours. 

After four or five hours the stomach has emptied.In the small intestine, the pH becomes crucial; it needs to be finely balanced in order to activate digestive enzymes. 

The chyme is very acidic, with a low pH, having been released from the stomach and needs to be made much more alkaline. 

This is achieved in the duodenum by the addition of bile from the gall bladder combined with the bicarbonate secretions from the pancreatic duct and also from secretions of bicarbonate-rich mucus from duodenal glands known as Brunner's glands. 

The chyme arrives in the intestines having been released from the stomach through the opening of the pyloric sphincter. 

The resulting alkaline fluid mix neutralises the gastric acid which would damage the lining of the intestine. 

The mucus component lubricates the walls of the intestine.

When the digested food particles are reduced enough in size and composition, they can be absorbed by the intestinal wall and carried to the bloodstream. 

The first receptacle for this chyme is the duodenal bulb. 

From here it passes into the first of the three sections of the small intestine, the duodenum. (The next section is the jejunum and the third is the ileum). 

The duodenum is the first and shortest section of the small intestine. 

It is a hollow, jointed C-shaped tube connecting the stomach to the jejunum. 

It starts at the duodenal bulb and ends at the suspensory muscle of duodenum. 

The attachment of the suspensory muscle to the diaphragm is thought to help the passage of food by making a wider angle at its attachment.

Most food digestion takes place in the small intestine. 

Segmentation contractions act to mix and move the chyme more slowly in the small intestine allowing more time for absorption (and these continue in the large intestine). 

In the duodenum, pancreatic lipase is secreted together with a co-enzyme, colipase to further digest the fat content of the chyme. 

From this breakdown, smaller particles of emulsified fats called chylomicrons are produced. 

There are also digestive cells called enterocytes lining the intestines (the majority being in the small intestine). 

They are unusual cells in that they have villi on their surface which in turn have innumerable microvilli on their surface. 

All these villi make for a greater surface area, not only for the absorption of chyme but also for its further digestion by large numbers of digestive enzymes present on the microvilli.

The chylomicrons are small enough to pass through the enterocyte villi and into their lymph capillaries called lacteals. 

A milky fluid called chyle, consisting mainly of the emulsified fats of the chylomicrons, results from the absorbed mix with the lymph in the lacteals. 

Chyle is then transported through the lymphatic system to the rest of the body.

The suspensory muscle marks the end of the duodenum and the division between the upper gastrointestinal tract and the lower GI tract. 

The digestive tract continues as the jejunum which continues as the ileum. 

The jejunum, the midsection of the small intestine contains circular folds, flaps of doubled mucosal membrane which partially encircle and sometimes completely encircle the lumen of the intestine. 

These folds together with villi serve to increase the surface area of the jejunum enabling an increased absorption of digested sugars, amino acids and fatty acids into the bloodstream. 

The circular folds also slow the passage of food giving more time for nutrients to be absorbed.

The last part of the small intestine is the ileum. 

This also contains villi and vitamin B12; bile acids and any residue nutrients are absorbed here. 

When the chyme is exhausted of its nutrients the remaining waste material changes into the semi-solids called feces, which pass to the large intestine, where bacteria in the gut flora further break down residual proteins and starches.

Transit time through the small intestine is an average of 4 hours. 

Half of the food residues of a meal have emptied from the small intestine by an average of 5.4 hours after ingestion. 

Emptying of the small intestine is complete after an average of 8.6 hours.


==== Cecum ====

The cecum is a pouch marking the division between the small intestine and the large intestine. 

It lies below the ileocecal valve in the lower right quadrant of the abdomen. 

The cecum receives chyme from the last part of the small intestine, the ileum, and connects to the ascending colon of the large intestine. 

At this junction there is a sphincter or valve, the ileocecal valve which slows the passage of chyme from the ileum, allowing further digestion. 

It is also the site of the appendix attachment.


==== Large intestine ====

In the large intestine, the passage of the digesting food in the colon is a lot slower, taking from 30 to 40 hours until it is removed by defecation. 

The colon mainly serves as a site for the fermentation of digestible matter by the gut flora. 

The time taken varies considerably between individuals. 

The remaining semi-solid waste is termed feces and is removed by the coordinated contractions of the intestinal walls, termed peristalsis, which propels the excreta forward to reach the rectum and exit via defecation from the anus. 

The wall has an outer layer of longitudinal muscles, the taeniae coli, and an inner layer of circular muscles. 

The circular muscle keeps the material moving forward and also prevents any back flow of waste. 

Also of help in the action of peristalsis is the basal electrical rhythm that determines the frequency of contractions. 

The taeniae coli can be seen and are responsible for the bulges (haustra) present in the colon. 

Most parts of the GI tract are covered with serous membranes and have a mesentery. 

Other more muscular parts are lined with adventitia.


== Blood supply ==


The digestive system is supplied by the celiac artery. 

The celiac artery is the first major branch from the abdominal aorta, and is the only major artery that nourishes the digestive organs.

There are three main divisions – the left gastric artery, the common hepatic artery and the splenic artery.

The celiac artery supplies the liver, stomach, spleen and the upper 1/3 of the duodenum (to the sphincter of Oddi) and the pancreas with oxygenated blood. 

Most of the blood is returned to the liver via the portal venous system for further processing and detoxification before returning to the systemic circulation via the hepatic veins.

The next branch from the abdominal aorta is the superior mesenteric artery, which supplies the regions of the digestive tract derived from the midgut, which includes the distal 2/3 of the duodenum, jejunum, ileum, cecum, appendix, ascending colon, and the proximal 2/3 of the transverse colon.

The final branch which is important for the digestive system is the inferior mesenteric artery, which supplies the regions of the digestive tract derived from the hindgut, which includes the distal 1/3 of the transverse colon, descending colon, sigmoid colon, rectum, and the anus above the pectinate line.

Blood flow to the digestive tract reaches its maximum 20–40 minutes after a meal and lasts for 1.5–2 hours.


== Nerve supply ==


The enteric nervous system consists of some one hundred million neurons that are embedded in the peritoneum, the lining of the gastrointestinal tract extending from the esophagus to the anus. 

These neurons are collected into two plexuses - the myenteric (or Auerbach's) plexus that lies between the longitudinal and the smooth muscle layers, and the submucosal (or Meissner's) plexus that lies between the circular smooth muscle layer and the mucosa.

Parasympathetic innervation to the ascending colon is supplied by the vagus nerve. 

Sympathetic innervation is supplied by the splanchnic nerves that join the celiac ganglia. 

Most of the digestive tract is innervated by the two large celiac ganglia, with the upper part of each ganglion joined by the greater splanchnic nerve and the lower parts joined by the lesser splanchnic nerve. 

It is from these ganglia that many of the gastric plexuses arise.


== Development ==


Early in embryonic development, the embryo has three germ layers and abuts a yolk sac. 

During the second week of development, the embryo grows and begins to surround and envelop portions of this sac. 

The enveloped portions form the basis for the adult gastrointestinal tract. 

Sections of this foregut begin to differentiate into the organs of the gastrointestinal tract, such as the esophagus, stomach, and intestines.During the fourth week of development, the stomach rotates. 

The stomach, originally lying in the midline of the embryo, rotates so that its body is on the left. 

This rotation also affects the part of the gastrointestinal tube immediately below the stomach, which will go on to become the duodenum. 

By the end of the fourth week, the developing duodenum begins to spout a small outpouching on its right side, the hepatic diverticulum, which will go on to become the biliary tree. 

Just below this is a second outpouching, known as the cystic diverticulum, that will eventually develop into the gallbladder.


== Clinical significance ==


Each part of the digestive system is subject to a wide range of disorders many of which can be congenital. 

Mouth diseases can also be caused by pathogenic bacteria, viruses, fungi and as a side effect of some medications. 

Mouth diseases include tongue diseases and salivary gland diseases. 

A common gum disease in the mouth is gingivitis which is caused by bacteria in plaque. 

The most common viral infection of the mouth is gingivostomatitis caused by herpes simplex. 

A common fungal infection is candidiasis commonly known as thrush which affects the mucous membranes of the mouth.

There are a number of esophageal diseases such as the development of Schatzki rings that can restrict the passageway, causing difficulties in swallowing. 

They can also completely block the esophagus.

Stomach diseases are often chronic conditions and include gastroparesis, gastritis, and peptic ulcers.

A number of problems including malnutrition and anemia can arise from malabsorption, the abnormal absorption of nutrients in the GI tract. 

Malabsorption can have many causes ranging from infection, to enzyme deficiencies such as exocrine pancreatic insufficiency. 

It can also arise as a result of other gastrointestinal diseases such as coeliac disease. 

Coeliac disease is an autoimmune disorder of the small intestine. 

This can cause vitamin deficiencies due to the improper absorption of nutrients in the small intestine. 

The small intestine can also be obstructed by a volvulus, a loop of intestine that becomes twisted enclosing its attached mesentery. 

This can cause mesenteric ischemia if severe enough.
A common disorder of the bowel is diverticulitis. 

Diverticula are small pouches that can form inside the bowel wall, which can become inflamed to give diverticulitis. 

This disease can have complications if an inflamed diverticulum bursts and infection sets in. 

Any infection can spread further to the lining of the abdomen (peritoneum) and cause potentially fatal peritonitis.

Crohn's disease is a common chronic inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), which can affect any part of the GI tract, but it mostly starts in the terminal ileum.

Ulcerative colitis an ulcerative form of colitis, is the other major inflammatory bowel disease which is restricted to the colon and rectum. 

Both of these IBDs can give an increased risk of the development of colorectal cancer. 

Ulcerative colitis is the most common of the IBDsIrritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is the most common of the functional gastrointestinal disorders. 

These are idiopathic disorders that the Rome process has helped to define.Giardiasis is a disease of the small intestine caused by a protist parasite Giardia lamblia. 

This does not spread but remains confined to the lumen of the small intestine. 

It can often be asymptomatic, but as often can be indicated by a variety of symptoms. 

Giardiasis is the most common pathogenic parasitic infection in humans.

There are diagnostic tools mostly involving the ingestion of barium sulphate to investigate disorders of the GI tract. 

These are known as upper gastrointestinal series that enable imaging of the pharynx, larynx, oesophagus, stomach and small intestine and lower gastrointestinal series for imaging of the colon.


=== In pregnancy ===

Gestation can predispose for certain digestive disorders. 

Gestational diabetes can develop in the mother as a result of pregnancy and while this often presents with few symptoms it can lead to pre-eclampsia.


== History ==


In the early 11th century the Islamic medical philosopher Avicenna wrote extensively on many subjects including medicine. 

Forty of these treatises on medicine survive, and in the most famous one titled the Canon of Medicine he discusses "rising gas". 

Avicenna believed that digestive system dysfunction was responsible for the overproduction of gas in the gastrointestinal tract. 

He suggested lifestyle changes and a compound of herbal drugs for its treatment.In 1497 Alessandro Benedetti viewed the stomach as an unclean organ separated off by the diaphragm. 

This view of the stomach and intestines as being base organs was generally held until the mid-17th century.

In the Renaissance of the 16th century Leonardo da Vinci produced some early drawings of the stomach and intestines. 

He thought that the digestive system aided the respiratory system. 

Andreas Vesalius provided some early anatomical drawings of the abdominal organs in the 16th century.

In the middle of the 17th century a Flemish physician Jan Baptist van Helmont offered the first chemical account of digestion which was later described as being very close to the later conceptualised enzyme.

In 1653 William Harvey described the intestines in terms of their length, their blood supply, the mesenteries, and fat (adenylyl cyclase).In 1823 William Prout discovered hydrochloric acid in the gastric juice. 

In 1895 Ivan Pavlov described its secretion as being stimulated by a neurologic reflex with the vagus nerve having a crucial role. 

Black in the 19th century suggested an association of histamine with this secretion. 

In 1916 Popielski described histamine as a gastric secretagogue of hydrochloric acid.
William Beaumont was an army surgeon who in 1825 was able to observe digestion as it took place in the stomach. 

This was made possible by experiments on a man with a stomach wound that did not fully heal leaving an opening into the stomach. 

The churning motion of the stomach was described among other findings.In the 19th century it was accepted that chemical processes were involved in the process of digestion. 

Physiological research into secretion and the gastrointestinal tract was pursued with experiments undertaken by Claude Bernard, Rudol[ph Heidenhain and Ivan Pavlov.
The rest of the 20th century was dominated by research into enzymes. 

The first to be discovered was secretin by Ernest Starling in 1902, with ensuing results from John Edkins in 1905 who first suggested gastrin with its structure being determined in 1964. 

Andre Latarjet and Lester Dragstedt found a role for acetylcholine in the digestive system. 

In 1972 H2 receptor agonists were described by J. 

Black, that block the action of histamine and decrease the production of hydrochloric acid. 

In 1980 proton pump inhibitors were described by Sachs. 

In 1983 the role of Helicobacter pylori in the formation of ulcers was described by Barry Marshall, and Robin Warren.

Art historians have often noted that banqueters on iconographic records of ancient Mediterranean societies almost always appear to be lying down on their left sides. 

One possible explanation could lie in the anatomy of the stomach and in the digestive mechanism. 

When lying on the left, the food has room to expand because the curvature of the stomach is enhanced in that position.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Human_digestive_system



;;;ES;;;



SISTEMA DIGESTIVO HUMANO


El sistema digestivo humano consta del tracto gastrointestinal más los órganos accesorios de la digestión (la lengua, las glándulas salivales, el páncreas, el hígado y la vesícula biliar).

La digestión implica la descomposición de los alimentos en componentes cada vez más pequeños, hasta que puedan ser absorbidos y asimilados por el cuerpo.

El proceso de digestión tiene tres etapas: la fase cefálica, la fase gástrica y la fase intestinal.

La primera etapa, la fase cefálica de la digestión, comienza con secreciones gástricas en respuesta a la vista y el olor de los alimentos.

Esta etapa incluye la descomposición mecánica de los alimentos por masticación y la descomposición química por las enzimas digestivas, que tiene lugar en la boca.

La saliva contiene enzimas digestivas llamadas amilasa y lipasa lingual, secretadas por las glándulas salivales y las glándulas serosas de la lengua.

Las enzimas comienzan a descomponer los alimentos en la boca.

La masticación, en la que el alimento se mezcla con la saliva, inicia el proceso mecánico de la digestión.

Esto produce un bolo que puede tragarse por el esófago para ingresar al estómago.

La segunda etapa de la digestión comienza en el estómago con la fase gástrica.

Aquí, la comida se descompone aún más mezclándola con ácido gástrico hasta que pasa al duodeno, la primera parte del intestino delgado.

La tercera etapa comienza en el duodeno con la fase intestinal, donde los alimentos parcialmente digeridos se mezclan con una serie de enzimas producidas por el páncreas.

La digestión es facilitada por la masticación de los alimentos realizada por los músculos de la masticación, la lengua y los dientes, y también por las contracciones del peristaltismo y la segmentación.

El ácido gástrico y la producción de moco en el estómago son esenciales para la continuación de la digestión.

La peristalsis es la contracción rítmica de los músculos que comienza en el esófago y continúa a lo largo de la pared del estómago y el resto del tracto gastrointestinal.

Esto da como resultado inicialmente la producción de quimo que, cuando se descompone por completo en el intestino delgado, se absorbe como quilo en el sistema linfático.

La mayor parte de la digestión de los alimentos tiene lugar en el intestino delgado.

El agua y algunos minerales se reabsorben en la sangre en el colon del intestino grueso.

Los productos de desecho de la digestión (heces) se defecan del recto a través del ano.


== Componentes ==

Hay varios órganos y otros componentes involucrados en la digestión de los alimentos.

Los órganos conocidos como órganos digestivos accesorios son el hígado, la vesícula biliar y el páncreas.

Otros componentes incluyen la boca, las glándulas salivales, la lengua, los dientes y la epiglotis.

La estructura más grande del sistema digestivo es el tracto gastrointestinal (tracto GI).

Este comienza en la boca y termina en el ano, recorriendo una distancia de unos nueve metros.

La parte más grande del tracto GI es el colon o intestino grueso.

El agua se absorbe aquí y los desechos restantes se almacenan antes de la defecación.

La mayor parte de la digestión de los alimentos tiene lugar en el intestino delgado, que es la parte más larga del tracto GI.

Un órgano digestivo importante es el estómago.

Dentro de su mucosa hay millones de glándulas gástricas incrustadas.

Sus secreciones son vitales para el funcionamiento del órgano.

Hay muchas células especializadas del tracto GI.

Estos incluyen las diversas células de las glándulas gástricas, las células del gusto, las células del conducto pancreático, los enterocitos y las células microplásticas.

Algunas partes del sistema digestivo también forman parte del sistema excretor, incluido el intestino grueso.


=== Boca ===

La boca es la primera parte del tracto gastrointestinal superior y está equipada con varias estructuras que inician los primeros procesos de digestión.

Estos incluyen las glándulas salivales, los dientes y la lengua.

La boca consta de dos regiones; el vestíbulo y la cavidad bucal propiamente dicha.

El vestíbulo es el área entre los dientes, los labios y las mejillas, y el resto es la cavidad bucal propiamente dicha.

La mayor parte de la cavidad oral está revestida con mucosa oral, una membrana mucosa que produce un moco lubricante, del cual solo se necesita una pequeña cantidad.

Las membranas mucosas varían en estructura en las diferentes regiones del cuerpo, pero todas producen un moco lubricante, que es secretado por las células de la superficie o, más generalmente, por las glándulas subyacentes.

La membrana mucosa de la boca continúa como la fina mucosa que recubre las bases de los dientes.

El componente principal del moco es una glicoproteína llamada mucina y el tipo secretado varía según la región involucrada.

La mucina es viscosa, transparente y pegajosa.

Debajo de la membrana mucosa de la boca hay una capa delgada de tejido muscular liso y la conexión suelta con la membrana le da su gran elasticidad.

Cubre las mejillas, las superficies internas de los labios y el piso de la boca, y la mucina producida es altamente protectora contra la caries dental.

El techo de la boca se denomina paladar y separa la cavidad oral de la cavidad nasal.

El paladar es duro en la parte delantera de la boca ya que la mucosa que lo recubre cubre una placa de hueso; es más suave y flexible en la parte posterior, está hecho de músculo y tejido conectivo, y puede moverse para tragar alimentos y líquidos.

El paladar blando termina en la úvula.

La superficie del paladar duro permite la presión necesaria para comer, para dejar despejada la fosa nasal.

La abertura entre los labios se denomina fisura oral, y la abertura en la garganta se llama fauces.

A ambos lados del paladar blando se encuentran los músculos palatoglosos que también alcanzan las regiones de la lengua.

Estos músculos levantan la parte posterior de la lengua y también cierran ambos lados de las fauces para permitir que se traguen los alimentos.

El moco ayuda en la masticación de los alimentos en su capacidad para ablandar y recoger los alimentos en la formación del bolo.


==== Glándulas salivales ====

Hay tres pares de glándulas salivales principales y entre 800 y 1000 glándulas salivales menores, todas las cuales sirven principalmente al proceso digestivo y también juegan un papel importante en el mantenimiento de la salud dental y la lubricación general de la boca, sin las cuales el habla sería imposible.

Las glándulas principales son todas glándulas exocrinas, que secretan a través de conductos.

Todas estas glándulas terminan en la boca.

Las más grandes son las glándulas parótidas, cuya secreción es principalmente serosa.

El siguiente par está debajo de la mandíbula, las glándulas submandibulares, que producen líquido seroso y mucosidad.

El fluido seroso es producido por glándulas serosas en estas glándulas salivales que también producen lipasa lingual.

Producen alrededor del 70% de la saliva de la cavidad bucal.

El tercer par son las glándulas sublinguales ubicadas debajo de la lengua y su secreción es principalmente mucosa con un pequeño porcentaje de saliva.

Dentro de la mucosa bucal, y también en la lengua, el paladar y el suelo de la boca, se encuentran las glándulas salivales menores; sus secreciones son principalmente mucosas y están inervados por el nervio facial (CN7).

Las glándulas también secretan amilasa, una primera etapa en la descomposición de los alimentos que actúa sobre los carbohidratos de los alimentos para transformar el contenido de almidón en maltosa.

Hay otras glándulas serosas en la superficie de la lengua que rodean las papilas gustativas en la parte posterior de la lengua y también producen lipasa lingual.

La lipasa es una enzima digestiva que cataliza la hidrólisis de los lípidos (grasas).

Estas glándulas se denominan glándulas de Von Ebner y también se ha demostrado que tienen otra función en la secreción de histatinas que ofrecen una defensa temprana (fuera del sistema inmunitario) contra los microbios en los alimentos, cuando entra en contacto con estas glándulas en el tejido de la lengua.

La información sensorial puede estimular la secreción de saliva proporcionando el líquido necesario para que la lengua trabaje y también para facilitar la deglución de los alimentos.


===== Saliva =====

La saliva humedece y ablanda la comida y, junto con la acción masticatoria de los dientes, transforma la comida en un bolo alimenticio suave.

El bolo se ve favorecido además por la lubricación proporcionada por la saliva en su paso de la boca al esófago.

También es importante la presencia en la saliva de las enzimas digestivas amilasa y lipasa.

La amilasa comienza a trabajar en el almidón de los carbohidratos, descomponiéndolo en azúcares simples de maltosa y dextrosa que se pueden descomponer aún más en el intestino delgado.

La saliva en la boca puede representar el 30% de esta digestión inicial del almidón.

La lipasa comienza a trabajar en la descomposición de las grasas.

La lipasa se produce además en el páncreas, donde se libera para continuar con la digestión de las grasas.

La presencia de lipasa salival es de suma importancia en bebés pequeños cuya lipasa pancreática aún no se ha desarrollado.

Además de su papel en el suministro de enzimas digestivas, la saliva tiene una acción de limpieza para los dientes y la boca.

También tiene un papel inmunológico en el suministro de anticuerpos al sistema, como la inmunoglobulina A.

Se considera que esto es clave para prevenir infecciones de las glándulas salivales, sobre todo la de la parotiditis.

La saliva también contiene una glicoproteína llamada haptocorrina, que es una proteína de unión a la vitamina B12.

Se une a la vitamina para transportarla de manera segura a través del contenido ácido del estómago.

Cuando llega al duodeno, las enzimas pancreáticas descomponen la glicoproteína y liberan la vitamina que luego se une al factor intrínseco.


==== Lengua ====
Los alimentos entran por la boca donde tiene lugar la primera etapa del proceso digestivo, con la acción de la lengua y la secreción de saliva.

La lengua es un órgano sensorial carnoso y musculoso, y la primera información sensorial se recibe a través de las papilas gustativas en las papilas de su superficie.

Si el sabor es agradable, la lengua entrará en acción, manipulando el alimento en la boca lo que estimula la secreción de saliva de las glándulas salivales.

La calidad líquida de la saliva ayudará a ablandar la comida y su contenido de enzimas comenzará a descomponer la comida mientras aún está en la boca.

La primera parte del alimento que se descompone es el almidón de los carbohidratos (por la enzima amilasa en la saliva).

La lengua está unida al piso de la boca por una banda de ligamentos llamada frenillo y esto le da una gran movilidad para manipular la comida (y el habla); el rango de manipulación está controlado de manera óptima por la acción de varios músculos y limitado en su rango externo por el estiramiento del frenillo.

Los dos conjuntos de músculos de la lengua son cuatro músculos intrínsecos que se originan en la lengua y están involucrados en su forma, y ​​cuatro músculos extrínsecos que se originan en el hueso que están involucrados en su movimiento.


===== Sabor =====

El gusto es una forma de quimiorrecepción que tiene lugar en los receptores especializados del gusto, contenidos en estructuras llamadas papilas gustativas en la boca.

Las papilas gustativas se encuentran principalmente en la superficie superior (dorso) de la lengua.

La función de la percepción del gusto es vital para ayudar a prevenir el consumo de alimentos nocivos o podridos.

También hay papilas gustativas en la epiglotis y la parte superior del esófago.

Las papilas gustativas están inervadas por una rama del nervio facial, la cuerda del tímpano y el nervio glosofaríngeo.

Los mensajes gustativos se envían a través de estos nervios craneales al cerebro.

El cerebro puede distinguir entre las cualidades químicas de los alimentos.

Los cinco sabores básicos se denominan salado, ácido, amargo, dulce y umami.

La detección de salinidad y acidez permite el control del equilibrio de sal y ácido.

La detección de amargor advierte sobre venenos: muchas de las defensas de una planta son compuestos venenosos que son amargos.

El dulzor guía a aquellos alimentos que aportarán energía; la descomposición inicial de los carbohidratos que dan energía por la amilasa salival crea el sabor dulce ya que los azúcares simples son el primer resultado.

Se cree que el sabor del umami indica alimentos ricos en proteínas.

Los sabores amargos son ácidos que a menudo se encuentran en la mala comida.

El cerebro tiene que decidir muy rápidamente si la comida debe comerse o no.

Fueron los hallazgos de 1991, que describían los primeros receptores olfativos, los que ayudaron a impulsar la investigación sobre el gusto.

Los receptores olfativos están ubicados en las superficies de las células de la nariz que se unen a las sustancias químicas que permiten la detección de olores.

Se supone que las señales de los receptores del gusto trabajan junto con las de la nariz para formar una idea de los sabores complejos de los alimentos.


==== Dientes ====

Los dientes son estructuras complejas hechas de materiales específicos para ellos.

Están hechos de un material similar al hueso llamado dentina, que está cubierto por el tejido más duro del cuerpo: el esmalte.

Los dientes tienen diferentes formas para hacer frente a los diferentes aspectos de la masticación que se emplean para desgarrar y masticar trozos de comida en trozos cada vez más pequeños.

Esto da como resultado un área de superficie mucho mayor para la acción de las enzimas digestivas.

Los dientes reciben el nombre de sus funciones particulares en el proceso de masticación: los incisivos se usan para cortar o morder trozos de comida; caninos, se utilizan para desgarrar, premolares y molares se utilizan para masticar y moler.

La masticación de la comida con la ayuda de la saliva y la mucosidad da como resultado la formación de un bolo blando que luego puede tragarse para descender por el tracto gastrointestinal superior hasta el estómago.
 
Las enzimas digestivas en la saliva también ayudan a mantener los dientes limpios al descomponer cualquier partícula de comida alojada.


==== Epiglotis ====

La epiglotis es un colgajo de cartílago elástico adherido a la entrada de la laringe.

Está cubierto con una membrana mucosa y hay papilas gustativas en su superficie lingual que mira hacia la boca.

Su superficie laríngea mira hacia la laringe.

La epiglotis funciona para proteger la entrada de la glotis, la abertura entre las cuerdas vocales.

Normalmente apunta hacia arriba durante la respiración con la parte inferior funcionando como parte de la faringe, pero durante la deglución, la epiglotis se pliega hacia abajo a una posición más horizontal, con la parte superior funcionando como parte de la faringe.

De esta manera, evita que la comida entre en la tráquea y, en cambio, la dirige hacia el esófago, que está detrás.

Durante la deglución, el movimiento hacia atrás de la lengua fuerza a la epiglotis sobre la abertura de la glotis para evitar que cualquier alimento que se esté tragando entre en la laringe que conduce a los pulmones; la laringe también se tira hacia arriba para ayudar en este proceso.

La estimulación de la laringe por la materia ingerida produce un fuerte reflejo de tos para proteger los pulmones.


=== Faringe ===


La faringe es parte de la zona de conducción del sistema respiratorio y también parte del sistema digestivo.

Es la parte de la garganta inmediatamente detrás de la cavidad nasal en la parte posterior de la boca y por encima del esófago y la laringe.

La faringe se compone de tres partes.

Las dos partes inferiores, la orofaringe y la laringofaringe, están involucradas en el sistema digestivo.

La laringofaringe se conecta con el esófago y sirve como vía de paso tanto para el aire como para los alimentos.

El aire ingresa a la laringe anteriormente, pero todo lo que se ingiere tiene prioridad y el paso del aire se bloquea temporalmente.

La faringe está inervada por el plexo faríngeo del nervio vago.: 1465 Los músculos de la faringe empujan el alimento hacia el esófago.

La faringe se une al esófago en la entrada esofágica que se encuentra detrás del cartílago cricoides.


=== Esófago ===


El esófago, comúnmente conocido como tubo de alimentación o garganta, consiste en un tubo muscular a través del cual pasa la comida desde la faringe hasta el estómago.

El esófago se continúa con la laringofaringe.

Pasa a través del mediastino posterior en el tórax y entra al estómago a través de un orificio en el diafragma torácico, el hiato esofágico, al nivel de la décima vértebra torácica (T10).

Su longitud tiene un promedio de 25 cm, que varía con la altura de un individuo.

Se divide en partes cervical, torácica y abdominal.

La faringe se une al esófago en la entrada esofágica que está detrás del cartílago cricoides.

En reposo, el esófago está cerrado en ambos extremos por los esfínteres esofágicos superior e inferior.

La apertura del esfínter superior se desencadena por el reflejo de deglución para permitir el paso de los alimentos.

El esfínter también sirve para evitar el reflujo del esófago hacia la faringe.

El esófago tiene una membrana mucosa y el epitelio que tiene una función protectora se reemplaza continuamente debido al volumen de comida que pasa dentro del esófago.

Durante la deglución, la comida pasa de la boca a través de la faringe al esófago.

La epiglotis se pliega hacia abajo a una posición más horizontal para dirigir la comida hacia el esófago y lejos de la tráquea.

Una vez en el esófago, el bolo desciende hasta el estómago a través de la contracción y relajación rítmica de los músculos conocida como peristalsis.

El esfínter esofágico inferior es un esfínter muscular que rodea la parte inferior del esófago.

La unión gastroesofágica entre el esófago y el estómago está controlada por el esfínter esofágico inferior, que permanece contraído en todo momento excepto durante la deglución y el vómito para evitar que el contenido del estómago entre en el esófago.

Como el esófago no tiene la misma protección contra el ácido que el estómago, cualquier falla de este esfínter puede provocar acidez estomacal.


=== Diafragma ===

El diafragma es una parte importante del sistema digestivo del cuerpo.

El diafragma muscular separa la cavidad torácica de la cavidad abdominal donde se encuentran la mayoría de los órganos digestivos.

El músculo suspensorio une el duodeno ascendente al diafragma.

Se cree que este músculo es de ayuda en el sistema digestivo porque su unión ofrece un ángulo más amplio a la flexión duodenoyeyunal para facilitar el paso del material digerido.

El diafragma también se adhiere y ancla el hígado en su área desnuda.

El esófago ingresa al abdomen a través de un orificio en el diafragma al nivel de T10.


=== Estómago ===


El estómago es un órgano importante del tracto gastrointestinal y del sistema digestivo.

Es un órgano consistentemente en forma de J unido al esófago en su extremo superior y al duodeno en su extremo inferior.

El ácido gástrico (jugo gástrico informal), producido en el estómago juega un papel vital en el proceso digestivo, y contiene principalmente ácido clorhídrico y cloruro de sodio.

Una hormona peptídica, la gastrina, producida por las células G en las glándulas gástricas, estimula la producción de jugo gástrico que activa las enzimas digestivas.

El pepsinógeno es una enzima precursora (zimógeno) producida por las células gástricas principales, y el ácido gástrico la activa a la enzima pepsina que inicia la digestión de las proteínas.

Como estos dos químicos dañarían la pared del estómago, innumerables glándulas gástricas en el estómago secretan mucosidad para proporcionar una capa protectora viscosa contra los efectos dañinos de los químicos en las capas internas del estómago.

Al mismo tiempo que se digieren las proteínas, se produce una agitación mecánica a través de la acción del peristaltismo, ondas de contracciones musculares que se mueven a lo largo de la pared del estómago.

Esto permite que la masa de comida se mezcle aún más con las enzimas digestivas.

La lipasa gástrica secretada por las células principales de las glándulas fúndicas en la mucosa gástrica del estómago es una lipasa ácida, en contraste con la lipasa pancreática alcalina.

Esto descompone las grasas hasta cierto punto, aunque no es tan eficiente como la lipasa pancreática.

El píloro, la sección más baja del estómago que se une al duodeno a través del canal pilórico, contiene innumerables glándulas que secretan enzimas digestivas, incluida la gastrina.

Después de una o dos horas, se produce un semilíquido espeso llamado quimo.

Cuando se abre el esfínter pilórico o válvula, el quimo ingresa al duodeno donde se mezcla más con las enzimas digestivas del páncreas y luego pasa al intestino delgado, donde continúa la digestión.

Las células parietales en el fondo del estómago, producen una glicoproteína llamada factor intrínseco que es esencial para la absorción de la vitamina B12.

La vitamina B12 (cobalamina) se transporta hacia y a través del estómago, unida a una glicoproteína secretada por las glándulas salivales, la transcobalamina I, también llamada haptocorrina, que protege a la vitamina sensible a los ácidos del contenido ácido del estómago.

Una vez en el duodeno más neutral, las enzimas pancreáticas descomponen la glicoproteína protectora.

La vitamina B12 liberada luego se une al factor intrínseco que luego es absorbido por los enterocitos en el íleon.
El estómago es un órgano distensible y normalmente puede expandirse para contener alrededor de un litro de comida.

Esta expansión está habilitada por una serie de pliegues gástricos en las paredes internas del estómago.

El estómago de un recién nacido solo podrá expandirse para retener unos 30 ml.


=== Bazo ===


El bazo es el órgano linfoide más grande del cuerpo pero tiene otras funciones.

Descompone los glóbulos rojos y blancos que se gastan.

Esta es la razón por la que a veces se le conoce como el "cementerio de glóbulos rojos".

Un producto de esta digestión es el pigmento bilirrubina, que se envía al hígado y se secreta en la bilis.

Otro producto es el hierro, que se utiliza en la formación de nuevas células sanguíneas en la médula ósea.

La medicina trata al bazo únicamente como perteneciente al sistema linfático, aunque se reconoce que aún no se comprende la gama completa de sus importantes funciones.: 1751 


=== Hígado ===


El hígado es el segundo órgano más grande (después de la piel) y es una glándula digestiva accesoria que desempeña un papel en el metabolismo del cuerpo.

El hígado tiene muchas funciones, algunas de las cuales son importantes para la digestión.

El hígado puede desintoxicar varios metabolitos; Sintetizar proteínas y producir bioquímicos necesarios para la digestión.

Regula el almacenamiento de glucógeno que puede formar a partir de la glucosa (glucogénesis).

El hígado también puede sintetizar glucosa a partir de ciertos aminoácidos.

Sus funciones digestivas están involucradas en gran medida con la descomposición de los carbohidratos.

También mantiene el metabolismo de las proteínas en su síntesis y degradación.

En el metabolismo de los lípidos sintetiza el colesterol.

Las grasas también se producen en el proceso de lipogénesis.

El hígado sintetiza la mayor parte de las lipoproteínas.

El hígado está ubicado en el cuadrante superior derecho del abdomen y debajo del diafragma al que está unido en una parte, el área desnuda del hígado.

Está a la derecha del estómago y se superpone a la vesícula biliar.

El hígado sintetiza ácidos biliares y lecitina para favorecer la digestión de las grasas.


==== bilis ====
La bilis producida por el hígado está compuesta por agua (97%), sales biliares, mocos y pigmentos, 1% grasas y sales inorgánicas.

La bilirrubina es su principal pigmento.

La bilis actúa en parte como un tensioactivo que reduce la tensión superficial entre dos líquidos o un sólido y un líquido y ayuda a emulsionar las grasas en el quimo.

La grasa de los alimentos se dispersa por la acción de la bilis en unidades más pequeñas llamadas micelas.

La descomposición en micelas crea un área de superficie mucho más grande para que actúe la enzima pancreática, la lipasa.

La lipasa digiere los triglicéridos que se descomponen en dos ácidos grasos y un monoglicérido.

Estos luego son absorbidos por las vellosidades en la pared intestinal.

Si las grasas no se absorben de esta manera en el intestino delgado, pueden surgir problemas más adelante en el intestino grueso, que no está equipado para absorber grasas.

La bilis también ayuda en la absorción de la vitamina K de la dieta.

La bilis se recoge y se entrega a través del conducto hepático común.

Este conducto se une con el conducto cístico para conectarse en un conducto biliar común con la vesícula biliar.

La bilis se almacena en la vesícula biliar para su liberación cuando la comida se descarga en el duodeno y también después de unas horas.


==== Vesícula biliar ====

La vesícula biliar es una parte hueca del tracto biliar que se encuentra justo debajo del hígado, con el cuerpo de la vesícula biliar descansando en una pequeña depresión.

Es un pequeño órgano donde se almacena la bilis producida por el hígado, antes de ser liberada al intestino delgado.

La bilis fluye desde el hígado a través de los conductos biliares hasta la vesícula biliar para su almacenamiento.

La bilis se libera en respuesta a la colecistoquinina (CCK), una hormona peptídica liberada por el duodeno.

La producción de CCK (por las células endocrinas del duodeno) es estimulada por la presencia de grasa en el duodeno. Se divide en tres secciones, fondo, cuerpo y cuello.

El cuello se estrecha y se conecta al tracto biliar a través del conducto cístico, que luego se une al conducto hepático común para formar el conducto biliar común.

En esta unión hay un pliegue mucoso llamado bolsa de Hartmann, donde comúnmente se atascan los cálculos biliares.

La capa muscular del cuerpo es de tejido muscular liso que ayuda a que la vesícula biliar se contraiga para que pueda descargar su bilis en el conducto biliar.

La vesícula biliar necesita almacenar bilis en forma natural y semilíquida en todo momento.

Los iones de hidrógeno secretados por el revestimiento interno de la vesícula biliar mantienen la bilis lo suficientemente ácida para evitar que se endurezca.

Para diluir la bilis, se agregan agua y electrolitos del sistema de digestión.

Además, las sales se adhieren a las moléculas de colesterol en la bilis para evitar que se cristalicen.

Si hay demasiado colesterol o bilirrubina en la bilis, o si la vesícula biliar no se vacía correctamente, los sistemas pueden fallar.

Así es como se forman los cálculos biliares cuando una pequeña porción de calcio se cubre con colesterol o bilirrubina y la bilis se cristaliza y forma un cálculo biliar.

El propósito principal de la vesícula biliar es almacenar y liberar bilis o hiel.

La bilis se libera en el intestino delgado para ayudar en la digestión de las grasas al descomponer las moléculas más grandes en otras más pequeñas.

Después de que se absorbe la grasa, la bilis también se absorbe y se transporta de regreso al hígado para su reutilización.


=== Páncreas ===


El páncreas es un órgano importante que funciona como una glándula digestiva accesoria en el sistema digestivo.

Es a la vez una glándula endocrina y una glándula exocrina.

La parte endocrina segrega insulina cuando el nivel de azúcar en la sangre aumenta; la insulina mueve la glucosa de la sangre a los músculos y otros tejidos para usarla como energía.

La parte endocrina libera glucagón cuando el nivel de azúcar en la sangre es bajo; El glucagón permite que el azúcar almacenado se descomponga en glucosa por el hígado para reequilibrar los niveles de azúcar.

El páncreas produce y libera enzimas digestivas importantes en el jugo pancreático que lleva al duodeno.

El páncreas se encuentra debajo y en la parte posterior del estómago.

Se conecta al duodeno a través del conducto pancreático al que se une cerca de la conexión del conducto biliar donde tanto la bilis como el jugo pancreático pueden actuar sobre el quimo que se libera del estómago hacia el duodeno.

Las secreciones pancreáticas acuosas de las células del conducto pancreático contienen iones de bicarbonato que son alcalinos y ayudan a la bilis a neutralizar el quimo ácido que produce el estómago.
El páncreas es también la principal fuente de enzimas para la digestión de grasas y proteínas.

Algunos de estos se liberan en respuesta a la producción de CKK en el duodeno.

(Las enzimas que digieren los polisacáridos, por el contrario, son producidas principalmente por las paredes de los intestinos).

Las células están llenas de gránulos secretores que contienen las enzimas digestivas precursoras.

Las principales proteasas, las enzimas pancreáticas que actúan sobre las proteínas, son el tripsinógeno y el quimotripsinógeno.

También se produce elastasa.

Se secretan cantidades más pequeñas de lipasa y amilasa.

El páncreas también secreta fosfolipasa A2, lisofosfolipasa y colesterol esterasa.

Los zimógenos precursores, son variantes inactivas de las enzimas; lo que evita la aparición de pancreatitis por autodegradación.

Una vez liberada en el intestino, la enzima enteropeptidasa presente en la mucosa intestinal activa el tripsinógeno escindiéndolo para formar tripsina; la escisión adicional da como resultado la quimotripsina.


=== Tracto gastrointestinal inferior ===


El tracto gastrointestinal (GI) inferior incluye el intestino delgado y todo el intestino grueso.

El intestino también se llama el intestino o el intestino.

El GI inferior comienza en el esfínter pilórico del estómago y termina en el ano.

El intestino delgado se subdivide en duodeno, yeyuno e íleon.

El ciego marca la división entre el intestino delgado y el grueso.

El intestino grueso incluye el recto y el canal anal.


==== Intestino delgado ====

Los alimentos parcialmente digeridos comienzan a llegar al intestino delgado como quimo semilíquido, una hora después de haberlos consumido.

El estómago está medio vacío después de un promedio de 1,2 horas.

Después de cuatro o cinco horas, el estómago se ha vaciado. En el intestino delgado, el pH se vuelve crucial; necesita estar finamente equilibrado para activar las enzimas digestivas.

El quimo es muy ácido, con un pH bajo, se ha liberado del estómago y necesita volverse mucho más alcalino.

Esto se logra en el duodeno mediante la adición de bilis de la vesícula biliar combinada con las secreciones de bicarbonato del conducto pancreático y también de las secreciones de moco rico en bicarbonato de las glándulas duodenales conocidas como glándulas de Brunner.

El quimo llega a los intestinos después de haber sido liberado del estómago a través de la abertura del esfínter pilórico.

La mezcla de fluidos alcalinos resultante neutraliza el ácido gástrico que dañaría el revestimiento del intestino.

El componente mucoso lubrica las paredes del intestino.

Cuando las partículas de alimentos digeridos se reducen lo suficiente en tamaño y composición, pueden ser absorbidas por la pared intestinal y transportadas al torrente sanguíneo.

El primer receptáculo de este quimo es el bulbo duodenal.

Desde aquí pasa a la primera de las tres secciones del intestino delgado, el duodeno. (La siguiente sección es el yeyuno y la tercera es el íleon).

El duodeno es la primera y más corta sección del intestino delgado.

Es un tubo hueco, articulado en forma de C que conecta el estómago con el yeyuno.

Comienza en el bulbo duodenal y termina en el músculo suspensorio del duodeno.

Se cree que la unión del músculo suspensorio al diafragma ayuda al paso de los alimentos al formar un ángulo más amplio en su unión.

La mayor parte de la digestión de los alimentos tiene lugar en el intestino delgado.

Las contracciones de segmentación actúan para mezclar y mover el quimo más lentamente en el intestino delgado, lo que permite más tiempo para la absorción (y esto continúa en el intestino grueso).

En el duodeno, la lipasa pancreática se secreta junto con una coenzima, la colipasa, para digerir aún más el contenido de grasa del quimo.

A partir de esta descomposición, se producen partículas más pequeñas de grasas emulsionadas llamadas quilomicrones.

También hay células digestivas llamadas enterocitos que recubren los intestinos (la mayoría se encuentran en el intestino delgado).

Son células inusuales porque tienen vellosidades en su superficie que a su vez tienen innumerables microvellosidades en su superficie.

Todas estas vellosidades forman una mayor superficie, no solo para la absorción del quimo sino también para su posterior digestión por un gran número de enzimas digestivas presentes en las microvellosidades.

Los quilomicrones son lo suficientemente pequeños para pasar a través de las vellosidades de los enterocitos y hacia sus capilares linfáticos llamados lacteales.

Un líquido lechoso llamado quilo, que consiste principalmente en las grasas emulsionadas de los quilomicrones, resulta de la mezcla absorbida con la linfa en los lácteos.

Luego, el quilo se transporta a través del sistema linfático al resto del cuerpo.

El músculo suspensorio marca el final del duodeno y la división entre el tracto gastrointestinal superior y el tracto GI inferior.

El tracto digestivo continúa como el yeyuno que continúa como el íleon.

El yeyuno, la sección media del intestino delgado, contiene pliegues circulares, colgajos de membrana mucosa doble que rodean parcialmente ya veces completamente la luz del intestino.

Estos pliegues, junto con las vellosidades, sirven para aumentar la superficie del yeyuno, lo que permite una mayor absorción de azúcares, aminoácidos y ácidos grasos digeridos en el torrente sanguíneo.

Los pliegues circulares también ralentizan el paso de los alimentos dando más tiempo para que se absorban los nutrientes.

La última parte del intestino delgado es el íleon.

Este también contiene vellosidades y vitamina B12; Los ácidos biliares y los nutrientes residuales se absorben aquí.

Cuando el quimo se agota de sus nutrientes, el material de desecho restante se convierte en semisólidos llamados heces, que pasan al intestino grueso, donde las bacterias en la flora intestinal descomponen aún más las proteínas y los almidones residuales.

El tiempo de tránsito a través del intestino delgado es un promedio de 4 horas.

La mitad de los residuos de comida de una comida se han vaciado del intestino delgado en un promedio de 5,4 horas después de la ingestión.

El vaciado del intestino delgado se completa después de un promedio de 8,6 horas.


==== Ciego ====

El ciego es una bolsa que marca la división entre el intestino delgado y el intestino grueso.

Se encuentra debajo de la válvula ileocecal en el cuadrante inferior derecho del abdomen.

El ciego recibe quimo de la última parte del intestino delgado, el íleon, y se conecta con el colon ascendente del intestino grueso.

En esta unión hay un esfínter o válvula, la válvula ileocecal, que frena el paso del quimo desde el íleon, lo que permite una mayor digestión.

También es el sitio del archivo adjunto del apéndice.


==== Intestino grueso ====

En el intestino grueso, el paso de los alimentos digeridos en el colon es mucho más lento, tardando de 30 a 40 horas hasta que se elimina por defecación.

El colon sirve principalmente como sitio para la fermentación de materia digerible por parte de la flora intestinal.

El tiempo necesario varía considerablemente entre los individuos.

Los desechos semisólidos restantes se denominan heces y se eliminan mediante las contracciones coordinadas de las paredes intestinales, denominadas peristalsis, que impulsan los excrementos hacia adelante para llegar al recto y salir a través de la defecación por el ano.

La pared tiene una capa exterior de músculos longitudinales, las tenias coli, y una capa interior de músculos circulares.

El músculo circular mantiene el material en movimiento hacia adelante y también evita cualquier reflujo de desechos.

También ayuda en la acción del peristaltismo el ritmo eléctrico basal que determina la frecuencia de las contracciones.

Las tenias coli se pueden ver y son las responsables de las protuberancias (haustras) presentes en el colon.

La mayoría de las partes del tracto gastrointestinal están cubiertas con membranas serosas y tienen un mesenterio.

Otras partes más musculosas están revestidas de adventicia.


== Suministro de sangre ==


El sistema digestivo está irrigado por la arteria celíaca.

La arteria celíaca es la primera rama principal de la aorta abdominal y es la única arteria principal que nutre los órganos digestivos.

Hay tres divisiones principales: la arteria gástrica izquierda, la arteria hepática común y la arteria esplénica.

La arteria celíaca irriga el hígado, el estómago, el bazo y el 1/3 superior del duodeno (al esfínter de Oddi) y el páncreas con sangre oxigenada.

La mayor parte de la sangre regresa al hígado a través del sistema venoso portal para su posterior procesamiento y desintoxicación antes de regresar a la circulación sistémica a través de las venas hepáticas.

La siguiente rama de la aorta abdominal es la arteria mesentérica superior, que irriga las regiones del tracto digestivo derivadas del intestino medio, que incluye los 2/3 distales del duodeno, yeyuno, íleon, ciego, apéndice, colon ascendente y el 2/3 proximales del colon transverso.

La rama final que es importante para el sistema digestivo es la arteria mesentérica inferior, que irriga las regiones del tracto digestivo derivadas del intestino posterior, que incluye el 1/3 distal del colon transverso, colon descendente, colon sigmoide, recto y el ano por encima de la línea pectínea.

El flujo de sangre al tracto digestivo alcanza su máximo de 20 a 40 minutos después de una comida y dura de 1,5 a 2 horas.


== Suministro nervioso ==


El sistema nervioso entérico consta de unos cien millones de neuronas que están incrustadas en el peritoneo, el revestimiento del tracto gastrointestinal que se extiende desde el esófago hasta el ano.

Estas neuronas se agrupan en dos plexos: el plexo mientérico (o de Auerbach) que se encuentra entre las capas de músculo liso y longitudinal, y el plexo submucoso (o de Meissner) que se encuentra entre la capa de músculo liso circular y la mucosa.

La inervación parasimpática del colon ascendente la proporciona el nervio vago.

La inervación simpática es suministrada por los nervios esplácnicos que se unen a los ganglios celíacos.

La mayor parte del tracto digestivo está inervado por los dos grandes ganglios celíacos, con la parte superior de cada ganglio unida por el nervio esplácnico mayor y las partes inferiores unidas por el nervio esplácnico menor.

De estos ganglios surgen muchos de los plexos gástricos.


== Desarrollo ==


En las primeras etapas del desarrollo embrionario, el embrión tiene tres capas germinales y se apoya en un saco vitelino.

Durante la segunda semana de desarrollo, el embrión crece y comienza a rodear y envolver porciones de este saco.

Las porciones envueltas forman la base para el tracto gastrointestinal adulto.

Las secciones de este intestino anterior comienzan a diferenciarse en los órganos del tracto gastrointestinal, como el esófago, el estómago y los intestinos. Durante la cuarta semana de desarrollo, el estómago gira.

El estómago, que originalmente se encuentra en la línea media del embrión, gira de modo que su cuerpo quede a la izquierda.

Esta rotación también afecta a la parte del tubo gastrointestinal inmediatamente debajo del estómago, que pasará a convertirse en el duodeno.

Hacia el final de la cuarta semana, el duodeno en desarrollo comienza a producir una pequeña protuberancia en su lado derecho, el divertículo hepático, que se convertirá en el árbol biliar.

Justo debajo de esto hay una segunda evaginación, conocida como divertículo quístico, que eventualmente se convertirá en la vesícula biliar.


== Importancia clínica ==


Cada parte del sistema digestivo está sujeta a una amplia gama de trastornos, muchos de los cuales pueden ser congénitos.

Las enfermedades bucales también pueden ser causadas por bacterias patógenas, virus, hongos y como efecto secundario de algunos medicamentos.

Las enfermedades de la boca incluyen enfermedades de la lengua y enfermedades de las glándulas salivales.

Una enfermedad común de las encías en la boca es la gingivitis, que es causada por bacterias en la placa.

La infección viral más común de la boca es la gingivoestomatitis causada por el herpes simple.

Una infección fúngica común es la candidiasis, comúnmente conocida como aftas, que afecta las membranas mucosas de la boca.

Hay una serie de enfermedades esofágicas, como el desarrollo de anillos de Schatzki, que pueden restringir el paso y causar dificultades para tragar.

También pueden bloquear completamente el esófago.

Las enfermedades estomacales suelen ser afecciones crónicas e incluyen gastroparesia, gastritis y úlceras pépticas.

Una serie de problemas que incluyen desnutrición y anemia pueden surgir de la malabsorción, la absorción anormal de nutrientes en el tracto GI.

La malabsorción puede tener muchas causas que van desde una infección hasta deficiencias enzimáticas como la insuficiencia pancreática exocrina.

También puede surgir como resultado de otras enfermedades gastrointestinales como la enfermedad celíaca.

La enfermedad celíaca es un trastorno autoinmune del intestino delgado.

Esto puede causar deficiencias vitamínicas debido a la absorción inadecuada de nutrientes en el intestino delgado.

El intestino delgado también puede estar obstruido por un vólvulo, un asa de intestino que se retuerce y encierra su mesenterio adherido.

Esto puede causar isquemia mesentérica si es lo suficientemente grave.
Un trastorno común del intestino es la diverticulitis.

Los divertículos son pequeñas bolsas que se pueden formar dentro de la pared intestinal, que pueden inflamarse y dar diverticulitis.

Esta enfermedad puede tener complicaciones si se revienta un divertículo inflamado y se produce una infección.

Cualquier infección puede extenderse más al revestimiento del abdomen (peritoneo) y causar una peritonitis potencialmente fatal.

La enfermedad de Crohn es una enfermedad intestinal inflamatoria crónica (EII) común, que puede afectar cualquier parte del tracto GI, pero comienza principalmente en el íleon terminal.

La colitis ulcerosa, una forma ulcerosa de colitis, es la otra enfermedad inflamatoria intestinal importante que se limita al colon y al recto.

Ambas EII pueden aumentar el riesgo de desarrollar cáncer colorrectal.

La colitis ulcerosa es la más común de las EII. El síndrome del intestino irritable (SII) es el más común de los trastornos gastrointestinales funcionales.

Estos son trastornos idiopáticos que el proceso de Roma ha ayudado a definir. La giardiasis es una enfermedad del intestino delgado causada por un parásito protista Giardia lamblia.

Este no se disemina sino que permanece confinado a la luz del intestino delgado.

A menudo puede ser asintomático, pero con la misma frecuencia puede estar indicado por una variedad de síntomas.

La giardiasis es la infección parasitaria patógena más común en humanos.

Existen herramientas de diagnóstico que involucran principalmente la ingestión de sulfato de bario para investigar trastornos del tracto gastrointestinal.

Se conocen como series gastrointestinales superiores que permiten obtener imágenes de la faringe, la laringe, el esófago, el estómago y el intestino delgado, y series gastrointestinales inferiores para obtener imágenes del colon.


=== En el embarazo ===

La gestación puede predisponer a ciertos trastornos digestivos.

La diabetes gestacional puede desarrollarse en la madre como resultado del embarazo y, aunque a menudo se presenta con pocos síntomas, puede provocar preeclampsia.


== Historia ==


A principios del siglo XI, el filósofo médico islámico Avicena escribió extensamente sobre muchos temas, incluida la medicina.

Cuarenta de estos tratados sobre medicina sobreviven, y en el más famoso titulado Canon de la Medicina habla del "gas ascendente".

Avicena creía que la disfunción del sistema digestivo era responsable de la sobreproducción de gas en el tracto gastrointestinal.

Sugirió cambios en el estilo de vida y un compuesto de medicamentos a base de hierbas para su tratamiento. En 1497, Alessandro Benedetti vio el estómago como un órgano impuro separado por el diafragma.

Esta visión del estómago y los intestinos como órganos básicos se mantuvo generalmente hasta mediados del siglo XVII.

En el Renacimiento del siglo XVI, Leonardo da Vinci realizó algunos de los primeros dibujos del estómago y los intestinos.

Pensó que el sistema digestivo ayudaba al sistema respiratorio.

Andreas Vesalius proporcionó algunos de los primeros dibujos anatómicos de los órganos abdominales en el siglo XVI.

A mediados del siglo XVII, un médico flamenco, Jan Baptist van Helmont, ofreció la primera descripción química de la digestión, que luego se describió como muy cercana a la enzima conceptualizada más tarde.

En 1653, William Harvey describió los intestinos en términos de su longitud, su suministro de sangre, los mesenterios y la grasa (adenilil ciclasa). En 1823, William Prout descubrió el ácido clorhídrico en el jugo gástrico.

En 1895, Ivan Pavlov describió su secreción como estimulada por un reflejo neurológico en el que el nervio vago tiene un papel crucial.

Black en el siglo XIX sugirió una asociación de histamina con esta secreción.

En 1916 Popielski describió la histamina como un secretagogo gástrico del ácido clorhídrico.
William Beaumont fue un cirujano del ejército que en 1825 pudo observar la digestión en el estómago.

Esto fue posible gracias a los experimentos en un hombre con una herida en el estómago que no se curó por completo dejando una abertura en el estómago.

El movimiento de agitación del estómago se describió entre otros hallazgos. En el siglo XIX se aceptó que los procesos químicos estaban involucrados en el proceso de digestión.

La investigación fisiológica sobre la secreción y el tracto gastrointestinal se prosiguió con los experimentos realizados por Claude Bernard, Rudol[ph Heidenhain e Ivan Pavlov.
El resto del siglo XX estuvo dominado por la investigación de las enzimas.

El primero en ser descubierto fue la secretina por Ernest Starling en 1902, con los resultados subsiguientes de John Edkins en 1905, quien sugirió por primera vez la gastrina y su estructura se determinó en 1964.

Andre Latarjet y Lester Dragstedt encontraron un papel para la acetilcolina en el sistema digestivo.

En 1972, los agonistas de los receptores H2 fueron descritos por J.

Negro, que bloquean la acción de la histamina y disminuyen la producción de ácido clorhídrico.

En 1980 Sachs describió los inhibidores de la bomba de protones.

En 1983, Barry Marshall y Robin Warren describieron el papel de Helicobacter pylori en la formación de úlceras.

Los historiadores del arte han notado a menudo que los comensales en los registros iconográficos de las antiguas sociedades mediterráneas casi siempre parecen estar acostados sobre su lado izquierdo.

Una posible explicación podría estar en la anatomía del estómago y en el mecanismo digestivo.

Cuando se acuesta sobre la izquierda, la comida tiene espacio para expandirse porque la curvatura del estómago se realza en esa posición.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Human_digestive_system




;;;PT;;;



SISTEMA DIGESTIVO HUMANO


O sistema digestivo humano consiste no trato gastrointestinal mais os órgãos acessórios da digestão (língua, glândulas salivares, pâncreas, fígado e vesícula biliar).

A digestão envolve a quebra dos alimentos em componentes cada vez menores, até que possam ser absorvidos e assimilados pelo corpo.

O processo de digestão tem três fases: a fase cefálica, a fase gástrica e a fase intestinal.

O primeiro estágio, a fase cefálica da digestão, começa com as secreções gástricas em resposta à visão e ao cheiro dos alimentos.

Este estágio inclui a quebra mecânica dos alimentos pela mastigação e a quebra química pelas enzimas digestivas, que ocorre na boca.

A saliva contém enzimas digestivas chamadas amilase e lipase lingual, secretadas pelas glândulas salivares e glândulas serosas da língua.

As enzimas começam a quebrar o alimento na boca.

A mastigação, na qual o alimento é misturado à saliva, inicia o processo mecânico de digestão.

Isso produz um bolo que pode ser engolido pelo esôfago para entrar no estômago.

A segunda fase da digestão começa então no estômago com a fase gástrica.

Aqui, o alimento é decomposto pela mistura com o ácido gástrico até passar para o duodeno, a primeira parte do intestino delgado.

A terceira fase começa no duodeno com a fase intestinal, onde o alimento parcialmente digerido é misturado com uma série de enzimas produzidas pelo pâncreas.

A digestão é auxiliada pela mastigação dos alimentos realizada pelos músculos da mastigação, a língua e os dentes, e também pelas contrações do peristaltismo e da segmentação.

O ácido gástrico e a produção de muco no estômago são essenciais para a continuação da digestão.

Peristaltismo é a contração rítmica dos músculos que começa no esôfago e continua ao longo da parede do estômago e do resto do trato gastrointestinal.

Isso resulta inicialmente na produção de quimo que, quando totalmente decomposto no intestino delgado, é absorvido como quilo no sistema linfático.

A maior parte da digestão dos alimentos ocorre no intestino delgado.

A água e alguns minerais são reabsorvidos de volta ao sangue no cólon do intestino grosso.

Os produtos residuais da digestão (fezes) são defecados do reto através do ânus.


== Componentes ==

Existem vários órgãos e outros componentes envolvidos na digestão dos alimentos.

Os órgãos conhecidos como órgãos digestivos acessórios são o fígado, a vesícula biliar e o pâncreas.

Outros componentes incluem a boca, glândulas salivares, língua, dentes e epiglote.

A maior estrutura do sistema digestivo é o trato gastrointestinal (trato GI).

Este começa na boca e termina no ânus, percorrendo uma distância de cerca de nove metros.

A maior parte do trato GI é o cólon ou intestino grosso.

A água é absorvida aqui e os resíduos restantes são armazenados antes da defecação.

A maior parte da digestão dos alimentos ocorre no intestino delgado, que é a parte mais longa do trato GI.

Um dos principais órgãos digestivos é o estômago.

Dentro de sua mucosa estão milhões de glândulas gástricas embutidas.

Suas secreções são vitais para o funcionamento do órgão.

Existem muitas células especializadas do trato GI.

Estes incluem as várias células das glândulas gástricas, células gustativas, células do ducto pancreático, enterócitos e células microfold.

Algumas partes do sistema digestivo também fazem parte do sistema excretor, incluindo o intestino grosso.


=== Boca ===

A boca é a primeira parte do trato gastrointestinal superior e é dotada de várias estruturas que iniciam os primeiros processos de digestão.

Estes incluem glândulas salivares, dentes e língua.

A boca consiste em duas regiões; o vestíbulo e a cavidade oral propriamente dita.

O vestíbulo é a área entre os dentes, lábios e bochechas, e o resto é a cavidade oral propriamente dita.

A maior parte da cavidade oral é revestida por mucosa oral, uma membrana mucosa que produz um muco lubrificante, do qual apenas uma pequena quantidade é necessária.

As membranas mucosas variam em estrutura nas diferentes regiões do corpo, mas todas elas produzem um muco lubrificante, que é secretado pelas células da superfície ou, mais comumente, pelas glândulas subjacentes.

A membrana mucosa da boca continua como a fina mucosa que reveste as bases dos dentes.

O principal componente do muco é uma glicoproteína chamada mucina e o tipo secretado varia de acordo com a região envolvida.

A mucina é viscosa, clara e aderente.

Subjacente à membrana mucosa da boca encontra-se uma fina camada de tecido muscular liso e a ligação frouxa à membrana confere-lhe uma grande elasticidade.

Cobre as bochechas, as superfícies internas dos lábios e o assoalho da boca, e a mucina produzida é altamente protetora contra a cárie dentária.

O céu da boca é denominado palato e separa a cavidade oral da cavidade nasal.

O palato é duro na frente da boca, pois a mucosa sobrejacente está cobrindo uma placa de osso; é mais macio e flexível na parte de trás, sendo feito de músculo e tecido conjuntivo, e pode se mover para engolir alimentos e líquidos.

O palato mole termina na úvula.

A superfície do palato duro permite a pressão necessária na ingestão de alimentos, para deixar a passagem nasal clara.

A abertura entre os lábios é chamada de fissura oral, e a abertura na garganta é chamada de fauces.

Em ambos os lados do palato mole estão os músculos palatoglosso que também alcançam as regiões da língua.

Esses músculos levantam o dorso da língua e também fecham os dois lados das fauces para permitir que o alimento seja engolido.

O muco auxilia na mastigação dos alimentos em sua capacidade de amolecer e recolher o alimento na formação do bolo alimentar.


==== Glândulas salivares ====

Existem três pares de glândulas salivares principais e entre 800 e 1.000 glândulas salivares menores, todas as quais servem principalmente ao processo digestivo, e também desempenham um papel importante na manutenção da saúde bucal e na lubrificação geral da boca, sem os quais a fala seria impossível.

As glândulas principais são todas glândulas exócrinas, secretando através de ductos.

Todas essas glândulas terminam na boca.

A maior delas são as glândulas parótidas - sua secreção é principalmente serosa.

O próximo par está abaixo da mandíbula, as glândulas submandibulares, que produzem fluido seroso e muco.

O fluido seroso é produzido por glândulas serosas nessas glândulas salivares que também produzem lipase lingual.

Produzem cerca de 70% da saliva da cavidade oral.

O terceiro par são as glândulas sublinguais localizadas abaixo da língua e sua secreção é principalmente mucosa com uma pequena porcentagem de saliva.

Dentro da mucosa oral, e também na língua, palato e assoalho da boca, encontram-se as glândulas salivares menores; suas secreções são principalmente mucosas e são inervadas pelo nervo facial (NC7).

As glândulas também secretam amilase, um primeiro estágio na quebra do alimento, agindo sobre o carboidrato do alimento para transformar o conteúdo de amido em maltose.

Existem outras glândulas serosas na superfície da língua que circundam as papilas gustativas na parte posterior da língua e também produzem lipase lingual.

A lipase é uma enzima digestiva que catalisa a hidrólise de lipídios (gorduras).

Essas glândulas são denominadas glândulas de Von Ebner, que também demonstraram ter outra função na secreção de histatinas que oferecem uma defesa precoce (fora do sistema imunológico) contra micróbios nos alimentos, quando entra em contato com essas glândulas no tecido da língua.

As informações sensoriais podem estimular a secreção de saliva, fornecendo o fluido necessário para a língua trabalhar e também para facilitar a deglutição do alimento.


===== Saliva =====

A saliva umedece e amacia os alimentos e, juntamente com a ação de mastigação dos dentes, transforma o alimento em um bolo liso.

O bolo é ainda auxiliado pela lubrificação fornecida pela saliva em sua passagem da boca para o esôfago.

Também é importante a presença na saliva das enzimas digestivas amilase e lipase.

A amilase começa a trabalhar no amido dos carboidratos, quebrando-o em açúcares simples de maltose e dextrose que podem ser decompostos ainda mais no intestino delgado.

A saliva na boca pode ser responsável por 30% dessa digestão inicial do amido.

Lipase começa a trabalhar na quebra de gorduras.

A lipase é produzida no pâncreas, onde é liberada para continuar a digestão das gorduras.

A presença de lipase salivar é de primordial importância em bebês cuja lipase pancreática ainda não foi desenvolvida.

Além de seu papel no fornecimento de enzimas digestivas, a saliva tem uma ação de limpeza para os dentes e a boca.

Também tem um papel imunológico no fornecimento de anticorpos ao sistema, como a imunoglobulina A.

Isso é visto como fundamental na prevenção de infecções das glândulas salivares, principalmente a de parotidite.

A saliva também contém uma glicoproteína chamada haptocorrina, que é uma proteína de ligação à vitamina B12.

Ele se liga à vitamina para transportá-la com segurança através do conteúdo ácido do estômago.

Quando atinge o duodeno, as enzimas pancreáticas quebram a glicoproteína e liberam a vitamina que se liga ao fator intrínseco.


==== Língua ====
O alimento entra na boca onde ocorre a primeira etapa do processo digestivo, com a ação da língua e a secreção de saliva.

A língua é um órgão sensorial carnoso e muscular, e a primeira informação sensorial é recebida através das papilas gustativas nas papilas em sua superfície.

Se o sabor for agradável, a língua entrará em ação, manipulando o alimento na boca que estimula a secreção de saliva das glândulas salivares.

A qualidade líquida da saliva ajudará no amolecimento do alimento e seu conteúdo enzimático começará a decompor o alimento enquanto ainda estiver na boca.

A primeira parte do alimento a ser decomposta é o amido dos carboidratos (pela enzima amilase na saliva).

A língua está presa ao assoalho da boca por uma faixa ligamentar chamada freio e isso lhe confere grande mobilidade para a manipulação dos alimentos (e da fala); a amplitude de manipulação é otimamente controlada pela ação de vários músculos e limitada em sua amplitude externa pelo estiramento do freio.

Os dois conjuntos de músculos da língua são quatro músculos intrínsecos que se originam na língua e estão envolvidos com sua modelagem, e quatro músculos extrínsecos originados no osso que estão envolvidos com seu movimento.


===== Gosto =====

O paladar é uma forma de quimiorrecepção que ocorre nos receptores especializados do paladar, contidos em estruturas chamadas papilas gustativas na boca.

As papilas gustativas estão principalmente na superfície superior (dorso) da língua.

A função da percepção do paladar é vital para ajudar a evitar que alimentos nocivos ou podres sejam consumidos.

Há também papilas gustativas na epiglote e na parte superior do esôfago.

As papilas gustativas são inervadas por um ramo do nervo facial, a corda do tímpano e o nervo glossofaríngeo.

As mensagens gustativas são enviadas através desses nervos cranianos para o cérebro.

O cérebro pode distinguir entre as qualidades químicas do alimento.

Os cinco sabores básicos são chamados de salgado, azedo, amargo, doce e umami.

A detecção de salinidade e acidez permite o controle do equilíbrio salino e ácido.

A detecção de amargura alerta para venenos – muitas das defesas de uma planta são de compostos venenosos que são amargos.

A doçura orienta os alimentos que fornecerão energia; a quebra inicial dos carboidratos que fornecem energia pela amilase salivar cria o sabor de doçura, já que os açúcares simples são o primeiro resultado.

Acredita-se que o sabor do umami sinalize alimentos ricos em proteínas.

Os gostos azedos são ácidos, o que é frequentemente encontrado em alimentos ruins.

O cérebro tem que decidir muito rapidamente se o alimento deve ser ingerido ou não.

Foram as descobertas em 1991, descrevendo os primeiros receptores olfativos que ajudaram a estimular a pesquisa sobre o paladar.

Os receptores olfativos estão localizados nas superfícies das células do nariz que se ligam a substâncias químicas que permitem a detecção de cheiros.

Supõe-se que os sinais dos receptores gustativos trabalhem em conjunto com os do nariz, para formar uma ideia de sabores complexos dos alimentos.


==== Dentes ====

Os dentes são estruturas complexas feitas de materiais específicos para eles.

Eles são feitos de um material semelhante ao osso chamado dentina, que é coberto pelo tecido mais duro do corpo – o esmalte.

Os dentes têm formas diferentes para lidar com diferentes aspectos da mastigação empregados em rasgar e mastigar pedaços de alimentos em pedaços cada vez menores.

Isso resulta em uma área de superfície muito maior para a ação das enzimas digestivas.

Os dentes são nomeados de acordo com seus papéis específicos no processo de mastigação - os incisivos são usados ​​para cortar ou morder pedaços de comida; caninos, são usados ​​para rasgar, pré-molares e molares são usados ​​para mastigar e triturar.

A mastigação do alimento com a ajuda de saliva e muco resulta na formação de um bolo mole que pode então ser engolido para descer do trato gastrointestinal superior até o estômago.
 
As enzimas digestivas na saliva também ajudam a manter os dentes limpos, quebrando quaisquer partículas de alimentos alojadas.


==== Epiglote ====

A epiglote é um retalho de cartilagem elástica presa à entrada da laringe.

É coberto por uma membrana mucosa e há papilas gustativas em sua superfície lingual voltadas para a boca.

Sua superfície laríngea está voltada para a laringe.

A epiglote funciona para proteger a entrada da glote, a abertura entre as pregas vocais.

Normalmente é apontada para cima durante a respiração com sua parte inferior funcionando como parte da faringe, mas durante a deglutição, a epiglote se dobra para uma posição mais horizontal, com sua parte superior funcionando como parte da faringe.

Desta forma, evita que os alimentos entrem na traqueia e, em vez disso, os direciona para o esôfago, que fica atrás.

Durante a deglutição, o movimento para trás da língua força a epiglote sobre a abertura da glote para evitar que qualquer alimento que está sendo engolido entre na laringe que leva aos pulmões; a laringe também é puxada para cima para auxiliar nesse processo.

A estimulação da laringe pela matéria ingerida produz um forte reflexo de tosse para proteger os pulmões.


=== Faringe ===


A faringe faz parte da zona condutora do sistema respiratório e também faz parte do sistema digestivo.

É a parte da garganta imediatamente atrás da cavidade nasal na parte posterior da boca e acima do esôfago e da laringe.

A faringe é composta de três partes.

As duas partes inferiores - a orofaringe e a laringofaringe estão envolvidas no sistema digestivo.

A laringofaringe se conecta ao esôfago e serve como passagem para o ar e para os alimentos.

O ar entra na laringe anteriormente, mas qualquer coisa ingerida tem prioridade e a passagem de ar é temporariamente bloqueada.

A faringe é inervada pelo plexo faríngeo do nervo vago.: 1465 Os músculos da faringe empurram o alimento para o esôfago.

A faringe se une ao esôfago na entrada esofágica que está localizada atrás da cartilagem cricóide.


=== Esôfago ===


O esôfago, comumente conhecido como foodpipe ou garganta, consiste em um tubo muscular através do qual o alimento passa da faringe para o estômago.

O esôfago é contínuo com a laringofaringe.

Ele passa pelo mediastino posterior no tórax e entra no estômago através de um orifício no diafragma torácico - o hiato esofágico, no nível da décima vértebra torácica (T10).

Seu comprimento é em média 25 cm, variando com a altura do indivíduo.

É dividido em partes cervical, torácica e abdominal.

A faringe se une ao esôfago na entrada esofágica que está atrás da cartilagem cricóide.

Em repouso o esôfago é fechado em ambas as extremidades, pelos esfíncteres esofágicos superior e inferior.

A abertura do esfíncter superior é desencadeada pelo reflexo de deglutição para que o alimento seja permitido.

O esfíncter também serve para impedir o refluxo do esôfago para a faringe.

O esôfago possui uma membrana mucosa e o epitélio que tem função protetora é continuamente reposto devido ao volume de alimento que passa dentro do esôfago.

Durante a deglutição, o alimento passa da boca através da faringe para o esôfago.

A epiglote se dobra para uma posição mais horizontal para direcionar o alimento para o esôfago e para longe da traqueia.

Uma vez no esôfago, o bolo desce até o estômago por meio de contração rítmica e relaxamento dos músculos conhecidos como peristaltismo.

O esfíncter esofágico inferior é um esfíncter muscular que envolve a parte inferior do esôfago.

A junção gastroesofágica entre o esôfago e o estômago é controlada pelo esfíncter esofágico inferior, que permanece contraído o tempo todo, exceto durante a deglutição e o vômito, para evitar que o conteúdo do estômago entre no esôfago.

Como o esôfago não tem a mesma proteção contra o ácido que o estômago, qualquer falha desse esfíncter pode levar à azia.


=== Diafragma ===

O diafragma é uma parte importante do sistema digestivo do corpo.

O diafragma muscular separa a cavidade torácica da cavidade abdominal, onde estão localizados a maioria dos órgãos digestivos.

O músculo suspensor liga o duodeno ascendente ao diafragma.

Acredita-se que este músculo seja útil no sistema digestivo, pois sua fixação oferece um ângulo mais amplo à flexura duodenojejunal para facilitar a passagem do material digerido.

O diafragma também se liga e ancora o fígado em sua área nua.

O esôfago entra no abdome através de um orifício no diafragma no nível de T10.


=== Estômago ===


O estômago é um órgão importante do trato gastrointestinal e do sistema digestivo.

É um órgão consistentemente em forma de J unido ao esôfago em sua extremidade superior e ao duodeno em sua extremidade inferior.

O ácido gástrico (suco gástrico informal), produzido no estômago, desempenha um papel vital no processo digestivo e contém principalmente ácido clorídrico e cloreto de sódio.

Um hormônio peptídico, a gastrina, produzido pelas células G nas glândulas gástricas, estimula a produção de suco gástrico que ativa as enzimas digestivas.

O pepsinogênio é uma enzima precursora (zimogênio) produzida pelas células gástricas principais, e o ácido gástrico ativa a enzima pepsina, que inicia a digestão das proteínas.

Como esses dois produtos químicos danificariam a parede do estômago, o muco é secretado por inúmeras glândulas gástricas no estômago, para fornecer uma camada protetora viscosa contra os efeitos prejudiciais dos produtos químicos nas camadas internas do estômago.

Ao mesmo tempo em que a proteína está sendo digerida, a agitação mecânica ocorre através da ação do peristaltismo, ondas de contrações musculares que se movem ao longo da parede do estômago.

Isso permite que a massa de alimentos se misture ainda mais com as enzimas digestivas.

A lipase gástrica secretada pelas células principais das glândulas fúndicas na mucosa gástrica do estômago é uma lipase ácida, em contraste com a lipase pancreática alcalina.

Isso quebra as gorduras até certo ponto, embora não seja tão eficiente quanto a lipase pancreática.

O piloro, a parte inferior do estômago que se liga ao duodeno através do canal pilórico, contém inúmeras glândulas que secretam enzimas digestivas, incluindo a gastrina.

Após uma ou duas horas, um semi-líquido espesso chamado quimo é produzido.

Quando o esfíncter pilórico, ou válvula, se abre, o quimo entra no duodeno, onde se mistura ainda mais com as enzimas digestivas do pâncreas e depois passa pelo intestino delgado, onde a digestão continua.

As células parietais no fundo do estômago produzem uma glicoproteína chamada fator intrínseco que é essencial para a absorção da vitamina B12.

A vitamina B12 (cobalamina), é transportada para e através do estômago, ligada a uma glicoproteína secretada pelas glândulas salivares - transcobalamina I também chamada de haptocorrina, que protege a vitamina sensível ao ácido do conteúdo ácido do estômago.

Uma vez no duodeno mais neutro, as enzimas pancreáticas quebram a glicoproteína protetora.

A vitamina B12 liberada então se liga ao fator intrínseco que é então absorvido pelos enterócitos no íleo.
O estômago é um órgão distensível e normalmente pode se expandir para conter cerca de um litro de alimento.

Essa expansão é possibilitada por uma série de pregas gástricas nas paredes internas do estômago.

O estômago de um bebê recém-nascido só poderá se expandir para reter cerca de 30 ml.


=== Baço ===


O baço é o maior órgão linfóide do corpo, mas tem outras funções.

Ele quebra os glóbulos vermelhos e brancos que são gastos.

É por isso que às vezes é conhecido como o 'cemitério de glóbulos vermelhos'.

Um produto dessa digestão é o pigmento bilirrubina, que é enviado ao fígado e secretado na bile.

Outro produto é o ferro, que é usado na formação de novas células sanguíneas na medula óssea.

A medicina trata o baço apenas como pertencente ao sistema linfático, embora se reconheça que toda a gama de suas importantes funções ainda não é compreendida.: 1751 


=== Fígado ===


O fígado é o segundo maior órgão (depois da pele) e é uma glândula digestiva acessória que desempenha um papel no metabolismo do corpo.

O fígado tem muitas funções, algumas das quais são importantes para a digestão.

O fígado pode desintoxicar vários metabólitos; sintetizar proteínas e produzir bioquímicos necessários para a digestão.

Regula o armazenamento de glicogênio que pode formar a partir da glicose (glicogênese).

O fígado também pode sintetizar glicose a partir de certos aminoácidos.

Suas funções digestivas estão amplamente envolvidas com a quebra de carboidratos.

Também mantém o metabolismo das proteínas em sua síntese e degradação.

No metabolismo lipídico, sintetiza o colesterol.

As gorduras também são produzidas no processo de lipogênese.

O fígado sintetiza a maior parte das lipoproteínas.

O fígado está localizado no quadrante superior direito do abdome e abaixo do diafragma ao qual está ligado em uma parte, a área nua do fígado.

Este fica à direita do estômago e se sobrepõe à vesícula biliar.

O fígado sintetiza ácidos biliares e lecitina para promover a digestão da gordura.


==== Bile ====
A bile produzida pelo fígado é composta de água (97%), sais biliares, muco e pigmentos, 1% de gorduras e sais inorgânicos.

A bilirrubina é seu principal pigmento.

A bile atua parcialmente como um surfactante que reduz a tensão superficial entre dois líquidos ou um sólido e um líquido e ajuda a emulsificar as gorduras no quimo.

A gordura alimentar é dispersa pela ação da bile em unidades menores chamadas micelas.

A quebra em micelas cria uma área de superfície muito maior para a enzima pancreática, a lipase, trabalhar.

A lipase digere os triglicerídeos que são divididos em dois ácidos graxos e um monoglicerídeo.

Estes são então absorvidos pelas vilosidades da parede intestinal.

Se as gorduras não forem absorvidas desta forma no intestino delgado, podem surgir problemas mais tarde no intestino grosso, que não está equipado para absorver as gorduras.

A bile também ajuda na absorção da vitamina K da dieta.

A bile é coletada e entregue através do ducto hepático comum.

Este ducto se une ao ducto cístico para se conectar em um ducto biliar comum com a vesícula biliar.

A bile é armazenada na vesícula biliar para liberação quando o alimento é descarregado no duodeno e também após algumas horas.


==== Vesícula Biliar ====

A vesícula biliar é uma parte oca do trato biliar que fica logo abaixo do fígado, com o corpo da vesícula biliar descansando em uma pequena depressão.

É um pequeno órgão onde a bile produzida pelo fígado é armazenada, antes de ser liberada no intestino delgado.

A bile flui do fígado através dos ductos biliares e na vesícula biliar para armazenamento.

A bile é liberada em resposta à colecistocinina (CCK), um hormônio peptídico liberado do duodeno.

A produção de CCK (por células endócrinas do duodeno) é estimulada pela presença de gordura no duodeno. É dividido em três seções, um fundo, corpo e pescoço.

O colo afunila e se conecta ao trato biliar através do ducto cístico, que então se une ao ducto hepático comum para formar o ducto biliar comum.

Nesta junção há uma prega mucosa chamada bolsa de Hartmann, onde os cálculos biliares geralmente ficam presos.

A camada muscular do corpo é de tecido muscular liso que ajuda a contração da vesícula biliar, para que ela possa descarregar sua bile no ducto biliar.

A vesícula biliar precisa armazenar a bile em uma forma natural e semilíquida o tempo todo.

Os íons de hidrogênio secretados pelo revestimento interno da vesícula biliar mantêm a bile ácida o suficiente para evitar o endurecimento.

Para diluir a bile, são adicionados água e eletrólitos do sistema de digestão.

Além disso, os sais se ligam às moléculas de colesterol na bile para evitar que se cristalizem.

Se houver muito colesterol ou bilirrubina na bile, ou se a vesícula biliar não esvaziar adequadamente, os sistemas podem falhar.

É assim que os cálculos biliares se formam quando um pequeno pedaço de cálcio é revestido com colesterol ou bilirrubina e a bile se cristaliza e forma um cálculo biliar.

O principal objetivo da vesícula biliar é armazenar e liberar a bile, ou bílis.

A bile é liberada no intestino delgado para ajudar na digestão de gorduras, quebrando moléculas maiores em menores.

Depois que a gordura é absorvida, a bile também é absorvida e transportada de volta ao fígado para reutilização.


=== Pâncreas ===


O pâncreas é um órgão importante que funciona como uma glândula digestiva acessória no sistema digestivo.

É uma glândula endócrina e uma glândula exócrina.

A parte endócrina secreta insulina quando o açúcar no sangue fica alto; a insulina move a glicose do sangue para os músculos e outros tecidos para uso como energia.

A parte endócrina libera glucagon quando a glicemia está baixa; O glucagon permite que o açúcar armazenado seja decomposto em glicose pelo fígado para reequilibrar os níveis de açúcar.

O pâncreas produz e libera importantes enzimas digestivas no suco pancreático que ele entrega ao duodeno.

O pâncreas fica abaixo e na parte de trás do estômago.

Ele se conecta ao duodeno através do ducto pancreático, que se une próximo à conexão do ducto biliar, onde tanto a bile quanto o suco pancreático podem atuar no quimo que é liberado do estômago para o duodeno.

As secreções pancreáticas aquosas das células do ducto pancreático contêm íons bicarbonato que são alcalinos e ajudam a bile a neutralizar o quimo ácido que é produzido pelo estômago.
O pâncreas também é a principal fonte de enzimas para a digestão de gorduras e proteínas.

Alguns destes são liberados em resposta à produção de CKK no duodeno.

(As enzimas que digerem polissacarídeos, por outro lado, são produzidas principalmente pelas paredes do intestino.)

As células são preenchidas com grânulos secretores contendo as enzimas digestivas precursoras.

As principais proteases, as enzimas pancreáticas que atuam nas proteínas, são o tripsinogênio e o quimotripsinogênio.

Elastase também é produzida.

Quantidades menores de lipase e amilase são secretadas.

O pâncreas também secreta fosfolipase A2, lisofosfolipase e colesterol esterase.

Os zimogênios precursores são variantes inativas das enzimas; que evita o aparecimento de pancreatite causada por autodegradação.

Uma vez liberada no intestino, a enzima enteropeptidase presente na mucosa intestinal ativa o tripsinogênio clivando-o para formar tripsina; clivagem adicional resulta em quimotripsina.


=== Trato gastrointestinal inferior ===


O trato gastrointestinal inferior (GI), inclui o intestino delgado e todo o intestino grosso.

O intestino também é chamado de intestino ou intestino.

O GI inferior começa no esfíncter pilórico do estômago e termina no ânus.

O intestino delgado é subdividido em duodeno, jejuno e íleo.

O ceco marca a divisão entre o intestino delgado e grosso.

O intestino grosso inclui o reto e o canal anal.


==== Intestino delgado ====

O alimento parcialmente digerido começa a chegar ao intestino delgado como quimo semilíquido, uma hora depois de ser ingerido.

O estômago está meio vazio após uma média de 1,2 horas.

Após quatro ou cinco horas o estômago esvazia. No intestino delgado, o pH torna-se crucial; ele precisa ser bem equilibrado para ativar as enzimas digestivas.

O quimo é muito ácido, com pH baixo, tendo sido liberado do estômago e precisa ser muito mais alcalino.

Isso é alcançado no duodeno pela adição de bile da vesícula biliar combinada com as secreções de bicarbonato do ducto pancreático e também de secreções de muco rico em bicarbonato das glândulas duodenais conhecidas como glândulas de Brunner.

O quimo chega ao intestino tendo sido liberado do estômago através da abertura do esfíncter pilórico.

A mistura de fluido alcalino resultante neutraliza o ácido gástrico que danificaria o revestimento do intestino.

O componente mucoso lubrifica as paredes do intestino.

Quando as partículas de alimentos digeridos são reduzidas o suficiente em tamanho e composição, elas podem ser absorvidas pela parede intestinal e transportadas para a corrente sanguínea.

O primeiro receptáculo para este quimo é o bulbo duodenal.

A partir daqui, passa para a primeira das três seções do intestino delgado, o duodeno. (A próxima seção é o jejuno e a terceira é o íleo).

O duodeno é a primeira e mais curta seção do intestino delgado.

É um tubo oco e articulado em forma de C que conecta o estômago ao jejuno.

Começa no bulbo duodenal e termina no músculo suspensor do duodeno.

Acredita-se que a fixação do músculo suspensor ao diafragma ajude a passagem do alimento, fazendo um ângulo mais amplo em sua fixação.

A maior parte da digestão dos alimentos ocorre no intestino delgado.

As contrações de segmentação agem para misturar e mover o quimo mais lentamente no intestino delgado, permitindo mais tempo para absorção (e estas continuam no intestino grosso).

No duodeno, a lipase pancreática é secretada juntamente com uma coenzima, colipase, para digerir ainda mais o conteúdo de gordura do quimo.

A partir dessa quebra, são produzidas partículas menores de gorduras emulsificadas chamadas quilomícrons.

Existem também células digestivas chamadas enterócitos que revestem os intestinos (a maioria está no intestino delgado).

São células incomuns, pois possuem vilosidades em sua superfície que, por sua vez, possuem inúmeras microvilosidades em sua superfície.

Todas essas vilosidades contribuem para uma maior área de superfície, não apenas para a absorção do quimo, mas também para sua posterior digestão por um grande número de enzimas digestivas presentes nas microvilosidades.

Os quilomícrons são pequenos o suficiente para passar pelas vilosidades dos enterócitos e entrar nos capilares linfáticos chamados lácteos.

Um fluido leitoso chamado quilo, constituído principalmente pelas gorduras emulsificadas dos quilomícrons, resulta da mistura absorvida com a linfa nos lácteos.

O quilo é então transportado através do sistema linfático para o resto do corpo.

O músculo suspensor marca o final do duodeno e a divisão entre o trato gastrointestinal superior e o trato GI inferior.

O trato digestivo continua como o jejuno que continua como o íleo.

O jejuno, a seção média do intestino delgado, contém pregas circulares, retalhos de membrana mucosa dupla que circundam parcialmente e às vezes circundam completamente o lúmen do intestino.

Essas dobras, juntamente com as vilosidades, servem para aumentar a área de superfície do jejuno, permitindo uma maior absorção de açúcares digeridos, aminoácidos e ácidos graxos na corrente sanguínea.

As dobras circulares também retardam a passagem dos alimentos, dando mais tempo para que os nutrientes sejam absorvidos.

A última parte do intestino delgado é o íleo.

Isso também contém vilosidades e vitamina B12; ácidos biliares e quaisquer nutrientes residuais são absorvidos aqui.

Quando o quimo está esgotado de seus nutrientes, o material residual restante se transforma em semi-sólidos chamados fezes, que passam para o intestino grosso, onde as bactérias da flora intestinal decompõem ainda mais proteínas e amidos residuais.

O tempo de trânsito através do intestino delgado é em média de 4 horas.

Metade dos resíduos alimentares de uma refeição foram esvaziados do intestino delgado em média 5,4 horas após a ingestão.

O esvaziamento do intestino delgado está completo após uma média de 8,6 horas.


==== Ceco ====

O ceco é uma bolsa que marca a divisão entre o intestino delgado e o intestino grosso.

Situa-se abaixo da válvula ileocecal no quadrante inferior direito do abdome.

O ceco recebe o quimo da última parte do intestino delgado, o íleo, e se conecta ao cólon ascendente do intestino grosso.

Nesta junção há um esfíncter ou válvula, a válvula ileocecal que retarda a passagem do quimo do íleo, permitindo uma digestão posterior.

É também o local do anexo do apêndice.


==== Intestino grosso ====

No intestino grosso, a passagem do alimento digerido no cólon é muito mais lenta, levando de 30 a 40 horas até que seja removido pela defecação.

O cólon serve principalmente como um local para a fermentação de matéria digestível pela flora intestinal.

O tempo gasto varia consideravelmente entre os indivíduos.

Os resíduos semi-sólidos restantes são denominados fezes e são removidos pelas contrações coordenadas das paredes intestinais, denominadas peristaltismo, que impulsionam os excrementos para frente para alcançar o reto e sair através da defecação do ânus.

A parede tem uma camada externa de músculos longitudinais, as tênias do colo, e uma camada interna de músculos circulares.

O músculo circular mantém o material avançando e também evita qualquer refluxo de resíduos.

Também de ajuda na ação do peristaltismo é o ritmo elétrico basal que determina a frequência das contrações.

As tênias coli podem ser vistas e são responsáveis ​​pelas protuberâncias (haustra) presentes no cólon.

A maioria das partes do trato GI é coberta por membranas serosas e possui um mesentério.

Outras partes mais musculosas são revestidas com adventícia.


== Suprimento sanguíneo ==


O sistema digestivo é suprido pela artéria celíaca.

A artéria celíaca é o primeiro ramo principal da aorta abdominal e é a única artéria principal que nutre os órgãos digestivos.

Existem três divisões principais – a artéria gástrica esquerda, a artéria hepática comum e a artéria esplênica.

A artéria celíaca supre o fígado, estômago, baço e o 1/3 superior do duodeno (para o esfíncter de Oddi) e o pâncreas com sangue oxigenado.

A maior parte do sangue retorna ao fígado através do sistema venoso portal para posterior processamento e desintoxicação antes de retornar à circulação sistêmica através das veias hepáticas.

O próximo ramo da aorta abdominal é a artéria mesentérica superior, que supre as regiões do trato digestivo derivadas do intestino médio, que inclui os 2/3 distais do duodeno, jejuno, íleo, ceco, apêndice, cólon ascendente e 2/3 proximais do cólon transverso.

O último ramo importante para o sistema digestivo é a artéria mesentérica inferior, que supre as regiões do trato digestivo derivadas do intestino posterior, que inclui o 1/3 distal do cólon transverso, cólon descendente, cólon sigmóide, reto e o ânus acima da linha pectinada.

O fluxo sanguíneo para o trato digestivo atinge seu máximo 20 a 40 minutos após uma refeição e dura de 1,5 a 2 horas.


== Suprimento nervoso ==


O sistema nervoso entérico consiste em cerca de cem milhões de neurônios que estão embutidos no peritônio, o revestimento do trato gastrointestinal que se estende do esôfago ao ânus.

Esses neurônios são coletados em dois plexos - o plexo mioentérico (ou de Auerbach) que fica entre as camadas longitudinal e lisa do músculo, e o plexo submucoso (ou de Meissner) que fica entre a camada circular do músculo liso e a mucosa.

A inervação parassimpática do cólon ascendente é fornecida pelo nervo vago.

A inervação simpática é suprida pelos nervos esplâncnicos que se unem aos gânglios celíacos.

A maior parte do trato digestivo é inervada pelos dois grandes gânglios celíacos, com a parte superior de cada gânglio unida pelo nervo esplâncnico maior e as partes inferiores unidas pelo nervo esplâncnico menor.

É desses gânglios que muitos dos plexos gástricos surgem.


== Desenvolvimento ==


No início do desenvolvimento embrionário, o embrião tem três camadas germinativas e confina com um saco vitelino.

Durante a segunda semana de desenvolvimento, o embrião cresce e começa a envolver e envolver porções desse saco.

As porções envelopadas formam a base do trato gastrointestinal adulto.

Seções desse intestino anterior começam a se diferenciar em órgãos do trato gastrointestinal, como esôfago, estômago e intestinos. Durante a quarta semana de desenvolvimento, o estômago gira.

O estômago, originalmente situado na linha média do embrião, gira para que seu corpo fique à esquerda.

Essa rotação também afeta a parte do tubo gastrointestinal imediatamente abaixo do estômago, que se tornará o duodeno.

No final da quarta semana, o duodeno em desenvolvimento começa a jorrar uma pequena bolsa em seu lado direito, o divertículo hepático, que se tornará a árvore biliar.

Logo abaixo há uma segunda bolsa, conhecida como divertículo cístico, que eventualmente se desenvolverá na vesícula biliar.


== Significado clínico ==


Cada parte do sistema digestivo está sujeita a uma ampla gama de distúrbios, muitos dos quais podem ser congênitos.

As doenças bucais também podem ser causadas por bactérias patogênicas, vírus, fungos e como efeito colateral de alguns medicamentos.

As doenças da boca incluem doenças da língua e doenças das glândulas salivares.

Uma doença gengival comum na boca é a gengivite, que é causada por bactérias na placa.

A infecção viral mais comum da boca é a gengivoestomatite causada pelo herpes simples.

Uma infecção fúngica comum é a candidíase comumente conhecida como aftas, que afeta as membranas mucosas da boca.

Há uma série de doenças esofágicas, como o desenvolvimento de anéis de Schatzki, que podem restringir a passagem, causando dificuldades na deglutição.

Eles também podem bloquear completamente o esôfago.

As doenças do estômago são frequentemente condições crônicas e incluem gastroparesia, gastrite e úlceras pépticas.

Vários problemas, incluindo desnutrição e anemia, podem surgir da má absorção, a absorção anormal de nutrientes no trato GI.

A má absorção pode ter muitas causas, desde infecção até deficiências enzimáticas, como insuficiência pancreática exócrina.

Também pode surgir como resultado de outras doenças gastrointestinais, como a doença celíaca.

A doença celíaca é uma doença autoimune do intestino delgado.

Isso pode causar deficiências de vitaminas devido à absorção inadequada de nutrientes no intestino delgado.

O intestino delgado também pode ser obstruído por um vólvulo, uma alça do intestino que se torna torcida envolvendo seu mesentério anexado.

Isso pode causar isquemia mesentérica se for grave o suficiente.
Um distúrbio comum do intestino é a diverticulite.

Os divertículos são pequenas bolsas que podem se formar dentro da parede do intestino, que podem se inflamar e causar diverticulite.

Esta doença pode ter complicações se um divertículo inflamado estourar e a infecção se instalar.

Qualquer infecção pode se espalhar ainda mais para o revestimento do abdômen (peritônio) e causar peritonite potencialmente fatal.

A doença de Crohn é uma doença inflamatória intestinal crônica comum (DII), que pode afetar qualquer parte do trato GI, mas começa principalmente no íleo terminal.

A colite ulcerativa, uma forma ulcerativa de colite, é a outra doença inflamatória intestinal importante, restrita ao cólon e ao reto.

Ambas as DIIs podem aumentar o risco de desenvolvimento de câncer colorretal.

A colite ulcerosa é a mais comum das DIIsA síndrome do intestino irritável (SII) é a mais comum das doenças gastrointestinais funcionais.

São doenças idiopáticas que o processo de Roma ajudou a definir. A giardíase é uma doença do intestino delgado causada por um parasita protista Giardia lamblia.

Isso não se espalha, mas permanece confinado ao lúmen do intestino delgado.

Muitas vezes pode ser assintomática, mas muitas vezes pode ser indicada por uma variedade de sintomas.

A giardíase é a infecção parasitária patogênica mais comum em humanos.

Existem ferramentas de diagnóstico envolvendo principalmente a ingestão de sulfato de bário para investigar distúrbios do trato GI.

Estes são conhecidos como séries gastrointestinais superiores que permitem imagens da faringe, laringe, esôfago, estômago e intestino delgado e séries gastrointestinais inferiores para imagens do cólon.


=== Na gravidez ===

A gestação pode predispor a certos distúrbios digestivos.

A diabetes gestacional pode se desenvolver na mãe como resultado da gravidez e, embora muitas vezes apresente poucos sintomas, pode levar à pré-eclâmpsia.


== História ==


No início do século 11, o filósofo médico islâmico Avicena escreveu extensivamente sobre muitos assuntos, incluindo medicina.

Quarenta desses tratados sobre medicina sobreviveram, e no mais famoso, intitulado Canon of Medicine, ele discute "gás ascendente".

Avicena acreditava que a disfunção do sistema digestivo era responsável pela superprodução de gás no trato gastrointestinal.

Ele sugeriu mudanças no estilo de vida e um composto de ervas para seu tratamento. Em 1497, Alessandro Benedetti via o estômago como um órgão impuro separado pelo diafragma.

Essa visão do estômago e dos intestinos como órgãos básicos foi geralmente mantida até meados do século XVII.

No Renascimento do século XVI, Leonardo da Vinci produziu alguns desenhos iniciais do estômago e dos intestinos.

Ele achava que o sistema digestivo ajudava o sistema respiratório.

Andreas Vesalius forneceu alguns desenhos anatômicos iniciais dos órgãos abdominais no século XVI.

Em meados do século XVII, um médico flamengo Jan Baptist van Helmont apresentou o primeiro relato químico da digestão, que mais tarde foi descrito como muito próximo da enzima conceitualizada posteriormente.

Em 1653, William Harvey descreveu os intestinos em termos de comprimento, suprimento sanguíneo, mesentérios e gordura (adenilil ciclase). Em 1823, William Prout descobriu o ácido clorídrico no suco gástrico.

Em 1895, Ivan Pavlov descreveu sua secreção como sendo estimulada por um reflexo neurológico com o nervo vago tendo um papel crucial.

Black no século 19 sugeriu uma associação de histamina com essa secreção.

Em 1916, Popielski descreveu a histamina como um secretagogo gástrico de ácido clorídrico.
William Beaumont era um cirurgião do exército que em 1825 foi capaz de observar a digestão no estômago.

Isso foi possível por meio de experimentos em um homem com uma ferida no estômago que não cicatrizou completamente, deixando uma abertura no estômago.

O movimento de agitação do estômago foi descrito entre outros achados. No século 19 foi aceito que processos químicos estavam envolvidos no processo de digestão.

A pesquisa fisiológica da secreção e do trato gastrointestinal foi realizada com experimentos realizados por Claude Bernard, Rudolph Heidenhain e Ivan Pavlov.
O resto do século 20 foi dominado pela pesquisa em enzimas.

A primeira a ser descoberta foi a secretina por Ernest Starling em 1902, com resultados de John Edkins em 1905, que sugeriu pela primeira vez a gastrina com sua estrutura sendo determinada em 1964.

Andre Latarjet e Lester Dragstedt encontraram um papel para a acetilcolina no sistema digestivo.

Em 1972, os agonistas do receptor H2 foram descritos por J.

Preto, que bloqueiam a ação da histamina e diminuem a produção de ácido clorídrico.

Em 1980, os inibidores da bomba de prótons foram descritos por Sachs.

Em 1983, o papel do Helicobacter pylori na formação de úlceras foi descrito por Barry Marshall e Robin Warren.

Os historiadores da arte notaram com frequência que os banqueteiros de registros iconográficos das antigas sociedades mediterrâneas quase sempre parecem estar deitados sobre o lado esquerdo.

Uma possível explicação poderia estar na anatomia do estômago e no mecanismo digestivo.

Quando deitado à esquerda, o alimento tem espaço para se expandir porque a curvatura do estômago é reforçada nessa posição.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Human_digestive_system




;;;FR;;;



SYSTÈME DIGESTIF HUMAIN


Le système digestif humain comprend le tractus gastro-intestinal et les organes accessoires de la digestion (la langue, les glandes salivaires, le pancréas, le foie et la vésicule biliaire).

La digestion implique la décomposition des aliments en composants de plus en plus petits, jusqu'à ce qu'ils puissent être absorbés et assimilés par le corps.

Le processus de digestion comporte trois étapes : la phase céphalique, la phase gastrique et la phase intestinale.

La première étape, la phase céphalique de la digestion, commence par les sécrétions gastriques en réponse à la vue et à l'odeur des aliments.

Cette étape comprend la décomposition mécanique des aliments par mastication et la décomposition chimique par les enzymes digestives, qui se déroule dans la bouche.

La salive contient des enzymes digestives appelées amylase et lipase linguale, sécrétées par les glandes salivaires et les glandes séreuses de la langue.

Les enzymes commencent à décomposer les aliments dans la bouche.

La mastication, dans laquelle la nourriture est mélangée à de la salive, commence le processus mécanique de la digestion.

Cela produit un bolus qui peut être avalé dans l'œsophage pour pénétrer dans l'estomac.

La deuxième étape de la digestion commence alors dans l'estomac avec la phase gastrique.

Ici, la nourriture est encore décomposée en se mélangeant avec de l'acide gastrique jusqu'à ce qu'elle passe dans le duodénum, ​​la première partie de l'intestin grêle.

La troisième étape commence dans le duodénum avec la phase intestinale, où les aliments partiellement digérés sont mélangés à un certain nombre d'enzymes produites par le pancréas.

La digestion est aidée par la mastication des aliments effectuée par les muscles de la mastication, la langue et les dents, ainsi que par les contractions du péristaltisme et de la segmentation.

L'acide gastrique et la production de mucus dans l'estomac sont essentiels à la poursuite de la digestion.

Le péristaltisme est la contraction rythmique des muscles qui commence dans l'œsophage et se poursuit le long de la paroi de l'estomac et du reste du tractus gastro-intestinal.

Cela se traduit initialement par la production de chyme qui, une fois entièrement décomposé dans l'intestin grêle, est absorbé sous forme de chyle dans le système lymphatique.

La majeure partie de la digestion des aliments se déroule dans l'intestin grêle.

L'eau et certains minéraux sont réabsorbés dans le sang dans le côlon du gros intestin.

Les déchets de la digestion (fèces) sont évacués du rectum via l'anus.


== Composants ==

Il existe plusieurs organes et autres composants impliqués dans la digestion des aliments.

Les organes appelés organes digestifs accessoires sont le foie, la vésicule biliaire et le pancréas.

Les autres composants comprennent la bouche, les glandes salivaires, la langue, les dents et l'épiglotte.

La plus grande structure du système digestif est le tractus gastro-intestinal (tractus gastro-intestinal).

Cela commence à la bouche et se termine à l'anus, couvrant une distance d'environ neuf mètres.

La plus grande partie du tractus gastro-intestinal est le côlon ou le gros intestin.

L'eau est absorbée ici et les déchets restants sont stockés avant la défécation.

La majeure partie de la digestion des aliments a lieu dans l'intestin grêle, qui est la partie la plus longue du tractus gastro-intestinal.

Un organe digestif majeur est l'estomac.

Dans sa muqueuse se trouvent des millions de glandes gastriques incrustées.

Leurs sécrétions sont vitales pour le fonctionnement de l'organe.

Il existe de nombreuses cellules spécialisées du tractus gastro-intestinal.

Ceux-ci comprennent les différentes cellules des glandes gastriques, les cellules gustatives, les cellules du canal pancréatique, les entérocytes et les cellules micropliées.

Certaines parties du système digestif font également partie du système excréteur, y compris le gros intestin.


=== Bouche ===

La bouche est la première partie du tractus gastro-intestinal supérieur et est équipée de plusieurs structures qui commencent les premiers processus de digestion.

Ceux-ci comprennent les glandes salivaires, les dents et la langue.

La bouche se compose de deux régions; le vestibule et la cavité buccale proprement dite.

Le vestibule est la zone située entre les dents, les lèvres et les joues, et le reste est la cavité buccale proprement dite.

La majeure partie de la cavité buccale est tapissée de muqueuse buccale, une membrane muqueuse qui produit un mucus lubrifiant, dont seule une petite quantité est nécessaire.

Les membranes muqueuses varient en structure dans les différentes régions du corps, mais elles produisent toutes un mucus lubrifiant, qui est soit sécrété par les cellules de surface, soit plus généralement par les glandes sous-jacentes.

La membrane muqueuse de la bouche continue comme la fine muqueuse qui tapisse la base des dents.

Le composant principal du mucus est une glycoprotéine appelée mucine et le type sécrété varie selon la région concernée.

La mucine est visqueuse, claire et collante.

Sous la membrane muqueuse de la bouche se trouve une fine couche de tissu musculaire lisse et la connexion lâche à la membrane lui confère sa grande élasticité.

Il recouvre les joues, les surfaces internes des lèvres et le plancher de la bouche, et la mucine produite est hautement protectrice contre la carie dentaire.

Le toit de la bouche est appelé le palais et sépare la cavité buccale de la cavité nasale.

Le palais est dur à l'avant de la bouche car la muqueuse sus-jacente recouvre une plaque osseuse; il est plus doux et plus souple à l'arrière étant constitué de muscles et de tissus conjonctifs, et il peut se déplacer pour avaler des aliments et des liquides.

Le palais mou se termine à la luette.

La surface du palais dur permet à la pression nécessaire à la consommation d'aliments de laisser le passage nasal dégagé.

L'ouverture entre les lèvres s'appelle la fissure buccale et l'ouverture dans la gorge s'appelle l'arrière-bouche.

De chaque côté du palais mou se trouvent les muscles palatoglosses qui atteignent également les régions de la langue.

Ces muscles soulèvent l'arrière de la langue et ferment également les deux côtés de l'arrière-bouche pour permettre la déglutition des aliments.

Le mucus aide à la mastication des aliments dans sa capacité à ramollir et à recueillir les aliments lors de la formation du bolus.


==== Glandes salivaires ====

Il existe trois paires de glandes salivaires principales et entre 800 et 1 000 glandes salivaires mineures, qui servent toutes principalement au processus digestif, et jouent également un rôle important dans le maintien de la santé dentaire et la lubrification générale de la bouche, sans lesquelles la parole serait impossible.

Les glandes principales sont toutes des glandes exocrines, sécrétant via des conduits.

Toutes ces glandes se terminent dans la bouche.

Les plus grandes d'entre elles sont les glandes parotides - leur sécrétion est principalement séreuse.

La paire suivante se trouve sous la mâchoire, les glandes sous-maxillaires, celles-ci produisent à la fois du liquide séreux et du mucus.

Le liquide séreux est produit par les glandes séreuses de ces glandes salivaires qui produisent également la lipase linguale.

Ils produisent environ 70% de la salive de la cavité buccale.

La troisième paire sont les glandes sublinguales situées sous la langue et leur sécrétion est principalement muqueuse avec un faible pourcentage de salive.

Dans la muqueuse buccale, ainsi que sur la langue, les palais et le plancher de la bouche, se trouvent les glandes salivaires mineures ; leurs sécrétions sont principalement muqueuses et elles sont innervées par le nerf facial (CN7).

Les glandes sécrètent également de l'amylase, première étape de la dégradation des aliments, agissant sur les glucides contenus dans les aliments pour transformer l'amidon contenu en maltose.

Il existe d'autres glandes séreuses à la surface de la langue qui encerclent les papilles gustatives à l'arrière de la langue et qui produisent également de la lipase linguale.

La lipase est une enzyme digestive qui catalyse l'hydrolyse des lipides (graisses).

Ces glandes sont appelées glandes de Von Ebner, dont il a également été démontré qu'elles ont une autre fonction dans la sécrétion d'histatines qui offrent une défense précoce (en dehors du système immunitaire) contre les microbes dans les aliments, lorsqu'ils entrent en contact avec ces glandes sur le tissu de la langue.

Les informations sensorielles peuvent stimuler la sécrétion de salive en fournissant le liquide nécessaire au travail de la langue et également pour faciliter la déglutition de la nourriture.


===== Salive =====

La salive humidifie et ramollit les aliments et, avec l'action de mastication des dents, transforme les aliments en un bolus lisse.

Le bolus est en outre aidé par la lubrification apportée par la salive lors de son passage de la bouche dans l'œsophage.

La présence dans la salive des enzymes digestives amylase et lipase est également importante.

L'amylase commence à travailler sur l'amidon dans les glucides, le décomposant en sucres simples de maltose et de dextrose qui peuvent être décomposés davantage dans l'intestin grêle.

La salive dans la bouche peut représenter 30 % de cette digestion initiale de l'amidon.

La lipase commence à travailler sur la décomposition des graisses.

La lipase est ensuite produite dans le pancréas où elle est libérée pour poursuivre cette digestion des graisses.

La présence de lipase salivaire est primordiale chez les jeunes bébés dont la lipase pancréatique n'est pas encore développée.

En plus de son rôle de fournisseur d'enzymes digestives, la salive a une action nettoyante pour les dents et la bouche.

Il a également un rôle immunologique dans la fourniture d'anticorps au système, tels que l'immunoglobuline A.

Ceci est considéré comme essentiel pour prévenir les infections des glandes salivaires, surtout celle de la parotidite.

La salive contient également une glycoprotéine appelée haptocorrine qui est une protéine de liaison à la vitamine B12.

Il se lie à la vitamine afin de la transporter en toute sécurité à travers le contenu acide de l'estomac.

Lorsqu'elle atteint le duodénum, ​​les enzymes pancréatiques décomposent la glycoprotéine et libèrent la vitamine qui se lie ensuite au facteur intrinsèque.


==== Langue ====
Les aliments pénètrent dans la bouche où se déroule la première étape du processus digestif, avec l'action de la langue et la sécrétion de salive.

La langue est un organe sensoriel charnu et musclé, et les premières informations sensorielles sont reçues via les papilles gustatives dans les papilles à sa surface.

Si le goût est agréable, la langue entrera en action, manipulant les aliments dans la bouche, ce qui stimule la sécrétion de salive par les glandes salivaires.

La qualité liquide de la salive aidera à ramollir les aliments et sa teneur en enzymes commencera à décomposer les aliments alors qu'ils sont encore dans la bouche.

La première partie de l'aliment à décomposer est l'amidon des glucides (par l'enzyme amylase dans la salive).

La langue est attachée au plancher de la bouche par une bande ligamentaire appelée frein et cela lui confère une grande mobilité pour la manipulation des aliments (et de la parole) ; la plage de manipulation est contrôlée de manière optimale par l'action de plusieurs muscles et limitée dans sa plage externe par l'étirement du frein.

Les deux ensembles de muscles de la langue sont quatre muscles intrinsèques qui proviennent de la langue et participent à sa formation, et quatre muscles extrinsèques provenant de l'os qui participent à son mouvement.


===== Goût =====

Le goût est une forme de chimioréception qui a lieu dans les récepteurs gustatifs spécialisés, contenus dans des structures appelées papilles gustatives dans la bouche.

Les papilles gustatives se trouvent principalement sur la face supérieure (dorsum) de la langue.

La fonction de perception du goût est essentielle pour aider à prévenir la consommation d'aliments nocifs ou pourris.

Il existe également des papilles gustatives sur l'épiglotte et la partie supérieure de l'œsophage.

Les papilles gustatives sont innervées par une branche du nerf facial, la corde du tympan et le nerf glossopharyngien.

Les messages gustatifs sont envoyés via ces nerfs crâniens au cerveau.

Le cerveau peut distinguer les qualités chimiques des aliments.

Les cinq goûts de base sont appelés ceux du salé, de l'acidité, de l'amertume, de la douceur et de l'umami.

La détection de la salinité et de l'acidité permet de contrôler l'équilibre salin et acide.

La détection de l'amertume met en garde contre les poisons - de nombreuses défenses d'une plante sont constituées de composés toxiques qui sont amers.

Guides de douceur pour les aliments qui fourniront de l'énergie ; la décomposition initiale des glucides énergétiques par l'amylase salivaire crée le goût sucré puisque les sucres simples sont le premier résultat.

On pense que le goût de l'umami signale un aliment riche en protéines.

Les goûts acides sont acides, ce qui se retrouve souvent dans les mauvais aliments.

Le cerveau doit décider très rapidement si la nourriture doit être consommée ou non.

Ce sont les découvertes de 1991, décrivant les premiers récepteurs olfactifs, qui ont contribué à déclencher la recherche sur le goût.

Les récepteurs olfactifs sont situés sur les surfaces cellulaires du nez qui se lient aux produits chimiques permettant la détection des odeurs.

On suppose que les signaux des récepteurs gustatifs fonctionnent avec ceux du nez, pour former une idée des saveurs alimentaires complexes.


==== Dents ====

Les dents sont des structures complexes constituées de matériaux qui leur sont propres.

Ils sont faits d'un matériau ressemblant à de l'os appelé dentine, qui est recouvert du tissu le plus dur du corps, l'émail.

Les dents ont des formes différentes pour faire face aux différents aspects de la mastication utilisée pour déchirer et mâcher des morceaux de nourriture en morceaux de plus en plus petits.

Il en résulte une surface beaucoup plus grande pour l'action des enzymes digestives.

Les dents portent le nom de leurs rôles particuliers dans le processus de mastication - les incisives sont utilisées pour couper ou mordre des morceaux de nourriture; les canines, sont utilisées pour déchirer, les prémolaires et les molaires sont utilisées pour la mastication et le broyage.

La mastication de la nourriture à l'aide de salive et de mucus entraîne la formation d'un bolus mou qui peut ensuite être avalé pour se frayer un chemin dans le tractus gastro-intestinal supérieur jusqu'à l'estomac.
 
Les enzymes digestives de la salive aident également à garder les dents propres en décomposant les particules alimentaires logées.


==== Épiglotte ====

L'épiglotte est un lambeau de cartilage élastique attaché à l'entrée du larynx.

Il est recouvert d'une membrane muqueuse et il y a des papilles gustatives sur sa surface linguale qui fait face à la bouche.

Sa surface laryngée fait face au larynx.

L'épiglotte a pour fonction de protéger l'entrée de la glotte, l'ouverture entre les cordes vocales.

Il est normalement dirigé vers le haut pendant la respiration, sa face inférieure faisant partie du pharynx, mais pendant la déglutition, l'épiglotte se replie dans une position plus horizontale, sa face supérieure faisant partie du pharynx.

De cette manière, il empêche la nourriture d'entrer dans la trachée et la dirige plutôt vers l'œsophage, qui se trouve derrière.

Pendant la déglutition, le mouvement vers l'arrière de la langue force l'épiglotte au-dessus de l'ouverture de la glotte pour empêcher tout aliment avalé de pénétrer dans le larynx qui mène aux poumons; le larynx est également tiré vers le haut pour faciliter ce processus.

La stimulation du larynx par la matière ingérée produit un fort réflexe de toux afin de protéger les poumons.


=== Pharynx ===


Le pharynx fait partie de la zone conductrice du système respiratoire et fait également partie du système digestif.

C'est la partie de la gorge immédiatement derrière la cavité nasale à l'arrière de la bouche et au-dessus de l'œsophage et du larynx.

Le pharynx est composé de trois parties.

Les deux parties inférieures - l'oropharynx et le laryngopharynx sont impliquées dans le système digestif.

Le laryngopharynx se connecte à l'œsophage et sert de passage pour l'air et la nourriture.

L'air entre dans le larynx par l'avant mais tout ce qui est avalé a la priorité et le passage de l'air est temporairement bloqué.

Le pharynx est innervé par le plexus pharyngé du nerf vague.: 1465 Les muscles du pharynx poussent la nourriture dans l'œsophage.

Le pharynx rejoint l'œsophage au niveau de l'entrée œsophagienne située derrière le cartilage cricoïde.


=== Œsophage ===


L'œsophage, communément appelé tube alimentaire ou œsophage, consiste en un tube musculaire à travers lequel les aliments passent du pharynx à l'estomac.

L'œsophage est en continuité avec le laryngopharynx.

Il traverse le médiastin postérieur dans le thorax et pénètre dans l'estomac par un trou dans le diaphragme thoracique - le hiatus œsophagien, au niveau de la dixième vertèbre thoracique (T10).

Sa longueur moyenne est de 25 cm, variant selon la taille de l'individu.

Il est divisé en parties cervicale, thoracique et abdominale.

Le pharynx rejoint l'œsophage à l'entrée de l'œsophage qui se trouve derrière le cartilage cricoïde.

Au repos, l'œsophage est fermé aux deux extrémités, par les sphincters œsophagien supérieur et inférieur.

L'ouverture du sphincter supérieur est déclenchée par le réflexe de déglutition afin de laisser passer les aliments.

Le sphincter sert également à empêcher le reflux de l'œsophage dans le pharynx.

L'œsophage possède une membrane muqueuse et l'épithélium qui a une fonction protectrice est continuellement remplacé en raison du volume de nourriture qui passe à l'intérieur de l'œsophage.

Lors de la déglutition, les aliments passent de la bouche à travers le pharynx dans l'œsophage.

L'épiglotte se replie dans une position plus horizontale pour diriger la nourriture dans l'œsophage et loin de la trachée.

Une fois dans l'œsophage, le bolus descend jusqu'à l'estomac via la contraction rythmique et la relaxation des muscles appelés péristaltisme.

Le sphincter inférieur de l'œsophage est un sphincter musculaire entourant la partie inférieure de l'œsophage.

La jonction gastro-œsophagienne entre l'œsophage et l'estomac est contrôlée par le sphincter inférieur de l'œsophage, qui reste resserré à tout moment sauf pendant la déglutition et les vomissements pour empêcher le contenu de l'estomac de pénétrer dans l'œsophage.

Comme l'œsophage n'a pas la même protection contre l'acide que l'estomac, toute défaillance de ce sphincter peut entraîner des brûlures d'estomac.


=== Diaphragme ===

Le diaphragme est une partie importante du système digestif du corps.

Le diaphragme musculaire sépare la cavité thoracique de la cavité abdominale où se trouvent la plupart des organes digestifs.

Le muscle suspenseur relie le duodénum ascendant au diaphragme.

On pense que ce muscle est utile dans le système digestif en ce que sa fixation offre un angle plus large à la flexion duodénojéjunale pour faciliter le passage du matériel de digestion.

Le diaphragme s'attache également au foie et l'ancre dans sa zone nue.

L'œsophage pénètre dans l'abdomen par un trou dans le diaphragme au niveau de T10.


=== Estomac ===


L'estomac est un organe majeur du tractus gastro-intestinal et du système digestif.

C'est un organe en forme de J uni à l'œsophage à son extrémité supérieure et au duodénum à son extrémité inférieure.

L'acide gastrique (suc gastrique informel), produit dans l'estomac, joue un rôle vital dans le processus digestif et contient principalement de l'acide chlorhydrique et du chlorure de sodium.

Une hormone peptidique, la gastrine, produite par les cellules G des glandes gastriques, stimule la production de suc gastrique qui active les enzymes digestives.

Le pepsinogène est une enzyme précurseur (zymogène) produite par les cellules principales gastriques, et l'acide gastrique l'active en l'enzyme pepsine qui commence la digestion des protéines.

Comme ces deux produits chimiques endommageraient la paroi de l'estomac, le mucus est sécrété par d'innombrables glandes gastriques dans l'estomac, pour fournir une couche protectrice visqueuse contre les effets néfastes des produits chimiques sur les couches internes de l'estomac.

En même temps que la protéine est digérée, un barattage mécanique se produit sous l'action du péristaltisme, des vagues de contractions musculaires qui se déplacent le long de la paroi de l'estomac.

Cela permet à la masse de nourriture de se mélanger davantage avec les enzymes digestives.

La lipase gastrique sécrétée par les cellules principales des glandes fundiques de la muqueuse gastrique de l'estomac est une lipase acide, contrairement à la lipase pancréatique alcaline.

Cela décompose les graisses dans une certaine mesure, mais n'est pas aussi efficace que la lipase pancréatique.

Le pylore, la partie la plus basse de l'estomac qui s'attache au duodénum via le canal pylorique, contient d'innombrables glandes qui sécrètent des enzymes digestives dont la gastrine.

Après une heure ou deux, un semi-liquide épais appelé chyme est produit.

Lorsque le sphincter pylorique, ou valve, s'ouvre, le chyme pénètre dans le duodénum où il se mélange davantage aux enzymes digestives du pancréas, puis passe dans l'intestin grêle, où la digestion se poursuit.

Les cellules pariétales du fond de l'estomac produisent une glycoprotéine appelée facteur intrinsèque qui est essentielle à l'absorption de la vitamine B12.

La vitamine B12 (cobalamine) est transportée vers et à travers l'estomac, liée à une glycoprotéine sécrétée par les glandes salivaires - la transcobalamine I également appelée haptocorrine, qui protège la vitamine sensible à l'acide du contenu acide de l'estomac.

Une fois dans le duodénum plus neutre, les enzymes pancréatiques décomposent la glycoprotéine protectrice.

La vitamine B12 libérée se lie alors au facteur intrinsèque qui est ensuite absorbé par les entérocytes de l'iléon.
L'estomac est un organe extensible et peut normalement se dilater pour contenir environ un litre de nourriture.

Cette expansion est rendue possible par une série de plis gastriques dans les parois internes de l'estomac.

L'estomac d'un nouveau-né ne pourra se dilater que pour retenir environ 30 ml.


=== Rate ===


La rate est le plus grand organe lymphoïde du corps mais a d'autres fonctions.

Il décompose les globules rouges et blancs qui sont dépensés.

C'est pourquoi on l'appelle parfois le « cimetière des globules rouges ».

Un produit de cette digestion est le pigment bilirubine, qui est envoyé au foie et sécrété dans la bile.

Un autre produit est le fer, qui est utilisé dans la formation de nouvelles cellules sanguines dans la moelle osseuse.

La médecine traite la rate uniquement comme appartenant au système lymphatique, bien qu'il soit reconnu que la gamme complète de ses fonctions importantes n'est pas encore comprise.: 1751 


=== Foie ===


Le foie est le deuxième plus grand organe (après la peau) et est une glande digestive accessoire qui joue un rôle dans le métabolisme de l'organisme.

Le foie a de nombreuses fonctions dont certaines sont importantes pour la digestion.

Le foie peut détoxifier divers métabolites ; synthétiser des protéines et produire des substances biochimiques nécessaires à la digestion.

Il régule le stockage du glycogène qu'il peut former à partir du glucose (glycogenèse).

Le foie peut également synthétiser du glucose à partir de certains acides aminés.

Ses fonctions digestives sont largement impliquées dans la décomposition des glucides.

Il maintient également le métabolisme des protéines dans sa synthèse et sa dégradation.

Dans le métabolisme des lipides, il synthétise le cholestérol.

Les graisses sont également produites dans le processus de lipogenèse.

Le foie synthétise l'essentiel des lipoprotéines.

Le foie est situé dans le quadrant supérieur droit de l'abdomen et sous le diaphragme auquel il est attaché à une partie, la zone nue du foie.

C'est à droite de l'estomac et il recouvre la vésicule biliaire.

Le foie synthétise les acides biliaires et la lécithine pour favoriser la digestion des graisses.


==== Bile ====
La bile produite par le foie est composée d'eau (97%), de sels biliaires, de mucus et de pigments, de 1% de graisses et de sels inorganiques.

La bilirubine est son pigment majeur.

La bile agit en partie comme un tensioactif qui abaisse la tension superficielle entre deux liquides ou un solide et un liquide et aide à émulsionner les graisses dans le chyme.

La graisse alimentaire est dispersée par l'action de la bile en unités plus petites appelées micelles.

La décomposition en micelles crée une surface beaucoup plus grande sur laquelle l'enzyme pancréatique, la lipase, peut travailler.

La lipase digère les triglycérides qui se décomposent en deux acides gras et un monoglycéride.

Ceux-ci sont ensuite absorbés par les villosités de la paroi intestinale.

Si les graisses ne sont pas absorbées de cette manière dans l'intestin grêle, des problèmes peuvent survenir plus tard dans le gros intestin qui n'est pas équipé pour absorber les graisses.

La bile aide également à l'absorption de la vitamine K de l'alimentation.

La bile est collectée et délivrée par le canal hépatique commun.

Ce canal rejoint le canal cystique pour se connecter dans un canal cholédoque avec la vésicule biliaire.

La bile est stockée dans la vésicule biliaire pour être libérée lorsque la nourriture est évacuée dans le duodénum et également après quelques heures.


==== Vésicule biliaire ====

La vésicule biliaire est une partie creuse des voies biliaires qui se trouve juste sous le foie, le corps de la vésicule biliaire reposant dans une petite dépression.

C'est un petit organe où la bile produite par le foie est stockée, avant d'être libérée dans l'intestin grêle.

La bile s'écoule du foie à travers les voies biliaires et dans la vésicule biliaire pour le stockage.

La bile est libérée en réponse à la cholécystokinine (CCK), une hormone peptidique libérée du duodénum.

La production de CCK (par les cellules endocrines du duodénum) est stimulée par la présence de graisse dans le duodénum. Elle est divisée en trois sections, un fond d'œil, un corps et un cou.

Le col se rétrécit et se connecte aux voies biliaires via le canal cystique, qui rejoint ensuite le canal hépatique commun pour former le canal cholédoque.

À cette jonction se trouve un pli muqueux appelé poche de Hartmann, où les calculs biliaires se coincent généralement.

La couche musculaire du corps est constituée de tissu musculaire lisse qui aide la vésicule biliaire à se contracter, de sorte qu'elle puisse décharger sa bile dans le canal cholédoque.

La vésicule biliaire a besoin de stocker la bile sous une forme naturelle et semi-liquide à tout moment.

Les ions hydrogène sécrétés par la paroi interne de la vésicule biliaire maintiennent la bile suffisamment acide pour empêcher le durcissement.

Pour diluer la bile, de l'eau et des électrolytes du système de digestion sont ajoutés.

De plus, les sels se fixent aux molécules de cholestérol dans la bile pour les empêcher de se cristalliser.

S'il y a trop de cholestérol ou de bilirubine dans la bile, ou si la vésicule biliaire ne se vide pas correctement, les systèmes peuvent tomber en panne.

C'est ainsi que les calculs biliaires se forment lorsqu'un petit morceau de calcium est recouvert de cholestérol ou de bilirubine et que la bile se cristallise et forme un calcul biliaire.

Le but principal de la vésicule biliaire est de stocker et de libérer la bile ou la bile.

La bile est libérée dans l'intestin grêle afin d'aider à la digestion des graisses en décomposant les plus grosses molécules en plus petites.

Une fois la graisse absorbée, la bile est également absorbée et transportée vers le foie pour être réutilisée.


=== Pancréas ===


Le pancréas est un organe majeur fonctionnant comme une glande digestive accessoire dans le système digestif.

C'est à la fois une glande endocrine et une glande exocrine.

La partie endocrinienne sécrète de l'insuline lorsque la glycémie devient élevée ; l'insuline déplace le glucose du sang vers les muscles et d'autres tissus pour l'utiliser comme énergie.

La partie endocrinienne libère du glucagon lorsque la glycémie est basse ; le glucagon permet au foie de décomposer le sucre stocké en glucose afin de rééquilibrer le taux de sucre.

Le pancréas produit et libère d'importantes enzymes digestives dans le suc pancréatique qu'il délivre au duodénum.

Le pancréas se trouve en dessous et à l'arrière de l'estomac.

Il se connecte au duodénum via le canal pancréatique qu'il rejoint près de la connexion du canal biliaire où la bile et le suc pancréatique peuvent agir sur le chyme qui est libéré de l'estomac dans le duodénum.

Les sécrétions pancréatiques aqueuses des cellules du canal pancréatique contiennent des ions bicarbonate qui sont alcalins et aident la bile à neutraliser le chyme acide produit par l'estomac.
Le pancréas est également la principale source d'enzymes pour la digestion des graisses et des protéines.

Certains d'entre eux sont libérés en réponse à la production de CKK dans le duodénum.

(Les enzymes qui digèrent les polysaccharides, en revanche, sont principalement produites par les parois des intestins.)

Les cellules sont remplies de granules sécrétoires contenant les enzymes digestives précurseurs.

Les principales protéases, les enzymes pancréatiques qui agissent sur les protéines, sont le trypsinogène et le chymotrypsinogène.

L'élastase est également produite.

De plus petites quantités de lipase et d'amylase sont sécrétées.

Le pancréas sécrète également la phospholipase A2, la lysophospholipase et la cholestérol estérase.

Les zymogènes précurseurs sont des variantes inactives des enzymes ; ce qui évite l'apparition de pancréatite causée par l'autodégradation.

Une fois libérée dans l'intestin, l'enzyme entéropeptidase présente dans la muqueuse intestinale active le trypsinogène en le clivant pour former de la trypsine ; un clivage supplémentaire aboutit à la chymotripsine.


=== Tractus gastro-intestinal inférieur ===


Le tractus gastro-intestinal inférieur (GI) comprend l'intestin grêle et l'ensemble du gros intestin.

L'intestin est aussi appelé intestin ou intestin.

Le GI inférieur commence au sphincter pylorique de l'estomac et se termine à l'anus.

L'intestin grêle est subdivisé en duodénum, ​​jéjunum et iléon.

Le caecum marque la séparation entre l'intestin grêle et le gros intestin.

Le gros intestin comprend le rectum et le canal anal.


==== Intestin grêle ====

Les aliments partiellement digérés commencent à arriver dans l'intestin grêle sous forme de chyme semi-liquide, une heure après avoir été consommés.

L'estomac est à moitié vide après une moyenne de 1,2 heures.

Au bout de quatre ou cinq heures, l'estomac s'est vidé. Dans l'intestin grêle, le pH devient crucial ; il doit être finement équilibré afin d'activer les enzymes digestives.

Le chyme est très acide, avec un pH bas, ayant été libéré de l'estomac et doit être rendu beaucoup plus alcalin.

Ceci est réalisé dans le duodénum par l'ajout de bile de la vésicule biliaire combinée aux sécrétions de bicarbonate du canal pancréatique et également des sécrétions de mucus riche en bicarbonate des glandes duodénales appelées glandes de Brunner.

Le chyme arrive dans les intestins après avoir été libéré de l'estomac par l'ouverture du sphincter pylorique.

Le mélange liquide alcalin qui en résulte neutralise l'acide gastrique qui endommagerait la muqueuse de l'intestin.

Le composant de mucus lubrifie les parois de l'intestin.

Lorsque les particules alimentaires digérées sont suffisamment réduites en taille et en composition, elles peuvent être absorbées par la paroi intestinale et transportées dans la circulation sanguine.

Le premier réceptacle de ce chyme est le bulbe duodénal.

De là, il passe dans la première des trois sections de l'intestin grêle, le duodénum. (La section suivante est le jéjunum et la troisième est l'iléon).

Le duodénum est la première et la plus courte section de l'intestin grêle.

C'est un tube creux en forme de C articulé reliant l'estomac au jéjunum.

Il commence au bulbe duodénal et se termine au muscle suspenseur du duodénum.

On pense que la fixation du muscle suspenseur au diaphragme facilite le passage des aliments en faisant un angle plus large à sa fixation.

La majeure partie de la digestion des aliments a lieu dans l'intestin grêle.

Les contractions de segmentation agissent pour mélanger et déplacer le chyme plus lentement dans l'intestin grêle, ce qui laisse plus de temps pour l'absorption (et celles-ci se poursuivent dans le gros intestin).

Dans le duodénum, ​​la lipase pancréatique est sécrétée avec une coenzyme, la colipase, pour digérer davantage la teneur en graisse du chyme.

À partir de cette décomposition, de plus petites particules de graisses émulsifiées appelées chylomicrons sont produites.

Il existe également des cellules digestives appelées entérocytes tapissant les intestins (la majorité étant dans l'intestin grêle).

Ce sont des cellules inhabituelles en ce sens qu'elles ont des villosités à leur surface qui, à leur tour, ont d'innombrables microvillosités à leur surface.

Toutes ces villosités constituent une plus grande surface, non seulement pour l'absorption du chyme mais aussi pour sa digestion ultérieure par un grand nombre d'enzymes digestives présentes sur les microvillosités.

Les chylomicrons sont suffisamment petits pour passer à travers les villosités des entérocytes et dans leurs capillaires lymphatiques appelés lactés.

Un fluide laiteux appelé chyle, composé principalement des graisses émulsifiées des chylomicrons, résulte du mélange absorbé avec la lymphe dans les lactés.

Le chyle est ensuite transporté à travers le système lymphatique vers le reste du corps.

Le muscle suspenseur marque la fin du duodénum et la division entre le tractus gastro-intestinal supérieur et le tractus gastro-intestinal inférieur.

Le tube digestif continue comme le jéjunum qui continue comme l'iléon.

Le jéjunum, la section médiane de l'intestin grêle contient des plis circulaires, des lambeaux de membrane muqueuse doublée qui encerclent partiellement et parfois encerclent complètement la lumière de l'intestin.

Ces plis ainsi que les villosités servent à augmenter la surface du jéjunum permettant une absorption accrue des sucres digérés, des acides aminés et des acides gras dans la circulation sanguine.

Les plis circulaires ralentissent également le passage des aliments, ce qui donne plus de temps aux nutriments pour être absorbés.

La dernière partie de l'intestin grêle est l'iléon.

Cela contient également des villosités et de la vitamine B12; les acides biliaires et tous les nutriments résiduels sont absorbés ici.

Lorsque le chyme est épuisé de ses nutriments, les déchets restants se transforment en semi-solides appelés matières fécales, qui passent dans le gros intestin, où les bactéries de la flore intestinale décomposent davantage les protéines et les amidons résiduels.

Le temps de transit dans l'intestin grêle est en moyenne de 4 heures.

La moitié des résidus alimentaires d'un repas sont évacués de l'intestin grêle en moyenne 5,4 heures après l'ingestion.

La vidange de l'intestin grêle est complète au bout de 8,6 heures en moyenne.


==== Cécum ====

Le caecum est une poche marquant la séparation entre l'intestin grêle et le gros intestin.

Il se situe sous la valve iléo-colique dans le quadrant inférieur droit de l'abdomen.

Le caecum reçoit le chyme de la dernière partie de l'intestin grêle, l'iléon, et se connecte au côlon ascendant du gros intestin.

À cette jonction, il y a un sphincter ou valve, la valve iléo-colique qui ralentit le passage du chyme de l'iléon, permettant une digestion plus poussée.

C'est aussi le site de l'annexe annexe.


==== Gros intestin ====

Dans le gros intestin, le passage des aliments digérés dans le côlon est beaucoup plus lent, prenant de 30 à 40 heures jusqu'à ce qu'ils soient éliminés par défécation.

Le côlon sert principalement de site de fermentation des matières digestibles par la flore intestinale.

Le temps nécessaire varie considérablement d'un individu à l'autre.

Les déchets semi-solides restants sont appelés matières fécales et sont éliminés par les contractions coordonnées des parois intestinales, appelées péristaltisme, qui propulsent les excréments vers l'avant pour atteindre le rectum et sortir par défécation de l'anus.

La paroi a une couche externe de muscles longitudinaux, les taeniae coli, et une couche interne de muscles circulaires.

Le muscle circulaire maintient le matériau en mouvement et empêche également tout reflux de déchets.

Le rythme électrique basal qui détermine la fréquence des contractions est également utile dans l'action du péristaltisme.

Les taeniae coli peuvent être vus et sont responsables des renflements (haustra) présents dans le côlon.

La plupart des parties du tractus gastro-intestinal sont recouvertes de membranes séreuses et ont un mésentère.

D'autres parties plus musclées sont tapissées d'adventices.


== Approvisionnement en sang ==


Le système digestif est alimenté par l'artère coeliaque.

L'artère cœliaque est la première branche majeure de l'aorte abdominale et la seule artère majeure qui alimente les organes digestifs.

Il existe trois divisions principales - l'artère gastrique gauche, l'artère hépatique commune et l'artère splénique.

L'artère coeliaque alimente le foie, l'estomac, la rate et le tiers supérieur du duodénum (jusqu'au sphincter d'Oddi) et le pancréas en sang oxygéné.

La majeure partie du sang est renvoyée au foie via le système veineux porte pour un traitement et une détoxification ultérieurs avant de retourner dans la circulation systémique via les veines hépatiques.

La branche suivante de l'aorte abdominale est l'artère mésentérique supérieure, qui alimente les régions du tube digestif dérivées de l'intestin moyen, qui comprend les 2/3 distaux du duodénum, ​​le jéjunum, l'iléon, le caecum, l'appendice, le côlon ascendant et le 2/3 proximal du côlon transverse.

La dernière branche importante pour le système digestif est l'artère mésentérique inférieure, qui alimente les régions du tube digestif dérivées de l'intestin postérieur, qui comprend le 1/3 distal du côlon transverse, le côlon descendant, le côlon sigmoïde, le rectum et l'anus au-dessus de la ligne pectinée.

Le flux sanguin vers le tube digestif atteint son maximum 20 à 40 minutes après un repas et dure 1,5 à 2 heures.


== Innervation ==


Le système nerveux entérique se compose d'environ cent millions de neurones qui sont intégrés dans le péritoine, la muqueuse du tractus gastro-intestinal s'étendant de l'œsophage à l'anus.

Ces neurones sont rassemblés en deux plexus - le plexus myentérique (ou d'Auerbach) qui se situe entre les couches musculaires longitudinale et lisse, et le plexus sous-muqueux (ou de Meissner) qui se situe entre la couche musculaire lisse circulaire et la muqueuse.

L'innervation parasympathique du côlon ascendant est assurée par le nerf vague.

L'innervation sympathique est fournie par les nerfs splanchniques qui rejoignent les ganglions coeliaques.

La majeure partie du tube digestif est innervée par les deux grands ganglions coeliaques, la partie supérieure de chaque ganglion étant reliée par le nerf splanchnique supérieur et les parties inférieures reliées par le nerf splanchnique inférieur.

C'est à partir de ces ganglions que surgissent de nombreux plexus gastriques.


== Développement ==


Au début du développement embryonnaire, l'embryon a trois couches germinales et jouxte un sac vitellin.

Au cours de la deuxième semaine de développement, l'embryon se développe et commence à entourer et à envelopper des parties de ce sac.

Les parties enveloppées forment la base du tractus gastro-intestinal adulte.

Des sections de cet intestin antérieur commencent à se différencier en organes du tractus gastro-intestinal, tels que l'œsophage, l'estomac et les intestins. Au cours de la quatrième semaine de développement, l'estomac tourne.

L'estomac, situé à l'origine sur la ligne médiane de l'embryon, tourne de manière à ce que son corps soit à gauche.

Cette rotation affecte également la partie du tube gastro-intestinal immédiatement sous l'estomac, qui deviendra le duodénum.

À la fin de la quatrième semaine, le duodénum en développement commence à jaillir une petite poche sur son côté droit, le diverticule hépatique, qui deviendra l'arbre biliaire.

Juste en dessous se trouve un deuxième épanchement, connu sous le nom de diverticule kystique, qui finira par se développer dans la vésicule biliaire.


== Signification clinique ==


Chaque partie du système digestif est sujette à un large éventail de troubles dont beaucoup peuvent être congénitaux.

Les maladies de la bouche peuvent également être causées par des bactéries pathogènes, des virus, des champignons et comme effet secondaire de certains médicaments.

Les maladies de la bouche comprennent les maladies de la langue et les maladies des glandes salivaires.

Une maladie des gencives courante dans la bouche est la gingivite qui est causée par des bactéries dans la plaque dentaire.

L'infection virale la plus courante de la bouche est la gingivostomatite causée par l'herpès simplex.

Une infection fongique courante est la candidose communément appelée muguet qui affecte les muqueuses de la bouche.

Il existe un certain nombre de maladies de l'œsophage telles que le développement d'anneaux de Schatzki qui peuvent restreindre le passage, entraînant des difficultés à avaler.

Ils peuvent également bloquer complètement l'œsophage.

Les maladies de l'estomac sont souvent des affections chroniques et comprennent la gastroparésie, la gastrite et les ulcères peptiques.

Un certain nombre de problèmes, notamment la malnutrition et l'anémie, peuvent découler de la malabsorption, l'absorption anormale des nutriments dans le tractus gastro-intestinal.

La malabsorption peut avoir de nombreuses causes allant de l'infection à des déficiences enzymatiques telles que l'insuffisance pancréatique exocrine.

Elle peut également survenir à la suite d'autres maladies gastro-intestinales telles que la maladie coeliaque.

La maladie coeliaque est une maladie auto-immune de l'intestin grêle.

Cela peut entraîner des carences en vitamines en raison de la mauvaise absorption des nutriments dans l'intestin grêle.

L'intestin grêle peut également être obstrué par un volvulus, une boucle d'intestin qui se tord en enfermant son mésentère attaché.

Cela peut provoquer une ischémie mésentérique si elle est suffisamment grave.
Un trouble commun de l'intestin est la diverticulite.

Les diverticules sont de petites poches qui peuvent se former à l'intérieur de la paroi intestinale, qui peuvent s'enflammer et provoquer une diverticulite.

Cette maladie peut avoir des complications si un diverticule enflammé éclate et qu'une infection s'installe.

Toute infection peut se propager davantage à la muqueuse de l'abdomen (péritoine) et provoquer une péritonite potentiellement mortelle.

La maladie de Crohn est une maladie intestinale inflammatoire chronique (MII) courante, qui peut affecter n'importe quelle partie du tractus gastro-intestinal, mais elle débute principalement dans l'iléon terminal.

La colite ulcéreuse, une forme ulcéreuse de colite, est l'autre maladie intestinale inflammatoire majeure qui se limite au côlon et au rectum.

Ces deux MII peuvent augmenter le risque de développer un cancer colorectal.

La colite ulcéreuse est la plus courante des MII. Le syndrome du côlon irritable (IBS) est le plus courant des troubles gastro-intestinaux fonctionnels.

Ce sont des troubles idiopathiques que le processus de Rome a permis de définir. La giardiase est une maladie de l'intestin grêle causée par un parasite protiste Giardia lamblia.

Celle-ci ne se propage pas mais reste confinée à la lumière de l'intestin grêle.

Il peut souvent être asymptomatique, mais aussi souvent peut être indiqué par une variété de symptômes.

La giardiase est l'infection parasitaire pathogène la plus courante chez l'homme.

Il existe des outils de diagnostic impliquant principalement l'ingestion de sulfate de baryum pour étudier les troubles du tractus gastro-intestinal.

Celles-ci sont connues sous le nom de séries gastro-intestinales supérieures qui permettent l'imagerie du pharynx, du larynx, de l'œsophage, de l'estomac et de l'intestin grêle et les séries gastro-intestinales inférieures pour l'imagerie du côlon.


=== Pendant la grossesse ===

La gestation peut prédisposer à certains troubles digestifs.

Le diabète gestationnel peut se développer chez la mère à la suite d'une grossesse et, bien qu'il présente souvent peu de symptômes, il peut entraîner une pré-éclampsie.


== Historique ==


Au début du XIe siècle, le philosophe médical islamique Avicenne a beaucoup écrit sur de nombreux sujets, dont la médecine.

Quarante de ces traités de médecine survivent, et dans le plus célèbre intitulé le Canon de la médecine, il traite du "gaz ascendant".

Avicenne croyait que le dysfonctionnement du système digestif était responsable de la surproduction de gaz dans le tractus gastro-intestinal.

Il a suggéré des changements de mode de vie et un composé de plantes médicinales pour son traitement. En 1497, Alessandro Benedetti considérait l'estomac comme un organe impur séparé par le diaphragme.

Cette vision de l'estomac et des intestins comme organes de base a été généralement maintenue jusqu'au milieu du XVIIe siècle.

À la Renaissance du XVIe siècle, Léonard de Vinci a produit quelques premiers dessins de l'estomac et des intestins.

Il pensait que le système digestif aidait le système respiratoire.

Andreas Vesalius a fourni quelques premiers dessins anatomiques des organes abdominaux au 16ème siècle.

Au milieu du XVIIe siècle, un médecin flamand Jan Baptist van Helmont a proposé le premier récit chimique de la digestion qui a ensuite été décrit comme étant très proche de l'enzyme conceptualisée plus tard.

En 1653, William Harvey décrit les intestins en fonction de leur longueur, de leur apport sanguin, des mésentères et de la graisse (adénylcyclase). En 1823, William Prout découvre l'acide chlorhydrique dans le suc gastrique.

En 1895, Ivan Pavlov a décrit sa sécrétion comme étant stimulée par un réflexe neurologique, le nerf vague jouant un rôle crucial.

Black au 19ème siècle a suggéré une association d'histamine avec cette sécrétion.

En 1916, Popielski décrit l'histamine comme un sécrétagogue gastrique de l'acide chlorhydrique.
William Beaumont était un chirurgien de l'armée qui, en 1825, a pu observer la digestion telle qu'elle se déroulait dans l'estomac.

Cela a été rendu possible par des expériences sur un homme avec une blessure à l'estomac qui n'a pas complètement guéri en laissant une ouverture dans l'estomac.

Le mouvement de barattage de l'estomac a été décrit parmi d'autres découvertes. Au 19ème siècle, il était admis que des processus chimiques étaient impliqués dans le processus de digestion.

Les recherches physiologiques sur la sécrétion et le tractus gastro-intestinal se sont poursuivies avec des expériences menées par Claude Bernard, Rudol[ph Heidenhain et Ivan Pavlov.
Le reste du XXe siècle a été dominé par la recherche sur les enzymes.

Le premier à être découvert fut la sécrétine par Ernest Starling en 1902, suivi des résultats de John Edkins en 1905 qui suggéra pour la première fois la gastrine dont la structure fut déterminée en 1964.

Andre Latarjet et Lester Dragstedt ont trouvé un rôle pour l'acétylcholine dans le système digestif.

En 1972, les agonistes des récepteurs H2 ont été décrits par J.

Noir, qui bloquent l'action de l'histamine et diminuent la production d'acide chlorhydrique.

En 1980, les inhibiteurs de la pompe à protons ont été décrits par Sachs.

En 1983, le rôle d'Helicobacter pylori dans la formation des ulcères a été décrit par Barry Marshall et Robin Warren.

Les historiens de l'art ont souvent noté que les banqueteurs sur les archives iconographiques des sociétés méditerranéennes antiques semblent presque toujours allongés sur le côté gauche.

Une explication possible pourrait résider dans l'anatomie de l'estomac et dans le mécanisme digestif.

En position couchée sur la gauche, la nourriture a de la place pour se dilater car la courbure de l'estomac est renforcée dans cette position.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Human_digestive_system



