

EAR


The ear is the organ that enables hearing and, in mammals, balance. 

In mammals, the ear is usually described as having three parts—the outer ear, the middle ear and the inner ear. 

The outer ear consists of the pinna and the ear canal. 

Since the outer ear is the only visible portion of the ear in most animals, the word "ear" often refers to the external part alone. 

The middle ear includes the tympanic cavity and the three ossicles. 

The inner ear sits in the bony labyrinth, and contains structures which are key to several senses: the semicircular canals, which enable balance and eye tracking when moving; the utricle and saccule, which enable balance when stationary; and the cochlea, which enables hearing. 

The ears of vertebrates are placed somewhat symmetrically on either side of the head, an arrangement that aids sound localisation.

The ear develops from the first pharyngeal pouch and six small swellings that develop in the early embryo called otic placodes, which are derived from ectoderm.

The ear may be affected by disease, including infection and traumatic damage. 

Diseases of the ear may lead to hearing loss, tinnitus and balance disorders such as vertigo, although many of these conditions may also be affected by damage to the brain or neural pathways leading from the ear.

The ear has been adorned by earrings and other jewelry in numerous cultures for thousands of years, and has been subjected to surgical and cosmetic alterations.


== Structure ==

The human ear consists of three parts—the outer ear, middle ear and inner ear. 

The ear canal of the outer ear is separated from the air-filled tympanic cavity of the middle ear by the eardrum. 

The middle ear contains the three small bones—the ossicles—involved in the transmission of sound, and is connected to the throat at the nasopharynx, via the pharyngeal opening of the Eustachian tube. 

The inner ear contains the otolith organs—the utricle and saccule—and the semicircular canals belonging to the vestibular system, as well as the cochlea of the auditory system.


=== Outer ear ===


The outer ear is the external portion of the ear and includes the fleshy visible pinna (also called the auricle), the ear canal, and the outer layer of the eardrum (also called the tympanic membrane).

The pinna consists of the curving outer rim called the helix, the inner curved rim called the antihelix, and opens into the ear canal. 

The tragus protrudes and partially obscures the ear canal, as does the facing antitragus. 

The hollow region in front of the ear canal is called the concha. 

The ear canal stretches for about 1 inch (2.5 cm). 

The first part of the canal is surrounded by cartilage, while the second part near the eardrum is surrounded by bone. 

This bony part is known as the auditory bulla and is formed by the tympanic part of the temporal bone. 

The skin surrounding the ear canal contains ceruminous and sebaceous glands that produce protective ear wax. 

The ear canal ends at the external surface of the eardrum.Two sets of muscles are associated with the outer ear: the intrinsic and extrinsic muscles. 

In some mammals, these muscles can adjust the direction of the pinna. 

In humans, these muscles have little or no effect. 

The ear muscles are supplied by the facial nerve, which also supplies sensation to the skin of the ear itself, as well as to the external ear cavity. 

The great auricular nerve, auricular nerve, auriculotemporal nerve, and lesser and greater occipital nerves of the cervical plexus all supply sensation to parts of the outer ear and the surrounding skin.

The pinna consists of a single piece of elastic cartilage with a complicated relief on its inner surface and a fairly smooth configuration on its posterior surface. 

A tubercle, known as Darwin's tubercle, is sometimes present, lying in the descending part of the helix and corresponding to the ear-tip of mammals. 

The earlobe consists of areola and adipose tissue. 

The symmetrical arrangement of the two ears allows for the localisation of sound. 

The brain accomplishes this by comparing arrival-times and intensities from each ear, in circuits located in the superior olivary complex and the trapezoid bodies which are connected via pathways to both ears.


=== Middle ear ===


The middle ear lies between the outer ear and the inner ear. 

It consists of an air-filled cavity called the tympanic cavity and includes the three ossicles and their attaching ligaments; the auditory tube; and the round and oval windows. 

The ossicles are three small bones that function together to receive, amplify, and transmit the sound from the eardrum to the inner ear. 

The ossicles are the malleus (hammer), incus (anvil), and the stapes (stirrup). 

The stapes is the smallest named bone in the body. 

The middle ear also connects to the upper throat at the nasopharynx via the pharyngeal opening of the Eustachian tube.

The three ossicles transmit sound from the outer ear to the inner ear. 

The malleus receives vibrations from sound pressure on the eardrum, where it is connected at its longest part (the manubrium or handle) by a ligament. 

It transmits vibrations to the incus, which in turn transmits the vibrations to the small stapes bone. 

The wide base of the stapes rests on the oval window. 

As the stapes vibrates, vibrations are transmitted through the oval window, causing movement of fluid within the cochlea.

The round window allows for the fluid within the inner ear to move. 

As the stapes pushes the secondary tympanic membrane, fluid in the inner ear moves and pushes the membrane of the round window out by a corresponding amount into the middle ear. 

The ossicles help amplify sound waves by nearly 15–20 times.


=== Inner ear ===


The inner ear sits within the temporal bone in a complex cavity called the bony labyrinth. 

A central area known as the vestibule contains two small fluid-filled recesses, the utricle and saccule. 

These connect to the semicircular canals and the cochlea. 

There are three semicircular canals angled at right angles to each other which are responsible for dynamic balance. 

The cochlea is a spiral shell-shaped organ responsible for the sense of hearing. 

These structures together create the membranous labyrinth.

The bony labyrinth refers to the bony compartment which contains the membranous labyrinth, contained within the temporal bone. 

The inner ear structurally begins at the oval window, which receives vibrations from the incus of the middle ear. 

Vibrations are transmitted into the inner ear into a fluid called endolymph, which fills the membranous labyrinth. 

The endolymph is situated in two vestibules, the utricle and saccule, and eventually transmits to the cochlea, a spiral-shaped structure. 

The cochlea consists of three fluid-filled spaces: the vestibular duct, the cochlear duct, and the tympanic duct. 

Hair cells responsible for transduction—changing mechanical changes into electrical stimuli are present in the organ of Corti in the cochlea.


=== Blood supply ===

The blood supply of the ear differs according to each part of the ear.
The outer ear is supplied by a number of arteries. 

The posterior auricular artery provides the majority of the blood supply. 

The anterior auricular arteries provide some supply to the outer rim of the ear and scalp behind it. 

The posterior auricular artery is a direct branch of the external carotid artery, and the anterior auricular arteries are branches from the superficial temporal artery. 

The occipital artery also plays a role.

The middle ear is supplied by the mastoid branch of either the occipital or posterior auricular arteries and the deep auricular artery, a branch of the maxillary artery. 

Other arteries which are present but play a smaller role include branches of the middle meningeal artery, ascending pharyngeal artery, internal carotid artery, and the artery of the pterygoid canal.

The inner ear is supplied by the anterior tympanic branch of the maxillary artery; the stylomastoid branch of the posterior auricular artery; the petrosal branch of middle meningeal artery; and the labyrinthine artery, arising from either the anterior inferior cerebellar artery or the basilar artery.


== Function ==

=== Hearing ===

Sound waves travel through the outer ear, are modulated by the middle ear, and are transmitted to the vestibulocochlear nerve in the inner ear. 

This nerve transmits information to the temporal lobe of the brain, where it is registered as sound.

Sound that travels through the outer ear impacts on the eardrum, and causes it to vibrate. 

The three ossicles bones transmit this sound to a second window (the oval window) which protects the fluid-filled inner ear. 

In detail, the pinna of the outer ear helps to focus a sound, which impacts on the eardrum. 

The malleus rests on the membrane, and receives the vibration. 

This vibration is transmitted along the incus and stapes to the oval window. 

Two small muscles, the tensor tympani and stapedius, also help modulate noise. 

The two muscles reflexively contract to dampen excessive vibrations. 

Vibration of the oval window causes vibration of the endolymph within the vestibule and the cochlea.

The inner ear houses the apparatus necessary to change the vibrations transmitted from the outside world via the middle ear into signals passed along the vestibulocochlear nerve to the brain. 

The hollow channels of the inner ear are filled with liquid, and contain a sensory epithelium that is studded with hair cells. 

The microscopic "hairs" of these cells are structural protein filaments that project out into the fluid. 

The hair cells are mechanoreceptors that release a chemical neurotransmitter when stimulated. 

Sound waves moving through fluid flows against the receptor cells of the organ of Corti. 

The fluid pushes the filaments of individual cells; movement of the filaments causes receptor cells to become open to receive the potassium-rich endolymph. 

This causes the cell to depolarise, and creates an action potential that is transmitted along the spiral ganglion, which sends information through the auditory portion of the vestibulocochlear nerve to the temporal lobe of the brain.

The human ear can generally hear sounds with frequencies between 20 Hz and 20 kHz (the audio range). 

Sounds outside this range are considered infrasound (below 20 Hz) or ultrasound (above 20 kHz).

Although hearing requires an intact and functioning auditory portion of the central nervous system as well as a working ear, human deafness (extreme insensitivity to sound) most commonly occurs because of abnormalities of the inner ear, rather than in the nerves or tracts of the central auditory system.


=== Balance ===


Providing balance, when moving or stationary, is also a central function of the ear. 

The ear facilitates two types of balance: static balance, which allows a person to feel the effects of gravity, and dynamic balance, which allows a person to sense acceleration.

Static balance is provided by two ventricles, the utricle and the saccule. 

Cells lining the walls of these ventricles contain fine filaments, and the cells are covered with a fine gelatinous layer. 

Each cell has 50–70 small filaments, and one large filament, the kinocilium. 

Within the gelatinous layer lie otoliths, tiny formations of calcium carbonate. 

When a person moves, these otoliths shift position. 

This shift alters the positions of the filaments, which opens ion channels within the cell membranes, creating depolarisation and an action potential that is transmitted to the brain along the vestibulocochlear nerve.

Dynamic balance is provided through the three semicircular canals. 

These three canals are orthogonal (at right angles) to each other. 

At the end of each canal is a slight enlargement, known as the ampulla, which contains numerous cells with filaments in a central area called the cupula. 

The fluid in these canals rotates according to the momentum of the head. 

When a person changes acceleration, the inertia of the fluid changes. 

This affects the pressure on the cupula, and results in the opening of ion channels. 

This causes depolarisation, which is passed as a signal to the brain along the vestibulocochlear nerve. 

Dynamic balance also helps maintain eye tracking when moving, via the vestibulo–ocular reflex.


== Development ==

During embryogenesis the ear develops as three distinct structures: the inner ear, the middle ear and the outer ear. 

Each structure originates from a different germ layer: the ectoderm, endoderm and mesenchyme.


=== Inner ear ===


After implantation, around the second to third week the developing embryo consists of three layers: endoderm, mesoderm and ectoderm. 

The first part of the ear to develop is the inner ear, which begins to form from the ectoderm around the 22nd day of the embryo's development. 

Specifically, the inner ear derives from two thickenings called otic placodes on either side of the head. 

Each otic placode recedes below the ectoderm, forms an otic pit and then an otic vesicle. 

This entire mass will eventually become surrounded by mesenchyme to form the bony labyrinth.

Around the 33rd day of development, the vesicles begin to differentiate. 

Closer to the back of the embryo, they form what will become the utricle and semicircular canals. 

Closer to the front of the embryo, the vesicles differentiate into a rudimentary saccule, which will eventually become the saccule and cochlea. 

Part of the saccule will eventually give rise and connect to the cochlear duct. 

This duct appears approximately during the sixth week and connects to the saccule through the ductus reuniens.As the cochlear duct's mesenchyme begins to differentiate, three cavities are formed: the scala vestibuli, the scala tympani and the scala media. 

Both the scala vestibuli and the scala tympani contain an extracellular fluid called perilymph. 

The scala media contains endolymph. 

A set of membranes called the vestibular membrane and the basilar membrane develop to separate the cochlear duct from the vestibular duct and the tympanic duct, respectively.

Parts of the otic vesicle in turn form the vestibulocochlear nerve. 

These form bipolar neurons which supply sensation to parts of the inner ear (namely the sensory parts of the semicircular canals, macular of the utricle and saccule, and organ of Corti). 

The nerve begins to form around the 28th day.

Molecular regulationMost of the genes responsible for the regulation of inner ear formation and its morphogenesis are members of the homeobox gene family such as Pax, Msx and Otx homeobox genes. 

The development of inner ear structures such as the cochlea is regulated by Dlx5/Dlx6, Otx1/Otx2 and Pax2, which in turn are controlled by the master gene Shh. 

Shh is secreted by the notochord.


=== Middle ear ===

The middle ear and its components develop from the first and second pharyngeal arches. 

The tympanic cavity and auditory tube develop from the first part of the pharyngeal pouch between the first two arches in an area which will also go on to develop the pharynx. 

This develops as a structure called the tubotympanic recess. 

The ossicles (malleus, incus and stapes) normally appear during the first half of fetal development. 

The first two (malleus and incus) derive from the first pharyngeal arch and the stapes derives from the second. 

All three ossicles develop from the neural crest. 

Eventually cells from the tissue surrounding the ossicles will experience apoptosis and a new layer of endodermal epithelial will constitute the formation of the tympanic cavity wall.


=== Outer ear ===


Unlike structures of the inner and middle ear, which develop from pharyngeal pouches, the ear canal originates from the dorsal portion of the first pharyngeal cleft. 

It is fully expanded by the end of the 18th week of development. 

The eardrum is made up of three layers (ectoderm, endoderm and connective tissue). 

The pinna originates as a fusion of six hillocks. 

The first three hillocks are derived from the lower part of the first pharyngeal arch and form the tragus, crus of the helix, and helix, respectively. 

The final three hillocks are derived from the upper part of the second pharyngeal arch and form the antihelix, antitragus, and earlobe. 

The outer ears develop in the lower neck. 

As the mandible forms they move towards their final position level with the eyes.


== Clinical significance ==



=== Hearing loss ===


Hearing loss may be either partial or total. 

This may be a result of injury or damage, congenital disease, or physiological causes. 

When hearing loss is a result of injury or damage to the outer ear or middle ear, it is known as conductive hearing loss. 

When deafness is a result of injury or damage to the inner ear, vestibulochoclear nerve, or brain, it is known as sensorineural hearing loss.

Causes of conductive hearing loss include an ear canal blocked by ear wax, ossicles that are fixed together or absent, or holes in the eardrum. 

Conductive hearing loss may also result from middle ear inflammation causing fluid build-up in the normally air-filled space, such as by otitis media. 

Tympanoplasty is the general name of the operation to repair the middle ear's eardrum and ossicles. 

Grafts from muscle fascia are ordinarily used to rebuild an intact eardrum. 

Sometimes artificial ear bones are placed to substitute for damaged ones, or a disrupted ossicular chain is rebuilt in order to conduct sound effectively.

Hearing aids or cochlear implants may be used if the hearing loss is severe or prolonged. 

Hearing aids work by amplifying the sound of the local environment and are best suited to conductive hearing loss. 

Cochlear implants transmit the sound that is heard as if it were a nervous signal, bypassing the cochlea. 

Active middle ear implants send sound vibrations to the ossicles in the middle ear, bypassing any non-functioning parts of the outer and middle ear.


=== Congenital abnormalities ===

Anomalies and malformations of the pinna are common. 

These anomalies include chromosome syndromes such as ring 18. 

Children may also present cases of abnormal ear canals and low ear implantation. 

In rare cases no pinna is formed (atresia), or is extremely small (microtia). 

Small pinnae can develop when the auricular hillocks do not develop properly. 

The ear canal can fail to develop if it does not channelise properly or if there is an obstruction. 

Reconstructive surgery to treat hearing loss is considered as an option for children older than five, with a cosmetic surgical procedure to reduce the size or change the shape of the ear is called an otoplasty. 

The initial medical intervention is aimed at assessing the baby's hearing and the condition of the ear canal, as well as the middle and inner ear. 

Depending on the results of tests, reconstruction of the outer ear is done in stages, with planning for any possible repairs of the rest of the ear.

Approximately one out of one thousand children suffer some type of congenital deafness related to the development of the inner ear. 

Inner ear congenital anomalies are related to sensorineural hearing loss and are generally diagnosed with a computed tomography (CT) scan or a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan. 

Hearing loss problems also derive from inner ear anomalies because its development is separate from that of the middle and external ear. 

Middle ear anomalies can occur because of errors during head and neck development. 

The first pharyngeal pouch syndrome associates middle ear anomalies to the malleus and incus structures as well as to the non-differentiation of the annular stapedial ligament. 

Temporal bone and ear canal anomalies are also related to this structure of the ear and are known to be associated with sensorineural hearing loss and conductive hearing loss.


=== Vertigo ===

Vertigo refers to the inappropriate perception of motion. 

This is due to dysfunction of the vestibular system. 

One common type of vertigo is benign paroxysmal positional vertigo, when an otolith is displaced from the ventricles to the semicircular canal. 

The displaced otolith rests on the cupola, causing a sensation of movement when there is none. 

Ménière's disease, labyrinthitis, strokes, and other infective and congenital diseases may also result in the perception of vertigo.


=== Injury ===

Outer earInjuries to the external ear occur fairly frequently, and can leave minor to major deformity. 

Injuries include: laceration, avulsion injuries, burn and repeated twisting or pulling of an ear, for discipline or torture. 

Chronic damage to the ears can cause cauliflower ear, a common condition in boxers and wrestlers in which the cartilage around the ears becomes lumpy and distorted owing to persistence of a haematoma around the perichondrium, which can impair blood supply and healing. 

Owing to its exposed position, the external ear is susceptible to frostbite as well as skin cancers, including squamous-cell carcinoma and basal-cell carcinomas.

Middle ear

The ear drum may become perforated in the event of a large sound or explosion, when diving or flying (called barotrauma), or by objects inserted into the ear. 

Another common cause of injury is due to an infection such as otitis media. 

These may cause a discharge from the ear called otorrhea, and are often investigated by otoscopy and audiometry. 

Treatment may include watchful waiting, antibiotics and possibly surgery, if the injury is prolonged or the position of the ossicles is affected. 

Skull fractures that go through the part of the skull containing the ear structures (the temporal bone) can also cause damage to the middle ear. 

A cholesteatoma is a cyst of squamous skin cells that may develop from birth or secondary to other causes such as chronic ear infections. 

It may impair hearing or cause dizziness or vertigo, and is usually investigated by otoscopy and may require a CT scan. 

The treatment for cholesteatoma is surgery.
Inner earThere are two principal damage mechanisms to the inner ear in industrialised society, and both injure hair cells. 

The first is exposure to elevated sound levels (noise trauma), and the second is exposure to drugs and other substances (ototoxicity). 

A large number of people are exposed to sound levels on a daily basis that are likely to lead to significant hearing loss. 

The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health has recently published research on the estimated numbers of persons with hearing difficulty (11%) and the percentage of those that can be attributed to occupational noise exposure (24%). 

Furthermore, according to the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES), approximately twenty-two million (17%) US workers reported exposure to hazardous workplace noise. 

Workers exposed to hazardous noise further exacerbate the potential for developing noise-induced hearing loss when they do not wear hearing protection.


=== Tinnitus ===

Tinnitus is the hearing of sound when no external sound is present. 

While often described as a ringing, it may also sound like a clicking, hiss or roaring. 

Rarely, unclear voices or music are heard. 

The sound may be soft or loud, low pitched or high pitched and appear to be coming from one ear or both. 

Most of the time, it comes on gradually. 

In some people, the sound causes depression, anxiety, or concentration difficulties.

Tinnitus is not a disease but a symptom that can result from a number of underlying causes. 

One of the most common causes is noise-induced hearing loss. 

Other causes include: ear infections, disease of the heart or blood vessels, Ménière's disease, brain tumors, emotional stress, exposure to certain medications, a previous head injury, and earwax. 

It is more common in those with depression and anxiety.


== Society and culture ==


The ears have been ornamented with jewelry for thousands of years, traditionally by piercing of the earlobe. 

In ancient and modern cultures, ornaments have been placed to stretch and enlarge the earlobes, allowing for larger plugs to be slid into a large fleshy gap in the lobe. 

Tearing of the earlobe from the weight of heavy earrings, or from traumatic pull of an earring (for example, by snagging on a sweater), is fairly common.

Injury to the ears has been present since Roman times as a method of reprimand or punishment – "In Roman times, when a dispute arose that could not be settled amicably, the injured party cited the name of the person thought to be responsible before the Praetor; if the offender did not appear within the specified time limit, the complainant summoned witnesses to make statements. 

If they refused, as often happened, the injured party was allowed to drag them by the ear and to pinch them hard if they resisted. 

Hence the French expression "se faire tirer l’oreille", of which the literal meaning is "to have one's ear pulled" and the figurative meaning "to take a lot of persuading". 

We use the expression "to tweak (or pull) someone's ears" to mean "inflict a punishment"."The pinnae have an effect on facial appearance. 

In Western societies, protruding ears (present in about 5% of ethnic Europeans) have been considered unattractive, particularly if asymmetric. 

The first surgery to reduce the projection of prominent ears was published in the medical literature by Ernst Dieffenbach in 1845, and the first case report in 1881.

Pointy ears are a characteristic of some creatures in folklore such as the French croquemitaine, Brazilian curupira or Japanese earth spider. 

It has been a feature of characters on art as old as that of Ancient Greece and medieval Europe. 

Pointy ears are a common characteristic of many creatures in the fantasy genre, including elves, faeries, pixies, hobbits, or orcs. 

They are a characteristic of creatures in the horror genre, such as vampires. 

Pointy ears are also found in the science fiction genre; for example among the Vulcan and Romulan races of the Star Trek universe and the Nightcrawler character from the X-Men universe.

Georg von Békésy was a Hungarian biophysicist born in Budapest, Hungary. 

In 1961, he was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for his research on the function of the cochlea in the mammalian hearing organ.The Vacanti mouse was a laboratory mouse that had what looked like a human ear grown on its back. 

The "ear" was actually an ear-shaped cartilage structure grown by seeding cow cartilage cells into a biodegradable ear-shaped mold and then implanted under the skin of the mouse; then the cartilage naturally grew by itself. 

It was developed as an alternative to ear repair or grafting procedures and the results met with much publicity and controversy in 1997.


== Other animals ==


The pinna helps direct sound through the ear canal to the eardrum. 

The complex geometry of ridges on the inner surface of some mammalian ears helps to sharply focus sounds produced by prey, using echolocation signals. 

These ridges can be regarded as the acoustic equivalent of a fresnel lens, and may be seen in a wide range of animals, including the bat, aye-aye, lesser galago, bat-eared fox, mouse lemur and others.

Some large primates such as gorillas and orang-utans (and also humans) have undeveloped ear muscles that are non-functional vestigial structures, yet are still large enough to be easily identified. 

An ear muscle that cannot move the ear, for whatever reason, has lost that biological function. 

This serves as evidence of homology between related species. 

In humans, there is variability in these muscles, such that some people are able to move their ears in various directions, and it has been said that it may be possible for others to gain such movement by repeated trials. 

In such primates, the inability to move the ear is compensated for mainly by the ability to easily turn the head on a horizontal plane, an ability which is not common to most monkeys—a function once provided by one structure is now replaced by another.

In some animals with mobile pinnae (like the horse), each pinna can be aimed independently to better receive the sound. 

For these animals, the pinnae help localise the direction of the sound source.

		
		
		

The ear, with its blood vessels close to the surface, is an essential thermoregulator in some land mammals, including the elephant, the fox, and the rabbit. 

There are five types of ear carriage in domestic rabbits, some of which have been bred for exaggerated ear length—a potential health risk that is controlled in some countries. 

Abnormalities in the skull of a half-lop rabbit were studied by Charles Darwin in 1868. 

In marine mammals, Earless seals are one of three groups of Pinnipedia.


=== Invertebrates ===

Only vertebrate animals have ears, though many invertebrates detect sound using other kinds of sense organs. 

In insects, tympanal organs are used to hear distant sounds. 

They are located either on the head or elsewhere, depending on the insect family. 

The tympanal organs of some insects are extremely sensitive, offering acute hearing beyond that of most other animals. 

The female cricket fly Ormia ochracea has tympanal organs on each side of her abdomen. 

They are connected by a thin bridge of exoskeleton and they function like a tiny pair of eardrums, but, because they are linked, they provide acute directional information. 

The fly uses her "ears" to detect the call of her host, a male cricket. 

Depending on where the song of the cricket is coming from, the fly's hearing organs will reverberate at slightly different frequencies. 

This difference may be as little as 50 billionths of a second, but it is enough to allow the fly to home in directly on a singing male cricket and parasitise it.

Simpler structures allow other arthropods to detect near-field sounds. 

Spiders and cockroaches, for example, have hairs on their legs which are used for detecting sound. 

Caterpillars may also have hairs on their body that perceive vibrations and allow them to respond to sound.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ear
;;;ES;;;



OÍDO


El oído es el órgano que permite la audición y, en los mamíferos, el equilibrio.

En los mamíferos, generalmente se describe que el oído tiene tres partes: el oído externo, el oído medio y el oído interno.

El oído externo está formado por el pabellón auricular y el canal auditivo.

Dado que el oído externo es la única parte visible del oído en la mayoría de los animales, la palabra "oído" a menudo se refiere solo a la parte externa.

El oído medio incluye la cavidad timpánica y los tres huesecillos.

El oído interno se asienta en el laberinto óseo y contiene estructuras que son clave para varios sentidos: los canales semicirculares, que permiten el equilibrio y el seguimiento ocular al moverse; el utrículo y el sáculo, que permiten el equilibrio cuando está parado; y la cóclea, que permite oír.

Las orejas de los vertebrados se colocan algo simétricamente a ambos lados de la cabeza, una disposición que ayuda a la localización del sonido.

La oreja se desarrolla a partir de la primera bolsa faríngea y seis pequeñas hinchazones que se desarrollan en el embrión temprano llamadas placodas óticas, que se derivan del ectodermo.

El oído puede verse afectado por enfermedades, incluidas infecciones y daños traumáticos.

Las enfermedades del oído pueden provocar pérdida de la audición, tinnitus y trastornos del equilibrio como el vértigo, aunque muchas de estas afecciones también pueden verse afectadas por daños en el cerebro o en las vías neurales que salen del oído.

La oreja ha sido adornada con aretes y otras joyas en numerosas culturas durante miles de años y ha sido objeto de alteraciones quirúrgicas y cosméticas.


== Estructura ==

El oído humano consta de tres partes: el oído externo, el oído medio y el oído interno.

El canal auditivo del oído externo está separado de la cavidad timpánica llena de aire del oído medio por el tímpano.

El oído medio contiene los tres huesos pequeños, los huesecillos, que participan en la transmisión del sonido y está conectado a la garganta en la nasofaringe, a través de la abertura faríngea de la trompa de Eustaquio.

El oído interno contiene los órganos otolitos, el utrículo y el sáculo, y los canales semicirculares pertenecientes al sistema vestibular, así como la cóclea del sistema auditivo.


=== oído externo ===


El oído externo es la porción externa del oído e incluye el pabellón auditivo carnoso visible (también llamado aurícula), el canal auditivo y la capa externa del tímpano (también llamada membrana timpánica).

El pabellón consiste en el borde exterior curvo llamado hélice, el borde curvo interior llamado antihélix, y se abre hacia el canal auditivo.

El trago sobresale y oscurece parcialmente el canal auditivo, al igual que el antitrago de enfrente.

La región hueca frente al canal auditivo se llama concha.

El canal auditivo se estira aproximadamente 1 pulgada (2,5 cm).

La primera parte del canal está rodeada de cartílago, mientras que la segunda parte cerca del tímpano está rodeada de hueso.

Esta parte ósea se conoce como bulla auditiva y está formada por la parte timpánica del hueso temporal.

La piel que rodea el canal auditivo contiene glándulas ceruminosas y sebáceas que producen cerumen protector del oído.

El canal auditivo termina en la superficie externa del tímpano. Dos conjuntos de músculos están asociados con el oído externo: los músculos intrínsecos y extrínsecos.

En algunos mamíferos, estos músculos pueden ajustar la dirección del pabellón auricular.

En los humanos, estos músculos tienen poco o ningún efecto.

Los músculos de la oreja están inervados por el nervio facial, que también proporciona sensibilidad a la piel de la oreja misma, así como a la cavidad del oído externo.

El nervio auricular mayor, el nervio auricular, el nervio auriculotemporal y los nervios occipitales mayor y menor del plexo cervical proporcionan sensibilidad a partes del oído externo y la piel circundante.

El pabellón consiste en una sola pieza de cartílago elástico con un relieve complicado en su superficie interna y una configuración bastante suave en su superficie posterior.

A veces está presente un tubérculo, conocido como tubérculo de Darwin, que se encuentra en la parte descendente de la hélice y corresponde a la punta de la oreja de los mamíferos.

El lóbulo de la oreja está formado por areola y tejido adiposo.

La disposición simétrica de los dos oídos permite la localización del sonido.

El cerebro logra esto comparando los tiempos de llegada y las intensidades de cada oído, en circuitos ubicados en el complejo olivar superior y los cuerpos trapezoidales que están conectados a través de vías a ambos oídos.


=== oído medio ===


El oído medio se encuentra entre el oído externo y el oído interno.

Consiste en una cavidad llena de aire llamada cavidad timpánica e incluye los tres huesecillos y sus ligamentos de unión; el tubo auditivo; y las ventanas redondas y ovaladas.

Los huesecillos son tres pequeños huesos que funcionan juntos para recibir, amplificar y transmitir el sonido del tímpano al oído interno.

Los huesecillos son el martillo (martillo), el yunque (yunque) y el estribo (estribo).

El estribo es el hueso más pequeño del cuerpo.

El oído medio también se conecta con la parte superior de la garganta en la nasofaringe a través de la abertura faríngea de la trompa de Eustaquio.

Los tres huesecillos transmiten el sonido del oído externo al oído interno.

El martillo recibe vibraciones de la presión del sonido sobre el tímpano, donde está conectado en su parte más larga (el manubrio o mango) por un ligamento.

Transmite vibraciones al yunque, que a su vez transmite las vibraciones al pequeño estribo.

La amplia base del estribo descansa sobre la ventana oval.

A medida que vibra el estribo, las vibraciones se transmiten a través de la ventana oval, provocando el movimiento del líquido dentro de la cóclea.

La ventana redonda permite que el líquido dentro del oído interno se mueva.

A medida que el estribo empuja la membrana timpánica secundaria, el líquido del oído interno se mueve y empuja la membrana de la ventana redonda hacia el oído medio en una cantidad correspondiente.

Los huesecillos ayudan a amplificar las ondas de sonido entre 15 y 20 veces.


=== oído interno ===


El oído interno se encuentra dentro del hueso temporal en una cavidad compleja llamada laberinto óseo.

Un área central conocida como vestíbulo contiene dos pequeños huecos llenos de líquido, el utrículo y el sáculo.

Estos se conectan a los canales semicirculares y la cóclea.

Hay tres canales semicirculares en ángulo recto entre sí que son responsables del equilibrio dinámico.

La cóclea es un órgano en forma de concha en espiral responsable del sentido del oído.

Estas estructuras juntas crean el laberinto membranoso.

El laberinto óseo se refiere al compartimento óseo que contiene el laberinto membranoso, contenido dentro del hueso temporal.

El oído interno comienza estructuralmente en la ventana oval, que recibe vibraciones del yunque del oído medio.

Las vibraciones se transmiten al oído interno en un líquido llamado endolinfa, que llena el laberinto membranoso.

La endolinfa está situada en dos vestíbulos, el utrículo y el sáculo, y finalmente se transmite a la cóclea, una estructura en forma de espiral.

La cóclea consta de tres espacios llenos de líquido: el conducto vestibular, el conducto coclear y el conducto timpánico.

Las células ciliadas responsables de la transducción: cambiar los cambios mecánicos en estímulos eléctricos están presentes en el órgano de Corti en la cóclea.


=== Suministro de sangre ===

El suministro de sangre del oído difiere según cada parte del oído.
El oído externo está irrigado por varias arterias.

La arteria auricular posterior proporciona la mayor parte del suministro de sangre.

Las arterias auriculares anteriores proporcionan cierto suministro al borde externo de la oreja y al cuero cabelludo detrás de él.

La arteria auricular posterior es una rama directa de la arteria carótida externa y las arterias auriculares anteriores son ramas de la arteria temporal superficial.

La arteria occipital también juega un papel.

El oído medio está irrigado por la rama mastoidea de las arterias occipital o auricular posterior y la arteria auricular profunda, una rama de la arteria maxilar.

Otras arterias que están presentes pero juegan un papel menor incluyen ramas de la arteria meníngea media, la arteria faríngea ascendente, la arteria carótida interna y la arteria del canal pterigoideo.

El oído interno está irrigado por la rama timpánica anterior de la arteria maxilar; la rama estilomastoidea de la arteria auricular posterior; la rama petrosa de la arteria meníngea media; y la arteria laberíntica, que surge de la arteria cerebelosa anteroinferior o de la arteria basilar.


== Función ==

=== Escuchar ===

Las ondas de sonido viajan a través del oído externo, son moduladas por el oído medio y se transmiten al nervio vestibulococlear en el oído interno.

Este nervio transmite información al lóbulo temporal del cerebro, donde se registra como sonido.

El sonido que viaja a través del oído externo impacta en el tímpano y lo hace vibrar.

Los tres huesecillos transmiten este sonido a una segunda ventana (la ventana oval) que protege el oído interno lleno de líquido.

En detalle, el pabellón auricular del oído externo ayuda a enfocar un sonido, que impacta en el tímpano.

El martillo descansa sobre la membrana y recibe la vibración.

Esta vibración se transmite a lo largo del yunque y el estribo hasta la ventana oval.

Dos pequeños músculos, el tensor del tímpano y el estapedio, también ayudan a modular el ruido.

Los dos músculos se contraen por reflejo para amortiguar las vibraciones excesivas.

La vibración de la ventana oval provoca la vibración de la endolinfa dentro del vestíbulo y la cóclea.

El oído interno alberga el aparato necesario para cambiar las vibraciones transmitidas desde el mundo exterior a través del oído medio en señales que pasan por el nervio vestibulococlear hasta el cerebro.

Los canales huecos del oído interno están llenos de líquido y contienen un epitelio sensorial salpicado de células ciliadas.

Los "pelos" microscópicos de estas células son filamentos de proteínas estructurales que se proyectan hacia el líquido.

Las células ciliadas son mecanorreceptores que liberan un neurotransmisor químico cuando se estimulan.

Ondas sonoras que se desplazan a través de flujos de fluidos contra las células receptoras del órgano de Corti.

El fluido empuja los filamentos de las células individuales; el movimiento de los filamentos hace que las células receptoras se abran para recibir la endolinfa rica en potasio.

Esto hace que la célula se despolarice y crea un potencial de acción que se transmite a lo largo del ganglio espiral, que envía información a través de la porción auditiva del nervio vestibulococlear al lóbulo temporal del cerebro.

El oído humano generalmente puede escuchar sonidos con frecuencias entre 20 Hz y 20 kHz (el rango de audio).

Los sonidos fuera de este rango se consideran infrasonidos (por debajo de 20 Hz) o ultrasonidos (por encima de 20 kHz).

Aunque la audición requiere una porción auditiva intacta y en funcionamiento del sistema nervioso central, así como un oído que funcione, la sordera humana (insensibilidad extrema al sonido) ocurre más comúnmente debido a anomalías en el oído interno, más que en los nervios o tractos del oído central. sistema Auditorio.


=== Saldo ===


Proporcionar equilibrio, cuando está en movimiento o estático, también es una función central del oído.

El oído facilita dos tipos de equilibrio: el equilibrio estático, que le permite a una persona sentir los efectos de la gravedad, y el equilibrio dinámico, que le permite a una persona sentir la aceleración.

El equilibrio estático lo proporcionan dos ventrículos, el utrículo y el sáculo.

Las células que recubren las paredes de estos ventrículos contienen filamentos finos y están cubiertas por una fina capa gelatinosa.

Cada célula tiene de 50 a 70 filamentos pequeños y un filamento grande, el kinocilio.

Dentro de la capa gelatinosa se encuentran los otolitos, pequeñas formaciones de carbonato de calcio.

Cuando una persona se mueve, estos otolitos cambian de posición.

Este cambio altera las posiciones de los filamentos, lo que abre canales iónicos dentro de las membranas celulares, creando despolarización y un potencial de acción que se transmite al cerebro a lo largo del nervio vestibulococlear.

El equilibrio dinámico se proporciona a través de los tres canales semicirculares.

Estos tres canales son ortogonales (en ángulo recto) entre sí.

Al final de cada canal hay un ligero agrandamiento, conocido como ampolla, que contiene numerosas células con filamentos en un área central llamada cúpula.

El fluido en estos canales gira de acuerdo con el impulso de la cabeza.

Cuando una persona cambia de aceleración, la inercia del fluido cambia.

Esto afecta la presión sobre la cúpula y da como resultado la apertura de canales iónicos.

Esto provoca la despolarización, que pasa como una señal al cerebro a lo largo del nervio vestibulococlear.

El equilibrio dinámico también ayuda a mantener el seguimiento de los ojos cuando se mueve, a través del reflejo vestíbulo-ocular.


== Desarrollo ==

Durante la embriogénesis, el oído se desarrolla como tres estructuras distintas: el oído interno, el oído medio y el oído externo.

Cada estructura se origina a partir de una capa germinal diferente: el ectodermo, el endodermo y el mesénquima.


=== oído interno ===


Después de la implantación, alrededor de la segunda a la tercera semana, el embrión en desarrollo consta de tres capas: endodermo, mesodermo y ectodermo.

La primera parte del oído en desarrollarse es el oído interno, que comienza a formarse a partir del ectodermo alrededor del día 22 del desarrollo del embrión.

Específicamente, el oído interno se deriva de dos engrosamientos llamados placodas óticas a ambos lados de la cabeza.

Cada placoda ótica retrocede por debajo del ectodermo, forma una fosa ótica y luego una vesícula ótica.

Toda esta masa acabará rodeada de mesénquima para formar el laberinto óseo.

Alrededor del día 33 de desarrollo, las vesículas comienzan a diferenciarse.

Más cerca de la parte posterior del embrión, forman lo que se convertirá en el utrículo y los canales semicirculares.

Más cerca del frente del embrión, las vesículas se diferencian en un sáculo rudimentario, que eventualmente se convertirá en el sáculo y la cóclea.

Parte del sáculo finalmente dará lugar y se conectará al conducto coclear.

Este conducto aparece aproximadamente durante la sexta semana y se conecta con el sáculo a través del ductus reuniens. A medida que el mesénquima del conducto coclear comienza a diferenciarse, se forman tres cavidades: la rampa vestibular, la rampa timpánica y la rampa media.

Tanto la rampa vestibular como la rampa timpánica contienen un líquido extracelular llamado perilinfa.

La escala media contiene endolinfa.

Se desarrolla un conjunto de membranas denominadas membrana vestibular y membrana basilar para separar el conducto coclear del conducto vestibular y del conducto timpánico, respectivamente.

A su vez, partes de la vesícula ótica forman el nervio vestibulococlear.

Estos forman neuronas bipolares que suministran sensación a partes del oído interno (es decir, las partes sensoriales de los canales semicirculares, la mácula del utrículo y el sáculo, y el órgano de Corti).

El nervio comienza a formarse alrededor del día 28.

Regulación molecular La mayoría de los genes responsables de la regulación de la formación del oído interno y su morfogénesis son miembros de la familia de genes homeobox, como los genes homeobox Pax, Msx y Otx.

El desarrollo de las estructuras del oído interno, como la cóclea, está regulado por Dlx5/Dlx6, Otx1/Otx2 y Pax2, que a su vez están controlados por el gen maestro Shh.

Shh es secretado por la notocorda.


=== oído medio ===

El oído medio y sus componentes se desarrollan a partir del primer y segundo arco faríngeo.

La cavidad timpánica y el tubo auditivo se desarrollan a partir de la primera parte de la bolsa faríngea entre los dos primeros arcos en un área que también se desarrollará en la faringe.

Esto se desarrolla como una estructura llamada receso tubotimpánico.

Los huesecillos (martillo, yunque y estribo) normalmente aparecen durante la primera mitad del desarrollo fetal.

Los dos primeros (martillo e yunque) derivan del primer arco faríngeo y el estribo deriva del segundo.

Los tres huesecillos se desarrollan a partir de la cresta neural.

Eventualmente, las células del tejido que rodea los huesecillos experimentarán apoptosis y una nueva capa de epitelio endodérmico constituirá la formación de la pared de la cavidad timpánica.


=== oído externo ===


A diferencia de las estructuras del oído interno y medio, que se desarrollan a partir de las bolsas faríngeas, el canal auditivo se origina en la porción dorsal de la primera hendidura faríngea.

Está completamente expandido al final de la semana 18 de desarrollo.

El tímpano está formado por tres capas (ectodermo, endodermo y tejido conjuntivo).

La pinna se origina como una fusión de seis montículos.

Los tres primeros montículos se derivan de la parte inferior del primer arco faríngeo y forman el trago, el pilar del hélix y el hélix, respectivamente.

Los tres montículos finales se derivan de la parte superior del segundo arco faríngeo y forman el antihélix, el antitrago y el lóbulo de la oreja.

Las orejas externas se desarrollan en la parte inferior del cuello.

A medida que se forma la mandíbula, se mueven hacia su posición final al nivel de los ojos.


== Importancia clínica ==



=== Pérdida de audición ===


La pérdida de audición puede ser parcial o total.

Esto puede ser el resultado de una lesión o daño, una enfermedad congénita o causas fisiológicas.

Cuando la pérdida auditiva es el resultado de una lesión o daño en el oído externo o en el oído medio, se conoce como pérdida auditiva conductiva.

Cuando la sordera es el resultado de una lesión o daño en el oído interno, el nervio vestibulococlear o el cerebro, se conoce como pérdida auditiva neurosensorial.

Las causas de la pérdida auditiva conductiva incluyen un canal auditivo bloqueado por cerumen, osículos que están unidos o ausentes, o agujeros en el tímpano.

La pérdida auditiva conductiva también puede deberse a la inflamación del oído medio que provoca la acumulación de líquido en el espacio normalmente lleno de aire, como por ejemplo, la otitis media.

La timpanoplastia es el nombre general de la operación para reparar el tímpano y los huesecillos del oído medio.

Los injertos de fascia muscular normalmente se usan para reconstruir un tímpano intacto.

A veces, se colocan huesos del oído artificiales para sustituir los dañados, o se reconstruye una cadena osicular rota para conducir el sonido de manera efectiva.

Se pueden usar audífonos o implantes cocleares si la pérdida auditiva es severa o prolongada.

Los audífonos funcionan amplificando el sonido del entorno local y son los más adecuados para la pérdida auditiva conductiva.

Los implantes cocleares transmiten el sonido que se escucha como si fuera una señal nerviosa, sin pasar por la cóclea.

Los implantes de oído medio activos envían vibraciones de sonido a los huesecillos del oído medio, sin pasar por las partes del oído medio y externo que no funcionan.


=== Anomalías congénitas ===

Las anomalías y malformaciones del pabellón auricular son comunes.

Estas anomalías incluyen síndromes cromosómicos como el anillo 18.

Los niños también pueden presentar casos de conductos auditivos anormales e implantación baja del oído.

En casos raros, no se forma pinna (atresia), o es extremadamente pequeña (microtia).

Pueden desarrollarse pabellones pequeños cuando los montículos auriculares no se desarrollan adecuadamente.

El canal auditivo puede no desarrollarse si no se canaliza correctamente o si hay una obstrucción.

La cirugía reconstructiva para tratar la pérdida auditiva se considera una opción para niños mayores de cinco años, con un procedimiento quirúrgico estético para reducir el tamaño o cambiar la forma de la oreja que se llama otoplastia.

La intervención médica inicial está dirigida a evaluar la audición del bebé y el estado del canal auditivo, así como del oído medio e interno.

Dependiendo de los resultados de las pruebas, la reconstrucción del oído externo se realiza en etapas, con planificación para posibles reparaciones del resto del oído.

Aproximadamente uno de cada mil niños sufre algún tipo de sordera congénita relacionada con el desarrollo del oído interno.

Las anomalías congénitas del oído interno están relacionadas con la pérdida auditiva neurosensorial y generalmente se diagnostican con una tomografía computarizada (TC) o una resonancia magnética nuclear (RMN).

Los problemas de pérdida auditiva también se derivan de anomalías del oído interno porque su desarrollo está separado del oído medio y externo.

Las anomalías del oído medio pueden ocurrir debido a errores durante el desarrollo de la cabeza y el cuello.

El síndrome de la primera bolsa faríngea asocia anomalías del oído medio a las estructuras del martillo y el yunque, así como a la no diferenciación del ligamento anular estapedial.

Las anomalías del hueso temporal y del canal auditivo también están relacionadas con esta estructura del oído y se sabe que están asociadas con la pérdida auditiva neurosensorial y la pérdida auditiva conductiva.


=== Vértigo ===

El vértigo se refiere a la percepción inadecuada del movimiento.

Esto se debe a una disfunción del sistema vestibular.

Un tipo común de vértigo es el vértigo posicional paroxístico benigno, cuando un otolito se desplaza de los ventrículos al canal semicircular.

El otolito desplazado se apoya sobre la cúpula, provocando una sensación de movimiento cuando no lo hay.

La enfermedad de Ménière, la laberintitis, los accidentes cerebrovasculares y otras enfermedades infecciosas y congénitas también pueden provocar la percepción de vértigo.


=== Lesión ===

Oído externoLas lesiones en el oído externo ocurren con bastante frecuencia y pueden dejar deformidades menores a mayores.

Las lesiones incluyen: laceraciones, lesiones por avulsión, quemaduras y torceduras o tirones repetidos de una oreja, para disciplinar o torturar.

El daño crónico en las orejas puede causar orejas en coliflor, una afección común en boxeadores y luchadores en la que el cartílago alrededor de las orejas se vuelve grumoso y distorsionado debido a la persistencia de un hematoma alrededor del pericondrio, que puede afectar el suministro de sangre y la cicatrización.

Debido a su posición expuesta, el oído externo es susceptible a la congelación y al cáncer de piel, incluido el carcinoma de células escamosas y los carcinomas de células basales.

Oído medio

El tímpano puede perforarse en caso de un sonido fuerte o explosión, al bucear o volar (llamado barotrauma), o por objetos insertados en el oído.

Otra causa común de lesión se debe a una infección como la otitis media.

Estos pueden causar una secreción del oído llamada otorrea y, a menudo, se investigan mediante otoscopia y audiometría.

El tratamiento puede incluir conducta expectante, antibióticos y posiblemente cirugía, si la lesión se prolonga o la posición de los huesecillos se ve afectada.

Las fracturas de cráneo que atraviesan la parte del cráneo que contiene las estructuras del oído (el hueso temporal) también pueden causar daño al oído medio.

Un colesteatoma es un quiste de células escamosas de la piel que puede desarrollarse desde el nacimiento o como consecuencia de otras causas, como infecciones crónicas del oído.

Puede afectar la audición o causar mareos o vértigo, y generalmente se investiga mediante otoscopia y puede requerir una tomografía computarizada.

El tratamiento para el colesteatoma es la cirugía.
Oído interno Hay dos mecanismos principales de daño al oído interno en la sociedad industrializada, y ambos dañan las células ciliadas.

El primero es la exposición a niveles elevados de sonido (trauma por ruido) y el segundo es la exposición a fármacos y otras sustancias (ototoxicidad).

Un gran número de personas están expuestas diariamente a niveles de sonido que probablemente provoquen una pérdida auditiva significativa.

El Instituto Nacional para la Seguridad y Salud Ocupacional ha publicado recientemente una investigación sobre el número estimado de personas con dificultad auditiva (11 %) y el porcentaje de las que se pueden atribuir a la exposición al ruido ocupacional (24 %).

Además, según la Encuesta Nacional de Examen de Salud y Nutrición (NHANES), aproximadamente veintidós millones (17 %) de trabajadores estadounidenses informaron exposición a ruidos peligrosos en el lugar de trabajo.

Los trabajadores expuestos a ruidos peligrosos exacerban aún más el potencial de desarrollar pérdida auditiva inducida por el ruido cuando no usan protección auditiva.


=== Tinnitus ===

El tinnitus es la audición de un sonido cuando no hay ningún sonido externo presente.

Si bien a menudo se describe como un timbre, también puede sonar como un chasquido, un silbido o un rugido.

En raras ocasiones, se escuchan voces o música poco claras.

El sonido puede ser suave o fuerte, de tono bajo o alto y parece provenir de un oído o de ambos.

La mayoría de las veces, se presenta gradualmente.

En algunas personas, el sonido provoca depresión, ansiedad o dificultades de concentración.

El tinnitus no es una enfermedad sino un síntoma que puede deberse a varias causas subyacentes.

Una de las causas más comunes es la pérdida de audición inducida por el ruido.

Otras causas incluyen: infecciones del oído, enfermedad del corazón o de los vasos sanguíneos, enfermedad de Ménière, tumores cerebrales, estrés emocional, exposición a ciertos medicamentos, una lesión anterior en la cabeza y cerumen.

Es más común en personas con depresión y ansiedad.


== Sociedad y cultura ==


Las orejas se han adornado con joyas durante miles de años, tradicionalmente mediante la perforación del lóbulo de la oreja.

En las culturas antiguas y modernas, se han colocado adornos para estirar y agrandar los lóbulos de las orejas, lo que permite deslizar tapones más grandes en un gran espacio carnoso en el lóbulo.

El desgarro del lóbulo de la oreja por el peso de aretes pesados ​​o por un tirón traumático de un arete (por ejemplo, al engancharse en un suéter) es bastante común.

Las lesiones en los oídos han estado presentes desde la época romana como método de reprimenda o castigo: "En la época romana, cuando surgía una disputa que no podía resolverse amistosamente, la parte lesionada citaba el nombre de la persona que se creía responsable ante el Pretor. ; si el infractor no comparece dentro del plazo señalado, el denunciante cita a testigos para que rindan declaración.

Si se negaban, como sucedía a menudo, se permitía que la víctima los arrastrara de la oreja y los pellizcara con fuerza si se resistían.

De ahí la expresión francesa "se faire tirer l'oreille", cuyo significado literal es "tirarse de la oreja" y el sentido figurado "tomar mucha persuasión".

Usamos la expresión "pellizcar (o tirar) de las orejas de alguien" en el sentido de "infligir un castigo". "Los pinnas tienen un efecto en la apariencia facial.

En las sociedades occidentales, las orejas prominentes (presentes en alrededor del 5% de los europeos étnicos) se han considerado poco atractivas, especialmente si son asimétricas.

La primera cirugía para reducir la proyección de orejas prominentes fue publicada en la literatura médica por Ernst Dieffenbach en 1845, y el primer reporte de caso en 1881.

Las orejas puntiagudas son una característica de algunas criaturas del folclore, como la croquemitaína francesa, la curupira brasileña o la araña de tierra japonesa.

Ha sido una característica de personajes del arte tan antiguos como el de la antigua Grecia y la Europa medieval.

Las orejas puntiagudas son una característica común de muchas criaturas del género fantástico, incluidos elfos, hadas, duendes, hobbits u orcos.

Son una característica de las criaturas del género de terror, como los vampiros.

Las orejas puntiagudas también se encuentran en el género de ciencia ficción; por ejemplo entre las razas Vulcan y Romulan del universo Star Trek y el personaje Nightcrawler del universo X-Men.

Georg von Békésy fue un biofísico húngaro nacido en Budapest, Hungría.

En 1961, recibió el Premio Nobel de Fisiología o Medicina por su investigación sobre la función de la cóclea en el órgano auditivo de los mamíferos. El ratón Vacanti era un ratón de laboratorio que tenía lo que parecía una oreja humana crecida en su espalda.

La "oreja" era en realidad una estructura de cartílago en forma de oreja cultivada al sembrar células de cartílago de vaca en un molde biodegradable en forma de oreja y luego implantado debajo de la piel del ratón; entonces el cartílago creció naturalmente por sí mismo.

Fue desarrollado como una alternativa a los procedimientos de injerto o reparación de orejas y los resultados generaron mucha publicidad y controversia en 1997.


== Otros animales ==


El pabellón auricular ayuda a dirigir el sonido a través del canal auditivo hasta el tímpano.

La compleja geometría de las crestas en la superficie interna de las orejas de algunos mamíferos ayuda a enfocar claramente los sonidos producidos por las presas, utilizando señales de ecolocalización.

Estas crestas se pueden considerar como el equivalente acústico de una lente de Fresnel y se pueden ver en una amplia gama de animales, incluidos el murciélago, el aye-aye, el galago menor, el zorro orejudo, el lémur ratón y otros.

Algunos primates grandes, como los gorilas y los orangutanes (y también los humanos), tienen músculos del oído sin desarrollar que son estructuras vestigiales no funcionales, pero aún son lo suficientemente grandes como para identificarlos fácilmente.

Un músculo de la oreja que no puede mover la oreja, por la razón que sea, ha perdido esa función biológica.

Esto sirve como evidencia de homología entre especies relacionadas.

En los seres humanos, existe una variabilidad en estos músculos, de modo que algunas personas pueden mover las orejas en varias direcciones, y se ha dicho que es posible que otras obtengan dicho movimiento mediante ensayos repetidos.

En tales primates, la incapacidad de mover la oreja se compensa principalmente con la capacidad de girar fácilmente la cabeza en un plano horizontal, una capacidad que no es común a la mayoría de los monos: una función que alguna vez proporcionó una estructura ahora es reemplazada por otra.

En algunos animales con pinnas móviles (como el caballo), cada pinna puede orientarse de forma independiente para recibir mejor el sonido.

Para estos animales, las pinnas ayudan a localizar la dirección de la fuente de sonido.

 
 
 

La oreja, con sus vasos sanguíneos cerca de la superficie, es un termorregulador esencial en algunos mamíferos terrestres, incluidos el elefante, el zorro y el conejo.

Hay cinco tipos de porte de orejas en conejos domésticos, algunos de los cuales han sido criados para orejas de longitud exagerada, un riesgo potencial para la salud que está controlado en algunos países.

Charles Darwin estudió las anomalías en el cráneo de un conejo medio cortado en 1868.

En los mamíferos marinos, las focas sin orejas son uno de los tres grupos de pinnípedos.


=== Invertebrados ===

Solo los animales vertebrados tienen oídos, aunque muchos invertebrados detectan el sonido usando otros tipos de órganos sensoriales.

En los insectos, los órganos del tímpano se utilizan para escuchar sonidos distantes.

Están ubicados en la cabeza o en otro lugar, según la familia de insectos.

Los órganos del tímpano de algunos insectos son extremadamente sensibles y ofrecen una audición aguda superior a la de la mayoría de los otros animales.

La mosca grillo hembra Ormia ochracea tiene órganos timpánicos a cada lado de su abdomen.

Están conectados por un delgado puente de exoesqueleto y funcionan como un pequeño par de tímpanos, pero, debido a que están conectados, proporcionan información direccional precisa.

La mosca usa sus "oídos" para detectar la llamada de su anfitrión, un grillo macho.

Dependiendo de dónde provenga el canto del grillo, los órganos auditivos de la mosca reverberarán a frecuencias ligeramente diferentes.

Esta diferencia puede ser tan pequeña como 50 milmillonésimas de segundo, pero es suficiente para permitir que la mosca se acerque directamente a un grillo macho que canta y lo parasite.

Las estructuras más simples permiten que otros artrópodos detecten sonidos de campo cercano.

Las arañas y las cucarachas, por ejemplo, tienen pelos en las patas que se utilizan para detectar el sonido.

Las orugas también pueden tener pelos en el cuerpo que perciben vibraciones y les permiten responder al sonido.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ear

;;;PT;;;



ORELHA


O ouvido é o órgão que possibilita a audição e, nos mamíferos, o equilíbrio.

Nos mamíferos, o ouvido é geralmente descrito como tendo três partes – o ouvido externo, o ouvido médio e o ouvido interno.

O ouvido externo consiste no pavilhão auricular e no canal auditivo.

Como a orelha externa é a única parte visível da orelha na maioria dos animais, a palavra "orelha" geralmente se refere apenas à parte externa.

A orelha média inclui a cavidade timpânica e os três ossículos.

O ouvido interno fica no labirinto ósseo e contém estruturas que são fundamentais para vários sentidos: os canais semicirculares, que permitem o equilíbrio e o rastreamento ocular ao se movimentar; o utrículo e o sáculo, que possibilitam o equilíbrio quando parados; e a cóclea, que possibilita a audição.

As orelhas dos vertebrados são colocadas um tanto simetricamente em ambos os lados da cabeça, um arranjo que ajuda na localização do som.

A orelha se desenvolve a partir da primeira bolsa faríngea e seis pequenos inchaços que se desenvolvem no embrião inicial chamados placódios óticos, que são derivados do ectoderma.

O ouvido pode ser afetado por doenças, incluindo infecção e danos traumáticos.

Doenças do ouvido podem levar à perda auditiva, zumbido e distúrbios do equilíbrio, como vertigem, embora muitas dessas condições também possam ser afetadas por danos ao cérebro ou às vias neurais que saem do ouvido.

A orelha foi adornada por brincos e outras joias em inúmeras culturas por milhares de anos e foi submetida a alterações cirúrgicas e cosméticas.


== Estrutura ==

O ouvido humano consiste em três partes: o ouvido externo, o ouvido médio e o ouvido interno.

O canal auditivo do ouvido externo é separado da cavidade timpânica cheia de ar do ouvido médio pelo tímpano.

O ouvido médio contém os três pequenos ossos - os ossículos - envolvidos na transmissão do som e está conectado à garganta na nasofaringe, através da abertura faríngea da trompa de Eustáquio.

A orelha interna contém os órgãos otólitos - o utrículo e o sáculo - e os canais semicirculares pertencentes ao sistema vestibular, bem como a cóclea do sistema auditivo.


=== Ouvido externo ===


O ouvido externo é a porção externa do ouvido e inclui o pavilhão visível carnudo (também chamado de aurícula), o canal auditivo e a camada externa do tímpano (também chamada de membrana timpânica).

O pavilhão auricular consiste na borda externa curva chamada hélice, a borda curva interna chamada anti-hélice e se abre no canal auditivo.

O tragus se projeta e obscurece parcialmente o canal auditivo, assim como o antitragus voltado.

A região oca na frente do canal auditivo é chamada de concha.

O canal auditivo se estende por cerca de 2,5 cm.

A primeira parte do canal é cercada por cartilagem, enquanto a segunda parte perto do tímpano é cercada por osso.

Essa parte óssea é conhecida como bula auditiva e é formada pela parte timpânica do osso temporal.

A pele ao redor do canal auditivo contém glândulas ceruminosas e sebáceas que produzem cera protetora do ouvido.

O canal auditivo termina na superfície externa do tímpano. Dois conjuntos de músculos estão associados ao ouvido externo: os músculos intrínsecos e extrínsecos.

Em alguns mamíferos, esses músculos podem ajustar a direção do pavilhão.

Em humanos, esses músculos têm pouco ou nenhum efeito.

Os músculos da orelha são supridos pelo nervo facial, que também fornece sensação à pele da própria orelha, bem como à cavidade externa da orelha.

O grande nervo auricular, o nervo auricular, o nervo auriculotemporal e os nervos occipitais menor e maior do plexo cervical fornecem sensação a partes do ouvido externo e à pele circundante.

O pavilhão auricular consiste em uma única peça de cartilagem elástica com um relevo complicado em sua superfície interna e uma configuração bastante lisa em sua superfície posterior.

Um tubérculo, conhecido como tubérculo de Darwin, às vezes está presente, situado na parte descendente da hélice e correspondendo à ponta da orelha dos mamíferos.

O lóbulo da orelha consiste em aréola e tecido adiposo.

A disposição simétrica das duas orelhas permite a localização do som.

O cérebro faz isso comparando os tempos de chegada e as intensidades de cada orelha, em circuitos localizados no complexo olivar superior e nos corpos trapezoidais que estão conectados por caminhos a ambas as orelhas.


=== Ouvido médio ===


O ouvido médio fica entre o ouvido externo e o ouvido interno.

Consiste em uma cavidade cheia de ar chamada cavidade timpânica e inclui os três ossículos e seus ligamentos de fixação; a tuba auditiva; e as janelas redondas e ovais.

Os ossículos são três pequenos ossos que funcionam juntos para receber, amplificar e transmitir o som do tímpano para o ouvido interno.

Os ossículos são o martelo (martelo), bigorna (bigorna) e o estribo (estribo).

O estribo é o menor osso nomeado no corpo.

O ouvido médio também se conecta à garganta superior na nasofaringe através da abertura faríngea da trompa de Eustáquio.

Os três ossículos transmitem o som do ouvido externo para o ouvido interno.

O martelo recebe vibrações da pressão sonora no tímpano, onde está conectado em sua parte mais longa (o manúbrio ou alça) por um ligamento.

Ele transmite vibrações para a bigorna, que por sua vez transmite as vibrações para o pequeno estribo.

A ampla base do estribo repousa sobre a janela oval.

À medida que o estribo vibra, as vibrações são transmitidas através da janela oval, causando movimento de fluido dentro da cóclea.

A janela redonda permite que o fluido dentro do ouvido interno se mova.

À medida que o estribo empurra a membrana timpânica secundária, o fluido no ouvido interno se move e empurra a membrana da janela redonda para fora em uma quantidade correspondente no ouvido médio.

Os ossículos ajudam a amplificar as ondas sonoras em cerca de 15 a 20 vezes.


=== Ouvido interno ===


O ouvido interno fica dentro do osso temporal em uma cavidade complexa chamada labirinto ósseo.

Uma área central conhecida como vestíbulo contém dois pequenos recessos cheios de líquido, o utrículo e o sáculo.

Estes se conectam aos canais semicirculares e à cóclea.

Existem três canais semicirculares em ângulo reto entre si que são responsáveis ​​pelo equilíbrio dinâmico.

A cóclea é um órgão em forma de concha espiral responsável pelo sentido da audição.

Essas estruturas juntas criam o labirinto membranoso.

O labirinto ósseo refere-se ao compartimento ósseo que contém o labirinto membranoso, contido no osso temporal.

A orelha interna começa estruturalmente na janela oval, que recebe vibrações da bigorna da orelha média.

As vibrações são transmitidas para o ouvido interno em um fluido chamado endolinfa, que preenche o labirinto membranoso.

A endolinfa está situada em dois vestíbulos, o utrículo e o sáculo, e eventualmente transmite para a cóclea, uma estrutura em forma de espiral.

A cóclea consiste em três espaços cheios de líquido: o ducto vestibular, o ducto coclear e o ducto timpânico.

Células ciliadas responsáveis ​​pela transdução – transformando mudanças mecânicas em estímulos elétricos estão presentes no órgão de Corti na cóclea.


=== Suprimento sanguíneo ===

O suprimento sanguíneo da orelha difere de acordo com cada parte da orelha.
A orelha externa é suprida por várias artérias.

A artéria auricular posterior fornece a maior parte do suprimento sanguíneo.

As artérias auriculares anteriores fornecem algum suprimento para a borda externa da orelha e couro cabeludo atrás dela.

A artéria auricular posterior é um ramo direto da artéria carótida externa e as artérias auriculares anteriores são ramos da artéria temporal superficial.

A artéria occipital também desempenha um papel.

A orelha média é suprida pelo ramo mastóide das artérias occipital ou auricular posterior e pela artéria auricular profunda, um ramo da artéria maxilar.

Outras artérias que estão presentes, mas desempenham um papel menor, incluem ramos da artéria meníngea média, artéria faríngea ascendente, artéria carótida interna e artéria do canal pterigóide.

A orelha interna é suprida pelo ramo timpânico anterior da artéria maxilar; o ramo estilomastóideo da artéria auricular posterior; o ramo petroso da artéria meníngea média; e a artéria labiríntica, originando-se da artéria cerebelar ântero-inferior ou da artéria basilar.


== Função ==

=== Ouvindo ===

As ondas sonoras viajam através do ouvido externo, são moduladas pelo ouvido médio e são transmitidas ao nervo vestibulococlear no ouvido interno.

Esse nervo transmite informações para o lobo temporal do cérebro, onde são registradas como som.

O som que viaja através do ouvido externo impacta no tímpano e faz com que ele vibre.

Os três ossos ossiculares transmitem esse som para uma segunda janela (a janela oval) que protege o ouvido interno cheio de líquido.

Em detalhe, o pavilhão auricular do ouvido externo ajuda a focalizar um som, que impacta no tímpano.

O martelo repousa sobre a membrana e recebe a vibração.

Essa vibração é transmitida ao longo da bigorna e do estribo até a janela oval.

Dois pequenos músculos, o tensor do tímpano e o estapédio, também ajudam a modular o ruído.

Os dois músculos se contraem reflexivamente para amortecer as vibrações excessivas.

A vibração da janela oval causa vibração da endolinfa dentro do vestíbulo e da cóclea.

O ouvido interno abriga o aparelho necessário para transformar as vibrações transmitidas do mundo exterior através do ouvido médio em sinais transmitidos ao longo do nervo vestibulococlear para o cérebro.

Os canais ocos do ouvido interno são preenchidos com líquido e contêm um epitélio sensorial cravejado de células ciliadas.

Os "cabelos" microscópicos dessas células são filamentos de proteínas estruturais que se projetam no fluido.

As células ciliadas são mecanorreceptores que liberam um neurotransmissor químico quando estimulados.

As ondas sonoras que se movem através do fluido fluem contra as células receptoras do órgão de Corti.

O fluido empurra os filamentos de células individuais; O movimento dos filamentos faz com que as células receptoras se abram para receber a endolinfa rica em potássio.

Isso faz com que a célula se despolarize e crie um potencial de ação que é transmitido ao longo do gânglio espiral, que envia informações através da porção auditiva do nervo vestibulococlear para o lobo temporal do cérebro.

O ouvido humano geralmente pode ouvir sons com frequências entre 20 Hz e 20 kHz (a faixa de áudio).

Sons fora desta faixa são considerados infra-sons (abaixo de 20 Hz) ou ultra-som (acima de 20 kHz).

Embora a audição exija uma porção auditiva intacta e funcional do sistema nervoso central, bem como um ouvido funcional, a surdez humana (extrema insensibilidade ao som) ocorre mais comumente devido a anormalidades do ouvido interno, e não nos nervos ou tratos do ouvido central. sistema auditivo.


=== Equilíbrio ===


Proporcionar equilíbrio, quando em movimento ou estacionário, também é uma função central do ouvido.

O ouvido facilita dois tipos de equilíbrio: equilíbrio estático, que permite que uma pessoa sinta os efeitos da gravidade, e equilíbrio dinâmico, que permite que uma pessoa sinta a aceleração.

O equilíbrio estático é fornecido por dois ventrículos, o utrículo e o sáculo.

As células que revestem as paredes desses ventrículos contêm filamentos finos e as células são cobertas por uma fina camada gelatinosa.

Cada célula tem 50-70 filamentos pequenos e um filamento grande, o cinocílio.

Dentro da camada gelatinosa estão os otólitos, pequenas formações de carbonato de cálcio.

Quando uma pessoa se move, esses otólitos mudam de posição.

Essa mudança altera as posições dos filamentos, que abrem canais iônicos dentro das membranas celulares, criando despolarização e um potencial de ação que é transmitido ao cérebro ao longo do nervo vestibulococlear.

O equilíbrio dinâmico é fornecido através dos três canais semicirculares.

Esses três canais são ortogonais (em ângulos retos) entre si.

No final de cada canal há um pequeno alargamento, conhecido como ampola, que contém numerosas células com filamentos em uma área central chamada cúpula.

O fluido nesses canais gira de acordo com o momento da cabeça.

Quando uma pessoa muda de aceleração, a inércia do fluido muda.

Isso afeta a pressão na cúpula e resulta na abertura de canais iônicos.

Isso causa a despolarização, que é passada como um sinal para o cérebro ao longo do nervo vestibulococlear.

O equilíbrio dinâmico também ajuda a manter o rastreamento ocular ao se mover, por meio do reflexo vestíbulo-ocular.


== Desenvolvimento ==

Durante a embriogênese, a orelha se desenvolve em três estruturas distintas: a orelha interna, a orelha média e a orelha externa.

Cada estrutura se origina de uma camada germinativa diferente: o ectoderma, o endoderma e o mesênquima.


=== Ouvido interno ===


Após a implantação, por volta da segunda a terceira semana, o embrião em desenvolvimento consiste em três camadas: endoderma, mesoderme e ectoderme.

A primeira parte do ouvido a se desenvolver é o ouvido interno, que começa a se formar a partir do ectoderma por volta do 22º dia de desenvolvimento do embrião.

Especificamente, o ouvido interno deriva de dois espessamentos chamados placódios óticos em ambos os lados da cabeça.

Cada placódio ótico recua abaixo do ectoderma, forma um poço ótico e depois uma vesícula ótica.

Toda essa massa acabará sendo cercada por mesênquima para formar o labirinto ósseo.

Por volta do 33º dia de desenvolvimento, as vesículas começam a se diferenciar.

Mais perto da parte de trás do embrião, eles formam o que se tornará o utrículo e os canais semicirculares.

Mais perto da frente do embrião, as vesículas se diferenciam em um sáculo rudimentar, que eventualmente se tornará o sáculo e a cóclea.

Parte do sáculo eventualmente dará origem e se conectará ao ducto coclear.

Este ducto aparece aproximadamente durante a sexta semana e se conecta ao sáculo através do ductus reuniens. À medida que o mesênquima do ducto coclear começa a se diferenciar, três cavidades são formadas: a rampa vestibular, a rampa timpânica e a rampa média.

Tanto a rampa vestibular quanto a rampa timpânica contêm um fluido extracelular chamado perilinfa.

A escala média contém endolinfa.

Um conjunto de membranas chamadas membrana vestibular e membrana basilar se desenvolvem para separar o ducto coclear do ducto vestibular e do ducto timpânico, respectivamente.

Partes da vesícula ótica, por sua vez, formam o nervo vestibulococlear.

Estes formam neurônios bipolares que fornecem sensação para partes do ouvido interno (ou seja, as partes sensoriais dos canais semicirculares, macular do utrículo e sáculo e órgão de Corti).

O nervo começa a se formar por volta do 28º dia.

Regulação molecularA maioria dos genes responsáveis ​​pela regulação da formação da orelha interna e sua morfogênese são membros da família de genes homeobox, como os genes homeobox Pax, Msx e Otx.

O desenvolvimento das estruturas da orelha interna, como a cóclea, é regulado por Dlx5/Dlx6, Otx1/Otx2 e Pax2, que por sua vez são controlados pelo gene mestre Shh.

Shh é secretado pela notocorda.


=== Ouvido médio ===

A orelha média e seus componentes se desenvolvem a partir do primeiro e segundo arcos faríngeos.

A cavidade timpânica e a tuba auditiva se desenvolvem a partir da primeira parte da bolsa faríngea entre os dois primeiros arcos em uma área que também irá desenvolver a faringe.

Isso se desenvolve como uma estrutura chamada recesso tubotimpânico.

Os ossículos (martelo, bigorna e estribo) normalmente aparecem durante a primeira metade do desenvolvimento fetal.

Os dois primeiros (martelo e bigorna) derivam do primeiro arco faríngeo e o estribo, do segundo.

Todos os três ossículos se desenvolvem a partir da crista neural.

Eventualmente, as células do tecido ao redor dos ossículos sofrerão apoptose e uma nova camada de epitélio endodérmico constituirá a formação da parede da cavidade timpânica.


=== Ouvido externo ===


Ao contrário das estruturas da orelha interna e média, que se desenvolvem a partir das bolsas faríngeas, o canal auditivo se origina da porção dorsal da primeira fenda faríngea.

Está totalmente expandido até o final da 18ª semana de desenvolvimento.

O tímpano é constituído por três camadas (ectoderma, endoderme e tecido conjuntivo).

A pina se origina como uma fusão de seis montículos.

Os três primeiros outeirinhos são derivados da parte inferior do primeiro arco faríngeo e formam o tragus, crus da hélice e hélice, respectivamente.

Os três outeirinhos finais são derivados da parte superior do segundo arco faríngeo e formam a anti-hélice, o antitragus e o lóbulo da orelha.

As orelhas externas se desenvolvem na parte inferior do pescoço.

À medida que a mandíbula se forma, eles se movem em direção à sua posição final no nível dos olhos.


== Significado clínico ==



=== Perda auditiva ===


A perda auditiva pode ser parcial ou total.

Isso pode ser resultado de lesão ou dano, doença congênita ou causas fisiológicas.

Quando a perda auditiva é resultado de lesão ou dano ao ouvido externo ou ao ouvido médio, é conhecida como perda auditiva condutiva.

Quando a surdez é resultado de lesão ou dano ao ouvido interno, nervo vestibulococlear ou cérebro, é conhecida como perda auditiva neurossensorial.

As causas da perda auditiva condutiva incluem um canal auditivo bloqueado por cera de ouvido, ossículos que são fixados juntos ou ausentes ou orifícios no tímpano.

A perda auditiva condutiva também pode resultar de inflamação do ouvido médio, causando acúmulo de líquido no espaço normalmente cheio de ar, como por otite média.

Timpanoplastia é o nome geral da operação para reparar o tímpano e os ossículos da orelha média.

Enxertos de fáscia muscular são comumente usados ​​para reconstruir um tímpano intacto.

Às vezes, os ossos artificiais do ouvido são colocados para substituir os danificados, ou uma cadeia ossicular rompida é reconstruída para conduzir o som de maneira eficaz.

Aparelhos auditivos ou implantes cocleares podem ser usados ​​se a perda auditiva for grave ou prolongada.

Os aparelhos auditivos funcionam amplificando o som do ambiente local e são mais adequados para a perda auditiva condutiva.

Os implantes cocleares transmitem o som que é ouvido como se fosse um sinal nervoso, contornando a cóclea.

Os implantes ativos do ouvido médio enviam vibrações sonoras para os ossículos do ouvido médio, ignorando quaisquer partes que não funcionem do ouvido externo e médio.


=== Anormalidades congênitas ===

Anomalias e malformações do pavilhão auricular são comuns.

Essas anomalias incluem síndromes cromossômicas como o anel 18.

As crianças também podem apresentar casos de canais auditivos anormais e implantação baixa da orelha.

Em casos raros, nenhum pavilhão é formado (atresia) ou é extremamente pequeno (microtia).

Pequenas orelhas podem se desenvolver quando as colinas auriculares não se desenvolvem adequadamente.

O canal auditivo pode não se desenvolver se não canalizar adequadamente ou se houver uma obstrução.

A cirurgia reconstrutiva para tratar a perda auditiva é considerada uma opção para crianças com mais de cinco anos, com um procedimento cirúrgico cosmético para reduzir o tamanho ou alterar o formato da orelha é chamado de otoplastia.

A intervenção médica inicial visa avaliar a audição do bebê e a condição do canal auditivo, bem como do ouvido médio e interno.

Dependendo dos resultados dos exames, a reconstrução da orelha externa é feita em etapas, com planejamento para eventuais reparos do restante da orelha.

Aproximadamente uma em cada mil crianças sofre algum tipo de surdez congênita relacionada ao desenvolvimento do ouvido interno.

As anomalias congênitas da orelha interna estão relacionadas à perda auditiva neurossensorial e geralmente são diagnosticadas com uma tomografia computadorizada (TC) ou uma ressonância magnética (RM).

Os problemas de perda auditiva também derivam de anomalias da orelha interna porque seu desenvolvimento é separado da orelha média e externa.

Anomalias da orelha média podem ocorrer devido a erros durante o desenvolvimento da cabeça e pescoço.

A primeira síndrome da bolsa faríngea associa anomalias da orelha média às estruturas do martelo e da bigorna, bem como à não diferenciação do ligamento anular do estapediano.

As anomalias do osso temporal e do canal auditivo também estão relacionadas a essa estrutura da orelha e são conhecidas por estarem associadas à perda auditiva neurossensorial e à perda auditiva condutiva.


=== Vertigem ===

A vertigem refere-se à percepção inadequada do movimento.

Isto é devido à disfunção do sistema vestibular.

Um tipo comum de vertigem é a vertigem posicional paroxística benigna, quando um otólito é deslocado dos ventrículos para o canal semicircular.

O otólito deslocado repousa sobre a cúpula, causando uma sensação de movimento quando não há nenhum.

Doença de Ménière, labirintite, acidente vascular cerebral e outras doenças infecciosas e congênitas também podem resultar na percepção de vertigem.


=== Lesão ===

Ouvido externo Lesões no ouvido externo ocorrem com bastante frequência e podem deixar deformidades menores a maiores.

As lesões incluem: laceração, lesões por avulsão, queimaduras e torções repetidas ou puxões de uma orelha, para disciplina ou tortura.

Danos crônicos às orelhas podem causar orelha de couve-flor, uma condição comum em boxeadores e lutadores em que a cartilagem ao redor das orelhas se torna irregular e distorcida devido à persistência de um hematoma ao redor do pericôndrio, que pode prejudicar o suprimento sanguíneo e a cicatrização.

Devido à sua posição exposta, o ouvido externo é suscetível a queimaduras de frio, bem como câncer de pele, incluindo carcinoma de células escamosas e carcinomas basocelulares.

Ouvido médio

O tímpano pode ser perfurado no caso de um grande som ou explosão, ao mergulhar ou voar (chamado barotrauma), ou por objetos inseridos no ouvido.

Outra causa comum de lesão é devido a uma infecção, como a otite média.

Estes podem causar uma descarga do ouvido chamada otorréia, e muitas vezes são investigados por otoscopia e audiometria.

O tratamento pode incluir espera vigilante, antibióticos e possivelmente cirurgia, se a lesão for prolongada ou a posição dos ossículos for afetada.

As fraturas do crânio que atravessam a parte do crânio que contém as estruturas do ouvido (o osso temporal) também podem causar danos ao ouvido médio.

Um colesteatoma é um cisto de células escamosas da pele que pode se desenvolver desde o nascimento ou secundário a outras causas, como infecções crônicas do ouvido.

Pode prejudicar a audição ou causar tontura ou vertigem, e geralmente é investigado por otoscopia e pode exigir uma tomografia computadorizada.

O tratamento do colesteatoma é cirúrgico.
Ouvido interno Existem dois mecanismos principais de dano ao ouvido interno na sociedade industrializada, e ambos lesam as células ciliadas.

A primeira é a exposição a níveis sonoros elevados (trauma sonoro), e a segunda é a exposição a drogas e outras substâncias (ototoxicidade).

Um grande número de pessoas é exposto diariamente a níveis sonoros que podem levar a uma perda auditiva significativa.

O Instituto Nacional de Segurança e Saúde Ocupacional publicou recentemente uma pesquisa sobre o número estimado de pessoas com dificuldade auditiva (11%) e a porcentagem daqueles que podem ser atribuídos à exposição ocupacional ao ruído (24%).

Além disso, de acordo com o National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES), aproximadamente vinte e dois milhões (17%) de trabalhadores norte-americanos relataram exposição a ruídos perigosos no local de trabalho.

Trabalhadores expostos a ruídos perigosos exacerbam ainda mais o potencial de desenvolver perda auditiva induzida por ruído quando não usam proteção auditiva.


=== Zumbido ===

Zumbido é a audição do som quando nenhum som externo está presente.

Embora muitas vezes descrito como um toque, também pode soar como um clique, assobio ou rugido.

Raramente, vozes ou música pouco claras são ouvidas.

O som pode ser suave ou alto, grave ou agudo e parece vir de um ouvido ou de ambos.

Na maioria das vezes, ele vem gradualmente.

Em algumas pessoas, o som causa depressão, ansiedade ou dificuldades de concentração.

O zumbido não é uma doença, mas um sintoma que pode resultar de várias causas subjacentes.

Uma das causas mais comuns é a perda auditiva induzida por ruído.

Outras causas incluem: infecções de ouvido, doenças do coração ou vasos sanguíneos, doença de Ménière, tumores cerebrais, estresse emocional, exposição a certos medicamentos, traumatismo craniano anterior e cera de ouvido.

É mais comum em pessoas com depressão e ansiedade.


== Sociedade e cultura ==


As orelhas são ornamentadas com joias há milhares de anos, tradicionalmente por piercing no lóbulo da orelha.

Nas culturas antigas e modernas, ornamentos foram colocados para esticar e ampliar os lóbulos das orelhas, permitindo que tampões maiores fossem deslizados em uma grande lacuna carnuda no lóbulo.

Rasgar o lóbulo da orelha pelo peso de brincos pesados ​​ou por puxão traumático de um brinco (por exemplo, ao prender um suéter) é bastante comum.

A lesão nos ouvidos está presente desde os tempos romanos como método de repreensão ou punição – “Na época romana, quando surgia uma disputa que não podia ser resolvida amigavelmente, o lesado citava o nome da pessoa considerada responsável perante o pretor ; se o delinquente não comparecesse no prazo fixado, o queixoso convocava testemunhas para prestarem declarações.

Se eles se recusassem, como muitas vezes acontecia, a parte ofendida podia arrastá-los pela orelha e beliscá-los com força se resistissem.

Daí a expressão francesa "se faire tirer l'oreille", cujo sentido literal é "ter a orelha puxada" e o sentido figurado "tomar muita persuasão".

Usamos a expressão "apertar (ou puxar) as orelhas de alguém" para significar "infligir uma punição".

Nas sociedades ocidentais, orelhas salientes (presentes em cerca de 5% dos europeus étnicos) têm sido consideradas pouco atraentes, principalmente se assimétricas.

A primeira cirurgia para reduzir a projeção de orelhas proeminentes foi publicada na literatura médica por Ernst Dieffenbach em 1845, e o primeiro relato de caso em 1881.

As orelhas pontudas são uma característica de algumas criaturas do folclore como o croquemitaine francês, o curupira brasileiro ou a aranha-da-terra japonesa.

Tem sido uma característica de personagens da arte tão antiga quanto a da Grécia Antiga e da Europa medieval.

Orelhas pontudas são uma característica comum de muitas criaturas do gênero de fantasia, incluindo elfos, fadas, duendes, hobbits ou orcs.

Eles são uma característica de criaturas do gênero terror, como vampiros.

Orelhas pontudas também são encontradas no gênero de ficção científica; por exemplo, entre as raças Vulcana e Romulana do universo Star Trek e o personagem Noturno do universo X-Men.

Georg von Békésy foi um biofísico húngaro nascido em Budapeste, Hungria.

Em 1961, ele recebeu o Prêmio Nobel de Fisiologia ou Medicina por sua pesquisa sobre a função da cóclea no órgão auditivo dos mamíferos. O camundongo Vacanti era um camundongo de laboratório que tinha o que parecia ser uma orelha humana crescida em suas costas.

A "orelha" era na verdade uma estrutura de cartilagem em forma de orelha cultivada pela semeadura de células de cartilagem de vaca em um molde biodegradável em forma de orelha e depois implantado sob a pele do camundongo; então a cartilagem cresceu naturalmente por si mesma.

Foi desenvolvido como uma alternativa ao reparo da orelha ou procedimentos de enxerto e os resultados encontraram muita publicidade e controvérsia em 1997.


== Outros animais ==


O pavilhão auricular ajuda a direcionar o som através do canal auditivo até o tímpano.

A geometria complexa das cristas na superfície interna de algumas orelhas de mamíferos ajuda a focar nitidamente os sons produzidos pelas presas, usando sinais de ecolocalização.

Essas cristas podem ser consideradas o equivalente acústico de uma lente de fresnel e podem ser vistas em uma ampla variedade de animais, incluindo o morcego, sim-sim, galago menor, raposa com orelhas de morcego, lêmure-rato e outros.

Alguns grandes primatas, como gorilas e orangotangos (e também humanos) têm músculos auriculares não desenvolvidos que são estruturas vestigiais não funcionais, mas ainda são grandes o suficiente para serem facilmente identificados.

Um músculo da orelha que não pode mover a orelha, por qualquer motivo, perdeu essa função biológica.

Isso serve como evidência de homologia entre espécies relacionadas.

Em humanos, há variabilidade nesses músculos, de modo que algumas pessoas são capazes de mover suas orelhas em várias direções, e foi dito que pode ser possível que outras pessoas ganhem esse movimento por tentativas repetidas.

Nesses primatas, a incapacidade de mover a orelha é compensada principalmente pela capacidade de girar facilmente a cabeça em um plano horizontal, uma habilidade que não é comum à maioria dos macacos – uma função que antes era fornecida por uma estrutura agora é substituída por outra.

Em alguns animais com pinas móveis (como o cavalo), cada pina pode ser direcionada de forma independente para melhor receber o som.

Para esses animais, as pinas ajudam a localizar a direção da fonte sonora.

 
 
 

A orelha, com seus vasos sanguíneos próximos à superfície, é um termorregulador essencial em alguns mamíferos terrestres, incluindo o elefante, a raposa e o coelho.

Existem cinco tipos de transporte de orelha em coelhos domésticos, alguns dos quais foram criados para comprimento exagerado da orelha – um risco potencial à saúde que é controlado em alguns países.

Anormalidades no crânio de um coelho half-lop foram estudadas por Charles Darwin em 1868.

Nos mamíferos marinhos, as focas sem orelha são um dos três grupos de Pinnipedia.


=== Invertebrados ===

Apenas os animais vertebrados têm ouvidos, embora muitos invertebrados detectem o som usando outros tipos de órgãos dos sentidos.

Nos insetos, os órgãos timpânicos são usados ​​para ouvir sons distantes.

Eles estão localizados na cabeça ou em outro lugar, dependendo da família dos insetos.

Os órgãos timpânicos de alguns insetos são extremamente sensíveis, oferecendo uma audição aguçada além da maioria dos outros animais.

A fêmea da mosca de grilo Ormia ochracea tem órgãos timpânicos em cada lado do abdômen.

Eles são conectados por uma ponte fina de exoesqueleto e funcionam como um pequeno par de tímpanos, mas, por estarem ligados, fornecem informações direcionais agudas.

A mosca usa seus "ouvidos" para detectar o chamado de seu hospedeiro, um grilo macho.

Dependendo de onde vem o canto do grilo, os órgãos auditivos da mosca irão reverberar em frequências ligeiramente diferentes.

Essa diferença pode ser tão pequena quanto 50 bilionésimos de segundo, mas é suficiente para permitir que a mosca se aproxime diretamente de um grilo macho cantando e o parasita.

Estruturas mais simples permitem que outros artrópodes detectem sons de campo próximo.

Aranhas e baratas, por exemplo, têm pêlos nas pernas que são usados ​​para detectar sons.

As lagartas também podem ter pêlos em seu corpo que percebem vibrações e permitem que respondam ao som.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ear

;;;FR;;;



OREILLE


L'oreille est l'organe qui permet l'ouïe et, chez les mammifères, l'équilibre.

Chez les mammifères, l'oreille est généralement décrite comme ayant trois parties : l'oreille externe, l'oreille moyenne et l'oreille interne.

L'oreille externe est constituée du pavillon et du conduit auditif.

Étant donné que l'oreille externe est la seule partie visible de l'oreille chez la plupart des animaux, le mot «oreille» fait souvent référence à la seule partie externe.

L'oreille moyenne comprend la cavité tympanique et les trois osselets.

L'oreille interne se trouve dans le labyrinthe osseux et contient des structures qui sont essentielles à plusieurs sens : les canaux semi-circulaires, qui permettent l'équilibre et le suivi des yeux lors des mouvements ; l'utricule et le saccule, qui permettent l'équilibre à l'arrêt ; et la cochlée, qui permet d'entendre.

Les oreilles des vertébrés sont placées quelque peu symétriquement de chaque côté de la tête, une disposition qui facilite la localisation du son.

L'oreille se développe à partir de la première poche pharyngienne et de six petits gonflements qui se développent dans l'embryon précoce appelés placodes otiques, dérivés de l'ectoderme.

L'oreille peut être affectée par la maladie, y compris l'infection et les dommages traumatiques.

Les maladies de l'oreille peuvent entraîner une perte auditive, des acouphènes et des troubles de l'équilibre tels que les vertiges, bien que bon nombre de ces affections puissent également être affectées par des dommages au cerveau ou aux voies neuronales partant de l'oreille.

L'oreille a été ornée de boucles d'oreilles et d'autres bijoux dans de nombreuses cultures pendant des milliers d'années et a été soumise à des modifications chirurgicales et cosmétiques.


== Structure ==

L'oreille humaine se compose de trois parties : l'oreille externe, l'oreille moyenne et l'oreille interne.

Le conduit auditif de l'oreille externe est séparé de la cavité tympanique remplie d'air de l'oreille moyenne par le tympan.

L'oreille moyenne contient les trois petits os - les osselets - impliqués dans la transmission du son et est reliée à la gorge au niveau du nasopharynx, via l'ouverture pharyngée de la trompe d'Eustache.

L'oreille interne contient les organes de l'otolithe - l'utricule et le saccule - et les canaux semi-circulaires appartenant au système vestibulaire, ainsi que la cochlée du système auditif.


=== Oreille externe ===


L'oreille externe est la partie externe de l'oreille et comprend le pavillon charnu visible (également appelé oreillette), le conduit auditif et la couche externe du tympan (également appelée membrane tympanique).

Le pavillon se compose du bord extérieur incurvé appelé hélice, du bord intérieur incurvé appelé antihélice et s'ouvre dans le conduit auditif.

Le tragus fait saillie et obscurcit partiellement le conduit auditif, tout comme l'antitragus qui lui fait face.

La région creuse devant le conduit auditif s'appelle la conque.

Le conduit auditif s'étend sur environ 1 pouce (2,5 cm).

La première partie du canal est entourée de cartilage, tandis que la seconde partie près du tympan est entourée d'os.

Cette partie osseuse est connue sous le nom de bulle auditive et est formée par la partie tympanique de l'os temporal.

La peau entourant le conduit auditif contient des glandes cérumineuses et sébacées qui produisent du cérumen protecteur.

Le conduit auditif se termine à la surface externe du tympan. Deux ensembles de muscles sont associés à l'oreille externe : les muscles intrinsèques et extrinsèques.

Chez certains mammifères, ces muscles peuvent ajuster la direction du pavillon.

Chez l'homme, ces muscles ont peu ou pas d'effet.

Les muscles de l'oreille sont alimentés par le nerf facial, qui fournit également des sensations à la peau de l'oreille elle-même, ainsi qu'à la cavité de l'oreille externe.

Le grand nerf auriculaire, le nerf auriculaire, le nerf auriculotemporal et les nerfs petits et grands occipitaux du plexus cervical fournissent tous des sensations à des parties de l'oreille externe et de la peau environnante.

Le pavillon est constitué d'un seul morceau de cartilage élastique avec un relief compliqué sur sa face interne et une configuration assez lisse sur sa face postérieure.

Un tubercule, dit tubercule de Darwin, est parfois présent, situé dans la partie descendante de l'hélice et correspondant au dôme des mammifères.

Le lobe de l'oreille est constitué d'aréole et de tissu adipeux.

La disposition symétrique des deux oreilles permet la localisation du son.

Le cerveau accomplit cela en comparant les temps d'arrivée et les intensités de chaque oreille, dans des circuits situés dans le complexe olivaire supérieur et les corps trapézoïdaux qui sont reliés par des voies aux deux oreilles.


=== Oreille moyenne ===


L'oreille moyenne se situe entre l'oreille externe et l'oreille interne.

Il se compose d'une cavité remplie d'air appelée la cavité tympanique et comprend les trois osselets et leurs ligaments de fixation ; le tube auditif; et les fenêtres rondes et ovales.

Les osselets sont trois petits os qui fonctionnent ensemble pour recevoir, amplifier et transmettre le son du tympan à l'oreille interne.

Les osselets sont le marteau (marteau), l'enclume (enclume) et l'étrier (étrier).

L'étrier est le plus petit os nommé du corps.

L'oreille moyenne se connecte également à la partie supérieure de la gorge au niveau du nasopharynx via l'ouverture pharyngée de la trompe d'Eustache.

Les trois osselets transmettent le son de l'oreille externe à l'oreille interne.

Le marteau reçoit des vibrations de la pression acoustique sur le tympan, où il est relié à sa partie la plus longue (le manubrium ou poignée) par un ligament.

Il transmet les vibrations à l'incus, qui à son tour transmet les vibrations au petit os de l'étrier.

La large base de l'étrier repose sur la fenêtre ovale.

Lorsque l'étrier vibre, les vibrations sont transmises à travers la fenêtre ovale, provoquant un mouvement de fluide dans la cochlée.

La fenêtre ronde permet au fluide dans l'oreille interne de se déplacer.

Lorsque l'étrier pousse la membrane tympanique secondaire, le liquide dans l'oreille interne se déplace et pousse la membrane de la fenêtre ronde d'une quantité correspondante dans l'oreille moyenne.

Les osselets aident à amplifier les ondes sonores de près de 15 à 20 fois.


=== Oreille interne ===


L'oreille interne se trouve dans l'os temporal dans une cavité complexe appelée labyrinthe osseux.

Une zone centrale connue sous le nom de vestibule contient deux petits évidements remplis de liquide, l'utricule et le saccule.

Ceux-ci se connectent aux canaux semi-circulaires et à la cochlée.

Il y a trois canaux semi-circulaires perpendiculaires les uns aux autres qui sont responsables de l'équilibre dynamique.

La cochlée est un organe en forme de coquille en spirale responsable du sens de l'ouïe.

Ces structures créent ensemble le labyrinthe membraneux.

Le labyrinthe osseux fait référence au compartiment osseux qui contient le labyrinthe membraneux, contenu dans l'os temporal.

L'oreille interne commence structurellement au niveau de la fenêtre ovale, qui reçoit les vibrations de l'enclume de l'oreille moyenne.

Les vibrations sont transmises dans l'oreille interne dans un fluide appelé endolymphe, qui remplit le labyrinthe membraneux.

L'endolymphe est située dans deux vestibules, l'utricule et le saccule, et finit par transmettre à la cochlée, une structure en forme de spirale.

La cochlée est constituée de trois espaces remplis de liquide : le canal vestibulaire, le canal cochléaire et le canal tympanique.

Cellules ciliées responsables de la transduction - la transformation des changements mécaniques en stimuli électriques est présente dans l'organe de Corti dans la cochlée.


=== Approvisionnement en sang ===

L'approvisionnement en sang de l'oreille diffère selon chaque partie de l'oreille.
L'oreille externe est alimentée par un certain nombre d'artères.

L'artère auriculaire postérieure fournit la majorité de l'apport sanguin.

Les artères auriculaires antérieures alimentent en partie le bord externe de l'oreille et le cuir chevelu derrière celui-ci.

L'artère auriculaire postérieure est une branche directe de l'artère carotide externe et les artères auriculaires antérieures sont des branches de l'artère temporale superficielle.

L'artère occipitale joue également un rôle.

L'oreille moyenne est alimentée par la branche mastoïdienne des artères auriculaires occipitales ou postérieures et l'artère auriculaire profonde, une branche de l'artère maxillaire.

D'autres artères présentes mais jouant un rôle moindre comprennent les branches de l'artère méningée moyenne, l'artère pharyngée ascendante, l'artère carotide interne et l'artère du canal ptérygoïdien.

L'oreille interne est alimentée par la branche tympanique antérieure de l'artère maxillaire ; la branche stylomastoïdienne de l'artère auriculaire postérieure ; la branche pétreuse de l'artère méningée moyenne ; et l'artère labyrinthique, issue soit de l'artère cérébelleuse antéro-inférieure, soit de l'artère basilaire.


== Fonction ==

=== Audition ===

Les ondes sonores traversent l'oreille externe, sont modulées par l'oreille moyenne et sont transmises au nerf vestibulocochléaire de l'oreille interne.

Ce nerf transmet des informations au lobe temporal du cerveau, où il est enregistré en tant que son.

Le son qui traverse l'oreille externe a un impact sur le tympan et le fait vibrer.

Les trois os des osselets transmettent ce son à une deuxième fenêtre (la fenêtre ovale) qui protège l'oreille interne remplie de liquide.

En détail, le pavillon de l'oreille externe aide à focaliser un son, qui a un impact sur le tympan.

Le marteau repose sur la membrane et reçoit la vibration.

Cette vibration est transmise le long de l'enclume et de l'étrier jusqu'à la fenêtre ovale.

Deux petits muscles, le tenseur du tympan et l'étrier, aident également à moduler le bruit.

Les deux muscles se contractent par réflexe pour amortir les vibrations excessives.

La vibration de la fenêtre ovale provoque la vibration de l'endolymphe dans le vestibule et la cochlée.

L'oreille interne abrite l'appareil nécessaire pour transformer les vibrations transmises du monde extérieur via l'oreille moyenne en signaux transmis par le nerf vestibulocochléaire au cerveau.

Les canaux creux de l'oreille interne sont remplis de liquide et contiennent un épithélium sensoriel parsemé de cellules ciliées.

Les « poils » microscopiques de ces cellules sont des filaments protéiques structurels qui se projettent dans le liquide.

Les cellules ciliées sont des mécanorécepteurs qui libèrent un neurotransmetteur chimique lorsqu'elles sont stimulées.

Les ondes sonores se déplaçant à travers les fluides s'écoulent contre les cellules réceptrices de l'organe de Corti.

Le fluide pousse les filaments des cellules individuelles ; le mouvement des filaments provoque l'ouverture des cellules réceptrices pour recevoir l'endolymphe riche en potassium.

Cela provoque la dépolarisation de la cellule et crée un potentiel d'action qui est transmis le long du ganglion spiral, qui envoie des informations via la partie auditive du nerf vestibulocochléaire au lobe temporal du cerveau.

L'oreille humaine peut généralement entendre des sons avec des fréquences comprises entre 20 Hz et 20 kHz (la gamme audio).

Les sons en dehors de cette plage sont considérés comme des infrasons (en dessous de 20 Hz) ou des ultrasons (au-dessus de 20 kHz).

Bien que l'audition nécessite une partie auditive intacte et fonctionnelle du système nerveux central ainsi qu'une oreille qui fonctionne, la surdité humaine (insensibilité extrême au son) survient le plus souvent en raison d'anomalies de l'oreille interne, plutôt que dans les nerfs ou les voies de l'oreille centrale. système auditif.


=== Équilibre ===


Assurer l'équilibre, en mouvement ou à l'arrêt, est également une fonction centrale de l'oreille.

L'oreille facilite deux types d'équilibre : l'équilibre statique, qui permet à une personne de ressentir les effets de la gravité, et l'équilibre dynamique, qui permet à une personne de ressentir une accélération.

L'équilibre statique est assuré par deux ventricules, l'utricule et le saccule.

Les cellules tapissant les parois de ces ventricules contiennent de fins filaments et les cellules sont recouvertes d'une fine couche gélatineuse.

Chaque cellule a 50 à 70 petits filaments et un gros filament, le kinocilium.

Dans la couche gélatineuse se trouvent des otolithes, de minuscules formations de carbonate de calcium.

Lorsqu'une personne bouge, ces otolithes changent de position.

Ce déplacement modifie la position des filaments, ce qui ouvre des canaux ioniques à l'intérieur des membranes cellulaires, créant une dépolarisation et un potentiel d'action qui est transmis au cerveau le long du nerf vestibulocochléaire.

L'équilibre dynamique est assuré par les trois canaux semi-circulaires.

Ces trois canaux sont orthogonaux (à angle droit) entre eux.

À l'extrémité de chaque canal se trouve un léger élargissement, connu sous le nom d'ampoule, qui contient de nombreuses cellules avec des filaments dans une zone centrale appelée la cupule.

Le fluide dans ces canaux tourne en fonction de l'élan de la tête.

Lorsqu'une personne change d'accélération, l'inertie du fluide change.

Cela affecte la pression sur la cupule et entraîne l'ouverture des canaux ioniques.

Cela provoque une dépolarisation, qui est transmise sous forme de signal au cerveau le long du nerf vestibulocochléaire.

L'équilibre dynamique aide également à maintenir le suivi oculaire lors des déplacements, via le réflexe vestibulo-oculaire.


== Développement ==

Au cours de l'embryogenèse, l'oreille se développe en trois structures distinctes : l'oreille interne, l'oreille moyenne et l'oreille externe.

Chaque structure provient d'une couche germinale différente : l'ectoderme, l'endoderme et le mésenchyme.


=== Oreille interne ===


Après l'implantation, vers la deuxième à la troisième semaine, l'embryon en développement se compose de trois couches : endoderme, mésoderme et ectoderme.

La première partie de l'oreille à se développer est l'oreille interne, qui commence à se former à partir de l'ectoderme vers le 22e jour du développement de l'embryon.

Plus précisément, l'oreille interne dérive de deux épaississements appelés placodes otiques de part et d'autre de la tête.

Chaque placode otique recule sous l'ectoderme, forme une fosse otique puis une vésicule otique.

Cette masse entière finira par être entourée de mésenchyme pour former le labyrinthe osseux.

Vers le 33e jour de développement, les vésicules commencent à se différencier.

Plus près de l'arrière de l'embryon, ils forment ce qui deviendra l'utricule et les canaux semi-circulaires.

Plus près de l'avant de l'embryon, les vésicules se différencient en un saccule rudimentaire, qui deviendra éventuellement le saccule et la cochlée.

Une partie du saccule finira par donner naissance et se connectera au conduit cochléaire.

Ce canal apparaît approximativement au cours de la sixième semaine et se connecte au saccule par le biais du ductus reuniens. Lorsque le mésenchyme du canal cochléaire commence à se différencier, trois cavités se forment : la rampe vestibulaire, la rampe tympanique et la rampe médiane.

La rampe vestibulaire et la rampe tympanique contiennent toutes deux un liquide extracellulaire appelé périlymphe.

La scala media contient de l'endolymphe.

Un ensemble de membranes appelées membrane vestibulaire et membrane basilaire se développe pour séparer respectivement le canal cochléaire du canal vestibulaire et du canal tympanique.

Certaines parties de la vésicule otique forment à leur tour le nerf vestibulocochléaire.

Ceux-ci forment des neurones bipolaires qui fournissent des sensations à certaines parties de l'oreille interne (à savoir les parties sensorielles des canaux semi-circulaires, maculaire de l'utricule et du saccule, et organe de Corti).

Le nerf commence à se former vers le 28e jour.

Régulation moléculaireLa plupart des gènes responsables de la régulation de la formation de l'oreille interne et de sa morphogenèse sont membres de la famille des gènes homéobox tels que les gènes homéobox Pax, Msx et Otx.

Le développement des structures de l'oreille interne telles que la cochlée est régulé par Dlx5/Dlx6, Otx1/Otx2 et Pax2, qui à leur tour sont contrôlés par le gène maître Shh.

Shh est sécrété par la notocorde.


=== Oreille moyenne ===

L'oreille moyenne et ses composants se développent à partir des premier et deuxième arcs pharyngés.

La cavité tympanique et le tube auditif se développent à partir de la première partie de la poche pharyngée entre les deux premiers arcs dans une zone qui développera également le pharynx.

Cela se développe sous la forme d'une structure appelée évidement tubotympanique.

Les osselets (marteau, enclume et étrier) apparaissent normalement au cours de la première moitié du développement fœtal.

Les deux premiers (marteau et enclume) dérivent du premier arc pharyngien et l'étrier dérive du second.

Les trois osselets se développent à partir de la crête neurale.

Finalement, les cellules du tissu entourant les osselets connaîtront l'apoptose et une nouvelle couche d'épithélium endodermique constituera la formation de la paroi de la cavité tympanique.


=== Oreille externe ===


Contrairement aux structures de l'oreille interne et moyenne, qui se développent à partir des poches pharyngées, le conduit auditif prend naissance dans la partie dorsale de la première fente pharyngée.

Il est entièrement développé à la fin de la 18e semaine de développement.

Le tympan est constitué de trois couches (ectoderme, endoderme et tissu conjonctif).

La penne provient d'une fusion de six buttes.

Les trois premières buttes sont dérivées de la partie inférieure du premier arc pharyngien et forment respectivement le tragus, la crus de l'hélice et l'hélice.

Les trois dernières buttes sont dérivées de la partie supérieure du deuxième arc pharyngien et forment l'antihelix, l'antitragus et le lobe de l'oreille.

Les oreilles externes se développent dans le bas du cou.

Au fur et à mesure que la mandibule se forme, elles se déplacent vers leur position finale au niveau des yeux.


== Signification clinique ==



=== Perte auditive ===


La perte auditive peut être partielle ou totale.

Cela peut être le résultat d'une blessure ou d'un dommage, d'une maladie congénitale ou de causes physiologiques.

Lorsque la perte auditive est le résultat d'une blessure ou d'une lésion de l'oreille externe ou de l'oreille moyenne, on parle de perte auditive de transmission.

Lorsque la surdité résulte d'une blessure ou d'une lésion de l'oreille interne, du nerf vestibulochoclair ou du cerveau, on parle de surdité neurosensorielle.

Les causes de la surdité de transmission comprennent un conduit auditif obstrué par du cérumen, des osselets fixés ensemble ou absents, ou des trous dans le tympan.

La surdité de transmission peut également résulter d'une inflammation de l'oreille moyenne provoquant une accumulation de liquide dans l'espace normalement rempli d'air, comme par une otite moyenne.

La tympanoplastie est le nom général de l'opération de réparation du tympan et des osselets de l'oreille moyenne.

Les greffes de fascia musculaire sont généralement utilisées pour reconstruire un tympan intact.

Parfois, des os artificiels de l'oreille sont placés pour remplacer ceux qui sont endommagés, ou une chaîne ossiculaire perturbée est reconstruite afin de conduire efficacement le son.

Des aides auditives ou des implants cochléaires peuvent être utilisés si la perte auditive est sévère ou prolongée.

Les aides auditives fonctionnent en amplifiant le son de l'environnement local et sont les mieux adaptées à la perte auditive de transmission.

Les implants cochléaires transmettent le son entendu comme s'il s'agissait d'un signal nerveux, en contournant la cochlée.

Les implants actifs de l'oreille moyenne envoient des vibrations sonores aux osselets de l'oreille moyenne, contournant toutes les parties non fonctionnelles de l'oreille externe et moyenne.


=== Anomalies congénitales ===

Les anomalies et malformations du pavillon sont fréquentes.

Ces anomalies comprennent des syndromes chromosomiques tels que l'anneau 18.

Les enfants peuvent également présenter des cas de conduits auditifs anormaux et d'implantation d'oreille basse.

Dans de rares cas, aucun pavillon n'est formé (atrésie) ou est extrêmement petit (microtie).

De petites pennes peuvent se développer lorsque les buttes auriculaires ne se développent pas correctement.

Le conduit auditif peut ne pas se développer s'il ne canalise pas correctement ou s'il y a une obstruction.

La chirurgie reconstructive pour traiter la perte auditive est considérée comme une option pour les enfants de plus de cinq ans, avec une intervention chirurgicale esthétique pour réduire la taille ou modifier la forme de l'oreille appelée otoplastie.

L'intervention médicale initiale vise à évaluer l'audition du bébé et l'état du conduit auditif, ainsi que de l'oreille moyenne et interne.

En fonction des résultats des tests, la reconstruction de l'oreille externe se fait par étapes, en prévoyant d'éventuelles réparations du reste de l'oreille.

Environ un enfant sur mille souffre d'un type de surdité congénitale liée au développement de l'oreille interne.

Les anomalies congénitales de l'oreille interne sont liées à une perte auditive neurosensorielle et sont généralement diagnostiquées à l'aide d'une tomodensitométrie (TDM) ou d'une imagerie par résonance magnétique (IRM).

Les problèmes de perte auditive dérivent également d'anomalies de l'oreille interne car son développement est distinct de celui de l'oreille moyenne et externe.

Des anomalies de l'oreille moyenne peuvent survenir en raison d'erreurs lors du développement de la tête et du cou.

Le premier syndrome de la poche pharyngée associe des anomalies de l'oreille moyenne aux structures du marteau et de l'enclume ainsi qu'à l'indifférenciation du ligament annulaire stapédien.

Les anomalies de l'os temporal et du conduit auditif sont également liées à cette structure de l'oreille et sont connues pour être associées à la surdité de perception et à la surdité de transmission.


=== Vertige ===

Le vertige fait référence à la perception inappropriée du mouvement.

Cela est dû à un dysfonctionnement du système vestibulaire.

Un type courant de vertige est le vertige positionnel paroxystique bénin, lorsqu'un otolithe est déplacé des ventricules vers le canal semi-circulaire.

L'otolithe déplacé repose sur la coupole, provoquant une sensation de mouvement lorsqu'il n'y en a pas.

La maladie de Ménière, la labyrinthite, les accidents vasculaires cérébraux et d'autres maladies infectieuses et congénitales peuvent également entraîner la perception de vertiges.


=== Blessure ===

Oreille externeLes lésions de l'oreille externe sont assez fréquentes et peuvent laisser des déformations mineures à majeures.

Les blessures comprennent : les lacérations, les blessures par avulsion, les brûlures et les torsions ou tractions répétées d'une oreille, pour discipline ou torture.

Des dommages chroniques aux oreilles peuvent provoquer une oreille de chou-fleur, une affection courante chez les boxeurs et les lutteurs dans laquelle le cartilage autour des oreilles devient grumeleux et déformé en raison de la persistance d'un hématome autour du périchondre, ce qui peut nuire à l'apport sanguin et à la guérison.

En raison de sa position exposée, l'oreille externe est sensible aux engelures ainsi qu'aux cancers de la peau, y compris les carcinomes épidermoïdes et les carcinomes basocellulaires.

Oreille moyenne

Le tympan peut être perforé en cas de bruit important ou d'explosion, en plongée ou en vol (appelé barotraumatisme), ou par des objets insérés dans l'oreille.

Une autre cause fréquente de blessure est due à une infection telle que l'otite moyenne.

Ceux-ci peuvent provoquer un écoulement de l'oreille appelé otorrhée et sont souvent examinés par otoscopie et audiométrie.

Le traitement peut inclure une attente vigilante, des antibiotiques et éventuellement une intervention chirurgicale, si la blessure se prolonge ou si la position des osselets est affectée.

Les fractures du crâne qui traversent la partie du crâne contenant les structures de l'oreille (l'os temporal) peuvent également endommager l'oreille moyenne.

Un cholestéatome est un kyste de cellules squameuses de la peau qui peut se développer dès la naissance ou secondaire à d'autres causes telles que les otites chroniques.

Il peut altérer l'audition ou provoquer des étourdissements ou des vertiges, et est généralement étudié par otoscopie et peut nécessiter une tomodensitométrie.

Le traitement du cholestéatome est chirurgical.
Oreille interneIl existe deux principaux mécanismes de dommages à l'oreille interne dans la société industrialisée, et les deux endommagent les cellules ciliées.

Le premier est l'exposition à des niveaux sonores élevés (traumatisme sonore) et le second est l'exposition à des médicaments et à d'autres substances (ototoxicité).

Un grand nombre de personnes sont quotidiennement exposées à des niveaux sonores susceptibles d'entraîner une perte auditive importante.

L'Institut national pour la sécurité et la santé au travail a récemment publié des recherches sur le nombre estimé de personnes malentendantes (11 %) et le pourcentage de celles qui peuvent être attribuées à l'exposition professionnelle au bruit (24 %).

En outre, selon l'enquête nationale sur la santé et la nutrition (NHANES), environ vingt-deux millions (17 %) de travailleurs américains ont déclaré avoir été exposés à des bruits dangereux sur le lieu de travail.

Les travailleurs exposés à des bruits dangereux aggravent davantage le risque de développer une perte auditive due au bruit lorsqu'ils ne portent pas de protection auditive.


=== Acouphènes ===

L'acouphène est l'audition d'un son lorsqu'aucun son externe n'est présent.

Bien que souvent décrit comme une sonnerie, cela peut aussi ressembler à un clic, un sifflement ou un rugissement.

Rarement, des voix ou de la musique peu claires sont entendues.

Le son peut être doux ou fort, grave ou aigu et semble provenir d'une oreille ou des deux.

La plupart du temps, cela s'installe progressivement.

Chez certaines personnes, le son provoque de la dépression, de l'anxiété ou des difficultés de concentration.

Les acouphènes ne sont pas une maladie mais un symptôme qui peut résulter d'un certain nombre de causes sous-jacentes.

L'une des causes les plus courantes est la perte auditive due au bruit.

Les autres causes comprennent : les otites, les maladies du cœur ou des vaisseaux sanguins, la maladie de Ménière, les tumeurs cérébrales, le stress émotionnel, l'exposition à certains médicaments, un traumatisme crânien antérieur et le cérumen.

Il est plus fréquent chez les personnes souffrant de dépression et d'anxiété.


== Société et culture ==


Les oreilles sont ornées de bijoux depuis des milliers d'années, traditionnellement en perçant le lobe de l'oreille.

Dans les cultures anciennes et modernes, des ornements ont été placés pour étirer et agrandir les lobes des oreilles, permettant de glisser des bouchons plus gros dans un grand espace charnu du lobe.

La déchirure du lobe de l'oreille due au poids de boucles d'oreilles lourdes ou à la traction traumatique d'une boucle d'oreille (par exemple, en s'accrochant à un pull) est assez courante.

Les blessures aux oreilles sont présentes depuis l'époque romaine comme méthode de réprimande ou de punition - "A l'époque romaine, lorsqu'un différend survenait qui ne pouvait être réglé à l'amiable, la partie lésée citait le nom de la personne présumée responsable devant le préteur. Si l'auteur de l'infraction ne se présente pas dans le délai imparti, le plaignant convoque des témoins pour qu'ils fassent des déclarations.

S'ils refusaient, comme cela arrivait souvent, la personne lésée était autorisée à les traîner par l'oreille et à les pincer fortement s'ils résistaient.

D'où l'expression française "se faire tirer l'oreille", dont le sens littéral est "se faire tirer l'oreille" et le sens figuré "prendre beaucoup de persuasion".

Nous utilisons l'expression "pour tordre (ou tirer) les oreilles de quelqu'un" pour signifier "infliger une punition". "Les pennes ont un effet sur l'apparence du visage.

Dans les sociétés occidentales, les oreilles décollées (présentes chez environ 5% des Européens de souche) ont été considérées comme peu attrayantes, en particulier si elles sont asymétriques.

La première intervention chirurgicale visant à réduire la projection des oreilles décollées a été publiée dans la littérature médicale par Ernst Dieffenbach en 1845, et le premier rapport de cas en 1881.

Les oreilles pointues sont une caractéristique de certaines créatures du folklore comme la croquemitaine française, la curupira brésilienne ou l'araignée de terre japonaise.

Cela a été une caractéristique de personnages sur l'art aussi vieux que celui de la Grèce antique et de l'Europe médiévale.

Les oreilles pointues sont une caractéristique commune à de nombreuses créatures du genre fantastique, notamment les elfes, les fées, les lutins, les hobbits ou les orcs.

Ils sont une caractéristique des créatures du genre horreur, comme les vampires.

Les oreilles pointues se retrouvent également dans le genre science-fiction; par exemple parmi les races vulcaine et romulienne de l'univers Star Trek et le personnage Nightcrawler de l'univers X-Men.

Georg von Békésy était un biophysicien hongrois né à Budapest, en Hongrie.

En 1961, il a reçu le prix Nobel de physiologie ou médecine pour ses recherches sur la fonction de la cochlée dans l'organe auditif des mammifères. La souris Vacanti était une souris de laboratoire qui avait ce qui ressemblait à une oreille humaine développée sur le dos.

L '«oreille» était en fait une structure de cartilage en forme d'oreille cultivée en ensemençant des cellules de cartilage de vache dans un moule biodégradable en forme d'oreille, puis implantée sous la peau de la souris; puis le cartilage s'est naturellement développé tout seul.

Il a été développé comme une alternative aux procédures de réparation ou de greffe d'oreille et les résultats ont suscité beaucoup de publicité et de controverse en 1997.


== Autres animaux ==


Le pavillon aide à diriger le son à travers le conduit auditif vers le tympan.

La géométrie complexe des crêtes sur la surface interne de certaines oreilles de mammifères aide à focaliser fortement les sons produits par les proies, en utilisant des signaux d'écholocation.

Ces crêtes peuvent être considérées comme l'équivalent acoustique d'une lentille de Fresnel et peuvent être observées chez un large éventail d'animaux, notamment la chauve-souris, l'aye-aye, le petit galago, le renard à oreilles de chauve-souris, le lémurien souris et autres.

Certains grands primates tels que les gorilles et les orangs-outans (ainsi que les humains) ont des muscles auriculaires non développés qui sont des structures résiduelles non fonctionnelles, mais qui sont encore suffisamment grands pour être facilement identifiés.

Un muscle de l'oreille qui ne peut pas bouger l'oreille, pour une raison quelconque, a perdu cette fonction biologique.

Cela sert de preuve d'homologie entre les espèces apparentées.

Chez l'homme, il existe une variabilité dans ces muscles, de sorte que certaines personnes sont capables de bouger leurs oreilles dans différentes directions, et il a été dit qu'il pourrait être possible pour d'autres d'obtenir un tel mouvement par des essais répétés.

Chez ces primates, l'incapacité de bouger l'oreille est compensée principalement par la capacité de tourner facilement la tête sur un plan horizontal, une capacité qui n'est pas commune à la plupart des singes - une fonction autrefois assurée par une structure est maintenant remplacée par une autre.

Chez certains animaux à pennes mobiles (comme le cheval), chaque penne peut être pointée indépendamment pour mieux capter le son.

Pour ces animaux, les pennes aident à localiser la direction de la source sonore.

 
 
 

L'oreille, avec ses vaisseaux sanguins proches de la surface, est un thermorégulateur essentiel chez certains mammifères terrestres, dont l'éléphant, le renard et le lapin.

Il existe cinq types de port d'oreille chez les lapins domestiques, dont certains ont été élevés pour une longueur d'oreille exagérée, un risque potentiel pour la santé qui est contrôlé dans certains pays.

Les anomalies du crâne d'un lapin demi-bélier ont été étudiées par Charles Darwin en 1868.

Chez les mammifères marins, les phoques sans oreilles sont l'un des trois groupes de Pinnipèdes.


=== Invertébrés ===

Seuls les animaux vertébrés ont des oreilles, bien que de nombreux invertébrés détectent le son en utilisant d'autres types d'organes sensoriels.

Chez les insectes, les organes du tympan sont utilisés pour entendre les sons distants.

Ils sont situés soit sur la tête, soit ailleurs, selon la famille d'insectes.

Les organes du tympan de certains insectes sont extrêmement sensibles, offrant une audition aiguë au-delà de celle de la plupart des autres animaux.

La mouche grillon femelle Ormia ochracea a des organes tympanaux de chaque côté de son abdomen.

Ils sont reliés par un mince pont d'exosquelette et ils fonctionnent comme une minuscule paire de tympans, mais, parce qu'ils sont liés, ils fournissent des informations directionnelles précises.

La mouche utilise ses "oreilles" pour détecter l'appel de son hôte, un grillon mâle.

Selon l'origine du chant du grillon, les organes auditifs de la mouche résonneront à des fréquences légèrement différentes.

Cette différence peut être aussi faible que 50 milliardièmes de seconde, mais elle est suffisante pour permettre à la mouche de se diriger directement vers un grillon mâle chantant et de le parasiter.

Des structures plus simples permettent à d'autres arthropodes de détecter les sons en champ proche.

Les araignées et les cafards, par exemple, ont des poils sur les pattes qui sont utilisés pour détecter les sons.

Les chenilles peuvent également avoir des poils sur leur corps qui perçoivent les vibrations et leur permettent de réagir au son.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ear
