

ELBOW


The elbow is the region between the upper and lower parts of the arm that surrounds the elbow joint. 

The elbow includes prominent landmarks such as the olecranon, the elbow pit, and the lateral and the medial epicondyles of the humerus. 

The elbow joint is a hinge joint between the upper arm and the forearm; more specifically between the humerus in the upper arm and the radius and ulna in the forearm which allows the forearm and hand to be moved towards and away from the body.The term elbow is specifically used for humans and other primates, and in other vertebrates forelimb plus joint is used.The name for the elbow in Latin is cubitus, and so the word cubital is used in some elbow-related terms, as in cubital nodes for example.


== Structure ==



=== Joint ===

The elbow joint has three different portions surrounded by a common joint capsule. 

These are joints between the three bones of the elbow, the humerus of the upper arm, and the radius and the ulna of the forearm.

When in anatomical position there are four main bony landmarks of the elbow. 

At the lower part of the humerus are the medial and lateral epicondyles, on the side closest to the body (medial) and on the side away from the body (lateral) surfaces. 

The third landmark is the olecranon found at the head of the ulna. 

These lie on a horizontal line called the Hueter line. 

When the elbow is flexed, they form a triangle called the Hueter triangle, which resembles an equilateral triangle.

At the surface of the humerus where it faces the joint is the trochlea. 

In most people, the groove running across the trochlea is vertical on the anterior side but it spirals off on the posterior side. 

This results in the forearm being aligned to the upper arm during flexion, but forming an angle to the upper arm during extension — an angle known as the carrying angle.The superior radioulnar joint shares the joint capsule with the elbow joint but plays no functional role at the elbow.


==== Joint capsule ====

The elbow joint and the superior radioulnar joint are enclosed by a single fibrous capsule. 

The capsule is strengthened by ligaments at the sides but is relatively weak in front and behind.On the anterior side, the capsule consists mainly of longitudinal fibres. 

However, some bundles among these fibers run obliquely or transversely, thickening and strengthening the capsule. 

These bundles are referred to as the capsular ligament. 

Deep fibres of the brachialis muscle insert anteriorly into the capsule and act to pull it and the underlying membrane during flexion in order to prevent them from being pinched.On the posterior side, the capsule is thin and mainly composed of transverse fibres. 

A few of these fibres stretch across the olecranon fossa without attaching to it and form a transverse band with a free upper border. 

On the ulnar side, the capsule reaches down to the posterior part of the annular ligament. 

The posterior capsule is attached to the triceps tendon which prevents the capsule from being pinched during extension.


==== Synovial membrane ====
The synovial membrane of the elbow joint is very extensive. 

On the humerus, it extends up from the articular margins and covers the coronoid and radial fossae anteriorly and the olecranon fossa posteriorly. 

Distally, it is prolonged down to the neck of the radius and the superior radioulnar joint. 

It is supported by the quadrate ligament below the annular ligament where it also forms a fold which gives the head of the radius freedom of movement.Several synovial folds project into the recesses of the joint.
These folds or plicae are remnants of normal embryonic development and can be categorized as either anterior (anterior humeral recess) or posterior (olecranon recess).
A crescent-shaped fold is commonly present between the head of the radius and the capitulum of the humerus.On the humerus there are extrasynovial fat pads adjacent to the three articular fossae. 

These pads fill the radial and coronoid fossa anteriorly during extension, and the olecranon fossa posteriorly during flexion. 

They are displaced when the fossae are occupied by the bony projections of the ulna and radius.


==== Ligaments ====

The elbow, like other joints, has ligaments on either side. 

These are triangular bands which blend with the joint capsule. 

They are positioned so that they always lie across the transverse joint axis and are, therefore, always relatively tense and impose strict limitations on abduction, adduction, and axial rotation at the elbow.The ulnar collateral ligament has its apex on the medial epicondyle. 

Its anterior band stretches from the anterior side of the medial epicondyle to the medial edge of the coronoid process, while the posterior band stretches from posterior side of the medial epicondyle to the medial side of the olecranon. 

These two bands are separated by a thinner intermediate part and their distal attachments are united by a transverse band below which the synovial membrane protrudes during joint movements. 

The anterior band is closely associated with the tendon of the superficial flexor muscles of the forearm, even being the origin of flexor digitorum superficialis. 

The ulnar nerve crosses the intermediate part as it enters the forearm.The radial collateral ligament is attached to the lateral epicondyle below the common extensor tendon. 

Less distinct than the ulnar collateral ligament, this ligament blends with the annular ligament of the radius and its margins are attached near the radial notch of the ulna.


=== Muscles ===



==== Flexion ====
There are three main flexor muscles at the elbow:
Brachialis acts exclusively as an elbow flexor and is one of the few muscles in the human body with a single function. 

It originates low on the anterior side of the humerus and is inserted into the tuberosity of the ulna.
Brachioradialis acts essentially as an elbow flexor but also supinates during extreme pronation and pronates during extreme supination. 

It originates at the lateral supracondylar ridge distally on the humerus and is inserted distally on the radius at the styloid process.
Biceps brachii is the main elbow flexor but, as a biarticular muscle, also plays important secondary roles as a stabiliser at the shoulder and as a supinator. 

It originates on the scapula with two tendons: That of the long head on the supraglenoid tubercle just above the shoulder joint and that of the short head on the coracoid process at the top of the scapula. 

Its main insertion is at the radial tuberosity on the radius.Brachialis is the main muscle used when the elbow is flexed slowly. 

During rapid and forceful flexion all three muscles are brought into action assisted by the superficial forearm flexors originating at the medial side of the elbow.
The efficiency of the flexor muscles increases dramatically as the elbow is brought into midflexion (flexed 90°) — biceps reaches its angle of maximum efficiency at 80–90° and brachialis at 100–110°.Active flexion is limited to 145° by the contact between the anterior muscles of the upper arm and forearm, more so because they are hardened by contraction during flexion. 

Passive flexion (forearm is pushed against the upper arm with flexors relaxed) is limited to 160° by the bony projections on the radius and ulna as they reach to shallow depressions on the humerus; i.e. the head of radius being pressed against the radial fossa and the coronoid process being pressed against the coronoid fossa. 

Passive flexion is further limited by tension in the posterior capsular ligament and in triceps brachii.A small accessory muscle, so called epitrochleoanconeus muscle, may be found on the medial aspect of the elbow running from the medial epicondyle to the olecranon.


==== Extension ====
Elbow extension is simply bringing the forearm back to anatomical position. 

This action is performed by triceps brachii with a negligible assistance from anconeus. 

Triceps originates with two heads posteriorly on the humerus and with its long head on the scapula just below the shoulder joint. 

It is inserted posteriorly on the olecranon.Triceps is maximally efficient with the elbow flexed 20–30°. 

As the angle of flexion increases, the position of the olecranon approaches the main axis of the humerus which decreases muscle efficiency. 

In full flexion, however, the triceps tendon is "rolled up" on the olecranon as on a pulley which compensates for the loss of efficiency. 

Because triceps' long head is biarticular (acts on two joints), its efficiency is also dependent on the position of the shoulder.Extension is limited by the olecranon reaching the olecranon fossa, tension in the anterior ligament, and resistance in flexor muscles. 

Forced extension results in a rupture in one of the limiting structures: olecranon fracture, torn capsule and ligaments, and, though the muscles are normally left unaffected, a bruised brachial artery.


=== Blood supply ===


The arteries supplying the joint are derived from an extensive circulatory anastomosis between the brachial artery and its terminal branches. 

The superior and inferior ulnar collateral branches of the brachial artery and the radial and middle collateral branches of the profunda brachii artery descend from above to reconnect on the joint capsule, where they also connect with the anterior and posterior ulnar recurrent branches of the ulnar artery; the radial recurrent branch of the radial artery; and the interosseous recurrent branch of the common interosseous artery.The blood is brought back by vessels from the radial, ulnar, and brachial veins.
There are two sets of lymphatic nodes at the elbow, normally located above the medial epicondyle — the deep and superficial cubital nodes (also called epitrochlear nodes). 

The lymphatic drainage at the elbow is through the deep nodes at the bifurcation of the brachial artery, the superficial nodes drain the forearm and the ulnar side of the hand. 

The efferent lymph vessels from the elbow proceed to the lateral group of axillary lymph nodes.


=== Nerve supply ===

The elbow is innervated anteriorly by branches from the musculocutaneous, median, and radial nerve, and posteriorly from the ulnar nerve and the branch of the radial nerve to anconeus.


=== Development ===

The elbow undergoes dynamic development of ossification centers through infancy and adolescence, with the order of both the appearance and fusion of the apophyseal growth centers being crucial in assessment of the pediatric elbow on radiograph, in order to distinguish a traumatic fracture or apophyseal separation from normal development. 

The order of appearance can be understood by the mnemonic CRITOE, referring to the capitellum, radial head, internal epicondyle, trochlea, olecranon, and external epicondyle at ages 1, 3, 5, 7, 9 and 11 years. 

These apophyseal centers then fuse during adolescence, with the internal epicondyle and olecranon fusing last. 

The ages of fusion are more variable than ossification, but normally occur at 13, 15, 17, 13, 16 and 13 years, respectively. 

In addition, the presence of a joint effusion can be inferenced by the presence of the fat pad sign, a structure that is normally physiologically present, but pathologic when elevated by fluid, and always pathologic when posterior.


== Function ==

The function of the elbow joint is to extend and flex the arm grasp and reach for objects. 

The range of movement in the elbow is from 0 degrees of elbow extension to 150 degrees of elbow flexion. 

Muscles contributing to function are all flexion (biceps brachii, brachialis, and brachioradialis) and extension muscles (triceps and anconeus).
In humans, the main task of the elbow is to properly place the hand in space by shortening and lengthening the upper limb. 

While the superior radioulnar joint shares joint capsule with the elbow joint, it plays no functional role at the elbow.With the elbow extended, the long axis of the humerus and that of the ulna coincide. 

At the same time, the articular surfaces on both bones are located in front of those axes and deviate from them at an angle of 45°. 

Additionally, the forearm muscles that originate at the elbow are grouped at the sides of the joint in order not to interfere with its movement. 

The wide angle of flexion at the elbow made possible by this arrangement — almost 180° — allows the bones to be brought almost in parallel to each other.


=== Carrying angle ===


When the arm is extended, with the palm facing forward or up, the bones of the upper arm (humerus) and forearm (radius and ulna) are not perfectly aligned. 

The deviation from a straight line occurs in the direction of the thumb, and is referred to as the "carrying angle" (visible in the right half of the picture, right).
The carrying angle permits the arm to be swung without contacting the hips. 

Women on average have smaller shoulders and wider hips than men, which tends to produce a larger carrying angle (i.e., larger deviation from a straight line than that in men). 

There is, however, extensive overlap in the carrying angle between individual men and women, and a sex-bias has not been consistently observed in scientific studies. 

This could however be attributed to the very small sample sizes in those cited earlier studies.The angle is greater in the dominant limb than the non-dominant limb of both sexes, suggesting that natural forces acting on the elbow modify the carrying angle. 

Developmental, aging and possibly racial influences add further to the variability of this parameter.


== Pathology ==


The types of disease most commonly seen at the elbow are due to injury.


=== Tendonitis ===

Two of the most common injuries at the elbow are overuse injuries: tennis elbow and golfer's elbow. 

Golfer's elbow involves the tendon of the common flexor origin which originates at the medial epicondyle of the humerus (the "inside" of the elbow). 

Tennis elbow is the equivalent injury, but at the common extensor origin (the lateral epicondyle of the humerus).


=== Fractures ===

There are three bones at the elbow joint, and any combination of these bones may be involved in a fracture of the elbow. 

Patients who are able to fully extend their arm at the elbow are unlikely to have a fracture (98% certainty) and an X-ray is not required as long as an olecranon fracture is ruled out. 

Acute fractures may not be easily visible on X-ray.


=== Dislocation ===


Elbow dislocations constitute 10% to 25% of all injuries to the elbow. 

The elbow is one of the most commonly dislocated joints in the body, with an average annual incidence of acute dislocation of 6 per 100,000 persons. 

Among injuries to the upper extremity, dislocation of the elbow is second only to a dislocated shoulder.
A full dislocation of the elbow will require expert medical attention to re-align, and recovery can take approximately 8–14 weeks.


=== Infection ===

Infection of the elbow joint (septic arthritis) is uncommon. 

It may occur spontaneously, but may also occur in relation to surgery or infection elsewhere in the body (for example, endocarditis).


=== Arthritis ===

Elbow arthritis is usually seen in individuals with rheumatoid arthritis or after fractures that involve the joint itself. 

When the damage to the joint is severe, fascial arthroplasty or elbow joint replacement may be considered.


=== Bursitis ===


Olecranon bursitis, tenderness, warmth, swelling, pain in both flexion and extension-in chronic case great flexion-is extremely painful.


=== Elbow pain ===


Elbow pain occurs when the tenderness of the tissues in the elbow become inflamed. 

Frequent exercise of the inflamed elbow will assist with healing.


== Clinical significance ==

Elbow pain can occur for a multitude of reasons, including injury, disease, and other conditions. 

Common conditions include tennis elbow, golfer's elbow, distal radioulnar joint rheumatoid arthritis, and cubital tunnel syndrome.


=== Tennis elbow ===

Tennis elbow is a very common type of overuse injury. 

It can occur both from chronic repetitive motions of the hand and forearm, and from trauma to the same areas. 

These repetitions can injure the tendons that connect the extensor supinator muscles (which rotate and extend the forearm) to the olecranon process (also known as “the elbow”). 

Pain occurs, often radiating from the lateral forearm. 

Weakness, numbness, and stiffness are also very common, along with tenderness upon touch.
A non-invasive treatment for pain management is rest. 

If achieving rest is an issue, a wrist brace can also be worn. 

This keeps the wrist in flexion, thereby relieving the extensor muscles and allowing rest. 

Ice, heat, ultrasound, steroid injections, and compression can also help alleviate pain. 

After the pain has been reduced, exercise therapy is important to prevent injury in the future. 

Exercises should be low velocity, and weight should increase progressively. 

Stretching the flexors and extensors is helpful, as are strengthening exercises. 

Massage can also be useful, focusing on the extensor trigger points.


=== Golfer’s elbow ===

Golfer's elbow is very similar to tennis elbow, but less common. 

It is caused by overuse and repetitive motions like a golf swing. 

It can also be caused by trauma. 

Wrist flexion and pronation (rotating of the forearm) causes irritation to the tendons near the medial epicondyle of the elbow. 

It can cause pain, stiffness, loss of sensation, and weakness radiating from the inside of the elbow to the fingers.
Rest is the primary intervention for this injury. 

Ice, pain medication, steroid injections, strengthening exercises, and avoiding any aggravating activities can also help. 

Surgery is a last resort, and rarely used. 

Exercises should focus on strengthening and stretching the forearm, and utilizing proper form when performing movements.


=== Rheumatoid arthritis ===

Rheumatoid arthritis is a chronic disease that affects joints. 

It is very common in the wrist, and is most common at the radioulnar joint. 

It results in pain, stiffness, and deformities.
There are many different treatments for rheumatoid arthritis, and there is no one consensus for which methods are best. 

Most common treatments include wrist splints, surgery, physical and occupational therapy, and antirheumatic medication.


=== Cubital tunnel syndrome ===

Cubital tunnel syndrome, more commonly known as ulnar neuropathy, occurs when the ulnar nerve is irritated and becomes inflamed. 

This can often happen where the ulnar nerve is most superficial, at the elbow. 

The ulnar nerve passes over the elbow, at the area known as the “funny bone”. 

Irritation can occur due to constant, repeated stress and pressure at this area, or from a trauma. 

It can also occur due to bone deformities, and oftentimes from sports. 

Symptoms include tingling, numbness, and weakness, along with pain.
First line pain management techniques include the use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory oral medicines. 

These help to reduce inflammation, pressure, and irritation of the nerve and around the nerve. 

Other simple fixes include learning more ergonomically friendly habits that can help prevent nerve impingement and irritation in the future. 

Protective equipment can also be very helpful. 

Examples of this include a protective elbow pad, and an arm splint. 

More serious cases often involve surgery, in which the nerve or the surrounding tissue is moved to relieve the pressure. 

Recovery from surgery can take awhile, but the prognosis is often a good one. 

Recovery often includes movement restrictions, and range of motion activities, and can last a few months (cubital and radial tunnel syndrome, 2).


== Society and culture ==

The now obsolete length unit ell relates closely to the elbow. 

This becomes especially visible when considering the Germanic origins of both words, Elle (ell, defined as the length of a male forearm from elbow to fingertips) and Ellbogen (elbow). 

It is unknown when or why the second "l" was dropped from English usage of the word. 

The ell as in the English measure could also be taken to come from the letter L, being bent at right angles, as an elbow. 

The ell as a measure was taken as six handbreadths; three to the elbow and three from the elbow to the shoulder. 

Another measure was the cubit (from cubital). 

This was taken to be the length of a man's arm from the elbow to the end of the middle finger.


== Other primates ==

Though the elbow is similarly adapted for stability through a wide range of pronation-supination and flexion-extension in all apes, there are some minor difference. 

In arboreal apes such as orangutans, the large forearm muscles originating on the epicondyles of the humerus generate significant transverse forces on the elbow joint. 

The structure to resist these forces is a pronounced keel on the trochlear notch on the ulna, which is more flattened in, for example, humans and gorillas. 

In knuckle-walkers, on the other hand, the elbow has to deal with large vertical loads passing through extended forearms and the joint is therefore more expanded to provide larger articular surfaces perpendicular to those forces.Derived traits in catarrhini (apes and Old World monkeys) elbows include the loss of the entepicondylar foramen (a hole in the distal humerus), a non-translatory (rotation-only) humeroulnar joint, and a more robust ulna with a shortened trochlear notch.The proximal radioulnar joint is similarly derived in higher primates in the location and shape of the radial notch on the ulna; the primitive form being represented by New World monkeys, such as the howler monkey, and by fossil catarrhines, such as Aegyptopithecus. 

In these taxa, the oval head of the radius lies in front of the ulnar shaft so that the former overlaps the latter by half its width. 

With this forearm configuration, the ulna supports the radius and maximum stability is achieved when the forearm is fully pronated.


== Notes ==



== References ==




https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Elbow
;;;ES;;;



CODO


El codo es la región entre la parte superior e inferior del brazo que rodea la articulación del codo.

El codo incluye puntos de referencia prominentes como el olécranon, la fosa del codo y los epicóndilos lateral y medial del húmero.

La articulación del codo es una articulación de bisagra entre la parte superior del brazo y el antebrazo; más específicamente entre el húmero en la parte superior del brazo y el radio y el cúbito en el antebrazo, lo que permite que el antebrazo y la mano se muevan hacia y desde el cuerpo. El término codo se usa específicamente para humanos y otros primates, y en otros vertebrados. se usa la articulación más. El nombre del codo en latín es cubitus, por lo que la palabra cubital se usa en algunos términos relacionados con el codo, como en los nodos cubitales, por ejemplo.


== Estructura ==



=== Articulación ===

La articulación del codo tiene tres porciones diferentes rodeadas por una cápsula articular común.

Estas son articulaciones entre los tres huesos del codo, el húmero de la parte superior del brazo y el radio y el cúbito del antebrazo.

Cuando está en posición anatómica, hay cuatro puntos de referencia óseos principales del codo.

En la parte inferior del húmero se encuentran los epicóndilos medial y lateral, en el lado más cercano al cuerpo (medial) y en el lado opuesto al cuerpo (lateral).

El tercer punto de referencia es el olécranon que se encuentra en la cabeza del cúbito.

Estos se encuentran en una línea horizontal llamada línea Hueter.

Cuando se flexiona el codo, forman un triángulo llamado triángulo de Hueter, que se asemeja a un triángulo equilátero.

En la superficie del húmero, donde mira hacia la articulación, se encuentra la tróclea.

En la mayoría de las personas, el surco que atraviesa la tróclea es vertical en el lado anterior pero forma una espiral en el lado posterior.

Esto da como resultado que el antebrazo se alinee con la parte superior del brazo durante la flexión, pero que forme un ángulo con la parte superior del brazo durante la extensión, un ángulo conocido como ángulo de carga. La articulación radiocubital superior comparte la cápsula articular con la articulación del codo, pero no desempeña ningún papel funcional. en el codo


==== Cápsula articular ====

La articulación del codo y la articulación radiocubital superior están rodeadas por una sola cápsula fibrosa.

La cápsula está reforzada por ligamentos a los lados, pero es relativamente débil por delante y por detrás. En el lado anterior, la cápsula consta principalmente de fibras longitudinales.

Sin embargo, algunos haces entre estas fibras discurren de forma oblicua o transversal, engrosando y fortaleciendo la cápsula.

Estos haces se denominan ligamento capsular.

Las fibras profundas del músculo braquial se insertan anteriormente en la cápsula y actúan para tirar de ella y de la membrana subyacente durante la flexión para evitar que se pellizquen. En el lado posterior, la cápsula es delgada y está compuesta principalmente por fibras transversales.

Algunas de estas fibras se extienden a través de la fosa olecraneana sin unirse a ella y forman una banda transversal con un borde superior libre.

En el lado cubital, la cápsula llega hasta la parte posterior del ligamento anular.

La cápsula posterior está unida al tendón del tríceps, lo que evita que la cápsula se pellizque durante la extensión.


==== Membrana sinovial ====
La membrana sinovial de la articulación del codo es muy extensa.

En el húmero, se extiende hacia arriba desde los márgenes articulares y cubre las fosas coronoides y radial por delante y la fosa olecraneana por detrás.

Distalmente, se prolonga hasta el cuello del radio y la articulación radiocubital superior.

Está sostenido por el ligamento cuadrado debajo del ligamento anular donde también forma un pliegue que le da libertad de movimiento a la cabeza del radio. Varios pliegues sinoviales se proyectan en los huecos de la articulación.
Estos pliegues o plicas son restos del desarrollo embrionario normal y pueden clasificarse como anteriores (receso humeral anterior) o posteriores (receso del olécranon).
Un pliegue en forma de media luna está comúnmente presente entre la cabeza del radio y el capítulo del húmero. En el húmero hay almohadillas de grasa extrasinoviales adyacentes a las tres fosas articulares.

Estas almohadillas llenan la fosa radial y la coronoides anteriormente durante la extensión y la fosa del olécranon posteriormente durante la flexión.

Se desplazan cuando las fosas están ocupadas por las proyecciones óseas del cúbito y el radio.


==== Ligamentos ====

El codo, como otras articulaciones, tiene ligamentos a ambos lados.

Estas son bandas triangulares que se mezclan con la cápsula articular.

Se colocan de manera que siempre se encuentran a través del eje de la articulación transversa y, por lo tanto, siempre están relativamente tensos e imponen limitaciones estrictas en la abducción, aducción y rotación axial del codo. El ligamento colateral cubital tiene su vértice en el epicóndilo medial.

Su banda anterior se extiende desde el lado anterior del epicóndilo medial hasta el borde medial de la apófisis coronoides, mientras que la banda posterior se extiende desde el lado posterior del epicóndilo medial hasta el lado medial del olécranon.

Estas dos bandas están separadas por una parte intermedia más delgada y sus uniones distales están unidas por una banda transversal por debajo de la cual sobresale la membrana sinovial durante los movimientos articulares.

La banda anterior está íntimamente asociada con el tendón de los músculos flexores superficiales del antebrazo, siendo incluso el origen del flexor digitorum superficialis.

El nervio cubital cruza la parte intermedia al entrar en el antebrazo. El ligamento colateral radial se une al epicóndilo lateral por debajo del tendón extensor común.

Menos diferenciado que el ligamento colateral cubital, este ligamento se fusiona con el ligamento anular del radio y sus márgenes se unen cerca de la muesca radial del cúbito.


=== Músculos ===



==== Flexión ====
Hay tres músculos flexores principales en el codo:
Brachialis actúa exclusivamente como flexor del codo y es uno de los pocos músculos del cuerpo humano con una sola función.

Se origina en la parte baja del lado anterior del húmero y se inserta en la tuberosidad del cúbito.
Brachioradialis actúa esencialmente como un flexor del codo, pero también supina durante la pronación extrema y prona durante la supinación extrema.

Se origina en la cresta supracondílea lateral distalmente en el húmero y se inserta distalmente en el radio en la apófisis estiloides.
El bíceps braquial es el principal flexor del codo pero, como músculo biarticular, también desempeña importantes funciones secundarias como estabilizador del hombro y supinador.

Se origina en la escápula con dos tendones: el de la cabeza larga en el tubérculo supraglenoideo justo por encima de la articulación del hombro y el de la cabeza corta en la apófisis coracoides en la parte superior de la escápula.

Su inserción principal está en la tuberosidad radial del radio. El braquial es el músculo principal que se usa cuando el codo se flexiona lentamente.

Durante la flexión rápida y enérgica, los tres músculos se ponen en acción con la ayuda de los flexores superficiales del antebrazo que se originan en el lado medial del codo.
La eficiencia de los músculos flexores aumenta drásticamente a medida que el codo se lleva a la flexión media (flexión de 90°): el bíceps alcanza su ángulo de máxima eficiencia a 80–90° y el braquial a 100–110°. La flexión activa está limitada a 145° por el contacto entre los músculos anteriores de la parte superior del brazo y el antebrazo, más aún porque se endurecen por la contracción durante la flexión.

La flexión pasiva (el antebrazo se empuja contra la parte superior del brazo con los flexores relajados) está limitada a 160° por las proyecciones óseas del radio y el cúbito a medida que alcanzan las depresiones poco profundas del húmero; es decir, la cabeza del radio se presiona contra la fosa radial y el proceso coronoides se presiona contra la fosa coronoides.

La flexión pasiva se ve limitada aún más por la tensión en el ligamento capsular posterior y en el tríceps braquial. En la cara medial del codo se puede encontrar un pequeño músculo accesorio, llamado músculo epitrocleoancóneo, que se extiende desde el epicóndilo medial hasta el olécranon.


==== Extensión ====
La extensión del codo es simplemente devolver el antebrazo a la posición anatómica.

Esta acción la realiza el tríceps braquial con una asistencia insignificante del ancóneo.

El tríceps se origina con dos cabezas en la parte posterior del húmero y con su cabeza larga en la escápula justo debajo de la articulación del hombro.

Se inserta posteriormente en el olécranon. El tríceps es máximamente eficiente con el codo flexionado 20-30°.

A medida que aumenta el ángulo de flexión, la posición del olécranon se acerca al eje principal del húmero, lo que disminuye la eficiencia muscular.

Sin embargo, en flexión completa, el tendón del tríceps se "enrolla" sobre el olécranon como en una polea que compensa la pérdida de eficiencia.

Debido a que la cabeza larga del tríceps es biarticular (actúa sobre dos articulaciones), su eficiencia también depende de la posición del hombro. La extensión está limitada por el olécranon que llega a la fosa del olécranon, la tensión en el ligamento anterior y la resistencia en los músculos flexores.

La extensión forzada da como resultado una ruptura en una de las estructuras limitantes: fractura de olécranon, cápsula y ligamentos desgarrados y, aunque los músculos normalmente no se ven afectados, una arteria braquial magullada.


=== Suministro de sangre ===


Las arterias que irrigan la articulación derivan de una extensa anastomosis circulatoria entre la arteria braquial y sus ramas terminales.

Las ramas colaterales cubital superior e inferior de la arteria braquial y las ramas colaterales radial y media de la arteria braquial profunda descienden desde arriba para reconectarse en la cápsula articular, donde también se conectan con las ramas recurrentes cubitales anterior y posterior de la arteria cubital; la rama radial recurrente de la arteria radial; y la rama recurrente interósea de la arteria interósea común. La sangre es devuelta por los vasos de las venas radial, cubital y braquial.
Hay dos conjuntos de ganglios linfáticos en el codo, normalmente ubicados sobre el epicóndilo medial: los ganglios cubitales profundos y superficiales (también llamados ganglios epitrocleares).

El drenaje linfático en el codo es a través de los ganglios profundos en la bifurcación de la arteria braquial, los ganglios superficiales drenan el antebrazo y el lado cubital de la mano.

Los vasos linfáticos eferentes del codo proceden al grupo lateral de ganglios linfáticos axilares.


=== Suministro nervioso ===

El codo está inervado anteriormente por ramas de los nervios musculocutáneo, mediano y radial, y posteriormente por el nervio cubital y la rama del nervio radial hasta el ancóneo.


=== Desarrollo ===

El codo experimenta un desarrollo dinámico de los centros de osificación durante la infancia y la adolescencia, y el orden de aparición y fusión de los centros de crecimiento apofisario es crucial en la evaluación del codo pediátrico en la radiografía, para distinguir una fractura traumática o una separación apofisaria de lo normal. desarrollo.

El orden de aparición puede entenderse por la nemotécnica CRITOE, refiriéndose al capitellum, la cabeza radial, el epicóndilo interno, la tróclea, el olécranon y el epicóndilo externo a las edades de 1, 3, 5, 7, 9 y 11 años.

Estos centros apofisarios luego se fusionan durante la adolescencia, con el epicóndilo interno y el olécranon fusionándose en último lugar.

Las edades de fusión son más variables que las de osificación, pero normalmente se dan a los 13, 15, 17, 13, 16 y 13 años, respectivamente.

Además, la presencia de un derrame articular puede inferirse por la presencia del signo de la almohadilla grasa, una estructura que normalmente está fisiológicamente presente, pero patológica cuando está elevada por líquido y siempre patológica cuando es posterior.


== Función ==

La función de la articulación del codo es extender y flexionar el brazo para agarrar y alcanzar objetos.

El rango de movimiento en el codo es de 0 grados de extensión del codo a 150 grados de flexión del codo.

Los músculos que contribuyen a la función son todos los músculos de flexión (bíceps braquial, braquial y braquiorradial) y de extensión (tríceps y ancóneo).
En los humanos, la tarea principal del codo es colocar correctamente la mano en el espacio acortando y alargando la extremidad superior.

Si bien la articulación radiocubital superior comparte cápsula articular con la articulación del codo, no desempeña ningún papel funcional en el codo. Con el codo extendido, el eje largo del húmero y el del cúbito coinciden.

Al mismo tiempo, las superficies articulares de ambos huesos se ubican frente a esos ejes y se desvían de ellos en un ángulo de 45°.

Además, los músculos del antebrazo que se originan en el codo se agrupan a los lados de la articulación para no interferir con su movimiento.

El amplio ángulo de flexión del codo que hace posible esta disposición (casi 180°) permite que los huesos se coloquen casi en paralelo entre sí.


=== Ángulo de transporte ===


Cuando el brazo está extendido, con la palma hacia adelante o hacia arriba, los huesos de la parte superior del brazo (húmero) y el antebrazo (radio y cúbito) no están perfectamente alineados.

La desviación de una línea recta se produce en la dirección del pulgar y se denomina "ángulo de carga" (visible en la mitad derecha de la imagen, a la derecha).
El ángulo de transporte permite balancear el brazo sin tocar las caderas.

Las mujeres en promedio tienen hombros más pequeños y caderas más anchas que los hombres, lo que tiende a producir un mayor ángulo de carga (es decir, una desviación mayor de una línea recta que la de los hombres).

Sin embargo, existe una gran superposición en el ángulo de carga entre hombres y mujeres individuales, y no se ha observado consistentemente un sesgo sexual en los estudios científicos.

Sin embargo, esto podría atribuirse a los tamaños de muestra muy pequeños en los estudios anteriores citados. El ángulo es mayor en la extremidad dominante que en la extremidad no dominante de ambos sexos, lo que sugiere que las fuerzas naturales que actúan sobre el codo modifican el ángulo de carga.

Las influencias del desarrollo, el envejecimiento y posiblemente la raza aumentan aún más la variabilidad de este parámetro.


== Patología ==


Los tipos de enfermedad que se observan con mayor frecuencia en el codo se deben a una lesión.


=== Tendinitis ===

Dos de las lesiones más comunes en el codo son las lesiones por uso excesivo: codo de tenista y codo de golfista.

El codo de golfista involucra el tendón del origen del flexor común que se origina en el epicóndilo medial del húmero (el "interior" del codo).

El codo de tenista es la lesión equivalente, pero en el origen extensor común (el epicóndilo lateral del húmero).


=== Fracturas ===

Hay tres huesos en la articulación del codo y cualquier combinación de estos huesos puede estar involucrada en una fractura del codo.

Es poco probable que los pacientes que pueden extender completamente el brazo a la altura del codo tengan una fractura (98% de certeza) y no se requiere una radiografía siempre que se descarte una fractura de olécranon.

Las fracturas agudas pueden no ser fácilmente visibles en la radiografía.


=== Dislocación ===


Las dislocaciones de codo constituyen del 10% al 25% de todas las lesiones del codo.

El codo es una de las articulaciones más comúnmente dislocadas del cuerpo, con una incidencia anual promedio de dislocación aguda de 6 por cada 100 000 personas.

Entre las lesiones de la extremidad superior, la luxación del codo ocupa el segundo lugar después de la luxación del hombro.
Una dislocación completa del codo requerirá atención médica experta para volver a alinearlo, y la recuperación puede demorar aproximadamente de 8 a 14 semanas.


=== Infección ===

La infección de la articulación del codo (artritis séptica) es poco común.

Puede ocurrir espontáneamente, pero también puede ocurrir en relación con una cirugía o una infección en otras partes del cuerpo (por ejemplo, endocarditis).


=== Artritis ===

La artritis del codo generalmente se observa en personas con artritis reumatoide o después de fracturas que involucran la articulación misma.

Cuando el daño a la articulación es severo, se puede considerar la artroplastia fascial o el reemplazo de la articulación del codo.


=== Bursitis ===


La bursitis del olécranon, la sensibilidad, el calor, la hinchazón, el dolor tanto en la flexión como en la extensión (en el caso crónico, una gran flexión) es extremadamente dolorosa.


=== Dolor de codo ===


El dolor de codo ocurre cuando la sensibilidad de los tejidos del codo se inflama.

El ejercicio frecuente del codo inflamado ayudará con la curación.


== Importancia clínica ==

El dolor de codo puede ocurrir por una multitud de razones, incluidas lesiones, enfermedades y otras afecciones.

Las afecciones comunes incluyen codo de tenista, codo de golfista, artritis reumatoide de la articulación radiocubital distal y síndrome del túnel cubital.


=== Codo de tenista ===

El codo de tenista es un tipo muy común de lesión por uso excesivo.

Puede ocurrir tanto por movimientos repetitivos crónicos de la mano y el antebrazo, como por traumatismos en las mismas áreas.

Estas repeticiones pueden lesionar los tendones que conectan los músculos supinadores extensores (que rotan y extienden el antebrazo) con el proceso del olécranon (también conocido como “el codo”).

Se produce dolor, que a menudo se irradia desde la parte lateral del antebrazo.

La debilidad, el entumecimiento y la rigidez también son muy comunes, junto con la sensibilidad al tacto.
Un tratamiento no invasivo para el manejo del dolor es el reposo.

Si lograr el descanso es un problema, también se puede usar una muñequera.

Esto mantiene la muñeca en flexión, aliviando así los músculos extensores y permitiendo el descanso.

El hielo, el calor, el ultrasonido, las inyecciones de esteroides y la compresión también pueden ayudar a aliviar el dolor.

Una vez que se ha reducido el dolor, la terapia de ejercicios es importante para prevenir lesiones en el futuro.

Los ejercicios deben ser de baja velocidad y el peso debe aumentar progresivamente.

Es útil estirar los flexores y extensores, al igual que los ejercicios de fortalecimiento.

El masaje también puede ser útil, centrándose en los puntos gatillo extensores.


=== Codo de golfista ===

El codo de golfista es muy similar al codo de tenista, pero menos común.

Es causado por el uso excesivo y los movimientos repetitivos como un swing de golf.

También puede ser causado por un trauma.

La flexión y pronación de la muñeca (rotación del antebrazo) causa irritación en los tendones cerca del epicóndilo medial del codo.

Puede causar dolor, rigidez, pérdida de sensibilidad y debilidad que se irradia desde el interior del codo hasta los dedos.
El descanso es la intervención principal para esta lesión.

El hielo, los medicamentos para el dolor, las inyecciones de esteroides, los ejercicios de fortalecimiento y evitar cualquier actividad agravante también pueden ayudar.

La cirugía es el último recurso y rara vez se usa.

Los ejercicios deben centrarse en fortalecer y estirar el antebrazo y utilizar la forma adecuada al realizar los movimientos.


=== Artritis reumatoide ===

La artritis reumatoide es una enfermedad crónica que afecta a las articulaciones.

Es muy común en la muñeca y es más común en la articulación radiocubital.

Provoca dolor, rigidez y deformidades.
Hay muchos tratamientos diferentes para la artritis reumatoide, y no hay un consenso sobre qué métodos son los mejores.

Los tratamientos más comunes incluyen férulas para la muñeca, cirugía, terapia física y ocupacional y medicamentos antirreumáticos.


=== Síndrome del túnel cubital ===

El síndrome del túnel cubital, más comúnmente conocido como neuropatía cubital, ocurre cuando el nervio cubital se irrita y se inflama.

Esto a menudo puede ocurrir donde el nervio cubital es más superficial, en el codo.

El nervio cubital pasa sobre el codo, en el área conocida como el “hueso de la risa”.

La irritación puede ocurrir debido al estrés y la presión constantes y repetidos en esta área, o por un trauma.

También puede ocurrir debido a deformidades óseas y, a menudo, por los deportes.

Los síntomas incluyen hormigueo, entumecimiento y debilidad, junto con dolor.
Las técnicas de manejo del dolor de primera línea incluyen el uso de medicamentos orales antiinflamatorios no esteroideos.

Estos ayudan a reducir la inflamación, la presión y la irritación del nervio y alrededor del nervio.

Otras soluciones simples incluyen aprender hábitos más ergonómicos que pueden ayudar a prevenir el pinzamiento y la irritación de los nervios en el futuro.

El equipo de protección también puede ser muy útil.

Ejemplos de esto incluyen una almohadilla protectora para el codo y una férula para el brazo.

Los casos más graves a menudo implican cirugía, en la que se mueve el nervio o el tejido circundante para aliviar la presión.

La recuperación de la cirugía puede llevar un tiempo, pero el pronóstico suele ser bueno.

La recuperación a menudo incluye restricciones de movimiento y actividades de rango de movimiento, y puede durar algunos meses (síndrome del túnel cubital y radial, 2).


== Sociedad y cultura ==

La ahora obsoleta unidad de longitud ell se relaciona estrechamente con el codo.

Esto se vuelve especialmente visible cuando se consideran los orígenes germánicos de ambas palabras, Elle (ell, definida como la longitud del antebrazo masculino desde el codo hasta la punta de los dedos) y Ellbogen (codo).

Se desconoce cuándo o por qué se eliminó la segunda "l" del uso de la palabra en inglés.

El ell, como en la medida inglesa, también podría tomarse como proveniente de la letra L, al estar doblado en ángulo recto, como un codo.

La ana como medida se tomó como seis palmos; tres al codo y tres del codo al hombro.

Otra medida era el codo (de cubital).

Esto se tomó como la longitud del brazo de un hombre desde el codo hasta la punta del dedo medio.


== Otros primates ==

Aunque el codo está adaptado de manera similar para la estabilidad a través de una amplia gama de pronación-supinación y flexión-extensión en todos los simios, hay algunas diferencias menores.

En los simios arbóreos como los orangutanes, los grandes músculos del antebrazo que se originan en los epicóndilos del húmero generan fuerzas transversales significativas en la articulación del codo.

La estructura para resistir estas fuerzas es una quilla pronunciada en la muesca troclear del cúbito, que es más aplanada, por ejemplo, en humanos y gorilas.

En los que caminan con los nudillos, por otro lado, el codo tiene que lidiar con grandes cargas verticales que pasan a través de los antebrazos extendidos y, por lo tanto, la articulación se expande más para proporcionar superficies articulares más grandes perpendiculares a esas fuerzas. Rasgos derivados en catarrinos (simios y monos del Viejo Mundo ) los codos incluyen la pérdida del agujero entepicondilar (un orificio en el húmero distal), una articulación humerocubital no traslatoria (rotación solamente) y un cúbito más robusto con una muesca troclear acortada. La articulación radiocubital proximal se deriva de manera similar en primates en la ubicación y forma de la muesca radial en el cúbito; la forma primitiva está representada por monos del Nuevo Mundo, como el mono aullador, y por catarrinos fósiles, como Aegyptopithecus.

En estos taxones, la cabeza ovalada del radio se encuentra frente al eje cubital, de modo que la primera se superpone a la segunda en la mitad de su ancho.

Con esta configuración del antebrazo, el cúbito sostiene el radio y se logra la máxima estabilidad cuando el antebrazo está en pronación completa.


== Notas ==



== Referencias ==




https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Codo

;;;PT;;;



COTOVELO


O cotovelo é a região entre as partes superior e inferior do braço que envolve a articulação do cotovelo.

O cotovelo inclui pontos de referência proeminentes, como o olécrano, a fossa do cotovelo e os epicôndilos lateral e medial do úmero.

A articulação do cotovelo é uma articulação em dobradiça entre o braço e o antebraço; mais especificamente entre o úmero na parte superior do braço e o rádio e a ulna no antebraço, o que permite que o antebraço e a mão sejam movidos para perto e para longe do corpo. plus joint é usado. O nome do cotovelo em latim é cubitus, e assim a palavra cubital é usada em alguns termos relacionados ao cotovelo, como em nós cubitais, por exemplo.


== Estrutura ==



=== Articulação ===

A articulação do cotovelo tem três porções diferentes cercadas por uma cápsula articular comum.

Estas são articulações entre os três ossos do cotovelo, o úmero da parte superior do braço e o rádio e a ulna do antebraço.

Quando em posição anatômica existem quatro principais pontos de referência ósseos do cotovelo.

Na parte inferior do úmero estão os epicôndilos medial e lateral, no lado mais próximo do corpo (medial) e no lado afastado das superfícies do corpo (lateral).

O terceiro marco é o olécrano encontrado na cabeça da ulna.

Estes encontram-se em uma linha horizontal chamada linha de Hueter.

Quando o cotovelo é flexionado, eles formam um triângulo chamado triângulo de Hueter, que se assemelha a um triângulo equilátero.

Na superfície do úmero, onde está voltado para a articulação, está a tróclea.

Na maioria das pessoas, o sulco que atravessa a tróclea é vertical no lado anterior, mas espirala no lado posterior.

Isso resulta no alinhamento do antebraço com a parte superior do braço durante a flexão, mas formando um ângulo com a parte superior do braço durante a extensão - um ângulo conhecido como ângulo de transporte. A articulação radioulnar superior compartilha a cápsula articular com a articulação do cotovelo, mas não desempenha nenhum papel funcional no cotovelo.


==== Cápsula articular ====

A articulação do cotovelo e a articulação radioulnar superior são envolvidas por uma única cápsula fibrosa.

A cápsula é reforçada por ligamentos nas laterais, mas é relativamente fraca na frente e atrás. No lado anterior, a cápsula consiste principalmente de fibras longitudinais.

No entanto, alguns feixes entre essas fibras correm obliquamente ou transversalmente, engrossando e fortalecendo a cápsula.

Esses feixes são chamados de ligamento capsular.

As fibras profundas do músculo braquial inserem-se anteriormente na cápsula e atuam para tracioná-la e a membrana subjacente durante a flexão, a fim de evitar que sejam pinçadas. Na face posterior, a cápsula é fina e composta principalmente de fibras transversais.

Algumas dessas fibras se estendem pela fossa do olécrano sem se fixar a ela e formam uma faixa transversal com uma borda superior livre.

No lado ulnar, a cápsula desce até a parte posterior do ligamento anular.

A cápsula posterior é fixada ao tendão do tríceps, o que evita que a cápsula seja comprimida durante a extensão.


==== Membrana sinovial ====
A membrana sinovial da articulação do cotovelo é muito extensa.

No úmero, estende-se a partir das margens articulares e cobre as fossas coronóide e radial anteriormente e a fossa do olécrano posteriormente.

Distalmente, prolonga-se até o colo do rádio e a articulação radioulnar superior.

É sustentado pelo ligamento quadrado abaixo do ligamento anular, onde também forma uma dobra que dá liberdade de movimento à cabeça do rádio. Várias pregas sinoviais projetam-se nos recessos da articulação.
Essas dobras ou plicas são remanescentes do desenvolvimento embrionário normal e podem ser classificadas como anteriores (recesso umeral anterior) ou posteriores (recesso olecraniano).
Uma dobra em forma de crescente está comumente presente entre a cabeça do rádio e o capítulo do úmero. No úmero existem coxins de gordura extrassinoviais adjacentes às três fossas articulares.

Essas almofadas preenchem a fossa radial e coronóide anteriormente durante a extensão e a fossa olecraniana posteriormente durante a flexão.

Eles são deslocados quando as fossas são ocupadas pelas projeções ósseas da ulna e do rádio.


==== Ligamentos ====

O cotovelo, como outras articulações, tem ligamentos de cada lado.

Estas são bandas triangulares que se misturam com a cápsula articular.

Eles são posicionados de forma que sempre se encontram no eixo transversal da articulação e, portanto, são sempre relativamente tensos e impõem limitações estritas à abdução, adução e rotação axial no cotovelo. O ligamento colateral ulnar tem seu ápice no epicôndilo medial.

Sua banda anterior se estende do lado anterior do epicôndilo medial até a borda medial do processo coronóide, enquanto a banda posterior se estende do lado posterior do epicôndilo medial até o lado medial do olécrano.

Essas duas faixas são separadas por uma parte intermediária mais fina e suas inserções distais são unidas por uma faixa transversal abaixo da qual a membrana sinovial se projeta durante os movimentos articulares.

A banda anterior está intimamente associada ao tendão dos músculos flexores superficiais do antebraço, mesmo sendo a origem do flexor superficial dos dedos.

O nervo ulnar cruza a parte intermediária ao entrar no antebraço. O ligamento colateral radial está ligado ao epicôndilo lateral abaixo do tendão extensor comum.

Menos distinto que o ligamento colateral ulnar, este ligamento se funde com o ligamento anular do rádio e suas margens estão inseridas próximo à incisura radial da ulna.


=== Músculos ===



==== Flexão ====
Existem três principais músculos flexores no cotovelo:
O braquial atua exclusivamente como flexor do cotovelo e é um dos poucos músculos do corpo humano com uma única função.

Origina-se na face anterior do úmero e insere-se na tuberosidade da ulna.
O braquiorradial atua essencialmente como flexor do cotovelo, mas também supina durante a pronação extrema e prona durante a supinação extrema.

Origina-se na crista supracondilar lateral distalmente no úmero e insere-se distalmente no rádio no processo estilóide.
O bíceps braquial é o principal flexor do cotovelo, mas, como músculo biarticular, também desempenha papéis secundários importantes como estabilizador do ombro e supinador.

Origina-se na escápula com dois tendões: o da cabeça longa no tubérculo supraglenoidal logo acima da articulação do ombro e o da cabeça curta no processo coracóide no topo da escápula.

Sua inserção principal é na tuberosidade radial do rádio. O braquial é o principal músculo usado quando o cotovelo é flexionado lentamente.

Durante a flexão rápida e vigorosa, todos os três músculos são acionados auxiliados pelos flexores superficiais do antebraço originados no lado medial do cotovelo.
A eficiência dos músculos flexores aumenta dramaticamente à medida que o cotovelo é colocado em flexão média (flexão de 90°) - o bíceps atinge seu ângulo de eficiência máxima em 80-90° e o braquial em 100-110°. A flexão ativa é limitada a 145° pela contato entre os músculos anteriores da parte superior do braço e antebraço, mais ainda porque eles são endurecidos pela contração durante a flexão.

A flexão passiva (o antebraço é empurrado contra a parte superior do braço com os flexores relaxados) é limitada a 160° pelas projeções ósseas no rádio e na ulna à medida que atingem depressões rasas no úmero; isto é, a cabeça do rádio sendo pressionada contra a fossa radial e o processo coronóide sendo pressionado contra a fossa coronóide.

A flexão passiva é ainda limitada pela tensão no ligamento capsular posterior e no tríceps braquial. Um pequeno músculo acessório, denominado músculo epitrocleoancôneo, pode ser encontrado na face medial do cotovelo, indo do epicôndilo medial ao olécrano.


==== Extensão ====
A extensão do cotovelo é simplesmente trazer o antebraço de volta à posição anatômica.

Esta ação é realizada pelo tríceps braquial com uma assistência insignificante do ancôneo.

O tríceps se origina com duas cabeças posteriormente no úmero e com sua cabeça longa na escápula logo abaixo da articulação do ombro.

Ele é inserido posteriormente no olécrano. O tríceps é extremamente eficiente com o cotovelo flexionado em 20-30°.

À medida que o ângulo de flexão aumenta, a posição do olécrano se aproxima do eixo principal do úmero, o que diminui a eficiência muscular.

Em flexão total, no entanto, o tendão do tríceps é "enrolado" no olécrano como em uma polia que compensa a perda de eficiência.

Como a cabeça longa do tríceps é biarticular (atua em duas articulações), sua eficiência também depende da posição do ombro. A extensão é limitada pelo olécrano atingindo a fossa do olécrano, tensão no ligamento anterior e resistência nos músculos flexores.

A extensão forçada resulta em uma ruptura em uma das estruturas limitantes: fratura do olécrano, ruptura da cápsula e ligamentos e, embora os músculos normalmente não sejam afetados, uma artéria braquial contundida.


=== Suprimento sanguíneo ===


As artérias que suprem a articulação são derivadas de uma extensa anastomose circulatória entre a artéria braquial e seus ramos terminais.

Os ramos colaterais ulnar superior e inferior da artéria braquial e os ramos colaterais radial e médio da artéria braquial profunda descem de cima para se reconectar na cápsula articular, onde também se conectam com os ramos recorrentes ulnar anterior e posterior da artéria ulnar; o ramo recorrente radial da artéria radial; e o ramo recorrente interósseo da artéria interóssea comum. O sangue é trazido de volta pelos vasos das veias radial, ulnar e braquial.
Existem dois conjuntos de linfonodos no cotovelo, normalmente localizados acima do epicôndilo medial - os linfonodos cúbicos profundos e superficiais (também chamados de linfonodos epitrocleares).

A drenagem linfática no cotovelo é feita pelos linfonodos profundos na bifurcação da artéria braquial, os linfonodos superficiais drenam o antebraço e o lado ulnar da mão.

Os vasos linfáticos eferentes do cotovelo seguem para o grupo lateral de linfonodos axilares.


=== Suprimento nervoso ===

O cotovelo é inervado anteriormente por ramos do nervo musculocutâneo, mediano e radial, e posteriormente do nervo ulnar e do ramo do nervo radial para o ancôneo.


=== Desenvolvimento ===

O cotovelo sofre desenvolvimento dinâmico de centros de ossificação ao longo da infância e adolescência, sendo a ordem de aparecimento e fusão dos centros de crescimento apofisários cruciais na avaliação do cotovelo pediátrico na radiografia, a fim de distinguir uma fratura traumática ou separação apofisária do normal. desenvolvimento.

A ordem de aparecimento pode ser compreendida pelo mnemônico CRITÓE, referindo-se ao capítulo, cabeça do rádio, epicôndilo interno, tróclea, olécrano e epicôndilo externo nas idades de 1, 3, 5, 7, 9 e 11 anos.

Esses centros apofisários então se fundem durante a adolescência, com o epicôndilo interno e o olécrano se fundindo por último.

As idades de fusão são mais variáveis ​​do que de ossificação, mas normalmente ocorrem aos 13, 15, 17, 13, 16 e 13 anos, respectivamente.

Além disso, a presença de derrame articular pode ser inferida pela presença do sinal do coxim adiposo, uma estrutura que normalmente está fisiologicamente presente, mas patológica quando elevada por fluido, e sempre patológica quando posterior.


== Função ==

A função da articulação do cotovelo é estender e flexionar o braço, agarrar e alcançar objetos.

A amplitude de movimento no cotovelo é de 0 graus de extensão do cotovelo a 150 graus de flexão do cotovelo.

Os músculos que contribuem para a função são todos os músculos de flexão (bíceps braquial, braquial e braquiorradial) e de extensão (tríceps e ancôneo).
Nos humanos, a principal tarefa do cotovelo é posicionar adequadamente a mão no espaço, encurtando e alongando o membro superior.

Enquanto a articulação radioulnar superior compartilha a cápsula articular com a articulação do cotovelo, ela não desempenha nenhum papel funcional no cotovelo. Com o cotovelo estendido, o eixo longo do úmero e o da ulna coincidem.

Ao mesmo tempo, as superfícies articulares em ambos os ossos estão localizadas na frente desses eixos e desviam deles em um ângulo de 45°.

Além disso, os músculos do antebraço que se originam no cotovelo são agrupados nas laterais da articulação para não interferir em seu movimento.

O amplo ângulo de flexão no cotovelo possibilitado por esse arranjo - quase 180° - permite que os ossos sejam trazidos quase paralelamente uns aos outros.


=== Ângulo de transporte ===


Quando o braço está estendido, com a palma da mão voltada para frente ou para cima, os ossos do braço (úmero) e do antebraço (rádio e ulna) não ficam perfeitamente alinhados.

O desvio de uma linha reta ocorre na direção do polegar e é chamado de "ângulo de transporte" (visível na metade direita da imagem, à direita).
O ângulo de transporte permite que o braço seja balançado sem entrar em contato com os quadris.

As mulheres, em média, têm ombros menores e quadris mais largos do que os homens, o que tende a produzir um ângulo de carregamento maior (ou seja, maior desvio de uma linha reta do que nos homens).

Há, no entanto, uma extensa sobreposição no ângulo de transporte entre homens e mulheres individuais, e um viés sexual não foi consistentemente observado em estudos científicos.

Isso pode, no entanto, ser atribuído aos tamanhos de amostra muito pequenos nos estudos anteriores citados. O ângulo é maior no membro dominante do que no membro não dominante de ambos os sexos, sugerindo que as forças naturais que atuam no cotovelo modificam o ângulo de carregamento.

Influências de desenvolvimento, envelhecimento e possivelmente raciais aumentam ainda mais a variabilidade desse parâmetro.


== Patologia ==


Os tipos de doença mais comumente vistos no cotovelo são devido a lesão.


=== Tendinite ===

Duas das lesões mais comuns no cotovelo são lesões por uso excessivo: cotovelo de tenista e cotovelo de golfista.

O cotovelo do golfista envolve o tendão da origem do flexor comum que se origina no epicôndilo medial do úmero (o "interno" do cotovelo).

Cotovelo de tenista é a lesão equivalente, mas na origem do extensor comum (o epicôndilo lateral do úmero).


=== Fraturas ===

Existem três ossos na articulação do cotovelo, e qualquer combinação desses ossos pode estar envolvida em uma fratura do cotovelo.

Os pacientes que são capazes de estender completamente o braço no cotovelo provavelmente não terão uma fratura (98% de certeza) e um raio-X não é necessário, desde que uma fratura do olécrano seja descartada.

As fraturas agudas podem não ser facilmente visíveis na radiografia.


=== Deslocamento ===


As luxações do cotovelo constituem 10% a 25% de todas as lesões do cotovelo.

O cotovelo é uma das articulações mais comumente luxadas do corpo, com uma incidência média anual de luxação aguda de 6 por 100.000 pessoas.

Entre as lesões da extremidade superior, a luxação do cotovelo perde apenas para um ombro deslocado.
Uma luxação completa do cotovelo exigirá atenção médica especializada para realinhar, e a recuperação pode levar aproximadamente 8 a 14 semanas.


=== Infecção ===

A infecção da articulação do cotovelo (artrite séptica) é incomum.

Pode ocorrer espontaneamente, mas também pode ocorrer em relação à cirurgia ou infecção em outras partes do corpo (por exemplo, endocardite).


=== Artrite ===

A artrite do cotovelo geralmente é observada em indivíduos com artrite reumatóide ou após fraturas que envolvem a própria articulação.

Quando o dano à articulação é grave, a artroplastia fascial ou a substituição da articulação do cotovelo podem ser consideradas.


=== Bursite ===


Bursite do olécrano, sensibilidade, calor, inchaço, dor em flexão e extensão - no caso crônico de grande flexão - é extremamente dolorosa.


=== Dor no cotovelo ===


A dor no cotovelo ocorre quando a sensibilidade dos tecidos do cotovelo fica inflamada.

O exercício frequente do cotovelo inflamado ajudará na cura.


== Significado clínico ==

A dor no cotovelo pode ocorrer por vários motivos, incluindo lesões, doenças e outras condições.

As condições comuns incluem cotovelo de tenista, cotovelo de golfista, artrite reumatóide da articulação radioulnar distal e síndrome do túnel cubital.


=== Cotovelo de tenista ===

Cotovelo de tenista é um tipo muito comum de lesão por uso excessivo.

Pode ocorrer tanto por movimentos repetitivos crônicos da mão e antebraço quanto por trauma nas mesmas áreas.

Essas repetições podem lesionar os tendões que conectam os músculos extensores supinadores (que giram e estendem o antebraço) ao processo do olécrano (também conhecido como “cotovelo”).

A dor ocorre, muitas vezes irradiando do antebraço lateral.

Fraqueza, dormência e rigidez também são muito comuns, juntamente com sensibilidade ao toque.
Um tratamento não invasivo para o controle da dor é o repouso.

Se conseguir descansar é um problema, uma cinta de pulso também pode ser usada.

Isso mantém o punho em flexão, aliviando os músculos extensores e permitindo o descanso.

Gelo, calor, ultra-som, injeções de esteróides e compressão também podem ajudar a aliviar a dor.

Depois que a dor foi reduzida, a terapia de exercícios é importante para evitar lesões no futuro.

Os exercícios devem ser de baixa velocidade e o peso deve aumentar progressivamente.

Alongar os flexores e extensores é útil, assim como os exercícios de fortalecimento.

A massagem também pode ser útil, concentrando-se nos pontos-gatilho extensores.


=== Cotovelo de golfista ===

O cotovelo do golfista é muito semelhante ao cotovelo do tenista, mas menos comum.

É causada pelo uso excessivo e movimentos repetitivos, como um swing de golfe.

Também pode ser causada por trauma.

A flexão e a pronação do punho (rotação do antebraço) causam irritação nos tendões próximos ao epicôndilo medial do cotovelo.

Pode causar dor, rigidez, perda de sensibilidade e fraqueza irradiando da parte interna do cotovelo para os dedos.
O descanso é a intervenção primária para esta lesão.

Gelo, analgésicos, injeções de esteróides, exercícios de fortalecimento e evitar atividades agravantes também podem ajudar.

A cirurgia é um último recurso e raramente usado.

Os exercícios devem se concentrar no fortalecimento e alongamento do antebraço e na utilização da forma adequada ao realizar os movimentos.


=== Artrite reumatóide ===

A artrite reumatóide é uma doença crônica que afeta as articulações.

É muito comum no punho, e é mais comum na articulação radioulnar.

Isso resulta em dor, rigidez e deformidades.
Existem muitos tratamentos diferentes para a artrite reumatóide, e não há um consenso sobre quais métodos são os melhores.

Os tratamentos mais comuns incluem talas de punho, cirurgia, fisioterapia e terapia ocupacional e medicação antirreumática.


=== Síndrome do túnel cubital ===

A síndrome do túnel cubital, mais comumente conhecida como neuropatia ulnar, ocorre quando o nervo ulnar fica irritado e inflamado.

Isso geralmente pode acontecer onde o nervo ulnar é mais superficial, no cotovelo.

O nervo ulnar passa sobre o cotovelo, na área conhecida como “osso engraçado”.

A irritação pode ocorrer devido ao estresse e pressão constantes e repetidos nessa área ou por um trauma.

Também pode ocorrer devido a deformidades ósseas e, muitas vezes, por esportes.

Os sintomas incluem formigamento, dormência e fraqueza, juntamente com dor.
As técnicas de tratamento da dor de primeira linha incluem o uso de medicamentos anti-inflamatórios não esteroides orais.

Estes ajudam a reduzir a inflamação, pressão e irritação do nervo e ao redor do nervo.

Outras correções simples incluem aprender hábitos mais ergonomicamente amigáveis ​​que podem ajudar a prevenir o impacto e a irritação dos nervos no futuro.

Equipamentos de proteção também podem ser muito úteis.

Exemplos disso incluem uma cotoveleira protetora e uma tala de braço.

Casos mais graves geralmente envolvem cirurgia, na qual o nervo ou o tecido circundante é movido para aliviar a pressão.

A recuperação da cirurgia pode demorar um pouco, mas o prognóstico geralmente é bom.

A recuperação geralmente inclui restrições de movimento e atividades de amplitude de movimento e pode durar alguns meses (síndrome do túnel cubital e radial, 2).


== Sociedade e cultura ==

A agora obsoleta unidade de comprimento ell está intimamente relacionada ao cotovelo.

Isso se torna especialmente visível quando se considera as origens germânicas de ambas as palavras, Elle (ell, definido como o comprimento de um antebraço masculino do cotovelo à ponta dos dedos) e Ellbogen (cotovelo).

Não se sabe quando ou por que o segundo "l" foi retirado do uso da palavra em inglês.

O ell como na medida inglesa também pode ser considerado como proveniente da letra L, sendo dobrada em ângulos retos, como um cotovelo.

O ll como medida foi tomado como seis palmos; três até o cotovelo e três do cotovelo até o ombro.

Outra medida era o côvado (de cubital).

Este foi considerado o comprimento do braço de um homem do cotovelo até o final do dedo médio.


== Outros primatas ==

Embora o cotovelo seja similarmente adaptado para estabilidade através de uma ampla gama de pronação-supinação e flexo-extensão em todos os macacos, há algumas pequenas diferenças.

Em macacos arborícolas como os orangotangos, os grandes músculos do antebraço originados nos epicôndilos do úmero geram forças transversais significativas na articulação do cotovelo.

A estrutura para resistir a essas forças é uma quilha pronunciada na incisura troclear na ulna, que é mais achatada, por exemplo, em humanos e gorilas.

Em knuckle-walkers, por outro lado, o cotovelo tem que lidar com grandes cargas verticais que passam pelos antebraços estendidos e a articulação é, portanto, mais expandida para fornecer superfícies articulares maiores perpendiculares a essas forças. ) incluem a perda do forame entepicondilar (um orifício no úmero distal), uma articulação úmeroulnar não translatória (apenas rotação) e uma ulna mais robusta com uma incisura troclear encurtada. primatas na localização e forma da incisura radial na ulna; a forma primitiva sendo representada por macacos do Novo Mundo, como o bugio, e por catarrinos fósseis, como Aegyptopithecus.

Nesses táxons, a cabeça oval do rádio fica na frente do eixo ulnar, de modo que o primeiro se sobrepõe ao segundo pela metade de sua largura.

Com esta configuração do antebraço, a ulna suporta o rádio e a estabilidade máxima é alcançada quando o antebraço está totalmente pronado.


== Notas ==



== Referências ==




https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cotovelo

;;;FR;;;



COUDE


Le coude est la région entre les parties supérieure et inférieure du bras qui entoure l'articulation du coude.

Le coude comprend des repères proéminents tels que l'olécrane, la fosse du coude et les épicondyles latéral et médial de l'humérus.

L'articulation du coude est une articulation charnière entre la partie supérieure du bras et l'avant-bras ; plus précisément entre l'humérus dans la partie supérieure du bras et le radius et le cubitus dans l'avant-bras, ce qui permet à l'avant-bras et à la main d'être déplacés vers et loin du corps. Le terme coude est spécifiquement utilisé pour les humains et les autres primates, et chez d'autres vertébrés. plus l'articulation est utilisée. Le nom du coude en latin est cubitus, et donc le mot cubital est utilisé dans certains termes liés au coude, comme dans les nœuds cubitaux par exemple.


== Structure ==



=== Joint ===

L'articulation du coude comporte trois parties différentes entourées d'une capsule articulaire commune.

Ce sont des articulations entre les trois os du coude, l'humérus du bras, le radius et le cubitus de l'avant-bras.

En position anatomique, il existe quatre principaux repères osseux du coude.

À la partie inférieure de l'humérus se trouvent les épicondyles médial et latéral, du côté le plus proche du corps (médial) et du côté éloigné des surfaces corporelles (latérales).

Le troisième repère est l'olécrâne situé à la tête de l'ulna.

Ceux-ci se trouvent sur une ligne horizontale appelée la ligne Hueter.

Lorsque le coude est fléchi, ils forment un triangle appelé triangle de Hueter, qui ressemble à un triangle équilatéral.

À la surface de l'humérus où il fait face à l'articulation se trouve la trochlée.

Chez la plupart des gens, le sillon traversant la trochlée est vertical du côté antérieur mais il s'enroule en spirale du côté postérieur.

Il en résulte que l'avant-bras est aligné sur le haut du bras pendant la flexion, mais forme un angle avec le haut du bras pendant l'extension - un angle connu sous le nom d'angle de portage. L'articulation radioulnaire supérieure partage la capsule articulaire avec l'articulation du coude mais ne joue aucun rôle fonctionnel au coude.


==== Capsule articulaire ====

L'articulation du coude et l'articulation radioulnaire supérieure sont entourées d'une seule capsule fibreuse.

La capsule est renforcée par des ligaments sur les côtés mais est relativement faible devant et derrière. Sur la face antérieure, la capsule est principalement constituée de fibres longitudinales.

Cependant, certains faisceaux parmi ces fibres courent obliquement ou transversalement, épaississant et renforçant la capsule.

Ces faisceaux sont appelés ligament capsulaire.

Les fibres profondes du muscle brachial s'insèrent antérieurement dans la capsule et agissent pour la tirer ainsi que la membrane sous-jacente lors de la flexion afin d'éviter qu'elles ne soient pincées. Sur la face postérieure, la capsule est fine et principalement composée de fibres transversales.

Quelques-unes de ces fibres s'étendent à travers la fosse olécrânienne sans s'y attacher et forment une bande transversale avec un bord supérieur libre.

Du côté ulnaire, la capsule descend jusqu'à la partie postérieure du ligament annulaire.

La capsule postérieure est attachée au tendon du triceps qui empêche la capsule d'être pincée lors de l'extension.


==== Membrane synoviale ====
La membrane synoviale de l'articulation du coude est très étendue.

Sur l'humérus, il s'étend à partir des marges articulaires et recouvre les fosses coronoïde et radiale en avant et la fosse olécrânienne en arrière.

Distalement, il se prolonge jusqu'au col du radius et à l'articulation radio-ulnaire supérieure.

Il est soutenu par le ligament carré sous le ligament annulaire où il forme également un pli qui donne à la tête du radius une liberté de mouvement. Plusieurs plis synoviaux se projettent dans les creux de l'articulation.
Ces plis ou plicae sont des vestiges du développement embryonnaire normal et peuvent être classés comme antérieurs (renfoncement huméral antérieur) ou postérieurs (renfoncement olécrânien).
Un pli en forme de croissant est généralement présent entre la tête du radius et le capitule de l'humérus. Sur l'humérus, il y a des coussinets adipeux extrasynoviaux adjacents aux trois fosses articulaires.

Ces coussinets remplissent la fosse radiale et coronoïde en avant lors de l'extension, et la fosse olécrânienne en arrière lors de la flexion.

Ils sont déplacés lorsque les fosses sont occupées par les projections osseuses du cubitus et du radius.


==== Ligaments ====

Le coude, comme les autres articulations, a des ligaments de chaque côté.

Ce sont des bandes triangulaires qui se confondent avec la capsule articulaire.

Ils sont positionnés de manière à toujours se trouver en travers de l'axe articulaire transversal et sont donc toujours relativement tendus et imposent des limitations strictes à l'abduction, l'adduction et la rotation axiale au niveau du coude. Le ligament collatéral ulnaire a son sommet sur l'épicondyle médial.

Sa bande antérieure s'étend du côté antérieur de l'épicondyle médial au bord médial du processus coronoïde, tandis que la bande postérieure s'étend du côté postérieur de l'épicondyle médial au côté médial de l'olécrâne.

Ces deux bandes sont séparées par une partie intermédiaire plus fine et leurs attaches distales sont réunies par une bande transversale en dessous de laquelle la membrane synoviale fait saillie lors des mouvements articulaires.

La bande antérieure est étroitement associée au tendon des muscles fléchisseurs superficiels de l'avant-bras, étant même à l'origine du fléchisseur superficiel des doigts.

Le nerf cubital traverse la partie intermédiaire à son entrée dans l'avant-bras. Le ligament collatéral radial est attaché à l'épicondyle latéral sous le tendon extenseur commun.

Moins distinct que le ligament collatéral ulnaire, ce ligament se confond avec le ligament annulaire du radius et ses marges se fixent près de l'échancrure radiale de l'ulna.


=== Muscles ===



==== Flexion ====
Il existe trois principaux muscles fléchisseurs au niveau du coude :
Brachialis agit exclusivement comme un fléchisseur du coude et est l'un des rares muscles du corps humain à avoir une seule fonction.

Il prend naissance bas sur la face antérieure de l'humérus et s'insère dans la tubérosité de l'ulna.
Brachioradialis agit essentiellement comme un fléchisseur du coude mais aussi en supination lors d'une pronation extrême et en pronation lors d'une supination extrême.

Il prend naissance au niveau de la crête supracondylienne latérale distalement sur l'humérus et est inséré distalement sur le radius au niveau de l'apophyse styloïde.
Le biceps brachial est le principal fléchisseur du coude mais, en tant que muscle biarticulaire, il joue également un rôle secondaire important de stabilisateur de l'épaule et de supinateur.

Il prend naissance sur l'omoplate avec deux tendons : celui du chef long sur le tubercule supraglénoïdien juste au-dessus de l'articulation de l'épaule et celui du chef court sur l'apophyse coracoïde au sommet de l'omoplate.

Son insertion principale se situe au niveau de la tubérosité radiale sur le radius. Le muscle brachial est le principal muscle sollicité lorsque le coude est fléchi lentement.

Lors d'une flexion rapide et énergique, les trois muscles sont mis en action, assistés par les fléchisseurs superficiels de l'avant-bras prenant leur origine sur le côté médial du coude.
L'efficacité des muscles fléchisseurs augmente considérablement lorsque le coude est amené en flexion médiane (flexion à 90°) - le biceps atteint son angle d'efficacité maximale à 80–90° et le brachial à 100–110°. La flexion active est limitée à 145° par le contact entre les muscles antérieurs de la partie supérieure du bras et de l'avant-bras, d'autant plus qu'ils sont durcis par la contraction lors de la flexion.

La flexion passive (l'avant-bras est poussé contre le haut du bras avec les fléchisseurs relâchés) est limitée à 160° par les projections osseuses sur le radius et le cubitus lorsqu'elles atteignent des dépressions peu profondes sur l'humérus ; c'est-à-dire que la tête du radius est appuyée contre la fosse radiale et l'apophyse coronoïde est appuyée contre la fosse coronoïde.

La flexion passive est en outre limitée par la tension du ligament capsulaire postérieur et du triceps brachial. Un petit muscle accessoire, appelé muscle épitrochléoanconé, peut être trouvé sur la face médiale du coude allant de l'épicondyle médial à l'olécrane.


==== Extension ====
L'extension du coude ramène simplement l'avant-bras à sa position anatomique.

Cette action est réalisée par le triceps brachial avec une aide négligeable de l'anconé.

Le triceps prend naissance avec deux têtes en arrière sur l'humérus et avec sa longue tête sur l'omoplate juste en dessous de l'articulation de l'épaule.

Il est inséré postérieurement sur l'olécrâne. Le triceps est efficace au maximum avec le coude fléchi à 20–30°.

Lorsque l'angle de flexion augmente, la position de l'olécrane se rapproche de l'axe principal de l'humérus, ce qui diminue l'efficacité musculaire.

En pleine flexion, cependant, le tendon du triceps est "enroulé" sur l'olécrâne comme sur une poulie ce qui compense la perte d'efficacité.

Le chef long du triceps étant biarticulaire (agissant sur deux articulations), son efficacité dépend également de la position de l'épaule. L'extension est limitée par l'olécrâne atteignant la fosse olécrânienne, la tension du ligament antérieur et la résistance des muscles fléchisseurs.

L'extension forcée entraîne une rupture dans l'une des structures limitantes : fracture de l'olécrane, déchirure de la capsule et des ligaments et, bien que les muscles ne soient normalement pas touchés, une artère brachiale contusionnée.


=== Approvisionnement en sang ===


Les artères irriguant l'articulation sont issues d'une anastomose circulatoire étendue entre l'artère brachiale et ses branches terminales.

Les branches collatérales ulnaires supérieures et inférieures de l'artère brachiale et les branches collatérales radiales et moyennes de l'artère brachiale profonde descendent d'en haut pour se reconnecter sur la capsule articulaire, où elles se connectent également aux branches récurrentes ulnaires antérieure et postérieure de l'artère ulnaire ; la branche radiale récurrente de l'artère radiale ; et la branche récurrente interosseuse de l'artère interosseuse commune. Le sang est ramené par les vaisseaux des veines radiale, ulnaire et brachiale.
Il existe deux ensembles de ganglions lymphatiques au niveau du coude, normalement situés au-dessus de l'épicondyle médial - les ganglions cubitaux profonds et superficiels (également appelés nœuds épitrochléaires).

Le drainage lymphatique au coude se fait par les ganglions profonds à la bifurcation de l'artère brachiale, les ganglions superficiels drainent l'avant-bras et la face ulnaire de la main.

Les vaisseaux lymphatiques efférents du coude se dirigent vers le groupe latéral des ganglions lymphatiques axillaires.


=== Innervation ===

Le coude est innervé en avant par des branches du nerf musculo-cutané, médian et radial, et en arrière du nerf ulnaire et de la branche du nerf radial à l'anconé.


=== Développement ===

Le coude subit un développement dynamique des centres d'ossification au cours de la petite enfance et de l'adolescence, l'ordre d'apparition et de fusion des centres de croissance apophysaires étant crucial dans l'évaluation du coude pédiatrique sur la radiographie, afin de distinguer une fracture traumatique ou une séparation apophysaire de la normale. développement.

L'ordre d'apparition peut être compris par le mnémonique CRITOE, faisant référence au capitellum, à la tête radiale, à l'épicondyle interne, à la trochlée, à l'olécrâne et à l'épicondyle externe aux âges de 1, 3, 5, 7, 9 et 11 ans.

Ces centres apophysaires fusionnent ensuite pendant l'adolescence, l'épicondyle interne et l'olécrane fusionnant en dernier.

Les âges de fusion sont plus variables que l'ossification, mais surviennent normalement à 13, 15, 17, 13, 16 et 13 ans, respectivement.

De plus, la présence d'un épanchement articulaire peut être inférée par la présence du signe du coussinet adipeux, une structure normalement présente physiologiquement, mais pathologique lorsqu'elle est surélevée par le liquide, et toujours pathologique lorsqu'elle est postérieure.


== Fonction ==

La fonction de l'articulation du coude est d'étendre et de fléchir la prise du bras et d'atteindre des objets.

L'amplitude de mouvement du coude va de 0 degré d'extension du coude à 150 degrés de flexion du coude.

Les muscles contribuant à la fonction sont tous les muscles de flexion (biceps brachial, brachialis et brachioradialis) et d'extension (triceps et anconeus).
Chez l'homme, la tâche principale du coude est de placer correctement la main dans l'espace en raccourcissant et en allongeant le membre supérieur.

Alors que l'articulation radioulnaire supérieure partage la capsule articulaire avec l'articulation du coude, elle ne joue aucun rôle fonctionnel au niveau du coude. Avec le coude en extension, le grand axe de l'humérus et celui de l'ulna coïncident.

En même temps, les surfaces articulaires des deux os sont situées devant ces axes et s'en écartent d'un angle de 45°.

De plus, les muscles de l'avant-bras qui proviennent du coude sont regroupés sur les côtés de l'articulation afin de ne pas gêner son mouvement.

Le grand angle de flexion au niveau du coude rendu possible par cette disposition - presque 180° - permet de rapprocher les os quasiment parallèlement les uns aux autres.


=== Angle de portage ===


Lorsque le bras est étendu, la paume tournée vers l'avant ou vers le haut, les os du bras (humérus) et de l'avant-bras (radius et cubitus) ne sont pas parfaitement alignés.

L'écart par rapport à une ligne droite se produit dans la direction du pouce et est appelé "angle de portage" (visible dans la moitié droite de l'image, à droite).
L'angle de portage permet de balancer le bras sans toucher les hanches.

Les femmes ont en moyenne des épaules plus petites et des hanches plus larges que les hommes, ce qui a tendance à produire un angle de portage plus grand (c'est-à-dire un écart plus important par rapport à une ligne droite que chez les hommes).

Il existe cependant un chevauchement important dans l'angle de portage entre les hommes et les femmes, et un biais sexuel n'a pas été systématiquement observé dans les études scientifiques.

Cela pourrait cependant être attribué à la très petite taille des échantillons dans les études précédentes citées. L'angle est plus grand dans le membre dominant que dans le membre non dominant des deux sexes, ce qui suggère que les forces naturelles agissant sur le coude modifient l'angle de portage.

Les influences développementales, vieillissantes et peut-être raciales ajoutent encore à la variabilité de ce paramètre.


== Pathologie ==


Les types de maladies les plus fréquemment observées au niveau du coude sont dues à des blessures.


=== Tendinite ===

Deux des blessures les plus courantes au coude sont les blessures dues à la surutilisation : le coude du tennis et le coude du golfeur.

Le coude du golfeur implique le tendon de l'origine du fléchisseur commun qui prend naissance à l'épicondyle médial de l'humérus (l '«intérieur» du coude).

Le coude de tennis est la blessure équivalente, mais à l'origine de l'extenseur commun (l'épicondyle latéral de l'humérus).


=== Fractures ===

Il y a trois os à l'articulation du coude, et toute combinaison de ces os peut être impliquée dans une fracture du coude.

Les patients qui sont capables d'étendre complètement leur bras au niveau du coude sont peu susceptibles d'avoir une fracture (98 % de certitude) et une radiographie n'est pas nécessaire tant qu'une fracture de l'olécrane est exclue.

Les fractures aiguës peuvent ne pas être facilement visibles sur les rayons X.


=== Luxation ===


Les luxations du coude représentent 10 à 25 % de toutes les blessures au coude.

Le coude est l'une des articulations les plus fréquemment disloquées du corps, avec une incidence annuelle moyenne de luxation aiguë de 6 pour 100 000 personnes.

Parmi les blessures du membre supérieur, la luxation du coude vient en deuxième position après une luxation de l'épaule.
Une luxation complète du coude nécessitera des soins médicaux experts pour se réaligner, et la récupération peut prendre environ 8 à 14 semaines.


=== Infection ===

L'infection de l'articulation du coude (arthrite septique) est rare.

Elle peut survenir spontanément, mais peut également survenir en relation avec une intervention chirurgicale ou une infection ailleurs dans le corps (par exemple, une endocardite).


=== Arthrite ===

L'arthrite du coude est généralement observée chez les personnes atteintes de polyarthrite rhumatoïde ou après des fractures impliquant l'articulation elle-même.

Lorsque les dommages à l'articulation sont graves, une arthroplastie fasciale ou un remplacement de l'articulation du coude peut être envisagé.


=== Bursite ===


La bursite olécrânienne, la sensibilité, la chaleur, l'enflure, la douleur à la fois en flexion et en extension - dans les cas chroniques de grande flexion - sont extrêmement douloureuses.


=== Douleur au coude ===


La douleur au coude survient lorsque la sensibilité des tissus du coude devient enflammée.

L'exercice fréquent du coude enflammé aidera à la guérison.


== Signification clinique ==

La douleur au coude peut survenir pour une multitude de raisons, notamment une blessure, une maladie et d'autres conditions.

Les affections courantes comprennent le coude de tennis, le coude du golfeur, la polyarthrite rhumatoïde de l'articulation radioulnaire distale et le syndrome du tunnel cubital.


=== Tennis-elbow ===

Le coude de tennis est un type très courant de blessure due au surmenage.

Il peut survenir à la fois par des mouvements répétitifs chroniques de la main et de l'avant-bras et par un traumatisme aux mêmes zones.

Ces répétitions peuvent blesser les tendons qui relient les muscles supinateurs extenseurs (qui tournent et étendent l'avant-bras) au processus olécrânien (également appelé "le coude").

La douleur survient, irradiant souvent de l'avant-bras latéral.

La faiblesse, l'engourdissement et la raideur sont également très fréquents, ainsi que la sensibilité au toucher.
Un traitement non invasif pour la gestion de la douleur est le repos.

Si le repos est un problème, une attelle de poignet peut également être portée.

Cela maintient le poignet en flexion, soulageant ainsi les muscles extenseurs et permettant le repos.

La glace, la chaleur, les ultrasons, les injections de stéroïdes et la compression peuvent également aider à soulager la douleur.

Une fois la douleur réduite, la thérapie par l'exercice est importante pour prévenir les blessures à l'avenir.

Les exercices doivent être à faible vitesse et le poids doit augmenter progressivement.

L'étirement des fléchisseurs et des extenseurs est utile, tout comme les exercices de renforcement.

Le massage peut également être utile, en se concentrant sur les points de déclenchement des extenseurs.


=== Coude du golfeur ===

Le coude du golfeur est très similaire au coude du tennis, mais moins courant.

Elle est causée par une utilisation excessive et des mouvements répétitifs comme un swing de golf.

Elle peut aussi être causée par un traumatisme.

La flexion et la pronation du poignet (rotation de l'avant-bras) provoquent une irritation des tendons près de l'épicondyle médial du coude.

Il peut provoquer des douleurs, des raideurs, une perte de sensation et une faiblesse irradiant de l'intérieur du coude vers les doigts.
Le repos est la principale intervention pour cette blessure.

La glace, les analgésiques, les injections de stéroïdes, les exercices de renforcement et le fait d'éviter toute activité aggravante peuvent également aider.

La chirurgie est un dernier recours, et rarement utilisée.

Les exercices doivent se concentrer sur le renforcement et l'étirement de l'avant-bras et sur l'utilisation d'une forme appropriée lors de l'exécution des mouvements.


=== Polyarthrite rhumatoïde ===

La polyarthrite rhumatoïde est une maladie chronique qui affecte les articulations.

Elle est très fréquente au poignet et plus fréquente au niveau de l'articulation radio-ulnaire.

Il en résulte des douleurs, des raideurs et des déformations.
Il existe de nombreux traitements différents pour la polyarthrite rhumatoïde, et il n'y a pas de consensus sur les meilleures méthodes.

Les traitements les plus courants comprennent les attelles de poignet, la chirurgie, la physiothérapie et l'ergothérapie et les médicaments antirhumatismaux.


=== Syndrome du tunnel cubital ===

Le syndrome du tunnel cubital, plus communément appelé neuropathie ulnaire, survient lorsque le nerf ulnaire est irrité et devient enflammé.

Cela peut souvent se produire là où le nerf cubital est le plus superficiel, au niveau du coude.

Le nerf cubital passe au-dessus du coude, au niveau de la zone connue sous le nom de « drôle d'os ».

L'irritation peut survenir en raison d'un stress et d'une pression constants et répétés dans cette zone ou d'un traumatisme.

Il peut également survenir en raison de déformations osseuses et souvent de sports.

Les symptômes comprennent des picotements, des engourdissements et de la faiblesse, ainsi que de la douleur.
Les techniques de gestion de la douleur de première ligne comprennent l'utilisation de médicaments oraux anti-inflammatoires non stéroïdiens.

Ceux-ci aident à réduire l'inflammation, la pression et l'irritation du nerf et autour du nerf.

D'autres solutions simples incluent l'apprentissage d'habitudes plus ergonomiques qui peuvent aider à prévenir les conflits nerveux et les irritations à l'avenir.

Les équipements de protection peuvent également être très utiles.

Des exemples de ceci incluent une coudière protectrice et une attelle de bras.

Les cas plus graves impliquent souvent une intervention chirurgicale, dans laquelle le nerf ou le tissu environnant est déplacé pour soulager la pression.

La récupération après une intervention chirurgicale peut prendre un certain temps, mais le pronostic est souvent bon.

La récupération comprend souvent des restrictions de mouvement et une gamme d'activités de mouvement, et peut durer quelques mois (syndrome du tunnel cubital et radial, 2).


== Société et culture ==

L'unité de longueur désormais obsolète ell est étroitement liée au coude.

Cela devient particulièrement visible lorsque l'on considère les origines germaniques des deux mots, Elle (ell, défini comme la longueur d'un avant-bras masculin du coude au bout des doigts) et Ellbogen (coude).

On ne sait pas quand ni pourquoi le deuxième "l" a été supprimé de l'usage anglais du mot.

L'ell comme dans la mesure anglaise pourrait également être considérée comme venant de la lettre L, étant pliée à angle droit, comme un coude.

L'aune comme mesure était prise comme six largeurs de main ; trois au coude et trois du coude à l'épaule.

Une autre mesure était la coudée (de cubital).

Cela a été pris pour être la longueur du bras d'un homme du coude à l'extrémité du majeur.


== Autres primates ==

Bien que le coude soit adapté de la même manière pour la stabilité à travers une large gamme de pronation-supination et de flexion-extension chez tous les singes, il existe quelques différences mineures.

Chez les singes arboricoles tels que les orangs-outans, les grands muscles de l'avant-bras prenant naissance sur les épicondyles de l'humérus génèrent des forces transversales importantes sur l'articulation du coude.

La structure pour résister à ces forces est une quille prononcée sur l'encoche trochléaire de l'ulna, qui est plus aplatie chez, par exemple, les humains et les gorilles.

Chez les marcheurs articulés, en revanche, le coude doit faire face à de grandes charges verticales passant par les avant-bras étendus et l'articulation est donc plus étendue pour fournir de plus grandes surfaces articulaires perpendiculaires à ces forces. ) les coudes comprennent la perte du foramen entépicondylien (un trou dans l'humérus distal), une articulation huméro-ulnaire non translationnelle (rotation uniquement) et un cubitus plus robuste avec une encoche trochléaire raccourcie. les primates dans l'emplacement et la forme de l'encoche radiale sur le cubitus ; la forme primitive étant représentée par les singes du Nouveau Monde, comme le singe hurleur, et par les catarrhines fossiles, comme l'Aegyptopithecus.

Chez ces taxons, la tête ovale du radius se trouve devant la diaphyse ulnaire de sorte que la première chevauche la seconde sur la moitié de sa largeur.

Avec cette configuration d'avant-bras, le cubitus soutient le radius et une stabilité maximale est obtenue lorsque l'avant-bras est complètement en pronation.


== Remarques ==



== Références ==




https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Elbow
