

EXTERNAL NOSE


The human nose is the most protruding part of the face. 

It bears the nostrils and is the first organ of the respiratory system. 

It is also the principal organ in the olfactory system. 

The shape of the nose is determined by the nasal bones and the nasal cartilages, including the nasal septum which separates the nostrils and divides the nasal cavity into two. 

On average the nose of a male is larger than that of a female.
The nose has an important function in breathing. 

The nasal mucosa lining the nasal cavity and the paranasal sinuses carries out the necessary conditioning of inhaled air by warming and moistening it. 

Nasal conchae, shell-like bones in the walls of the cavities, play a major part in this process. 

Filtering of the air by nasal hair in the nostrils prevents large particles from entering the lungs. 

Sneezing is a reflex to expel unwanted particles from the nose that irritate the mucosal lining. 

Sneezing can transmit infections, because aerosols are created in which the droplets can harbour pathogens.

Another major function of the nose is olfaction, the sense of smell. 

The area of olfactory epithelium, in the upper nasal cavity, contains specialised olfactory cells responsible for this function.

The nose is also involved in the function of speech. 

Nasal vowels and nasal consonants are produced in the process of nasalisation. 

The hollow cavities of the paranasal sinuses act as sound chambers that modify and amplify speech and other vocal sounds.

There are many plastic surgery procedures on the nose, known as rhinoplasties available to correct various structural defects or to change the shape of the nose. 

Defects may be congenital, or result from nasal disorders or from trauma. 

These procedures are a type of reconstructive surgery. 

Elective procedures to change a nose shape are a type of cosmetic surgery.


== Structure ==

Several bones and cartilages make up the bony-cartilaginous framework of the nose, and the internal structure. 

The nose is also made up of types of soft tissue such as skin, epithelia, mucous membrane, muscles, nerves, and blood vessels. 

In the skin there are sebaceous glands, and in the mucous membrane there are nasal glands. 

The bones and cartilages provide strong protection for the internal structures of the nose. 

There are several muscles that are involved in movements of the nose. 

The arrangement of the cartilages allows flexibility through muscle control to enable airflow to be modified.


=== Bones ===


The bony structure of the nose is provided by the maxilla, frontal bone, and a number of smaller bones.

The topmost bony part of the nose is formed by the nasal part of the frontal bone, which lies between the brow ridges, and ends in a serrated nasal notch. 

A left and a right nasal bone join with the nasal part of the frontal bone at either side; and these at the side with the small lacrimal bones and the frontal process of each maxilla. 

The internal roof of the nasal cavity is composed of the horizontal, perforated cribriform plate of the ethmoid bone through which pass sensory fibres of the olfactory nerve. 

Below and behind the cribriform plate, sloping down at an angle, is the face of the sphenoid bone.

The wall separating the two cavities of the nose, the nasal septum, is made up of bone inside and cartilage closer to the tip of the nose. 

The bony part is formed by the perpendicular plate of the ethmoid bone at the top, and the vomer bone below. 

The floor of the nose is made up of the incisive bone and the horizontal plates of the palatine bones, and this makes up the hard palate of the roof of the mouth. 

The two horizontal plates join at the midline and form the posterior nasal spine that gives attachment to the musculus uvulae in the uvula.

The two maxilla bones join at the base of the nose at the lower nasal midline between the nostrils, and at the top of the philtrum to form the anterior nasal spine. 

This thin projection of bone holds the cartilaginous center of the nose. 

It is also an important cephalometric landmark.


=== Cartilages ===


The nasal cartilages are the septal, lateral, major alar, and minor alar cartilages. 

The major and minor cartilages are also known as the greater and lesser alar cartilages. 

There is a narrow strip of cartilage called the vomeronasal cartilage that lies between the vomer and the septal cartilage.

The septal nasal cartilage, extends from the nasal bones in the midline, to the bony part of the septum in the midline, posteriorly. 

It then passes along the floor of the nasal cavity. 

The septum is quadrangular–the upper half is attached to the two lateral nasal cartilages which are fused to the dorsal septum in the midline. 

The septum is laterally attached, with loose ligaments, to the bony margin of the anterior nasal aperture, while the inferior ends of the lateral cartilages are free (unattached). 

The three or four minor alar cartilages are adjacent to the lateral cartilages, held in the connective tissue membrane, that connects the lateral cartilages to the frontal process of the maxilla.

The nasal bones in the upper part of the nose are joined by the midline internasal suture. 

They join with the septal cartilage at a junction known as the rhinion. 

The rhinion is the midpoint of the internasal suture at the join with the cartilage, and from the rhinion to the apex, or tip, the framework is of cartilage.

The major alar cartilages are thin, U-shaped plates of cartilage on each side of the nose that form the lateral and medial walls of the vestibule, known as the medial and lateral crura. 

The medial crura are attached to the septal cartilage, forming fleshy parts at the front of the nostrils on each side of the septum, called the medial crural footpods. 

The medial crura meet at the midline below the end of the septum to form the columella and lobule. 

The lobule contains the tip of the nose and its base contains the nostrils. 

At the peaks of the folds of the medial crura, they form the alar domes the tip-defining points of the nose, separated by a notch. 

They then fold outwards, above and to the side of the nostrils forming the lateral crura. 

The major alar cartilages are freely moveable and can respond to muscles to either open or constrict the nostrils.

There is a reinforcing structure known as the nasal scroll that resists internal collapse from airflow pressure generated by normal breathing. 

This structure is formed by the junction between the lateral and major cartilages. 

Their edges interlock by one scrolling upwards and one scrolling inwards.


=== Muscles ===

The muscles of the nose are a subgroup of the facial muscles. 

They are involved in respiration and facial expression. 

The muscles of the nose include the procerus, nasalis, depressor septi nasi, levator labii superioris alaeque nasi, and the orbicularis oris of the mouth. 

As are all of the facial muscles, the muscles of the nose are innervated by the facial nerve and its branches. 

Although each muscle is independent, the muscles of the nose form a continuous layer with connections between all the components of the muscles and ligaments, in the nasal part of a superficial muscular aponeurotic system (SMAS). 

The SMAS is continuous from the nasofrontal process to the nasal tip. 

It divides at level of the nasal valve into superficial and deep layers, each layer having medial and lateral components.

The procerus muscle produces wrinkling over the bridge of the nose, and is active in concentration and frowning. 

It is a prime target for Botox procedures in the forehead to remove the lines between the eyes.

The nasalis muscle consists of two main parts: a transverse part called the compressor naris, and an alar part termed the dilator naris. 

The compressor naris muscle compresses the nostrils and may completely close them. 

The alar part, the dilator naris mainly consists of the dilator naris posterior, and a much smaller dilator naris anterior, and this muscle flares the nostrils. 

The dilator naris helps to form the upper ridge of the philtrum. 

The anterior, and the posterior dilator naris, (the alar part of the nasalis muscle), give support to the nasal valves.The depressor septi nasi may sometimes be absent or rudimentary. 

The depressor septi pulls the columella, the septum, and the tip of the nose downwards. 

At the start of inspiration this muscle tenses the nasal septum and with the dilator naris widens the nostrils.

The levator labii superioris alaeque nasi divides into a medial and a lateral slip. 

The medial slip blends into the perichondrium of the major alar cartilage and its overlying skin. 

The lateral slip blends at the side of the upper lip with the levator labii superioris, and with the orbicularis oris. 

The lateral slip raises the upper lip and deepens and increases the curve above the nasolabial furrow. 

The medial slip pulls the lateral crus upwards and modifies the curve of the furrow around the alae, and dilates the nostrils.


=== Soft tissue ===

The skin of the nose varies in thickness along its length. 

From the glabella to the bridge (the nasofrontal angle) the skin is thick, fairly flexible, and mobile. 

It tapers to the bridge where it is thinnest and least flexible as it is closest to the underlying bone. 

From the bridge until the tip of the nose the skin is thin. 

The tip is covered in skin that is as thick as the top section, and has many large sebaceous glands.

The thickness of the skin varies but is still separated from the underlying bones and cartilage by four layers – a superficial fatty layer; a fibromuscular layer continued from the SMAS; a deep fatty layer, and the periosteum.

Other areas of soft tissue are found where there is no support from cartilage; these include an area around the sides of the septum – the paraseptal area –, an area around the lateral cartilages, an area at the top of the nostril, and an area in the alae.


=== External nose ===

The nasal root is the top of the nose that attaches the nose to the forehead. 

The nasal root is above the bridge and below the glabella, forming an indentation known as the nasion at the frontonasal suture where the frontal bone meets the nasal bones. 

The nasal dorsum also known as the nasal ridge is the border between the root and the tip of the nose which in profile can be variously shaped. 

The ala of the nose (ala nasi, "wing of the nose"; plural alae) is the lower lateral surface of the external nose, shaped by the alar cartilage and covered in dense connective tissue. 

The alae flare out to form a rounded eminence around the nostril. 

Sexual dimorphism is evident in the larger nose of the male. 

This is due to the increased testosterone that thickens the brow ridge and the bridge of the nose making it wider.


=== Nasal cavity ===


The nasal cavity is the large internal space of the nose, and is in two parts – the nasal vestibule and the nasal cavity proper. 

The nasal vestibule is the frontmost part of the nasal cavity, enclosed by cartilages. 

The vestibule is lined with skin, hair follicles, and a large number of sebaceous glands. 

A mucous ridge known as the limen nasi separates the vestibule from the rest of the nasal cavity and marks the change from the skin of the vestibule to the respiratory epithelium of the rest of the nasal cavity. 

This area is also known as a mucocutaneous junction and has a dense microvasculature.

The nasal cavity is divided into two cavities by the nasal septum, and each is accessed by an external nostril. 

The division into two cavities enables the functioning of the nasal cycle that slows down the conditioning process of the inhaled air.

At the back of the nasal cavity there are two openings, called choanae (also posterior nostrils), that give entrance to the nasopharynx, and rest of the respiratory tract.

On the outer wall of each cavity are three shell-like bones called conchae, arranged as superior, middle and inferior nasal conchae. 

Below each concha is a corresponding superior, middle, and inferior nasal meatus, or passage. 

Sometimes when the superior concha is narrow, a fourth supreme nasal concha is present situated above and sharing the space with the superior concha. 

The term concha refers to the actual bone; when covered by soft tissue and mucosa, and functioning, a concha is termed a turbinate. 

Excessive moisture as tears collected in the lacrimal sac travel down the nasolacrimal ducts where they drain into the inferior meatus in the nasal cavity.

Most of the nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses is lined with respiratory epithelium as nasal mucosa. 

In the roof of each cavity is an area of specialised olfactory epithelium. 

This region is about 5 square cm, covering the superior concha, the cribriform plate, and the nasal septum.

There is a nasal valve area that is the narrowest part of the nasal passage. 

An external valve exists in the larger ala part of the vestibule. 

An internal nasal valve typically referred to as the nasal valve, is a slit-like segment between part of the upper lateral cartilage and the septum in the middle third of the cavity. 

The valves regulate the airflow and resistance. 

Air breathed in is forced to pass through the narrow internal nasal valve, and then expands as it moves into the nasal cavity. 

The sudden change in the speed and pressure of the airflow creates turbulence that allows optimum contact with the respiratory epithelium for the necessary warming, moisturising, and filtering. 

The turbulence also allows movement of the air to pass over the olfactory epithelium and transfer odour information. 

The angle of the valve between the septum and the sidewall needs to be sufficient for unobstructed airflow, and this is normally between 10 and 15 degrees.

The borders of each nasal cavity are a roof, floor, medial wall (the septum), and lateral wall. 

The middle part of the roof of the nasal cavity is composed of the horizontal, perforated cribriform plate of the ethmoid bone, through which pass sensory fibres of the olfactory nerve into the cranial cavity.


==== Paranasal sinuses ====

The mucosa that lines the nasal cavity extends into its chambers, the paranasal sinuses. 

The nasal cavity and the paranasal sinuses are referred to as the sinonasal tract or sinonasal region, and its anatomy is recognised as being unique and complex. 

Four paired paranasal sinuses – the frontal sinus, the sphenoid sinus, the ethmoid sinus and the maxillary sinus drain into regions of the nasal cavity.

The sinuses are air-filled extensions of the nasal cavity into the cranial bones. 

The frontal sinuses are located in the frontal bone; the sphenoidal sinuses in the sphenoid bone; the maxillary sinuses in the maxilla; and the ethmoidal sinuses in the ethmoid bone.

A narrow opening called a sinus ostium from each of the paranasal sinuses allows drainage into the nasal cavity. 

The maxillary sinus is the largest of the sinuses and drains into the middle meatus. 

Most of the ostia open into the middle meatus and the anterior ethmoid, that together are termed the ostiomeatal complex. 

Adults have a high concentration of cilia in the ostia. 

The cilia in the sinuses beat towards the openings into the nasal cavity. 

The increased numbers of cilia and the narrowness of the sinus openings allow for an increased time for moisturising, and warming.


=== Nose shape ===

The shape of the nose varies widely due to differences in the nasal bone shapes and formation of the bridge of the nose. 

Some nose shapes were classified for surgeries by Eden Warwick in Nasology. 

These were later incorporated into a nasal index by Paul Topinard. 

Anthropometric studies have importantly contributed to craniofacial surgery, and the nasal index is a recognised anthropometric index used in nasal surgery.

		

Paul Topinard developed the nasal index as a method of classifying ethnic groups. 

The index is based on the ratio of the breadth of the nose to its height. 

The nasal dimensions are also used to classify nasal morphology into five types: Hyperleptorrhine is a very long, narrow nose with a nasal index of 40 to 55. 

Leptorrhine describes a long, narrow nose with an index of 55–70. 

Mesorrhine is a medium nose with an index of 70–85. 

Platyrrhine is a short, broad nose with an index of 85–99·9. 

The fifth type is the hyperplatyrrhine having an index of more than 100.Some deformities of the nose are named, such as the pug nose and the saddle nose. 

The pug nose is characterised by excess tissue from the apex that is out of proportion to the rest of the nose. 

A low and underdeveloped nasal bridge may also be evident. 

A saddle nose deformity involving the collapse of the bridge of the nose is mostly associated with trauma to the nose but can be caused by other conditions including leprosy.

Werner syndrome, a condition associated with premature aging, causes a "bird-like" appearance due to pinching of the nose.

Down syndrome commonly presents a small nose with a flattened nasal bridge. 

This can be due to the absence of one or both nasal bones, shortened nasal bones, or nasal bones that have not fused in the midline.


== Blood supply and drainage ==



=== Supply ===


The blood supply to the nose is provided by branches of the ophthalmic, maxillary, and facial arteries – branches of the carotid arteries. 

Branches of these arteries anastomose to form plexuses in and under the nasal mucosa. 

In the septal region Kiesselbach's plexus is a common site of nosebleeds.

Branches of the ophthalmic artery – the anterior and posterior ethmoidal arteries supply the roof, upper bony septum, and ethmoidal and frontal sinuses. 

The anterior ethmoidal artery also helps to supply the lower septal cartilage. 

Another branch is the dorsal nasal artery a terminal branch that supplies the skin of the alae and dorsum.

Branches of the maxillary artery include the greater palatine artery; the sphenopalatine artery and its branches – the posterior lateral nasal arteries and posterior septal nasal branches; the pharyngeal branch; and the infraorbital artery and its branches – the superior anterior and posterior alveolar arteries.

The sphenopalatine artery and the ethmoid arteries supply the outer walls of the nasal cavity. 

There is additional supply from a branch of the facial artery – the superior labial artery. 

The sphenopalantine artery is the artery primarily responsible for supplying the nasal mucosa.The skin of the alae is supplied by the septal and lateral nasal branches of the facial artery. 

The skin of the outer parts of the alae and the dorsum of the nose are supplied by the dorsal nasal artery a branch of the ophthalmic artery, and the infraorbital branch of the maxillary arteries.


=== Drainage ===

Veins of the nose include the angular vein that drains the side of the nose, receiving lateral nasal veins from the alae. 

The angular vein joins with the superior labial vein. 

Some small veins from the dorsum of the nose drain to the nasal arch of the frontal vein at the root of the nose.
In the posterior region of the cavity, specifically in the posterior part of the inferior meatus is a venous plexus known as Woodruff's plexus. 

This plexus is made up of large thin-walled veins with little soft tissue such as muscle or fiber. 

The mucosa of the plexus is thin with very few structures.


== Lymphatic drainage ==

From different areas of the nose superficial lymphatic vessels run with the veins, and deep lymphatic vessels travel with the arteries.

Lymph drains from the anterior half of the nasal cavity, including both the medial and lateral walls, to join that of the external nasal skin to drain into the 
submandibular lymph nodes. 

The rest of the nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses all drain to the upper deep cervical lymph nodes, either directly or through the retropharyngeal lymph nodes. 

The back of the nasal floor probably drains to the parotid lymph nodes.


== Nerve supply ==

The nerve supply to the nose and paranasal sinuses comes from two branches of the trigeminal nerve (CN V): 
    the ophthalmic nerve (CN V1), the maxillary nerve (CN V2), and branches from these.In the nasal cavity, the nasal mucosa is divided in terms of nerve supply into a back lower part (posteroinferior), and a frontal upper part (anterosuperior). 

The posterior part is supplied by a branch of the maxillary nerve – the nasopalatine nerve which reaches the septum. 

Lateral nasal branches of the greater palatine nerve supply the lateral wall.

The frontal upper part is supplied from a branch of the ophthalmic nerve – the nasociliary nerve, and its branches – the anterior and posterior ethmoidal nerves.

Most of the external nose – the dorsum, and the apex are supplied by the infratrochlear nerve, (a branch of the nasociliary nerve). 

The external branch of the anterior ethmoidal nerve also supplies areas of skin between the root and the alae.

The alae of the nose are supplied by nasal branches of CN V2, the infraorbital nerve, and internal nasal branches of infraorbital nerve that supply the septum and the vestibule.

The maxillary sinus is supplied by superior alveolar nerves from the maxillary and infraorbital nerves. 

The frontal sinus is supplied by branches of the supraorbital nerve. 

The ethmoid sinuses are supplied by anterior and posterior ethmoid branches of the nasociliary nerve. 

The sphenoid sinus is supplied by the posterior ethmoidal nerves.


=== Movement ===

The muscles of the nose are supplied by branches of the facial nerve. 

The nasalis muscle is supplied by the buccal branches. 

It may also be supplied by one of the zygomatic branches. 

The procerus is supplied by temporal branches of the facial nerve and lower zygomatic branches; a supply from the buccal branch has also been described. 

The depressor septi is innervated by the buccal branch, and sometimes by the zygomatic branch, of the facial nerve. 

The levator labii superioris alaeque nasi is innervated by zygomatic and superior buccal branches of the facial nerve.


=== Smell ===

The sense of smell is transmitted by the olfactory nerves. 

Olfactory nerves are bundles of very small unmyelinated axons that are derived from olfactory receptor neurons in the olfactory mucosa. 

The axons are in varying stages of maturity, reflecting the constant turnover of neurons in the olfactory epithelium. 

A plexiform network is formed in the lamina propria, by the bundles of axons that are surrounded by olfactory ensheathing cells. 

In as many as twenty branches, the bundled axons cross the cribriform plate and enter the overlying olfactory bulb ending as glomeruli. 

Each branch is enclosed by an outer dura mater that becomes continuous with the nasal periosteum.


=== Autonomic supply ===

The nasal mucosa in the nasal cavity is also supplied by the autonomic nervous system. 

Postganglionic nerve fibers from the deep petrosal nerve join with preganglionic nerve fibers from the greater petrosal nerve to form the nerve of the pterygoid canal. 

Sympathetic postganglionic fibers are distributed to the blood vessels of the nose. 

Postganglionic parasympathetic fibres derived from the pterygopalatine ganglion provide the secretomotor supply to the nasal mucous glands, and are distributed via branches of the maxillary nerves.


== Development ==



=== Development of the nose ===

In the early development of the embryo, neural crest cells migrate to form the mesenchymal tissue as ectomesenchyme of the pharyngeal arches. 

By the end of the fourth week, the first pair of pharyngeal arches form five facial prominences or processes - an unpaired frontonasal process, paired mandibular processes and paired maxillary processes. 

The nose is largely formed by the fusion of these five facial prominences. 

The frontonasal process gives rise to the bridge of the nose. 

The medial nasal processes provide the crest and the tip of the nose, and the lateral nasal processes form the alae or sides of the nose. 

The frontonasal process is a proliferation of mesenchyme in front of the brain vesicles, and makes up the upper border of the stomadeum. 

During the fifth week the maxillary processes increase in size and at the same time the ectoderm of the frontonasal process becomes thickened at its sides and also increases in size, forming the nasal placodes. 

The nasal placodes are also known as the olfactory placodes. 

This development is induced by the ventral part of the forebrain. 

In the sixth week the ectoderm in each nasal placode invaginates to form an indented oval-shaped pit, which forms a surrounding raised ridge of tissue. 

Each nasal pit forms a division between the ridges, into a lateral nasal process on the outer edge, and a medial nasal process on the inner edge.

In the sixth week the nasal pits deepen as they penetrate into the underlying mesenchyme. 

At this time, the medial nasal processes migrate towards each other and fuse forming the primordium of the bridge of the nose and the septum. 

The migration is helped by the increased growth of the maxillary prominences medially, which compresses the medial nasal processes towards the midline. 

Their merging takes place at the surface, and also at a deeper level. 

The merge forms the intermaxillary segment, and this is continuous with the rostral part of the nasal septum. 

The tips of the maxillary processes also grow and fuse with the intermaxillary process. 

The intermaxillary process gives rise to the philtrum of the upper lip.At the end of the sixth week the nasal pits have deepened further and they fuse to make a large ectodermal nasal sac. 

This sac will be above and to the back of the intermaxillary process. 

Leading into the seventh week, the nasal sac floor and posterior wall grow to form a thickened plate-like ectodermal structure called the nasal fin. 

The nasal fin separates the sac from the oral cavity. 

Within the fin, vacuoles develop that fuse with the nasal sac. 

This enlarges the nasal sac and at the same time thins the fin to a membrane - the oronasal membrane that separates the nasal pits from the oral cavity. 

During the seventh week the oronasal membrane ruptures and disintegrates to form an opening - the single primitive choana. 

The intermaxillary segment extends posteriorly to form the primary palate which makes up the floor of the nasal cavity. 

During the eighth and ninth weeks a pair of thin extensions form from the medial walls of the maxillary process. 

These extensions are called the palatine shelves that form the secondary palate. 

The secondary palate will endochondrally ossify to form the hard palate - the end-stage floor of the nasal cavity. 

During this time ectoderm and mesoderm of the frontonasal process produce the midline septum. 

The septum grows down from the roof of the nasal cavity and fuses with the developing palates along the midline. 

The septum divides the nasal cavity into two nasal passages opening into the pharynx through the definitive choanae.

At ten weeks, the cells differentiate into muscle, cartilage, and bone. 

Problems at this stage of development can cause birth defects such as choanal atresia (absent or closed passage), facial clefts and nasal dysplasia (faulty or incomplete development) or extremely rarely polyrrhinia the formation of a duplicate nose.

Normal development is critical because the newborn infant breathes through the nose for the first six weeks, and any nasal blockage will need emergency treatment to clear.


=== Development of the paranasal sinuses ===

The four pairs of paranasal sinuses - the maxillary, ethmoid, sphenoid, and frontal, develop from the nasal cavity as invaginations extending into their named bones. 

Two pairs of sinuses form during prenatal development and two pairs form after birth. 

The maxillary sinuses are the first to appear during the fetal third month. 

They slowly expand within the maxillary bones and continue to expand throughout childhood. 

The maxillary sinuses form as invaginations from the nasal sac. 

The ethmoid sinuses appear in the fetal fifth month as invaginations of the middle meatus. 

The ethmoid sinuses do not grow into the ethmoid bone and do not completely develop until puberty. 

The sphenoid sinuses are extensions of the ethmoid sinuses into the sphenoid bones. 

They begin to develop around two years of age, and continue to enlarge during childhood.

The frontal sinuses only develop in the fifth or sixth year of childhood, and continue expanding throughout adolescence. 

Each frontal sinus is made up of two independent spaces that develop from two different sources; one from the expansion of ethmoid sinuses into frontal bone, and the other develops from invagination. 

They never coalesce so drain independently.


== Function ==

=== Respiration ===


The nose is the first organ of the upper respiratory tract in the respiratory system. 

Its main respiratory function is the supply and conditioning, by warming, moisturising and filtering of particulates of inhaled air. 

Nasal hair in the nostrils traps large particles preventing their entry into the lungs.

The three positioned nasal conchae in each cavity provide four grooves as air passages, along which the air is circulated and moved to the nasopharynx. 

The internal structures and cavities, including the conchae and paranasal sinuses form an integrated system for the conditioning of the air breathed in through the nose. 

This functioning also includes the major role of the nasal mucosa, and the resulting conditioning of the air before it reaches the lungs is important in maintaining the internal environment and proper functioning of the lungs. 

The turbulence created by the conchae and meatuses optimises the warming, moistening, and filtering of the mucosa. 

A major protective role is thereby provided by these structures of the upper respiratory tract, in the passage of air to the more delicate structures of the lower respiratory tract.

Sneezing is an important protective reflex action initiated by irritation of the nasal mucosa to expel unwanted particles through the mouth and nose. 

Photic sneezing is a reflex brought on by different stimuli such as bright lights. 

The nose is also able to provide sense information as to the temperature of the air being breathed.

Variations in shape of the nose have been hypothesised to possibly be adaptive to regional differences in temperature and humidity, though they may also have been driven by other factors such as sexual selection.


=== Sense of smell ===


The nose also plays the major part in the olfactory system. 

It contains an area of specialised cells, olfactory receptor neurons responsible for the sense of smell (olfaction). 

Olfactory mucosa in the upper nasal cavity, contains a type of nasal gland called olfactory glands or Bowman's glands which help in olfaction. 

The nasal conchae also help in olfaction function, by directing air-flow to the olfactory region.


=== Speech ===


Speech is produced with pressure from the lungs. 

This can be modified using airflow through the nose in a process called nasalisation. 

This involves the lowering of the soft palate to produce nasal vowels and consonants by allowing air to escape from both the nose and the mouth. 

Nasal airflow is also used to produce a variety of nasal clicks called click consonants. 

The large, hollow cavities of the paranasal sinuses act as resonating chambers that modify, and amplify speech and other vocal vibrations passing through them.


== Clinical significance ==

One of the most common medical conditions involving the nose is a nosebleed (epistaxis). 

Most nosebleeds occur in Kiesselbach's plexus, a vascular plexus in the lower front part of the septum involving the convergence of four arteries. 

A smaller proportion of nosebleeds that tend to be nontraumatic occur in Woodruff's plexus. 

Woodruff's plexus is a venous plexus of large thin-walled veins lying in the posterior part of the inferior meatus.

Another common condition is nasal congestion, usually a symptom of infection, particularly sinusitis, or other inflammation of the nasal lining called rhinitis, including allergic rhinitis and nonallergic rhinitis. 

Chronic nasal obstruction resulting in breathing through the mouth can greatly impair or prevent the nostrils from flaring. 

One of the causes of snoring is nasal obstruction, and anti-snoring devices such as a nasal strip help to flare the nostrils and keep the airway open. 

Nasal flaring, is usually seen in children when breathing is difficult. 

Most conditions of nasal congestion also cause a loss of the sense of smell (anosmia). 

This may also occur in other conditions, for example following trauma, in Kallmann syndrome or Parkinson's disease. 

A blocked sinus ostium, an opening from a paranasal sinus, will cause fluid to accumulate in the sinus.
In children the nose is a common site of foreign bodies. 

The nose is one of the exposed areas that is susceptible to frostbite.

Because of the special nature of the blood supply to the human nose and surrounding area, it is possible for retrograde infections from the nasal area to spread to the brain. 

For this reason, the area from the corners of the mouth to the bridge of the nose, including the nose and maxilla, is known as the danger triangle of the face.

Infections or other conditions that may result in destruction of, or damage to a part of the nose include rhinophyma, skin cancers particularly basal-cell carcinoma, paranasal sinus and nasal cavity cancer, granulomatosis with polyangiitis, syphilis, leprosy, recreational use of cocaine, chromium and other toxins. 

The nose may be stimulated to grow in acromegaly, a condition caused by an excess of growth hormone.A common anatomic variant is an air-filled cavity within a concha known as a concha bullosa. 

In rare cases a polyp can form inside a bullosa. 

Usually a concha bullosa is small and without symptoms but when large can cause obstruction to sinus drainage.

Some drugs can be nasally administered, including drug delivery to the brain, and these include nasal sprays and topical treatments. 

The septal cartilage can be destroyed through the repeated inhalation of recreational drugs such as cocaine. 

This, in turn, can lead to more widespread collapse of the nasal skeleton.Sneezing can transmit infections carried in the expelled droplets. 

This route is called either airborne transmission or aerosol transmission.


=== Surgical procedures ===


Badly positioned alar cartilages lack proper support, and can affect the function of the external nasal valve. 

This can cause breathing problems particularly during deep inhalation. 

The surgical procedure to correct breathing problems due to disorders in the nasal structures is called a rhinoplasty, and this is also the procedure used for a cosmetic surgery when it is commonly called a "nose job". 

For surgical procedures of rhinoplasty, the nose is mapped out into a number of subunits and segments. 

This uses nine aesthetic nasal subunits and six aesthetic nasal segments. 

A septoplasty is the specific surgery to correct a nasal septum deviation.
A broken nose can result from trauma. 

Minor fractures may heal on their own. 

Surgery known as reduction may be carried out on more severe breaks that cause dislocation.Several nasal procedures of the nose and paranasal sinuses can be carried out using minimally-invasive nasal endoscopy. 

These procedures aim to restore sinus ventilation, mucociliary clearance, and maintain the health of the sinus mucosa.

Some non-nasal surgeries can also be carried out through the use of an endoscope that is entered through the nose. 

These endoscopic endonasal surgeries are used to remove tumours from the front of the base of the skull.

Swollen conchae can cause obstruction and nasal congestion, and may be treated surgically by a turbinectomy.


== Society and culture ==

Some people choose to have cosmetic surgery (called a rhinoplasty) to change the appearance of their nose. 

Nose piercings, such as in the nostril, septum, or bridge, are also common. 

In certain Asian countries such as China, Japan, South Korea, Malaysia, Thailand and Bangladesh, rhinoplasties are commonly carried out to create a more developed nose bridge or a "high nose". 

Similarly, "DIY nose lifts" in the form of re-usable cosmetic items have become popular and are sold in many Asian countries such as China, Japan, South Korea, Taiwan, Sri Lanka and Thailand. 

A high-bridged nose has been a common beauty ideal in many Asian cultures dating back to the beauty ideals of ancient China and India.

In New Zealand, nose pressing ("hongi") is a traditional greeting originating among the Māori people. 

However it is now generally confined to certain traditional celebrations.

The Hanazuka monument enshrines the mutilated noses of at least 38,000 Koreans killed during the Japanese invasions of Korea from 1592 to 1598.Nose-picking is a common, mildly taboo habit. 

Medical risks include the spread of infections, nosebleeds and, rarely, perforation of the nasal septum. 

When it becomes compulsive it is termed rhinotillexomania. 

The wiping of the nose with the hand, commonly referred to as the "allergic salute", is also mildly taboo and can result in the spreading of infections as well. 

Habitual as well as fast or rough nose wiping may also result in a crease (known as a transverse nasal crease or groove) running across the nose, and can lead to permanent physical deformity observable in childhood and adulthood.Nose fetishism (or nasophilia) is the sexual partialism for the nose.


== Neanderthals ==

Clive Finlayson of the Gibraltar Museum said the large Neanderthal noses were an adaption to the cold, Todd C. 

Rae of the American Museum of Natural History said primate and arctic animal studies have shown sinus size reduction in areas of extreme cold rather than enlargement in accordance with Allen's rule. 

Therefore, Todd C. 

Rae concludes that the design of the large and prognathic Neanderthal nose was evolved for the hotter climate of the Middle East and Africa and remained unchanged when they entered Europe.Miquel Hernández of the Department of Animal Biology at the University of Barcelona said the "high and narrow nose of Eskimos and Neanderthals" is an "adaption to a cold and dry environment", since it contributes to warming and moisturizing the air and the "recovery of heat and moisture from expired air".



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Human_nose
;;;ES;;;



NARIZ EXTERNA


La nariz humana es la parte más prominente de la cara.

Lleva las fosas nasales y es el primer órgano del sistema respiratorio.

También es el órgano principal del sistema olfativo.

La forma de la nariz está determinada por los huesos nasales y los cartílagos nasales, incluido el tabique nasal que separa las fosas nasales y divide la cavidad nasal en dos.

En promedio, la nariz de un macho es más grande que la de una hembra.
La nariz tiene una función importante en la respiración.

La mucosa nasal que recubre la cavidad nasal y los senos paranasales realiza el necesario acondicionamiento del aire inhalado calentándolo y humedeciéndolo.

Los cornetes nasales, huesos con forma de concha en las paredes de las cavidades, juegan un papel importante en este proceso.

El filtrado del aire por el vello nasal en las fosas nasales evita que las partículas grandes entren en los pulmones.

El estornudo es un reflejo para expulsar partículas no deseadas de la nariz que irritan el revestimiento de la mucosa.

Los estornudos pueden transmitir infecciones, porque se crean aerosoles en los que las gotitas pueden albergar patógenos.

Otra función importante de la nariz es el olfato, el sentido del olfato.

El área del epitelio olfatorio, en la cavidad nasal superior, contiene células olfativas especializadas responsables de esta función.

La nariz también está involucrada en la función del habla.

Las vocales nasales y las consonantes nasales se producen en el proceso de nasalización.

Las cavidades huecas de los senos paranasales actúan como cámaras de sonido que modifican y amplifican el habla y otros sonidos vocales.

Hay muchos procedimientos de cirugía plástica en la nariz, conocidos como rinoplastias disponibles para corregir varios defectos estructurales o para cambiar la forma de la nariz.

Los defectos pueden ser congénitos o resultar de trastornos nasales o de un traumatismo.

Estos procedimientos son un tipo de cirugía reconstructiva.

Los procedimientos electivos para cambiar la forma de la nariz son un tipo de cirugía estética.


== Estructura ==

Varios huesos y cartílagos forman el marco óseo-cartilaginoso de la nariz y la estructura interna.

La nariz también se compone de tipos de tejido blando como la piel, el epitelio, la membrana mucosa, los músculos, los nervios y los vasos sanguíneos.

En la piel hay glándulas sebáceas y en la membrana mucosa hay glándulas nasales.

Los huesos y cartílagos brindan una fuerte protección a las estructuras internas de la nariz.

Hay varios músculos que están involucrados en los movimientos de la nariz.

La disposición de los cartílagos permite la flexibilidad a través del control muscular para permitir que se modifique el flujo de aire.


=== Huesos ===


La estructura ósea de la nariz la proporcionan el maxilar, el hueso frontal y varios huesos más pequeños.

La parte ósea superior de la nariz está formada por la parte nasal del hueso frontal, que se encuentra entre los arcos de las cejas y termina en una muesca nasal dentada.

Un hueso nasal izquierdo y uno derecho se unen con la parte nasal del hueso frontal a cada lado; y estos al lado con los pequeños huesos lagrimales y el proceso frontal de cada maxilar.

El techo interno de la cavidad nasal está compuesto por la placa cribosa perforada horizontal del hueso etmoides a través de la cual pasan las fibras sensoriales del nervio olfatorio.

Debajo y detrás de la placa cribosa, inclinada hacia abajo en ángulo, se encuentra la cara del hueso esfenoides.

La pared que separa las dos cavidades de la nariz, el tabique nasal, está formada por hueso en el interior y cartílago más cerca de la punta de la nariz.

La parte ósea está formada por la placa perpendicular del hueso etmoides en la parte superior y el hueso vómer en la parte inferior.

El piso de la nariz está formado por el hueso incisivo y las placas horizontales de los huesos palatinos, y esto forma el paladar duro del techo de la boca.

Las dos placas horizontales se unen en la línea media y forman la espina nasal posterior que se une al músculo de la úvula en la úvula.

Los dos huesos maxilares se unen en la base de la nariz en la línea media nasal inferior entre las fosas nasales y en la parte superior del filtrum para formar la espina nasal anterior.

Esta fina proyección de hueso sostiene el centro cartilaginoso de la nariz.

También es un hito cefalométrico importante.


=== Cartílagos ===


Los cartílagos nasales son los cartílagos septal, lateral, alar mayor y alar menor.

Los cartílagos mayor y menor también se conocen como cartílagos alares mayor y menor.

Hay una tira estrecha de cartílago llamada cartílago vomeronasal que se encuentra entre el vómer y el cartílago septal.

El cartílago nasal septal, se extiende desde los huesos nasales en la línea media, hasta la parte ósea del tabique en la línea media, posteriormente.

Luego pasa a lo largo del piso de la cavidad nasal.

El tabique es cuadrangular: la mitad superior está unida a los dos cartílagos nasales laterales que se fusionan con el tabique dorsal en la línea media.

El tabique está unido lateralmente, con ligamentos sueltos, al margen óseo de la abertura nasal anterior, mientras que los extremos inferiores de los cartílagos laterales están libres (sin unir).

Los tres o cuatro cartílagos alares menores están adyacentes a los cartílagos laterales, sostenidos en la membrana de tejido conectivo, que conecta los cartílagos laterales con el proceso frontal del maxilar.

Los huesos nasales en la parte superior de la nariz están unidos por la sutura internasal de la línea media.

Se unen con el cartílago septal en una unión conocida como rhinion.

El rhinion es el punto medio de la sutura internasal en la unión con el cartílago, y desde el rhinion hasta el vértice o punta, la estructura es de cartílago.

Los cartílagos alares principales son placas delgadas de cartílago en forma de U a cada lado de la nariz que forman las paredes lateral y medial del vestíbulo, conocidas como pilares medial y lateral.

Los pilares mediales están adheridos al cartílago septal, formando partes carnosas en la parte delantera de las fosas nasales a cada lado del tabique, denominadas bases crurales mediales.

Los pilares mediales se encuentran en la línea media por debajo del final del tabique para formar la columela y el lóbulo.

El lóbulo contiene la punta de la nariz y su base contiene las fosas nasales.

En los picos de los pliegues de los pilares mediales, forman las cúpulas alar, los puntos que definen la punta de la nariz, separados por una muesca.

Luego se doblan hacia afuera, por encima y al costado de las fosas nasales, formando los pilares laterales.

Los principales cartílagos alares se mueven libremente y pueden responder a los músculos para abrir o contraer las fosas nasales.

Hay una estructura de refuerzo conocida como voluta nasal que resiste el colapso interno de la presión del flujo de aire generado por la respiración normal.

Esta estructura está formada por la unión entre los cartílagos lateral y mayor.

Sus bordes se entrelazan por uno que se desplaza hacia arriba y otro que se desplaza hacia adentro.


=== Músculos ===

Los músculos de la nariz son un subgrupo de los músculos faciales.

Participan en la respiración y la expresión facial.

Los músculos de la nariz incluyen el procerus, nasalis, depressor septi nasi, levator labii superioris alaeque nasi y el orbicularis oris de la boca.

Como todos los músculos faciales, los músculos de la nariz están inervados por el nervio facial y sus ramas.

Aunque cada músculo es independiente, los músculos de la nariz forman una capa continua con conexiones entre todos los componentes de los músculos y ligamentos, en la parte nasal de un sistema aponeurótico muscular superficial (SMAS).

El SMAS es continuo desde el proceso nasofrontal hasta la punta nasal.

Se divide al nivel de la válvula nasal en capas superficiales y profundas, cada capa tiene componentes medial y lateral.

El músculo procerus produce arrugas sobre el puente de la nariz y está activo en la concentración y el ceño fruncido.

Es un objetivo principal para los procedimientos de Botox en la frente para eliminar las líneas entre los ojos.

El músculo nasal consta de dos partes principales: una parte transversal denominada naris compresora y una parte alar denominada naris dilatadora.

El músculo compresor de la naris comprime las fosas nasales y puede cerrarlas por completo.

La parte alar, el dilatador nasal consiste principalmente en el dilatador nasal posterior y un dilatador nasal anterior mucho más pequeño, y este músculo ensancha las fosas nasales.

El dilatador nasal ayuda a formar la cresta superior del filtrum.

Los dilatadores nasales anterior y posterior (la parte alar del músculo nasalis) dan soporte a las válvulas nasales. El depresor septi nasi a veces puede estar ausente o ser rudimentario.

El depresor del tabique tira de la columela, el tabique y la punta de la nariz hacia abajo.

Al comienzo de la inspiración este músculo tensa el tabique nasal y con el dilatador nasal ensancha las fosas nasales.

El elevador del labio superior alaeque nasi se divide en un deslizamiento medial y lateral.

El deslizamiento medial se funde con el pericondrio del cartílago alar mayor y la piel que lo recubre.

El deslizamiento lateral se funde en el lado del labio superior con el elevador del labio superior y con el orbicular de los labios.

El deslizamiento lateral eleva el labio superior y profundiza y aumenta la curva por encima del surco nasolabial.

El deslizamiento medial tira del pilar lateral hacia arriba y modifica la curva del surco alrededor de las alas, y dilata las fosas nasales.


=== Tejido blando ===

La piel de la nariz varía en grosor a lo largo de su longitud.

Desde la glabela hasta el puente (el ángulo nasofrontal), la piel es gruesa, bastante flexible y móvil.

Se estrecha hacia el puente donde es más delgado y menos flexible, ya que está más cerca del hueso subyacente.

Desde el puente hasta la punta de la nariz la piel es fina.

La punta está cubierta de piel que es tan gruesa como la sección superior y tiene muchas glándulas sebáceas grandes.

El grosor de la piel varía, pero aún está separada de los huesos y cartílagos subyacentes por cuatro capas: una capa de grasa superficial; una capa fibromuscular continuada desde el SMAS; una capa grasa profunda, y el periostio.

Se encuentran otras áreas de tejido blando donde no hay apoyo del cartílago; estos incluyen un área alrededor de los lados del tabique, el área paraseptal, un área alrededor de los cartílagos laterales, un área en la parte superior de la fosa nasal y un área en las alas.


=== Nariz externa ===

La raíz nasal es la parte superior de la nariz que une la nariz con la frente.

La raíz nasal está por encima del puente y debajo de la glabela, formando una hendidura conocida como nasion en la sutura frontonasal donde el hueso frontal se encuentra con los huesos nasales.

El dorso nasal, también conocido como cresta nasal, es el borde entre la raíz y la punta de la nariz, que de perfil puede tener varias formas.

El ala de la nariz (ala nasi, "ala de la nariz"; plural alae) es la superficie lateral inferior de la nariz externa, formada por el cartílago alar y cubierta de tejido conectivo denso.

Las alas se ensanchan para formar una eminencia redondeada alrededor de la fosa nasal.

El dimorfismo sexual es evidente en la nariz más grande del macho.

Esto se debe al aumento de testosterona que engrosa el borde de la ceja y el puente de la nariz haciéndolo más ancho.


=== Cavidad nasal ===


La cavidad nasal es el gran espacio interno de la nariz y se divide en dos partes: el vestíbulo nasal y la cavidad nasal propiamente dicha.

El vestíbulo nasal es la parte más frontal de la cavidad nasal, encerrada por cartílagos.

El vestíbulo está revestido de piel, folículos pilosos y un gran número de glándulas sebáceas.

Una cresta mucosa conocida como limen nasi separa el vestíbulo del resto de la cavidad nasal y marca el cambio de la piel del vestíbulo al epitelio respiratorio del resto de la cavidad nasal.

Esta área también se conoce como unión mucocutánea y tiene una microvasculatura densa.

La cavidad nasal está dividida en dos cavidades por el tabique nasal, y se accede a cada una por una fosa nasal externa.

La división en dos cavidades permite el funcionamiento del ciclo nasal que ralentiza el proceso de acondicionamiento del aire inhalado.

En la parte posterior de la cavidad nasal hay dos aberturas, llamadas coanas (también fosas nasales posteriores), que dan entrada a la nasofaringe y al resto del tracto respiratorio.

En la pared exterior de cada cavidad hay tres huesos en forma de concha llamados cornetes, dispuestos como cornetes nasales superior, medio e inferior.

Debajo de cada concha hay un meato o conducto nasal superior, medio e inferior correspondiente.

A veces, cuando la concha superior es estrecha, una cuarta concha nasal suprema está presente situada arriba y comparte el espacio con la concha superior.

El término concha se refiere al hueso real; cuando está cubierta por tejido blando y mucosa y funciona, la concha se denomina cornete.

Humedad excesiva a medida que las lágrimas acumuladas en el saco lagrimal viajan por los conductos nasolagrimales donde drenan hacia el meato inferior en la cavidad nasal.

La mayor parte de la cavidad nasal y los senos paranasales está revestido con epitelio respiratorio como mucosa nasal.

En el techo de cada cavidad hay un área de epitelio olfatorio especializado.

Esta región tiene unos 5 cm cuadrados y cubre la concha superior, la lámina cribosa y el tabique nasal.

Hay un área de la válvula nasal que es la parte más estrecha del conducto nasal.

Existe una válvula externa en la parte del ala más grande del vestíbulo.

Una válvula nasal interna, generalmente denominada válvula nasal, es un segmento en forma de hendidura entre parte del cartílago lateral superior y el tabique en el tercio medio de la cavidad.

Las válvulas regulan el flujo de aire y la resistencia.

El aire que se inhala se fuerza a pasar a través de la estrecha válvula nasal interna y luego se expande a medida que se mueve hacia la cavidad nasal.

El cambio repentino en la velocidad y la presión del flujo de aire crea una turbulencia que permite un contacto óptimo con el epitelio respiratorio para el calentamiento, la hidratación y la filtración necesarios.

La turbulencia también permite que el movimiento del aire pase sobre el epitelio olfativo y transfiera la información del olor.

El ángulo de la válvula entre el tabique y la pared lateral debe ser suficiente para que el flujo de aire no se obstruya, y normalmente está entre 10 y 15 grados.

Los bordes de cada cavidad nasal son el techo, el suelo, la pared medial (el tabique) y la pared lateral.

La parte media del techo de la cavidad nasal está compuesta por la placa cribosa perforada horizontal del hueso etmoides, a través de la cual pasan las fibras sensoriales del nervio olfatorio hacia la cavidad craneal.


==== Senos paranasales ====

La mucosa que recubre la cavidad nasal se extiende hasta sus cámaras, los senos paranasales.

La cavidad nasal y los senos paranasales se denominan tracto sinonasal o región sinonasal, y se reconoce que su anatomía es única y compleja.

Cuatro senos paranasales emparejados: el seno frontal, el seno esfenoidal, el seno etmoidal y el seno maxilar drenan en regiones de la cavidad nasal.

Los senos paranasales son extensiones llenas de aire de la cavidad nasal hacia los huesos craneales.

Los senos frontales se encuentran en el hueso frontal; los senos esfenoidales en el hueso esfenoides; los senos maxilares en el maxilar; y los senos etmoidales en el hueso etmoidal.

Una abertura estrecha llamada ostium sinusal de cada uno de los senos paranasales permite el drenaje hacia la cavidad nasal.

El seno maxilar es el más grande de los senos y drena en el meato medio.

La mayoría de los ostium se abren hacia el meato medio y el etmoides anterior, que en conjunto se denominan complejo ostiomeatal.

Los adultos tienen una alta concentración de cilios en los ostium.

Los cilios en los senos se mueven hacia las aberturas de la cavidad nasal.

El mayor número de cilios y la estrechez de las aberturas de los senos permiten un mayor tiempo para la hidratación y el calentamiento.


=== Forma de la nariz ===

La forma de la nariz varía ampliamente debido a las diferencias en las formas de los huesos nasales y la formación del puente de la nariz.

Algunas formas de nariz fueron clasificadas para cirugías por Eden Warwick en Nasología.

Posteriormente, Paul Topinard los incorporó a un índice nasal.

Los estudios antropométricos han contribuido de manera importante a la cirugía craneofacial, y el índice nasal es un índice antropométrico reconocido que se utiliza en la cirugía nasal.

 

Paul Topinard desarrolló el índice nasal como método de clasificación de grupos étnicos.

El índice se basa en la relación entre el ancho de la nariz y su altura.

Las dimensiones nasales también se utilizan para clasificar la morfología nasal en cinco tipos: La hiperleptorrina es una nariz muy larga y estrecha con un índice nasal de 40 a 55.

La leptorrina describe una nariz larga y estrecha con un índice de 55 a 70.

La mesorrina es una nariz mediana con un índice de 70–85.

Platyrrhine es una nariz corta y ancha con un índice de 85–99·9.

El quinto tipo es la hiperplatirrina que tiene un índice de más de 100. Se nombran algunas deformidades de la nariz, como la nariz chata y la nariz en silla de montar.

La nariz chata se caracteriza por un exceso de tejido del ápice que no guarda proporción con el resto de la nariz.

También puede ser evidente un puente nasal bajo y subdesarrollado.

Una deformidad de la nariz en silla de montar que involucra el colapso del puente de la nariz se asocia principalmente con un traumatismo en la nariz, pero puede ser causada por otras afecciones, incluida la lepra.

El síndrome de Werner, una condición asociada con el envejecimiento prematuro, provoca una apariencia de "pájaro" debido al pellizco de la nariz.

El síndrome de Down comúnmente presenta una nariz pequeña con un puente nasal aplanado.

Esto puede deberse a la ausencia de uno o ambos huesos nasales, huesos nasales acortados o huesos nasales que no se han fusionado en la línea media.


== Suministro de sangre y drenaje ==



=== Suministro ===


El suministro de sangre a la nariz lo proporcionan ramas de las arterias oftálmica, maxilar y facial, ramas de las arterias carótidas.

Las ramas de estas arterias se anastomosan para formar plexos dentro y debajo de la mucosa nasal.

En la región septal, el plexo de Kiesselbach es un sitio común de hemorragias nasales.

Ramas de la arteria oftálmica: las arterias etmoidales anterior y posterior irrigan el techo, el tabique óseo superior y los senos etmoidal y frontal.

La arteria etmoidal anterior también ayuda a irrigar el cartílago septal inferior.

Otra rama es la arteria nasal dorsal, una rama terminal que irriga la piel de las alas y el dorso.

Las ramas de la arteria maxilar incluyen la arteria palatina mayor; la arteria esfenopalatina y sus ramas: las arterias nasales laterales posteriores y las ramas nasales septales posteriores; la rama faríngea; y la arteria infraorbitaria y sus ramas, las arterias alveolares superior anterior y posterior.

La arteria esfenopalatina y las arterias etmoidales irrigan las paredes externas de la cavidad nasal.

Hay suministro adicional de una rama de la arteria facial, la arteria labial superior.

La arteria esfenopalantina es la principal arteria responsable de irrigar la mucosa nasal. La piel de las alas está irrigada por las ramas nasales septal y lateral de la arteria facial.

La piel de las partes externas de las alas y el dorso de la nariz están irrigadas por la arteria nasal dorsal, una rama de la arteria oftálmica, y la rama infraorbitaria de las arterias maxilares.


=== Drenaje ===

Las venas de la nariz incluyen la vena angular que drena el costado de la nariz y recibe las venas nasales laterales de las alas.

La vena angular se une con la vena labial superior.

Algunas pequeñas venas del dorso de la nariz drenan al arco nasal de la vena frontal en la raíz de la nariz.
En la región posterior de la cavidad, concretamente en la parte posterior del meato inferior se encuentra un plexo venoso conocido como plexo de Woodruff.

Este plexo está formado por grandes venas de paredes delgadas con poco tejido blando, como músculo o fibra.

La mucosa del plexo es delgada con muy pocas estructuras.


== Drenaje linfático ==

Desde diferentes áreas de la nariz, los vasos linfáticos superficiales corren con las venas y los vasos linfáticos profundos viajan con las arterias.

La linfa drena desde la mitad anterior de la cavidad nasal, incluidas las paredes medial y lateral, para unirse a la de la piel nasal externa para drenar en la
ganglios linfáticos submandibulares.

El resto de la cavidad nasal y los senos paranasales drenan a los ganglios linfáticos cervicales profundos superiores, ya sea directamente oa través de los ganglios linfáticos retrofaríngeos.

La parte posterior del piso nasal probablemente drena a los ganglios linfáticos parótidos.


== Suministro nervioso ==

La inervación de la nariz y los senos paranasales proviene de dos ramas del nervio trigémino (NC V):
el nervio oftálmico (CN V1), el nervio maxilar (CN V2) y las ramas de estos. En la cavidad nasal, la mucosa nasal se divide en términos de inervación en una parte inferior posterior (posteroinferior) y una parte superior frontal (anterosuperior).

La parte posterior está inervada por una rama del nervio maxilar, el nervio nasopalatino, que llega al tabique.

Las ramas nasales laterales del nervio palatino mayor inervan la pared lateral.

La parte frontal superior está inervada por una rama del nervio oftálmico, el nervio nasociliar, y sus ramas, los nervios etmoidales anterior y posterior.

La mayor parte de la parte externa de la nariz: el dorso y el vértice están inervados por el nervio infratroclear (una rama del nervio nasociliar).

La rama externa del nervio etmoidal anterior también inerva áreas de piel entre la raíz y las alas.

Las alas de la nariz están inervadas por las ramas nasales del CN ​​V2, el nervio infraorbitario, y las ramas nasales internas del nervio infraorbitario que inervan el tabique y el vestíbulo.

El seno maxilar está inervado por los nervios alveolares superiores de los nervios maxilar e infraorbitario.

El seno frontal está inervado por ramas del nervio supraorbitario.

Los senos etmoidales están inervados por ramas etmoidales anterior y posterior del nervio nasociliar.

El seno esfenoidal está inervado por los nervios etmoidales posteriores.


=== Movimiento ===

Los músculos de la nariz están inervados por ramas del nervio facial.

El músculo nasal está inervado por las ramas bucales.

También puede ser suministrado por una de las ramas cigomáticas.

El prócer está inervado por ramas temporales del nervio facial y ramas cigomáticas inferiores; también se ha descrito un suministro de la rama bucal.

El depresor del tabique está inervado por la rama bucal y, a veces, por la rama cigomática del nervio facial.

El elevador del labio superior alaeque nasi está inervado por las ramas cigomática y bucal superior del nervio facial.


=== Olor ===

El sentido del olfato es transmitido por los nervios olfativos.

Los nervios olfatorios son haces de axones amielínicos muy pequeños que se derivan de las neuronas receptoras olfatorias en la mucosa olfatoria.

Los axones se encuentran en diversas etapas de madurez, lo que refleja el recambio constante de neuronas en el epitelio olfatorio.

Se forma una red plexiforme en la lámina propia, por los haces de axones que están rodeados por células de envoltura olfatoria.

En hasta veinte ramas, los axones agrupados cruzan la placa cribosa y entran en el bulbo olfatorio suprayacente que termina como glomérulos.

Cada rama está encerrada por una duramadre externa que se continúa con el periostio nasal.


=== Abastecimiento autonómico ===

La mucosa nasal en la cavidad nasal también está inervada por el sistema nervioso autónomo.

Las fibras nerviosas posganglionares del nervio petroso profundo se unen con las fibras nerviosas preganglionares del nervio petroso mayor para formar el nervio del conducto pterigoideo.

Las fibras posganglionares simpáticas se distribuyen a los vasos sanguíneos de la nariz.

Las fibras parasimpáticas posganglionares derivadas del ganglio pterigopalatino proporcionan el suministro secretomotor a las glándulas mucosas nasales y se distribuyen a través de las ramas de los nervios maxilares.


== Desarrollo ==



=== Desarrollo de la nariz ===

En el desarrollo temprano del embrión, las células de la cresta neural migran para formar el tejido mesenquimatoso como ectomesénquima de los arcos faríngeos.

Al final de la cuarta semana, el primer par de arcos faríngeos forman cinco prominencias o procesos faciales: un proceso frontonasal no apareado, procesos mandibulares apareados y procesos maxilares apareados.

La nariz está formada en gran parte por la fusión de estas cinco prominencias faciales.

El proceso frontonasal da lugar al puente de la nariz.

Los procesos nasales mediales proporcionan la cresta y la punta de la nariz, y los procesos nasales laterales forman las alas o los lados de la nariz.

El proceso frontonasal es una proliferación de mesénquima frente a las vesículas cerebrales y constituye el borde superior del estomadeo.

Durante la quinta semana los procesos maxilares aumentan de tamaño y al mismo tiempo el ectodermo del proceso frontonasal se engrosa a los lados y también aumenta de tamaño, formando las placodas nasales.

Las placodas nasales también se conocen como placodas olfativas.

Este desarrollo es inducido por la parte ventral del cerebro anterior.

En la sexta semana, el ectodermo de cada placoda nasal se invagina para formar un hoyo de forma ovalada con muescas, que forma una cresta elevada de tejido circundante.

Cada fosa nasal forma una división entre las crestas, en un proceso nasal lateral en el borde exterior y un proceso nasal medial en el borde interior.

En la sexta semana, las fosas nasales se profundizan a medida que penetran en el mesénquima subyacente.

En este momento, los procesos nasales mediales migran uno hacia el otro y se fusionan formando el primordio del puente de la nariz y el tabique.

La migración se ve favorecida por el mayor crecimiento de las prominencias maxilares medialmente, lo que comprime las apófisis nasales mediales hacia la línea media.

Su fusión tiene lugar en la superficie y también a un nivel más profundo.

La fusión forma el segmento intermaxilar, y este se continúa con la parte rostral del tabique nasal.

Las puntas de los procesos maxilares también crecen y se fusionan con el proceso intermaxilar.

El proceso intermaxilar da lugar al filtrum del labio superior. Al final de la sexta semana, las fosas nasales se han profundizado aún más y se fusionan para formar un gran saco nasal ectodérmico.

Este saco estará por encima y por detrás del proceso intermaxilar.

Antes de la séptima semana, el piso del saco nasal y la pared posterior crecen para formar una estructura ectodérmica similar a una placa engrosada llamada aleta nasal.

La aleta nasal separa el saco de la cavidad oral.

Dentro de la aleta se desarrollan vacuolas que se fusionan con el saco nasal.

Esto agranda el saco nasal y al mismo tiempo adelgaza la aleta hasta formar una membrana, la membrana oronasal que separa las fosas nasales de la cavidad oral.

Durante la séptima semana, la membrana oronasal se rompe y se desintegra para formar una abertura: la única coana primitiva.

El segmento intermaxilar se extiende posteriormente para formar el paladar primario que constituye el suelo de la cavidad nasal.

Durante la octava y novena semana se forman un par de delgadas extensiones de las paredes mediales del proceso maxilar.

Estas extensiones se denominan estantes palatinos que forman el paladar secundario.

El paladar secundario se osificará endocondralmente para formar el paladar duro, el piso final de la cavidad nasal.

Durante este tiempo, el ectodermo y el mesodermo del proceso frontonasal producen el tabique de la línea media.

El tabique crece hacia abajo desde el techo de la cavidad nasal y se fusiona con los paladares en desarrollo a lo largo de la línea media.

El tabique divide la cavidad nasal en dos conductos nasales que desembocan en la faringe a través de las coanas definitivas.

A las diez semanas, las células se diferencian en músculo, cartílago y hueso.

Los problemas en esta etapa del desarrollo pueden causar defectos de nacimiento como atresia de coanas (ausencia o paso cerrado), hendiduras faciales y displasia nasal (desarrollo defectuoso o incompleto) o, muy raramente, polirrinia, la formación de una nariz duplicada.

El desarrollo normal es fundamental porque el recién nacido respira por la nariz durante las primeras seis semanas, y cualquier bloqueo nasal necesitará tratamiento de emergencia para eliminarlo.


=== Desarrollo de los senos paranasales ===

Los cuatro pares de senos paranasales: maxilar, etmoidal, esfenoidal y frontal, se desarrollan a partir de la cavidad nasal como invaginaciones que se extienden hacia los huesos nombrados.

Se forman dos pares de senos paranasales durante el desarrollo prenatal y dos pares se forman después del nacimiento.

Los senos maxilares son los primeros en aparecer durante el tercer mes fetal.

Se expanden lentamente dentro de los huesos maxilares y continúan expandiéndose durante la infancia.

Los senos maxilares se forman como invaginaciones del saco nasal.

Los senos etmoidales aparecen en el quinto mes fetal como invaginaciones del meato medio.

Los senos etmoidales no crecen dentro del hueso etmoidal y no se desarrollan completamente hasta la pubertad.

Los senos esfenoidales son extensiones de los senos etmoidales en los huesos esfenoidales.

Comienzan a desarrollarse alrededor de los dos años de edad y continúan aumentando durante la niñez.

Los senos frontales solo se desarrollan en el quinto o sexto año de la infancia, y continúan expandiéndose a lo largo de la adolescencia.

Cada seno frontal se compone de dos espacios independientes que se desarrollan a partir de dos fuentes diferentes; uno de la expansión de los senos etmoidales en el hueso frontal, y el otro se desarrolla a partir de la invaginación.

Nunca se unen, por lo que drenan de forma independiente.


== Función ==

=== Respiración ===


La nariz es el primer órgano del tracto respiratorio superior en el sistema respiratorio.

Su principal función respiratoria es el suministro y acondicionamiento, por calentamiento, hidratación y filtrado de partículas del aire inhalado.

El vello nasal en las fosas nasales atrapa partículas grandes impidiendo su entrada a los pulmones.

Los tres cornetes nasales colocados en cada cavidad proporcionan cuatro surcos como conductos de aire, a lo largo de los cuales el aire circula y se mueve hacia la nasofaringe.

Las estructuras y cavidades internas, incluidos los cornetes y los senos paranasales, forman un sistema integrado para el acondicionamiento del aire inspirado por la nariz.

Este funcionamiento también incluye el papel principal de la mucosa nasal, y el acondicionamiento resultante del aire antes de que llegue a los pulmones es importante para mantener el ambiente interno y el funcionamiento adecuado de los pulmones.

La turbulencia creada por los cornetes y meatos optimiza el calentamiento, la humectación y la filtración de la mucosa.

Por lo tanto, estas estructuras de las vías respiratorias superiores desempeñan un papel protector importante en el paso del aire a las estructuras más delicadas de las vías respiratorias inferiores.

El estornudo es una importante acción refleja protectora iniciada por la irritación de la mucosa nasal para expulsar partículas no deseadas por la boca y la nariz.

El estornudo fótico es un reflejo provocado por diferentes estímulos como luces brillantes.

La nariz también puede proporcionar información sensorial sobre la temperatura del aire que se respira.

Se ha planteado la hipótesis de que las variaciones en la forma de la nariz posiblemente se adapten a las diferencias regionales de temperatura y humedad, aunque también pueden haber sido impulsadas por otros factores, como la selección sexual.


=== Sentido del olfato ===


La nariz también juega un papel importante en el sistema olfativo.

Contiene un área de células especializadas, neuronas receptoras olfativas responsables del sentido del olfato (olfato).

La mucosa olfatoria en la cavidad nasal superior contiene un tipo de glándula nasal llamada glándulas olfatorias o glándulas de Bowman que ayudan en el olfato.

Los cornetes nasales también ayudan en la función del olfato, al dirigir el flujo de aire a la región olfativa.


=== Discurso ===


El habla se produce con la presión de los pulmones.

Esto se puede modificar utilizando el flujo de aire a través de la nariz en un proceso llamado nasalización.

Esto implica el descenso del paladar blando para producir vocales y consonantes nasales al permitir que el aire escape tanto de la nariz como de la boca.

El flujo de aire nasal también se usa para producir una variedad de chasquidos nasales llamados consonantes de chasquidos.

Las grandes cavidades huecas de los senos paranasales actúan como cámaras de resonancia que modifican y amplifican el habla y otras vibraciones vocales que pasan a través de ellas.


== Importancia clínica ==

Una de las condiciones médicas más comunes que involucran la nariz es una hemorragia nasal (epistaxis).

La mayoría de las hemorragias nasales ocurren en el plexo de Kiesselbach, un plexo vascular en la parte frontal inferior del tabique que involucra la convergencia de cuatro arterias.

Una proporción más pequeña de hemorragias nasales que tienden a no ser traumáticas ocurre en el plexo de Woodruff.

El plexo de Woodruff es un plexo venoso de grandes venas de paredes delgadas que se encuentran en la parte posterior del meato inferior.

Otra condición común es la congestión nasal, generalmente un síntoma de infección, particularmente sinusitis u otra inflamación del revestimiento nasal llamada rinitis, que incluye rinitis alérgica y rinitis no alérgica.

La obstrucción nasal crónica que resulta en la respiración por la boca puede afectar en gran medida o evitar que las fosas nasales se ensanchen.

Una de las causas de los ronquidos es la obstrucción nasal, y los dispositivos antirronquidos, como las tiras nasales, ayudan a ensanchar las fosas nasales y mantienen abiertas las vías respiratorias.

Aleteo nasal, por lo general se ve en los niños cuando la respiración es difícil.

La mayoría de las condiciones de congestión nasal también causan una pérdida del sentido del olfato (anosmia).

Esto también puede ocurrir en otras condiciones, por ejemplo después de un traumatismo, en el síndrome de Kallmann o en la enfermedad de Parkinson.

Un ostium sinusal bloqueado, una abertura de un seno paranasal, hará que se acumule líquido en el seno.
En los niños, la nariz es un sitio común de cuerpos extraños.

La nariz es una de las áreas expuestas que es susceptible a la congelación.

Debido a la naturaleza especial del suministro de sangre a la nariz humana y el área circundante, es posible que las infecciones retrógradas del área nasal se propaguen al cerebro.

Por esta razón, el área desde las comisuras de la boca hasta el puente de la nariz, incluyendo la nariz y el maxilar, se conoce como el triángulo de peligro de la cara.

Las infecciones u otras afecciones que pueden provocar la destrucción o el daño de una parte de la nariz incluyen rinofima, cánceres de piel, particularmente carcinoma de células basales, cáncer de senos paranasales y cavidad nasal, granulomatosis con poliangeítis, sífilis, lepra, uso recreativo de cocaína, cromo y otras toxinas.

La nariz puede ser estimulada para crecer en acromegalia, una condición causada por un exceso de hormona de crecimiento. Una variante anatómica común es una cavidad llena de aire dentro de una concha conocida como concha bullosa.

En casos raros, se puede formar un pólipo dentro de una bullosa.

Por lo general, una concha bullosa es pequeña y asintomática, pero cuando es grande puede obstruir el drenaje de los senos paranasales.

Algunos medicamentos se pueden administrar por vía nasal, incluida la administración de medicamentos al cerebro, y estos incluyen aerosoles nasales y tratamientos tópicos.

El cartílago septal puede destruirse mediante la inhalación repetida de drogas recreativas como la cocaína.

Esto, a su vez, puede conducir a un colapso más generalizado del esqueleto nasal. Los estornudos pueden transmitir infecciones transportadas en las gotitas expulsadas.

Esta ruta se denomina transmisión aérea o transmisión por aerosol.


=== Procedimientos quirúrgicos ===


Los cartílagos alares mal posicionados carecen de un soporte adecuado y pueden afectar la función de la válvula nasal externa.

Esto puede causar problemas respiratorios, especialmente durante la inhalación profunda.

El procedimiento quirúrgico para corregir problemas respiratorios debido a trastornos en las estructuras nasales se llama rinoplastia, y este es también el procedimiento utilizado para una cirugía estética cuando comúnmente se le llama "cirugía de nariz".

Para los procedimientos quirúrgicos de rinoplastia, la nariz se divide en varias subunidades y segmentos.

Este utiliza nueve subunidades nasales estéticas y seis segmentos nasales estéticos.

Una septoplastia es la cirugía específica para corregir una desviación del tabique nasal.
Una nariz rota puede resultar de un trauma.

Las fracturas menores pueden sanar por sí solas.

La cirugía conocida como reducción se puede realizar en roturas más graves que causan luxación. Se pueden realizar varios procedimientos nasales de la nariz y los senos paranasales mediante una endoscopia nasal mínimamente invasiva.

Estos procedimientos tienen como objetivo restaurar la ventilación sinusal, la limpieza mucociliar y mantener la salud de la mucosa sinusal.

Algunas cirugías no nasales también se pueden realizar mediante el uso de un endoscopio que se introduce por la nariz.

Estas cirugías endonasales endoscópicas se utilizan para extirpar tumores de la parte frontal de la base del cráneo.

Los cornetes inflamados pueden causar obstrucción y congestión nasal, y pueden tratarse quirúrgicamente mediante una turbinectomía.


== Sociedad y cultura ==

Algunas personas eligen someterse a una cirugía estética (llamada rinoplastia) para cambiar la apariencia de su nariz.

Las perforaciones en la nariz, como en la fosa nasal, el tabique o el puente, también son comunes.

En ciertos países asiáticos como China, Japón, Corea del Sur, Malasia, Tailandia y Bangladesh, las rinoplastias se realizan comúnmente para crear un puente nasal más desarrollado o una "nariz alta".

Del mismo modo, los "estiramientos de nariz hechos a mano" en forma de artículos cosméticos reutilizables se han vuelto populares y se venden en muchos países asiáticos como China, Japón, Corea del Sur, Taiwán, Sri Lanka y Tailandia.

Una nariz con puente alto ha sido un ideal de belleza común en muchas culturas asiáticas que se remontan a los ideales de belleza de la antigua China e India.

En Nueva Zelanda, presionarse la nariz ("hongi") es un saludo tradicional originario de los maoríes.

Sin embargo, ahora generalmente se limita a ciertas celebraciones tradicionales.

El monumento Hanazuka consagra las narices mutiladas de al menos 38.000 coreanos asesinados durante las invasiones japonesas de Corea entre 1592 y 1598. El hurgarse la nariz es un hábito común y levemente tabú.

Los riesgos médicos incluyen la propagación de infecciones, hemorragias nasales y, en raras ocasiones, la perforación del tabique nasal.

Cuando se vuelve compulsivo se denomina rinotillexomanía.

Limpiarse la nariz con la mano, comúnmente conocido como el "saludo alérgico", también es un tabú leve y también puede provocar la propagación de infecciones.

Limpiarse la nariz tanto de forma habitual como rápida o brusca también puede provocar un pliegue (conocido como surco o pliegue nasal transversal) que atraviesa la nariz y puede provocar una deformidad física permanente observable en la niñez y la edad adulta. El fetichismo de la nariz (o nasofilia) es el parcialismo sexual por la nariz.


== Neandertales ==

Clive Finlayson del Museo de Gibraltar dijo que las grandes narices de los neandertales eran una adaptación al frío, Todd C.

Rae, del Museo Americano de Historia Natural, dijo que los estudios con primates y animales árticos han mostrado una reducción del tamaño de los senos paranasales en áreas de frío extremo en lugar de un agrandamiento de acuerdo con la regla de Allen.

Por lo tanto, Todd C.

Rae concluye que el diseño de la nariz grande y prognática de los neandertales evolucionó para el clima más cálido de Medio Oriente y África y se mantuvo sin cambios cuando ingresaron a Europa. Miquel Hernández, del Departamento de Biología Animal de la Universidad de Barcelona, ​​dijo que el "alto y nariz estrecha de esquimales y neandertales" es una "adaptación a un ambiente frío y seco", ya que contribuye a calentar e hidratar el aire y a "recuperar el calor y la humedad del aire expirado".



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Human_nose


;;;PT;;;



NARIZ EXTERNO


O nariz humano é a parte mais saliente do rosto.

Ele carrega as narinas e é o primeiro órgão do sistema respiratório.

É também o principal órgão do sistema olfativo.

A forma do nariz é determinada pelos ossos nasais e pelas cartilagens nasais, incluindo o septo nasal que separa as narinas e divide a cavidade nasal em duas.

Em média, o nariz de um macho é maior que o de uma fêmea.
O nariz tem uma função importante na respiração.

A mucosa nasal que reveste a cavidade nasal e os seios paranasais realiza o condicionamento necessário do ar inalado, aquecendo-o e umedecendo-o.

As conchas nasais, ossos semelhantes a conchas nas paredes das cavidades, desempenham um papel importante nesse processo.

A filtragem do ar pelos pelos nasais nas narinas impede que partículas grandes entrem nos pulmões.

Espirrar é um reflexo para expelir partículas indesejadas do nariz que irritam a mucosa.

Espirrar pode transmitir infecções, pois são criados aerossóis nos quais as gotículas podem abrigar patógenos.

Outra função importante do nariz é o olfato, o sentido do olfato.

A área do epitélio olfativo, na cavidade nasal superior, contém células olfativas especializadas responsáveis ​​por essa função.

O nariz também está envolvido na função da fala.

Vogais nasais e consoantes nasais são produzidas no processo de nasalização.

As cavidades ocas dos seios paranasais atuam como câmaras sonoras que modificam e amplificam a fala e outros sons vocais.

Existem muitos procedimentos de cirurgia plástica no nariz, conhecidos como rinoplastias, disponíveis para corrigir vários defeitos estruturais ou para alterar a forma do nariz.

Os defeitos podem ser congênitos ou resultar de distúrbios nasais ou de trauma.

Esses procedimentos são um tipo de cirurgia reconstrutiva.

Procedimentos eletivos para alterar a forma do nariz são um tipo de cirurgia estética.


== Estrutura ==

Vários ossos e cartilagens compõem a estrutura óssea-cartilaginosa do nariz e a estrutura interna.

O nariz também é composto por tipos de tecidos moles, como pele, epitélios, membranas mucosas, músculos, nervos e vasos sanguíneos.

Na pele existem glândulas sebáceas e na membrana mucosa existem glândulas nasais.

Os ossos e cartilagens fornecem forte proteção para as estruturas internas do nariz.

Existem vários músculos que estão envolvidos nos movimentos do nariz.

A disposição das cartilagens permite flexibilidade através do controle muscular para permitir que o fluxo de ar seja modificado.


=== Ossos ===


A estrutura óssea do nariz é fornecida pela maxila, osso frontal e vários ossos menores.

A parte óssea superior do nariz é formada pela parte nasal do osso frontal, que fica entre as cristas da sobrancelha e termina em uma incisura nasal serrilhada.

Um osso nasal esquerdo e um direito se unem à parte nasal do osso frontal em ambos os lados; e estes ao lado com os pequenos ossos lacrimais e o processo frontal de cada maxila.

O teto interno da cavidade nasal é composto pela lâmina cribriforme horizontal e perfurada do osso etmóide, através da qual passam fibras sensitivas do nervo olfatório.

Abaixo e atrás da lâmina cribriforme, inclinando-se para baixo em um ângulo, está a face do osso esfenóide.

A parede que separa as duas cavidades do nariz, o septo nasal, é composta de osso por dentro e cartilagem mais próxima da ponta do nariz.

A parte óssea é formada pela lâmina perpendicular do osso etmóide na parte superior e pelo osso vômer abaixo.

O assoalho do nariz é formado pelo osso incisivo e pelas placas horizontais dos ossos palatinos, e isso compõe o palato duro do céu da boca.

As duas placas horizontais unem-se na linha média e formam a espinha nasal posterior que dá fixação ao músculo úvula na úvula.

Os dois ossos da maxila se unem na base do nariz na linha média nasal inferior entre as narinas e no topo do filtro para formar a espinha nasal anterior.

Esta fina projeção de osso mantém o centro cartilaginoso do nariz.

É também um importante marco cefalométrico.


=== Cartilagens ===


As cartilagens nasais são as cartilagens septal, lateral, alar maior e alar menor.

As cartilagens maiores e menores também são conhecidas como cartilagens alares maiores e menores.

Há uma faixa estreita de cartilagem chamada cartilagem vomeronasal que fica entre o vômer e a cartilagem septal.

A cartilagem septal nasal, estende-se dos ossos nasais na linha média, até a parte óssea do septo na linha média, posteriormente.

Em seguida, passa ao longo do assoalho da cavidade nasal.

O septo é quadrangular – a metade superior está ligada às duas cartilagens nasais laterais que são fundidas ao septo dorsal na linha média.

O septo está fixado lateralmente, com ligamentos frouxos, à margem óssea da abertura nasal anterior, enquanto as extremidades inferiores das cartilagens laterais estão livres (não fixadas).

As três ou quatro cartilagens alares menores são adjacentes às cartilagens laterais, mantidas na membrana do tecido conjuntivo, que conecta as cartilagens laterais ao processo frontal da maxila.

Os ossos nasais na parte superior do nariz são unidos pela sutura internaal da linha média.

Eles se unem à cartilagem septal em uma junção conhecida como rhinion.

O rhinion é o ponto médio da sutura internasal na junção com a cartilagem, e do rhinion ao ápice, ou ponta, a estrutura é de cartilagem.

As principais cartilagens alares são finas placas de cartilagem em forma de U em cada lado do nariz que formam as paredes lateral e medial do vestíbulo, conhecidas como pilares medial e lateral.

Os crura mediais estão ligados à cartilagem septal, formando partes carnudas na frente das narinas de cada lado do septo, chamadas de podods crurais mediais.

Os pilares mediais encontram-se na linha média abaixo da extremidade do septo para formar a columela e o lóbulo.

O lóbulo contém a ponta do nariz e sua base contém as narinas.

Nos picos das pregas dos pilares mediais, eles formam as cúpulas alares, os pontos que definem a ponta do nariz, separados por um entalhe.

Eles então se dobram para fora, acima e ao lado das narinas, formando os pilares laterais.

As principais cartilagens alares são livremente móveis e podem responder aos músculos para abrir ou contrair as narinas.

Existe uma estrutura de reforço conhecida como rolagem nasal que resiste ao colapso interno da pressão do fluxo de ar gerada pela respiração normal.

Essa estrutura é formada pela junção entre as cartilagens laterais e principais.

Suas bordas se entrelaçam por uma rolagem para cima e outra para dentro.


=== Músculos ===

Os músculos do nariz são um subgrupo dos músculos faciais.

Eles estão envolvidos na respiração e expressão facial.

Os músculos do nariz incluem o prócero, o nasal, o depressor do septo nasal, o elevador do lábio superior alaeque nasi e o orbicular da boca.

Como todos os músculos faciais, os músculos do nariz são inervados pelo nervo facial e seus ramos.

Embora cada músculo seja independente, os músculos do nariz formam uma camada contínua com conexões entre todos os componentes dos músculos e ligamentos, na parte nasal de um sistema aponeurótico muscular superficial (SMAS).

O SMAS é contínuo desde o processo nasofrontal até a ponta nasal.

Divide-se ao nível da válvula nasal em camadas superficial e profunda, cada camada tendo componentes medial e lateral.

O músculo prócero produz rugas sobre a ponte do nariz e é ativo na concentração e na carranca.

É um alvo principal para procedimentos de Botox na testa para remover as linhas entre os olhos.

O músculo nasal consiste em duas partes principais: uma parte transversal chamada de compressor naris e uma parte alar denominada dilatador naris.

O músculo compressor naris comprime as narinas e pode fechá-las completamente.

A parte alar, o dilatador naris consiste principalmente no dilatador naris posterior e um dilatador naris anterior muito menor, e esse músculo dilata as narinas.

O dilatador naris ajuda a formar a crista superior do filtro.

Os dilatadores naris anterior e posterior (a parte alar do músculo nasal) dão suporte às válvulas nasais. O depressor do septo nasal pode às vezes estar ausente ou rudimentar.

O depressor do septo puxa a columela, o septo e a ponta do nariz para baixo.

No início da inspiração este músculo tensiona o septo nasal e com o dilatador narina alarga as narinas.

O elevador do lábio superior alaeque nasi divide-se em deslizamento medial e lateral.

O deslizamento medial funde-se com o pericôndrio da cartilagem alar maior e sua pele sobrejacente.

O deslizamento lateral se mistura ao lado do lábio superior com o elevador do lábio superior e com o orbicular da boca.

O deslizamento lateral eleva o lábio superior e aprofunda e aumenta a curva acima do sulco nasolabial.

O deslizamento medial puxa o pilar lateral para cima e modifica a curva do sulco ao redor da asa e dilata as narinas.


=== Tecido mole ===

A pele do nariz varia em espessura ao longo de seu comprimento.

Da glabela à ponte (o ângulo nasofrontal) a pele é espessa, bastante flexível e móvel.

Ele afunila para a ponte onde é mais fino e menos flexível, pois está mais próximo do osso subjacente.

Da ponte até a ponta do nariz a pele é fina.

A ponta é coberta de pele tão espessa quanto a parte superior e possui muitas glândulas sebáceas grandes.

A espessura da pele varia, mas ainda está separada dos ossos e cartilagens subjacentes por quatro camadas – uma camada de gordura superficial; uma camada fibromuscular continuada do SMAS; uma camada gordurosa profunda e o periósteo.

Outras áreas de tecido mole são encontradas onde não há suporte da cartilagem; estas incluem uma área ao redor das laterais do septo – a área paraseptal –, uma área ao redor das cartilagens laterais, uma área na parte superior da narina e uma área nas asas.


=== Nariz externo ===

A raiz nasal é a parte superior do nariz que liga o nariz à testa.

A raiz nasal está acima da ponte e abaixo da glabela, formando uma reentrância conhecida como nasion na sutura frontonasal onde o osso frontal encontra os ossos nasais.

O dorso nasal também conhecido como crista nasal é a fronteira entre a raiz e a ponta do nariz que, em perfil, pode ter várias formas.

A asa do nariz (ala nasi, "asa do nariz"; plural alae) é a superfície lateral inferior do nariz externo, moldada pela cartilagem alar e coberta por tecido conjuntivo denso.

As alas se alargam para formar uma eminência arredondada ao redor da narina.

O dimorfismo sexual é evidente no nariz maior do macho.

Isso se deve ao aumento da testosterona que engrossa o cume da sobrancelha e a ponte do nariz, tornando-a mais larga.


=== Cavidade nasal ===


A cavidade nasal é o grande espaço interno do nariz, e é dividida em duas partes – o vestíbulo nasal e a cavidade nasal propriamente dita.

O vestíbulo nasal é a parte mais frontal da cavidade nasal, delimitada por cartilagens.

O vestíbulo é revestido por pele, folículos pilosos e um grande número de glândulas sebáceas.

Uma crista mucosa conhecida como limen nasi separa o vestíbulo do resto da cavidade nasal e marca a mudança da pele do vestíbulo para o epitélio respiratório do resto da cavidade nasal.

Essa área também é conhecida como junção mucocutânea e possui uma microvasculatura densa.

A cavidade nasal é dividida em duas cavidades pelo septo nasal, e cada uma é acessada por uma narina externa.

A divisão em duas cavidades possibilita o funcionamento do ciclo nasal que retarda o processo de condicionamento do ar inspirado.

Na parte posterior da cavidade nasal existem duas aberturas, chamadas coanas (também narinas posteriores), que dão entrada à nasofaringe e ao restante do trato respiratório.

Na parede externa de cada cavidade estão três ossos semelhantes a conchas chamados conchas, dispostos em conchas nasais superior, média e inferior.

Abaixo de cada concha está um meato ou passagem nasal superior, médio e inferior.

Às vezes, quando a concha superior é estreita, uma quarta concha nasal suprema está presente situada acima e compartilhando o espaço com a concha superior.

O termo concha refere-se ao osso real; quando recoberta por tecido mole e mucosa, e funcional, uma concha é denominada corneto.

O excesso de umidade à medida que as lágrimas coletadas no saco lacrimal percorrem os ductos nasolacrimais, onde drenam para o meato inferior na cavidade nasal.

A maior parte da cavidade nasal e seios paranasais é revestida por epitélio respiratório como mucosa nasal.

No teto de cada cavidade há uma área de epitélio olfativo especializado.

Essa região tem cerca de 5 cm quadrados, abrangendo a concha superior, a lâmina cribriforme e o septo nasal.

Há uma área da válvula nasal que é a parte mais estreita da passagem nasal.

Uma válvula externa existe na parte maior da asa do vestíbulo.

Uma válvula nasal interna normalmente referida como válvula nasal, é um segmento em forma de fenda entre parte da cartilagem lateral superior e o septo no terço médio da cavidade.

As válvulas regulam o fluxo de ar e a resistência.

O ar inspirado é forçado a passar pela estreita válvula nasal interna e depois se expande à medida que se move para a cavidade nasal.

A mudança repentina na velocidade e pressão do fluxo de ar cria uma turbulência que permite o contato ideal com o epitélio respiratório para o aquecimento, hidratação e filtragem necessários.

A turbulência também permite que o movimento do ar passe sobre o epitélio olfativo e transfira informações de odor.

O ângulo da válvula entre o septo e a parede lateral precisa ser suficiente para um fluxo de ar desobstruído, e normalmente está entre 10 e 15 graus.

As bordas de cada cavidade nasal são o teto, o assoalho, a parede medial (o septo) e a parede lateral.

A parte média do teto da cavidade nasal é composta pela lâmina cribriforme horizontal e perfurada do osso etmóide, através da qual passam fibras sensoriais do nervo olfatório para a cavidade craniana.


==== Seios paranasais ====

A mucosa que reveste a cavidade nasal se estende em suas câmaras, os seios paranasais.

A cavidade nasal e os seios paranasais são denominados trato nasossinusal ou região nasossinusal, e sua anatomia é reconhecida como única e complexa.

Quatro seios paranasais pareados – o seio frontal, o seio esfenoidal, o seio etmoidal e o seio maxilar drenam para regiões da cavidade nasal.

Os seios são extensões cheias de ar da cavidade nasal para os ossos cranianos.

Os seios frontais estão localizados no osso frontal; os seios esfenoidais no osso esfenoide; os seios maxilares na maxila; e os seios etmoidais no osso etmoidal.

Uma abertura estreita chamada óstio sinusal de cada um dos seios paranasais permite a drenagem para a cavidade nasal.

O seio maxilar é o maior dos seios e drena para o meato médio.

A maioria dos óstios se abre no meato médio e no etmóide anterior, que juntos são denominados complexo ostiomeatal.

Os adultos têm uma alta concentração de cílios nos óstios.

Os cílios nos seios batem em direção às aberturas da cavidade nasal.

O aumento do número de cílios e a estreiteza das aberturas sinusais permitem um maior tempo de hidratação e aquecimento.


=== Formato do nariz ===

A forma do nariz varia muito devido às diferenças nas formas dos ossos nasais e na formação da ponte nasal.

Algumas formas de nariz foram classificadas para cirurgias por Eden Warwick em Nasologia.

Estes foram posteriormente incorporados em um índice nasal por Paul Topinard.

Os estudos antropométricos têm contribuído de forma importante para a cirurgia craniofacial, e o índice nasal é um índice antropométrico reconhecido usado em cirurgia nasal.

 

Paul Topinard desenvolveu o índice nasal como método de classificação de grupos étnicos.

O índice é baseado na razão entre a largura do nariz e sua altura.

As dimensões nasais também são usadas para classificar a morfologia nasal em cinco tipos: A hiperleptorrina é um nariz muito longo e estreito com um índice nasal de 40 a 55.

Leptorrhine descreve um nariz longo e estreito com um índice de 55-70.

Mesorrhine é um nariz médio com um índice de 70-85.

O platirrino é um nariz curto e largo com um índice de 85–99·9.

O quinto tipo é a hiperplatirrina com índice superior a 100. Algumas deformidades do nariz são denominadas, como nariz pug e nariz em sela.

O nariz pug é caracterizado pelo excesso de tecido do ápice que é desproporcional ao resto do nariz.

Uma ponte nasal baixa e subdesenvolvida também pode ser evidente.

Uma deformidade do nariz em sela envolvendo o colapso da ponte do nariz está principalmente associada a trauma no nariz, mas pode ser causada por outras condições, incluindo a hanseníase.

A síndrome de Werner, uma condição associada ao envelhecimento prematuro, causa uma aparência de "pássaro" devido ao aperto do nariz.

A síndrome de Down geralmente apresenta um nariz pequeno com uma ponte nasal achatada.

Isso pode ser devido à ausência de um ou ambos os ossos nasais, ossos nasais encurtados ou ossos nasais que não se fundiram na linha média.


== Suprimento de sangue e drenagem ==



=== Fornecimento ===


O suprimento sanguíneo para o nariz é fornecido por ramos das artérias oftálmica, maxilar e facial – ramos das artérias carótidas.

Ramos dessas artérias se anastomosam para formar plexos dentro e sob a mucosa nasal.

Na região septal, o plexo de Kiesselbach é um local comum de hemorragias nasais.

Ramos da artéria oftálmica – as artérias etmoidais anterior e posterior suprem o teto, o septo ósseo superior e os seios etmoidais e frontais.

A artéria etmoidal anterior também ajuda a suprir a cartilagem septal inferior.

Outro ramo é a artéria nasal dorsal, um ramo terminal que supre a pele da asa e do dorso.

Ramos da artéria maxilar incluem a artéria palatina maior; a artéria esfenopalatina e seus ramos – as artérias nasais laterais posteriores e ramos nasais septais posteriores; o ramo faríngeo; e a artéria infraorbitária e seus ramos – as artérias alveolares superiores anterior e posterior.

A artéria esfenopalatina e as artérias etmoidais suprem as paredes externas da cavidade nasal.

Há suprimento adicional de um ramo da artéria facial – a artéria labial superior.

A artéria esfenopalantina é a artéria principal responsável pelo suprimento da mucosa nasal. A pele da asa é suprida pelos ramos septal e nasal lateral da artéria facial.

A pele das partes externas das asas e o dorso do nariz são supridos pela artéria nasal dorsal, um ramo da artéria oftálmica, e o ramo infraorbitário das artérias maxilares.


=== Drenagem ===

As veias do nariz incluem a veia angular que drena o lado do nariz, recebendo as veias nasais laterais das asas.

A veia angular une-se à veia labial superior.

Algumas pequenas veias do dorso do nariz drenam para o arco nasal da veia frontal na raiz do nariz.
Na região posterior da cavidade, especificamente na parte posterior do meato inferior, encontra-se um plexo venoso conhecido como plexo de Woodruff.

Este plexo é constituído por grandes veias de paredes finas com pouco tecido mole, como músculo ou fibra.

A mucosa do plexo é fina com poucas estruturas.


== Drenagem linfática ==

De diferentes áreas do nariz, vasos linfáticos superficiais correm com as veias, e vasos linfáticos profundos viajam com as artérias.

A linfa drena da metade anterior da cavidade nasal, incluindo as paredes medial e lateral, para se juntar à pele externa do nariz e drenar para a cavidade nasal.
linfonodos submandibulares.

O restante da cavidade nasal e os seios paranasais drenam para os linfonodos cervicais profundos superiores, diretamente ou através dos linfonodos retrofaríngeos.

A parte posterior do assoalho nasal provavelmente drena para os linfonodos parotídeos.


== Suprimento nervoso ==

O suprimento nervoso para o nariz e os seios paranasais vem de dois ramos do nervo trigêmeo (NC V):
o nervo oftálmico (NC V1), o nervo maxilar (NC V2) e ramos destes. (anteriores).

A parte posterior é suprida por um ramo do nervo maxilar – o nervo nasopalatino que atinge o septo.

Ramos nasais laterais do nervo palatino maior suprem a parede lateral.

A parte frontal superior é suprida por um ramo do nervo oftálmico – o nervo nasociliar, e seus ramos – os nervos etmoidais anterior e posterior.

A maior parte do nariz externo – o dorso e o ápice são supridos pelo nervo infratroclear (um ramo do nervo nasociliar).

O ramo externo do nervo etmoidal anterior também supre áreas de pele entre a raiz e a asa.

As asas do nariz são supridas por ramos nasais do NC V2, o nervo infraorbitário e ramos nasais internos do nervo infraorbitário que suprem o septo e o vestíbulo.

O seio maxilar é suprido pelos nervos alveolares superiores dos nervos maxilar e infraorbitário.

O seio frontal é suprido por ramos do nervo supraorbital.

Os seios etmoidais são supridos por ramos etmoidais anteriores e posteriores do nervo nasociliar.

O seio esfenoidal é suprido pelos nervos etmoidais posteriores.


=== Movimento ===

Os músculos do nariz são supridos por ramos do nervo facial.

O músculo nasal é suprido pelos ramos bucais.

Também pode ser fornecido por um dos ramos zigomáticos.

O prócero é suprido por ramos temporais do nervo facial e ramos zigomáticos inferiores; um suprimento do ramo bucal também foi descrito.

O depressor do septo é inervado pelo ramo bucal e, às vezes, pelo ramo zigomático do nervo facial.

O elevador do lábio superior alaeque nasi é inervado pelos ramos zigomático e bucal superior do nervo facial.


=== cheiro ===

O sentido do olfato é transmitido pelos nervos olfativos.

Os nervos olfativos são feixes de axônios não mielinizados muito pequenos que são derivados de neurônios receptores olfativos na mucosa olfativa.

Os axônios estão em estágios variados de maturidade, refletindo a constante renovação dos neurônios no epitélio olfatório.

Uma rede plexiforme é formada na lâmina própria, pelos feixes de axônios que são circundados por células olfativas embainhadas.

Em até vinte ramos, os axônios agrupados cruzam a placa cribriforme e entram no bulbo olfatório sobrejacente terminando como glomérulos.

Cada ramo é envolvido por uma dura-máter externa que se torna contínua com o periósteo nasal.


=== Suprimento autônomo ===

A mucosa nasal na cavidade nasal também é suprida pelo sistema nervoso autônomo.

As fibras nervosas pós-ganglionares do nervo petroso profundo unem-se às fibras nervosas pré-ganglionares do nervo petroso maior para formar o nervo do canal pterigóide.

As fibras pós-ganglionares simpáticas são distribuídas para os vasos sanguíneos do nariz.

As fibras parassimpáticas pós-ganglionares derivadas do gânglio pterigopalatino fornecem o suprimento secretomotor para as glândulas mucosas nasais e são distribuídas por ramos dos nervos maxilares.


== Desenvolvimento ==



=== Desenvolvimento do nariz ===

No desenvolvimento inicial do embrião, as células da crista neural migram para formar o tecido mesenquimal como ectomesênquima dos arcos faríngeos.

No final da quarta semana, o primeiro par de arcos faríngeos forma cinco proeminências ou processos faciais - um processo frontonasal não pareado, processos mandibulares pareados e processos maxilares pareados.

O nariz é em grande parte formado pela fusão dessas cinco proeminências faciais.

O processo frontonasal dá origem à ponte do nariz.

Os processos nasais mediais fornecem a crista e a ponta do nariz, e os processos nasais laterais formam as asas ou laterais do nariz.

O processo frontonasal é uma proliferação de mesênquima na frente das vesículas cerebrais e compõe a borda superior do estomadeu.

Durante a quinta semana os processos maxilares aumentam de tamanho e, ao mesmo tempo, o ectoderma do processo frontonasal torna-se espesso em suas laterais e também aumenta de tamanho, formando os placóides nasais.

Os placódios nasais também são conhecidos como placódios olfativos.

Este desenvolvimento é induzido pela parte ventral do prosencéfalo.

Na sexta semana, o ectoderma em cada placódio nasal se invagina para formar uma cavidade oval recortada, que forma uma crista elevada de tecido circundante.

Cada fossa nasal forma uma divisão entre as cristas, em um processo nasal lateral na borda externa e um processo nasal medial na borda interna.

Na sexta semana, as fossas nasais se aprofundam à medida que penetram no mesênquima subjacente.

Nesse momento, os processos nasais mediais migram um em direção ao outro e se fundem formando o primórdio da ponte do nariz e do septo.

A migração é auxiliada pelo aumento do crescimento das proeminências maxilares medialmente, que comprime os processos nasais mediais em direção à linha média.

Sua fusão ocorre na superfície e também em um nível mais profundo.

A junção forma o segmento intermaxilar, e este é contínuo com a parte rostral do septo nasal.

As pontas dos processos maxilares também crescem e se fundem com o processo intermaxilar.

O processo intermaxilar dá origem ao filtro do lábio superior. No final da sexta semana, as fossas nasais se aprofundam e se fundem para formar um grande saco nasal ectodérmico.

Este saco estará acima e atrás do processo intermaxilar.

A partir da sétima semana, o assoalho do saco nasal e a parede posterior crescem para formar uma estrutura ectodérmica em forma de placa espessada chamada de nadadeira nasal.

A barbatana nasal separa o saco da cavidade oral.

Dentro da nadadeira, desenvolvem-se vacúolos que se fundem com o saco nasal.

Isso aumenta o saco nasal e, ao mesmo tempo, afina a nadadeira em uma membrana - a membrana oronasal que separa as fossas nasais da cavidade oral.

Durante a sétima semana, a membrana oronasal se rompe e se desintegra para formar uma abertura - a única coana primitiva.

O segmento intermaxilar estende-se posteriormente para formar o palato primário que compõe o assoalho da cavidade nasal.

Durante a oitava e nona semanas, um par de extensões finas se forma das paredes mediais do processo maxilar.

Essas extensões são chamadas de prateleiras palatinas que formam o palato secundário.

O palato secundário irá ossificar endocondralmente para formar o palato duro - o assoalho do estágio final da cavidade nasal.

Durante esse período, o ectoderma e o mesoderma do processo frontonasal produzem o septo da linha média.

O septo cresce para baixo do teto da cavidade nasal e se funde com os palatos em desenvolvimento ao longo da linha média.

O septo divide a cavidade nasal em duas passagens nasais que se abrem na faringe através das coanas definitivas.

Em dez semanas, as células se diferenciam em músculo, cartilagem e osso.

Problemas neste estágio de desenvolvimento podem causar defeitos congênitos, como atresia de coanas (passagem ausente ou fechada), fendas faciais e displasia nasal (desenvolvimento defeituoso ou incompleto) ou, muito raramente, polirrinia a formação de um nariz duplicado.

O desenvolvimento normal é fundamental porque o recém-nascido respira pelo nariz nas primeiras seis semanas, e qualquer obstrução nasal precisará de tratamento de emergência para ser eliminada.


=== Desenvolvimento dos seios paranasais ===

Os quatro pares de seios paranasais - maxilar, etmóide, esfenóide e frontal, desenvolvem-se a partir da cavidade nasal como invaginações que se estendem até seus ossos nomeados.

Dois pares de seios se formam durante o desenvolvimento pré-natal e dois pares se formam após o nascimento.

Os seios maxilares são os primeiros a aparecer durante o terceiro mês fetal.

Eles se expandem lentamente dentro dos ossos maxilares e continuam a se expandir ao longo da infância.

Os seios maxilares se formam como invaginações do saco nasal.

Os seios etmoidais aparecem no quinto mês fetal como invaginações do meato médio.

Os seios etmoidais não crescem no osso etmoide e não se desenvolvem completamente até a puberdade.

Os seios esfenoidais são extensões dos seios etmoidais nos ossos esfenoidais.

Eles começam a se desenvolver por volta dos dois anos de idade e continuam a aumentar durante a infância.

Os seios frontais só se desenvolvem no quinto ou sexto ano da infância e continuam se expandindo ao longo da adolescência.

Cada seio frontal é constituído por dois espaços independentes que se desenvolvem a partir de duas fontes diferentes; um da expansão dos seios etmoidais no osso frontal, e o outro se desenvolve a partir da invaginação.

Eles nunca coalescem, então drenam independentemente.


== Função ==

=== Respiração ===


O nariz é o primeiro órgão do trato respiratório superior no sistema respiratório.

Sua principal função respiratória é o suprimento e condicionamento, por aquecimento, hidratação e filtragem de partículas do ar inalado.

Os pelos nasais nas narinas retêm partículas grandes, impedindo sua entrada nos pulmões.

As três conchas nasais posicionadas em cada cavidade fornecem quatro sulcos como passagens de ar, ao longo dos quais o ar circula e se move para a nasofaringe.

As estruturas e cavidades internas, incluindo as conchas e os seios paranasais, formam um sistema integrado de condicionamento do ar inspirado pelo nariz.

Esse funcionamento também inclui o papel principal da mucosa nasal, e o condicionamento resultante do ar antes de chegar aos pulmões é importante para a manutenção do ambiente interno e o bom funcionamento dos pulmões.

A turbulência criada pelas conchas e meatos otimiza o aquecimento, umedecimento e filtragem da mucosa.

Um papel protetor importante é, assim, fornecido por essas estruturas do trato respiratório superior, na passagem do ar para as estruturas mais delicadas do trato respiratório inferior.

O espirro é uma importante ação reflexa protetora iniciada pela irritação da mucosa nasal para expelir partículas indesejadas pela boca e nariz.

O espirro fótico é um reflexo provocado por diferentes estímulos, como luzes brilhantes.

O nariz também é capaz de fornecer informações sensoriais sobre a temperatura do ar que está sendo respirado.

A hipótese de variações na forma do nariz é possivelmente adaptativa às diferenças regionais de temperatura e umidade, embora também possam ter sido impulsionadas por outros fatores, como a seleção sexual.


=== Olfato ===


O nariz também desempenha o papel principal no sistema olfativo.

Ele contém uma área de células especializadas, neurônios receptores olfativos responsáveis ​​pelo sentido do olfato (olfato).

Mucosa olfativa na cavidade nasal superior, contém um tipo de glândula nasal chamada glândulas olfativas ou glândulas de Bowman que ajudam no olfato.

As conchas nasais também auxiliam na função olfativa, direcionando o fluxo de ar para a região olfativa.


=== Fala ===


A fala é produzida com a pressão dos pulmões.

Isso pode ser modificado usando o fluxo de ar através do nariz em um processo chamado nasalização.

Isso envolve o abaixamento do palato mole para produzir vogais e consoantes nasais, permitindo que o ar escape do nariz e da boca.

O fluxo de ar nasal também é usado para produzir uma variedade de cliques nasais chamados consoantes de clique.

As grandes cavidades ocas dos seios paranasais atuam como câmaras ressonantes que modificam e amplificam a fala e outras vibrações vocais que passam por elas.


== Significado clínico ==

Uma das condições médicas mais comuns envolvendo o nariz é uma hemorragia nasal (epistaxe).

A maioria dos sangramentos nasais ocorre no plexo de Kiesselbach, um plexo vascular na parte frontal inferior do septo envolvendo a convergência de quatro artérias.

Uma proporção menor de hemorragias nasais que tendem a não ser traumáticas ocorre no plexo de Woodruff.

O plexo de Woodruff é um plexo venoso de grandes veias de paredes finas situado na parte posterior do meato inferior.

Outra condição comum é a congestão nasal, geralmente um sintoma de infecção, particularmente sinusite, ou outra inflamação do revestimento nasal chamada rinite, incluindo rinite alérgica e rinite não alérgica.

A obstrução nasal crônica resultando em respiração pela boca pode prejudicar muito ou impedir que as narinas se alarguem.

Uma das causas do ronco é a obstrução nasal, e dispositivos anti-ronco, como uma tira nasal, ajudam a dilatar as narinas e manter as vias aéreas abertas.

Alargamento nasal, geralmente é visto em crianças quando a respiração é difícil.

A maioria das condições de congestão nasal também causa perda do olfato (anosmia).

Isso também pode ocorrer em outras condições, por exemplo, após trauma, na síndrome de Kallmann ou na doença de Parkinson.

Um óstio sinusal bloqueado, uma abertura de um seio paranasal, fará com que o líquido se acumule no seio.
Em crianças, o nariz é um local comum de corpos estranhos.

O nariz é uma das áreas expostas que é suscetível ao congelamento.

Devido à natureza especial do fornecimento de sangue ao nariz humano e à área circundante, é possível que infecções retrógradas da área nasal se espalhem para o cérebro.

Por esta razão, a área dos cantos da boca até a ponte do nariz, incluindo o nariz e a maxila, é conhecida como o triângulo de perigo da face.

Infecções ou outras condições que podem resultar em destruição ou dano a uma parte do nariz incluem rinofima, câncer de pele, particularmente carcinoma basocelular, câncer de seios paranasais e cavidade nasal, granulomatose com poliangeíte, sífilis, hanseníase, uso recreativo de cocaína, cromo e outras toxinas.

O nariz pode ser estimulado a crescer em acromegalia, uma condição causada por um excesso de hormônio do crescimento. Uma variante anatômica comum é uma cavidade cheia de ar dentro de uma concha conhecida como concha bolhosa.

Em casos raros, um pólipo pode se formar dentro de uma bolhosa.

Normalmente a concha bolhosa é pequena e assintomática, mas quando grande pode causar obstrução à drenagem do seio.

Alguns medicamentos podem ser administrados por via nasal, incluindo a entrega de medicamentos ao cérebro, e incluem sprays nasais e tratamentos tópicos.

A cartilagem septal pode ser destruída pela inalação repetida de drogas recreativas como a cocaína.

Isso, por sua vez, pode levar a um colapso mais generalizado do esqueleto nasal. O espirro pode transmitir infecções transportadas nas gotículas expelidas.

Essa rota é chamada de transmissão aérea ou transmissão por aerossol.


=== Procedimentos cirúrgicos ===


As cartilagens alares mal posicionadas carecem de suporte adequado e podem afetar a função da válvula nasal externa.

Isso pode causar problemas respiratórios, especialmente durante a inalação profunda.

O procedimento cirúrgico para corrigir problemas respiratórios devido a distúrbios nas estruturas nasais é chamado de rinoplastia, e este também é o procedimento utilizado para uma cirurgia estética quando é comumente chamado de "nariz".

Para procedimentos cirúrgicos de rinoplastia, o nariz é mapeado em várias subunidades e segmentos.

Isso usa nove subunidades nasais estéticas e seis segmentos nasais estéticos.

A septoplastia é a cirurgia específica para corrigir um desvio do septo nasal.
Um nariz quebrado pode resultar de trauma.

Fraturas menores podem curar por conta própria.

A cirurgia conhecida como redução pode ser realizada em rupturas mais graves que causam luxação. Vários procedimentos nasais do nariz e seios paranasais podem ser realizados por meio de endoscopia nasal minimamente invasiva.

Esses procedimentos visam restabelecer a ventilação sinusal, a depuração mucociliar e manter a saúde da mucosa sinusal.

Algumas cirurgias não nasais também podem ser realizadas através do uso de um endoscópio que é inserido pelo nariz.

Essas cirurgias endoscópicas endonasais são usadas para remover tumores da frente da base do crânio.

As conchas inchadas podem causar obstrução e congestão nasal e podem ser tratadas cirurgicamente por uma turbinectomia.


== Sociedade e cultura ==

Algumas pessoas optam por fazer uma cirurgia estética (chamada rinoplastia) para mudar a aparência do nariz.

Piercings no nariz, como na narina, septo ou ponte, também são comuns.

Em alguns países asiáticos, como China, Japão, Coréia do Sul, Malásia, Tailândia e Bangladesh, as rinoplastias são comumente realizadas para criar uma ponte nasal mais desenvolvida ou um "nariz alto".

Da mesma forma, "elevadores de nariz DIY" na forma de itens cosméticos reutilizáveis ​​tornaram-se populares e são vendidos em muitos países asiáticos, como China, Japão, Coréia do Sul, Taiwan, Sri Lanka e Tailândia.

Um nariz em ponte alta tem sido um ideal de beleza comum em muitas culturas asiáticas que remontam aos ideais de beleza da China e da Índia antigas.

Na Nova Zelândia, pressionar o nariz ("hongi") é uma saudação tradicional originária do povo maori.

No entanto, agora é geralmente confinado a certas celebrações tradicionais.

O monumento de Hanazuka consagra os narizes mutilados de pelo menos 38.000 coreanos mortos durante as invasões japonesas da Coreia de 1592 a 1598. O ato de cutucar o nariz é um hábito comum e levemente tabu.

Os riscos médicos incluem a disseminação de infecções, hemorragias nasais e, raramente, perfuração do septo nasal.

Quando se torna compulsivo é denominado rinotilexomania.

A limpeza do nariz com a mão, comumente chamada de "saudação alérgica", também é um tabu leve e pode resultar na disseminação de infecções.

A limpeza do nariz habitual, bem como rápida ou áspera, também pode resultar em um vinco (conhecido como sulco ou sulco nasal transversal) que atravessa o nariz e pode levar a deformidade física permanente observável na infância e na idade adulta. O fetichismo do nariz (ou nasofilia) é o parcialismo sexual para o nariz.


== Neandertais ==

Clive Finlayson, do Museu de Gibraltar, disse que os grandes narizes neandertais eram uma adaptação ao frio, disse Todd C.

Rae, do Museu Americano de História Natural, disse que estudos com primatas e animais do Ártico mostraram redução do tamanho dos seios nasais em áreas de frio extremo, em vez de aumento de acordo com a regra de Allen.

Portanto, Todd C.

Rae conclui que o design do nariz grande e prognático do Neanderthal foi desenvolvido para o clima mais quente do Oriente Médio e da África e permaneceu inalterado quando eles entraram na Europa. nariz estreito de esquimós e neandertais" é uma "adaptação a um ambiente frio e seco", pois contribui para o aquecimento e hidratação do ar e a "recuperação de calor e umidade do ar expirado".



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Human_nose


;;;FR;;;



NEZ EXTERNE


Le nez humain est la partie la plus saillante du visage.

Il porte les narines et est le premier organe du système respiratoire.

C'est aussi l'organe principal du système olfactif.

La forme du nez est déterminée par les os nasaux et les cartilages nasaux, y compris le septum nasal qui sépare les narines et divise la cavité nasale en deux.

En moyenne, le nez d'un mâle est plus gros que celui d'une femelle.
Le nez a une fonction importante dans la respiration.

La muqueuse nasale tapissant la cavité nasale et les sinus paranasaux effectue le conditionnement nécessaire de l'air inhalé en le réchauffant et en l'humidifiant.

Les conques nasales, des os en forme de coquille dans les parois des cavités, jouent un rôle majeur dans ce processus.

Le filtrage de l'air par les poils nasaux dans les narines empêche les grosses particules de pénétrer dans les poumons.

L'éternuement est un réflexe pour expulser les particules indésirables du nez qui irritent la muqueuse.

Les éternuements peuvent transmettre des infections, car des aérosols sont créés dans lesquels les gouttelettes peuvent héberger des agents pathogènes.

Une autre fonction majeure du nez est l'olfaction, l'odorat.

La zone de l'épithélium olfactif, dans la cavité nasale supérieure, contient des cellules olfactives spécialisées responsables de cette fonction.

Le nez est également impliqué dans la fonction de la parole.

Les voyelles nasales et les consonnes nasales sont produites lors du processus de nasalisation.

Les cavités creuses des sinus paranasaux agissent comme des chambres sonores qui modifient et amplifient la parole et d'autres sons vocaux.

Il existe de nombreuses procédures de chirurgie plastique du nez, connues sous le nom de rhinoplasties, permettant de corriger divers défauts structurels ou de modifier la forme du nez.

Les malformations peuvent être congénitales ou résulter de troubles nasaux ou d'un traumatisme.

Ces procédures sont un type de chirurgie reconstructive.

Les procédures électives pour changer la forme du nez sont un type de chirurgie esthétique.


== Structure ==

Plusieurs os et cartilages constituent la charpente ostéo-cartilagineuse du nez, et la structure interne.

Le nez est également composé de types de tissus mous tels que la peau, les épithéliums, les muqueuses, les muscles, les nerfs et les vaisseaux sanguins.

Dans la peau, il y a des glandes sébacées et dans la membrane muqueuse, il y a des glandes nasales.

Les os et les cartilages assurent une forte protection des structures internes du nez.

Plusieurs muscles sont impliqués dans les mouvements du nez.

La disposition des cartilages permet une flexibilité grâce au contrôle musculaire pour permettre de modifier le flux d'air.


=== Os ===


La structure osseuse du nez est constituée du maxillaire, de l'os frontal et d'un certain nombre d'os plus petits.

La partie osseuse supérieure du nez est formée par la partie nasale de l'os frontal, qui se situe entre les arcades sourcilières et se termine par une encoche nasale dentelée.

Un os nasal gauche et droit se joignent à la partie nasale de l'os frontal de chaque côté; et ceux-ci sur le côté avec les petits os lacrymaux et le processus frontal de chaque maxillaire.

Le toit interne de la cavité nasale est composé de la plaque cribriforme horizontale et perforée de l'os ethmoïde à travers laquelle passent les fibres sensorielles du nerf olfactif.

Au-dessous et derrière la plaque cribriforme, inclinée vers le bas, se trouve la face de l'os sphénoïde.

La paroi séparant les deux cavités du nez, la cloison nasale, est constituée d'os à l'intérieur et de cartilage plus près de la pointe du nez.

La partie osseuse est formée par la plaque perpendiculaire de l'os ethmoïde en haut et l'os vomer en bas.

Le plancher du nez est constitué de l'os incisif et des plaques horizontales des os palatins, ce qui constitue le palais dur du toit de la bouche.

Les deux plaques horizontales se rejoignent sur la ligne médiane et forment l'épine nasale postérieure qui s'attache au musculus uvulae dans la luette.

Les deux os maxillaires se rejoignent à la base du nez au niveau de la ligne médiane nasale inférieure entre les narines et au sommet du philtrum pour former l'épine nasale antérieure.

Cette fine saillie osseuse maintient le centre cartilagineux du nez.

C'est aussi un repère céphalométrique important.


=== Cartilages ===


Les cartilages nasaux sont les cartilages septal, latéral, alaire majeur et alaire mineur.

Les cartilages majeurs et mineurs sont également connus sous le nom de cartilages alaires plus grands et plus petits.

Il existe une étroite bande de cartilage appelée cartilage voméronasal qui se situe entre le vomer et le cartilage septal.

Le cartilage nasal septal s'étend des os nasaux sur la ligne médiane à la partie osseuse du septum sur la ligne médiane, en arrière.

Il passe ensuite le long du plancher de la cavité nasale.

Le septum est quadrangulaire - la moitié supérieure est attachée aux deux cartilages nasaux latéraux qui sont fusionnés au septum dorsal sur la ligne médiane.

Le septum est attaché latéralement, avec des ligaments lâches, à la marge osseuse de l'ouverture nasale antérieure, tandis que les extrémités inférieures des cartilages latéraux sont libres (non attachées).

Les trois ou quatre cartilages alaires mineurs sont adjacents aux cartilages latéraux, maintenus dans la membrane du tissu conjonctif, qui relie les cartilages latéraux au processus frontal du maxillaire.

Les os nasaux de la partie supérieure du nez sont reliés par la suture internasale médiane.

Ils rejoignent le cartilage septal à une jonction connue sous le nom de rhinion.

Le rhinion est le milieu de la suture internasale à la jonction avec le cartilage, et du rhinion à l'apex, ou pointe, le cadre est en cartilage.

Les principaux cartilages alaires sont de fines plaques de cartilage en forme de U de chaque côté du nez qui forment les parois latérale et médiale du vestibule, connues sous le nom de crus médiale et latérale.

Les piliers médiaux sont attachés au cartilage septal, formant des parties charnues à l'avant des narines de chaque côté du septum, appelées pédoncules cruraux médiaux.

Les crus médianes se rejoignent sur la ligne médiane sous l'extrémité du septum pour former la columelle et le lobule.

Le lobule contient le bout du nez et sa base contient les narines.

Aux sommets des plis de la crura médiale, ils forment les dômes alaires les points définissant la pointe du nez, séparés par une encoche.

Ils se replient ensuite vers l'extérieur, au-dessus et sur le côté des narines formant les crus latérales.

Les principaux cartilages alaires sont librement mobiles et peuvent répondre aux muscles pour ouvrir ou resserrer les narines.

Il existe une structure de renforcement connue sous le nom de volute nasale qui résiste à l'effondrement interne de la pression du flux d'air générée par la respiration normale.

Cette structure est formée par la jonction entre les cartilages latéral et majeur.

Leurs bords s'emboîtent par un défilement vers le haut et un défilement vers l'intérieur.


=== Muscles ===

Les muscles du nez sont un sous-groupe des muscles faciaux.

Ils interviennent dans la respiration et l'expression faciale.

Les muscles du nez comprennent le procerus, le nasalis, le dépresseur septi nasi, le levator labii superioris alaeque nasi et l'orbicularis oris de la bouche.

Comme tous les muscles faciaux, les muscles du nez sont innervés par le nerf facial et ses branches.

Bien que chaque muscle soit indépendant, les muscles du nez forment une couche continue avec des connexions entre tous les composants des muscles et des ligaments, dans la partie nasale d'un système musculaire aponévrotique superficiel (SMAS).

Le SMAS est continu du processus nasofrontal à la pointe nasale.

Il se divise au niveau de la valve nasale en couches superficielles et profondes, chaque couche ayant des composantes médiales et latérales.

Le muscle procerus produit des rides sur l'arête du nez et est actif dans la concentration et le froncement des sourcils.

C'est une cible de choix pour les procédures de Botox dans le front pour éliminer les rides entre les yeux.

Le muscle nasal est constitué de deux parties principales : une partie transversale appelée naris compresseur et une partie alaire appelée naris dilatateur.

Le muscle compresseur naris comprime les narines et peut les obturer complètement.

La partie alaire, le dilatateur naris se compose principalement du dilatateur naris postérieur et d'un dilatateur naris antérieur beaucoup plus petit, et ce muscle évase les narines.

Le dilatateur naris aide à former la crête supérieure du philtrum.

Les naris dilatateurs antérieur et postérieur (la partie alaire du muscle nasal) soutiennent les valves nasales. Le dépresseur septi nasi peut parfois être absent ou rudimentaire.

L'abaisseur septi tire la columelle, le septum et le bout du nez vers le bas.

Au début de l'inspiration, ce muscle tend la cloison nasale et avec le dilatateur naris élargit les narines.

Le levator labii superioris alaeque nasi se divise en un slip médial et un slip latéral.

Le feuillet médial se fond dans le périchondre du cartilage alaire majeur et sa peau sus-jacente.

Le glissement latéral se confond sur le côté de la lèvre supérieure avec le levator labii superioris et avec l'orbicularis oris.

Le glissement latéral soulève la lèvre supérieure et approfondit et augmente la courbure au-dessus du sillon nasolabial.

Le glissement médial tire la crus latérale vers le haut et modifie la courbure du sillon autour des ailes, et dilate les narines.


=== Tissus mous ===

La peau du nez varie en épaisseur sur sa longueur.

De la glabelle au pont (l'angle nasofrontal), la peau est épaisse, assez souple et mobile.

Il se rétrécit jusqu'au pont où il est le plus mince et le moins flexible car il est le plus proche de l'os sous-jacent.

De l'arête du nez jusqu'au bout du nez, la peau est fine.

La pointe est recouverte d'une peau aussi épaisse que la partie supérieure et possède de nombreuses grosses glandes sébacées.

L'épaisseur de la peau varie mais est toujours séparée des os et du cartilage sous-jacents par quatre couches - une couche graisseuse superficielle ; une couche fibromusculaire continue du SMAS ; une couche graisseuse profonde et le périoste.

D'autres zones de tissus mous se trouvent là où il n'y a pas de soutien du cartilage; ceux-ci comprennent une zone autour des côtés du septum - la zone paraseptale -, une zone autour des cartilages latéraux, une zone au sommet de la narine et une zone dans les ailes.


=== Nez externe ===

La racine nasale est le haut du nez qui relie le nez au front.

La racine nasale est au-dessus du pont et au-dessous de la glabelle, formant une indentation connue sous le nom de nasion au niveau de la suture frontonasale où l'os frontal rencontre les os nasaux.

Le dos nasal, également connu sous le nom de crête nasale, est la frontière entre la racine et la pointe du nez qui, de profil, peut avoir différentes formes.

L'ala du nez (ala nasi, "aile du nez" ; pluriel alae) est la surface latérale inférieure du nez externe, façonnée par le cartilage alaire et recouverte d'un tissu conjonctif dense.

Les ailes s'évasent pour former une éminence arrondie autour de la narine.

Le dimorphisme sexuel est évident dans le nez plus large du mâle.

Cela est dû à l'augmentation de la testostérone qui épaissit l'arcade sourcilière et l'arête du nez, ce qui la rend plus large.


=== Cavité nasale ===


La cavité nasale est le grand espace interne du nez et se compose de deux parties - le vestibule nasal et la cavité nasale proprement dite.

Le vestibule nasal est la partie la plus en avant de la cavité nasale, entourée de cartilages.

Le vestibule est tapissé de peau, de follicules pileux et d'un grand nombre de glandes sébacées.

Une crête muqueuse connue sous le nom de limen nasi sépare le vestibule du reste de la cavité nasale et marque le passage de la peau du vestibule à l'épithélium respiratoire du reste de la cavité nasale.

Cette zone est également connue sous le nom de jonction cutanéo-muqueuse et possède une microvascularisation dense.

La cavité nasale est divisée en deux cavités par le septum nasal, et chacune est accessible par une narine externe.

La division en deux cavités permet le fonctionnement du cycle nasal qui ralentit le processus de conditionnement de l'air inhalé.

À l'arrière de la cavité nasale, il y a deux ouvertures, appelées choanes (également narines postérieures), qui donnent accès au nasopharynx et au reste des voies respiratoires.

Sur la paroi externe de chaque cavité se trouvent trois os en forme de coquille appelés conques, disposés en conques nasales supérieures, moyennes et inférieures.

Au-dessous de chaque concha se trouve un méat ou un passage nasal supérieur, moyen et inférieur correspondant.

Parfois, lorsque la conque supérieure est étroite, une quatrième conque nasale suprême est présente, située au-dessus et partageant l'espace avec la conque supérieure.

Le terme concha fait référence à l'os réel; lorsqu'elle est recouverte de tissus mous et de muqueuses et qu'elle fonctionne, une conque est appelée cornet.

Une humidité excessive lorsque les larmes recueillies dans le sac lacrymal voyagent le long des conduits nasolacrymaux où elles s'écoulent dans le méat inférieur de la cavité nasale.

La majeure partie de la cavité nasale et des sinus paranasaux est tapissée d'épithélium respiratoire en tant que muqueuse nasale.

Dans le toit de chaque cavité se trouve une zone d'épithélium olfactif spécialisé.

Cette région mesure environ 5 cm2 et recouvre la conque supérieure, la plaque cribriforme et la cloison nasale.

Il y a une zone de valve nasale qui est la partie la plus étroite du passage nasal.

Une valve externe existe dans la plus grande partie ala du vestibule.

Une valve nasale interne, généralement appelée valve nasale, est un segment en forme de fente entre une partie du cartilage latéral supérieur et le septum dans le tiers médian de la cavité.

Les vannes régulent le débit d'air et la résistance.

L'air inspiré est forcé de passer à travers la valve nasale interne étroite, puis se dilate à mesure qu'il se déplace dans la cavité nasale.

Le changement soudain de la vitesse et de la pression du flux d'air crée des turbulences qui permettent un contact optimal avec l'épithélium respiratoire pour le réchauffement, l'hydratation et le filtrage nécessaires.

La turbulence permet également au mouvement de l'air de passer au-dessus de l'épithélium olfactif et de transférer les informations d'odeur.

L'angle de la valve entre le septum et la paroi latérale doit être suffisant pour un flux d'air non obstrué, et il est normalement compris entre 10 et 15 degrés.

Les bords de chaque cavité nasale sont un toit, un plancher, une paroi médiale (le septum) et une paroi latérale.

La partie médiane du toit de la cavité nasale est composée de la plaque cribriforme horizontale et perforée de l'os ethmoïde, à travers laquelle passent les fibres sensorielles du nerf olfactif dans la cavité crânienne.


==== Sinus paranasaux ====

La muqueuse qui tapisse la cavité nasale s'étend dans ses cavités, les sinus paranasaux.

La cavité nasale et les sinus paranasaux sont appelés tractus naso-sinusien ou région naso-sinusienne, et son anatomie est reconnue comme étant unique et complexe.

Quatre sinus paranasaux appariés - le sinus frontal, le sinus sphénoïde, le sinus ethmoïde et le sinus maxillaire se drainent dans les régions de la cavité nasale.

Les sinus sont des extensions remplies d'air de la cavité nasale dans les os crâniens.

Les sinus frontaux sont situés dans l'os frontal; les sinus sphénoïdaux dans l'os sphénoïde; les sinus maxillaires dans le maxillaire ; et les sinus ethmoïdaux dans l'os ethmoïde.

Une ouverture étroite appelée ostium sinusal de chacun des sinus paranasaux permet le drainage dans la cavité nasale.

Le sinus maxillaire est le plus grand des sinus et se déverse dans le méat moyen.

La plupart des ostia s'ouvrent dans le méat moyen et l'ethmoïde antérieur, qui ensemble sont appelés le complexe ostioméatal.

Les adultes ont une forte concentration de cils dans les ostia.

Les cils dans les sinus battent vers les ouvertures de la cavité nasale.

L'augmentation du nombre de cils et l'étroitesse des ouvertures des sinus permettent une augmentation du temps d'hydratation et de réchauffement.


=== Forme du nez ===

La forme du nez varie considérablement en raison des différences dans la forme des os nasaux et de la formation de l'arête du nez.

Certaines formes de nez ont été classées pour les chirurgies par Eden Warwick en Nasologie.

Ceux-ci ont ensuite été incorporés dans un index nasal par Paul Topinard.

Les études anthropométriques ont largement contribué à la chirurgie craniofaciale, et l'indice nasal est un indice anthropométrique reconnu utilisé en chirurgie nasale.

 

Paul Topinard a développé l'index nasal comme méthode de classification des groupes ethniques.

L'indice est basé sur le rapport entre la largeur du nez et sa hauteur.

Les dimensions nasales sont également utilisées pour classer la morphologie nasale en cinq types : L'hyperleptorrhine est un nez très long et étroit avec un indice nasal de 40 à 55.

La leptorrhine décrit un nez long et étroit avec un indice de 55 à 70.

La mésorrhine est un nez moyen avec un indice de 70 à 85.

Platyrrhine est un nez court et large avec un indice de 85–99·9.

Le cinquième type est l'hyperplatyrrhinien ayant un indice supérieur à 100. Certaines déformations du nez sont nommées, comme le nez carlin et le nez en selle.

Le nez carlin est caractérisé par un excès de tissu de l'apex qui est disproportionné par rapport au reste du nez.

Un pont nasal bas et sous-développé peut également être évident.

Une déformation du nez en selle impliquant l'affaissement de l'arête du nez est principalement associée à un traumatisme du nez, mais peut être causée par d'autres affections, notamment la lèpre.

Le syndrome de Werner, une affection associée au vieillissement prématuré, provoque une apparence "ressemblant à un oiseau" due au pincement du nez.

Le syndrome de Down présente généralement un petit nez avec un pont nasal aplati.

Cela peut être dû à l'absence d'un ou des deux os nasaux, d'os nasaux raccourcis ou d'os nasaux qui n'ont pas fusionné dans la ligne médiane.


== Approvisionnement en sang et drainage ==



=== Approvisionnement ===


L'apport sanguin au nez est assuré par des branches des artères ophtalmiques, maxillaires et faciales - branches des artères carotides.

Les branches de ces artères s'anastomosent pour former des plexus dans et sous la muqueuse nasale.

Dans la région septale, le plexus de Kiesselbach est un site courant de saignements de nez.

Branches de l'artère ophtalmique - les artères ethmoïdales antérieure et postérieure alimentent le toit, le septum osseux supérieur et les sinus ethmoïdaux et frontaux.

L'artère ethmoïdale antérieure contribue également à alimenter le cartilage septal inférieur.

Une autre branche est l'artère nasale dorsale, une branche terminale qui alimente la peau des ailes et du dos.

Les branches de l'artère maxillaire comprennent la grande artère palatine ; l'artère sphéno-palatine et ses branches - les artères nasales latérales postérieures et les branches nasales septales postérieures ; la branche pharyngienne ; et l'artère sous-orbitaire et ses branches - les artères alvéolaires antérieures et postérieures supérieures.

L'artère sphéno-palatine et les artères ethmoïdales alimentent les parois externes de la cavité nasale.

Il y a un apport supplémentaire à partir d'une branche de l'artère faciale - l'artère labiale supérieure.

L'artère sphénopalantine est l'artère principalement responsable de l'alimentation de la muqueuse nasale. La peau des ailes est alimentée par les branches nasales septales et latérales de l'artère faciale.

La peau des parties externes des ailes et le dos du nez sont alimentés par l'artère nasale dorsale, une branche de l'artère ophtalmique, et la branche infraorbitaire des artères maxillaires.


=== Vidange ===

Les veines du nez comprennent la veine angulaire qui draine le côté du nez, recevant les veines nasales latérales des ailes.

La veine angulaire rejoint la veine labiale supérieure.

Certaines petites veines du dos du nez se drainent vers l'arc nasal de la veine frontale à la racine du nez.
Dans la région postérieure de la cavité, plus précisément dans la partie postérieure du méat inférieur, se trouve un plexus veineux appelé plexus de Woodruff.

Ce plexus est constitué de grandes veines à parois minces avec peu de tissus mous tels que des muscles ou des fibres.

La muqueuse du plexus est mince avec très peu de structures.


== Drainage lymphatique ==

À partir de différentes zones du nez, les vaisseaux lymphatiques superficiels courent avec les veines et les vaisseaux lymphatiques profonds voyagent avec les artères.

La lymphe s'écoule de la moitié antérieure de la cavité nasale, y compris les parois médiale et latérale, pour rejoindre celle de la peau nasale externe pour s'écouler dans le
ganglions lymphatiques sous-maxillaires.

Le reste de la cavité nasale et des sinus paranasaux s'écoule tous vers les ganglions lymphatiques cervicaux profonds supérieurs, soit directement, soit par les ganglions lymphatiques rétropharyngés.

L'arrière du plancher nasal se draine probablement vers les ganglions lymphatiques parotidiens.


== Innervation ==

L'innervation du nez et des sinus paranasaux provient de deux branches du nerf trijumeau (CN V):
le nerf ophtalmique (CN V1), le nerf maxillaire (CN V2) et leurs branches. Dans la cavité nasale, la muqueuse nasale est divisée en termes d'innervation en une partie inférieure arrière (postéro-inférieure) et une partie supérieure frontale (antérosupérieure).

La partie postérieure est alimentée par une branche du nerf maxillaire - le nerf naso-palatin qui atteint le septum.

Les branches nasales latérales du nerf grand palatin alimentent la paroi latérale.

La partie supérieure frontale est alimentée par une branche du nerf ophtalmique - le nerf nasociliaire, et ses branches - les nerfs ethmoïdaux antérieur et postérieur.

La majeure partie du nez externe - le dos et l'apex sont alimentés par le nerf infratrochléaire (une branche du nerf nasociliaire).

La branche externe du nerf ethmoïdal antérieur fournit également des zones de peau entre la racine et les ailes.

Les ailes du nez sont alimentées par les branches nasales du CN V2, le nerf infraorbitaire et les branches nasales internes du nerf infraorbitaire qui alimentent le septum et le vestibule.

Le sinus maxillaire est alimenté par des nerfs alvéolaires supérieurs issus des nerfs maxillaires et infraorbitaires.

Le sinus frontal est alimenté par des branches du nerf supraorbitaire.

Les sinus ethmoïdaux sont alimentés par les branches ethmoïdales antérieure et postérieure du nerf nasociliaire.

Le sinus sphénoïdal est alimenté par les nerfs ethmoïdaux postérieurs.


=== Mouvement ===

Les muscles du nez sont alimentés par des branches du nerf facial.

Le muscle nasal est innervé par les branches buccales.

Il peut également être fourni par l'une des branches zygomatiques.

Le procerus est alimenté par des branches temporales du nerf facial et des branches zygomatiques inférieures ; une alimentation par la branche buccale a également été décrite.

Le dépresseur septi est innervé par la branche buccale, et parfois par la branche zygomatique, du nerf facial.

Le levator labii superioris alaeque nasi est innervé par les branches zygomatiques et buccales supérieures du nerf facial.


=== Odeur ===

L'odorat est transmis par les nerfs olfactifs.

Les nerfs olfactifs sont des faisceaux de très petits axones non myélinisés dérivés des neurones récepteurs olfactifs de la muqueuse olfactive.

Les axones sont à divers stades de maturité, reflétant le renouvellement constant des neurones dans l'épithélium olfactif.

Un réseau plexiforme est formé dans la lamina propria, par les faisceaux d'axones qui sont entourés de cellules engainantes olfactives.

Dans pas moins de vingt branches, les axones groupés traversent la plaque cribriforme et pénètrent dans le bulbe olfactif sus-jacent se terminant par des glomérules.

Chaque branche est entourée d'une dure-mère externe qui devient continue avec le périoste nasal.


=== Alimentation autonome ===

La muqueuse nasale dans la cavité nasale est également alimentée par le système nerveux autonome.

Les fibres nerveuses postganglionnaires du nerf pétreux profond se joignent aux fibres nerveuses préganglionnaires du nerf grand pétreux pour former le nerf du canal ptérygoïdien.

Les fibres postganglionnaires sympathiques sont distribuées aux vaisseaux sanguins du nez.

Les fibres parasympathiques postganglionnaires dérivées du ganglion ptérygopalatin assurent l'apport sécrétomoteur aux glandes muqueuses nasales et sont distribuées via les branches des nerfs maxillaires.


== Développement ==



=== Développement du nez ===

Au début du développement de l'embryon, les cellules de la crête neurale migrent pour former le tissu mésenchymateux en tant qu'ectomesenchyme des arcs pharyngés.

À la fin de la quatrième semaine, la première paire d'arcs pharyngés forme cinq proéminences ou processus faciaux - un processus frontonasal non apparié, des processus mandibulaires appariés et des processus maxillaires appariés.

Le nez est en grande partie formé par la fusion de ces cinq proéminences faciales.

Le processus frontonasal donne naissance à l'arête du nez.

Les processus nasaux médiaux fournissent la crête et le bout du nez, et les processus nasaux latéraux forment les ailes ou les côtés du nez.

Le processus frontonasal est une prolifération de mésenchyme devant les vésicules cérébrales et constitue le bord supérieur du stomadeum.

Au cours de la cinquième semaine, les processus maxillaires augmentent de taille et en même temps l'ectoderme du processus frontonasal s'épaissit sur ses côtés et augmente également de taille, formant les placodes nasales.

Les placodes nasales sont également appelées placodes olfactives.

Ce développement est induit par la partie ventrale du cerveau antérieur.

Au cours de la sixième semaine, l'ectoderme de chaque placode nasale s'invagine pour former une fosse de forme ovale en retrait, qui forme une crête de tissu surélevée environnante.

Chaque fosse nasale forme une division entre les crêtes, en un processus nasal latéral sur le bord extérieur et un processus nasal médial sur le bord intérieur.

Au cours de la sixième semaine, les fosses nasales s'approfondissent en pénétrant dans le mésenchyme sous-jacent.

A ce moment, les processus nasaux médiaux migrent l'un vers l'autre et fusionnent pour former l'ébauche de l'arête du nez et du septum.

La migration est facilitée par la croissance accrue des proéminences maxillaires médialement, ce qui comprime les processus nasaux médiaux vers la ligne médiane.

Leur fusion a lieu à la surface, mais aussi à un niveau plus profond.

La fusion forme le segment intermaxillaire, et celui-ci est continu avec la partie rostrale du septum nasal.

Les extrémités des processus maxillaires se développent également et fusionnent avec le processus intermaxillaire.

Le processus intermaxillaire donne naissance au philtrum de la lèvre supérieure. À la fin de la sixième semaine, les fosses nasales se sont encore approfondies et fusionnent pour former un grand sac nasal ectodermique.

Ce sac sera au-dessus et à l'arrière du processus intermaxillaire.

Au début de la septième semaine, le plancher du sac nasal et la paroi postérieure se développent pour former une structure ectodermique épaissie en forme de plaque appelée nageoire nasale.

La nageoire nasale sépare le sac de la cavité buccale.

Dans la nageoire, des vacuoles se développent qui fusionnent avec le sac nasal.

Cela agrandit le sac nasal et en même temps amincit la nageoire en une membrane - la membrane oronasale qui sépare les fosses nasales de la cavité buccale.

Au cours de la septième semaine, la membrane oronasale se rompt et se désintègre pour former une ouverture - l'unique choane primitive.

Le segment intermaxillaire s'étend vers l'arrière pour former le palais primaire qui constitue le plancher de la cavité nasale.

Au cours des huitième et neuvième semaines, une paire d'extensions minces se forme à partir des parois médiales du processus maxillaire.

Ces extensions sont appelées les plateaux palatins qui forment le palais secondaire.

Le palais secondaire s'ossifiera de manière endochondrale pour former le palais dur - le plancher terminal de la cavité nasale.

Pendant ce temps, l'ectoderme et le mésoderme du processus frontonasal produisent le septum médian.

Le septum se développe à partir du toit de la cavité nasale et fusionne avec les palais en développement le long de la ligne médiane.

Le septum divise la cavité nasale en deux voies nasales débouchant dans le pharynx par les choanes définitives.

À dix semaines, les cellules se différencient en muscle, cartilage et os.

Les problèmes à ce stade de développement peuvent provoquer des malformations congénitales telles que l'atrésie des choanes (passage absent ou fermé), les fentes faciales et la dysplasie nasale (développement défectueux ou incomplet) ou extrêmement rarement la polyrrhinie la formation d'un nez en double.

Le développement normal est essentiel car le nouveau-né respire par le nez pendant les six premières semaines, et tout blocage nasal nécessitera un traitement d'urgence pour être éliminé.


=== Développement des sinus paranasaux ===

Les quatre paires de sinus paranasaux - le maxillaire, l'ethmoïde, le sphénoïde et le frontal, se développent à partir de la cavité nasale sous forme d'invaginations s'étendant dans leurs os nommés.

Deux paires de sinus se forment pendant le développement prénatal et deux paires après la naissance.

Les sinus maxillaires sont les premiers à apparaître au cours du troisième mois fœtal.

Ils se développent lentement dans les os maxillaires et continuent de se développer tout au long de l'enfance.

Les sinus maxillaires forment des invaginations à partir du sac nasal.

Les sinus ethmoïdaux apparaissent au cinquième mois fœtal sous forme d'invaginations du méat moyen.

Les sinus ethmoïdaux ne se développent pas dans l'os ethmoïde et ne se développent complètement qu'à la puberté.

Les sinus sphénoïdaux sont des prolongements des sinus ethmoïdaux dans les os sphénoïdaux.

Ils commencent à se développer vers l'âge de deux ans et continuent de grossir pendant l'enfance.

Les sinus frontaux ne se développent qu'au cours de la cinquième ou sixième année de l'enfance et continuent de se développer tout au long de l'adolescence.

Chaque sinus frontal est composé de deux espaces indépendants qui se développent à partir de deux sources différentes ; l'un de l'expansion des sinus ethmoïdaux dans l'os frontal, et l'autre se développe à partir de l'invagination.

Ils ne fusionnent jamais donc drainent indépendamment.


== Fonction ==

=== Respiration ===


Le nez est le premier organe des voies respiratoires supérieures du système respiratoire.

Sa fonction respiratoire principale est l'approvisionnement et le conditionnement, en réchauffant, hydratant et filtrant les particules de l'air inhalé.

Les poils nasaux dans les narines piègent les grosses particules empêchant leur entrée dans les poumons.

Les trois conques nasales positionnées dans chaque cavité fournissent quatre rainures comme passages d'air, le long desquelles l'air circule et se déplace vers le nasopharynx.

Les structures et cavités internes, y compris les conques et les sinus paranasaux, forment un système intégré de conditionnement de l'air inspiré par le nez.

Ce fonctionnement comprend également le rôle majeur de la muqueuse nasale, et le conditionnement de l'air qui en résulte avant qu'il n'atteigne les poumons est important pour le maintien de l'environnement interne et le bon fonctionnement des poumons.

La turbulence créée par les conchae et les méats optimise le réchauffement, l'humidification et le filtrage de la muqueuse.

Un rôle protecteur majeur est ainsi assuré par ces structures des voies respiratoires supérieures, dans le passage de l'air vers les structures plus délicates des voies respiratoires inférieures.

L'éternuement est une action réflexe protectrice importante initiée par l'irritation de la muqueuse nasale pour expulser les particules indésirables par la bouche et le nez.

L'éternuement photique est un réflexe provoqué par différents stimuli tels que des lumières vives.

Le nez est également capable de fournir des informations sensorielles sur la température de l'air respiré.

On a supposé que les variations de la forme du nez pouvaient s'adapter aux différences régionales de température et d'humidité, bien qu'elles puissent également avoir été motivées par d'autres facteurs tels que la sélection sexuelle.


=== Odorat ===


Le nez joue également un rôle majeur dans le système olfactif.

Il contient une zone de cellules spécialisées, les neurones récepteurs olfactifs responsables de l'odorat (olfaction).

La muqueuse olfactive dans la cavité nasale supérieure contient un type de glande nasale appelée glandes olfactives ou glandes de Bowman qui aident à l'olfaction.

Les conques nasales contribuent également à la fonction olfactive, en dirigeant le flux d'air vers la région olfactive.


=== Discours ===


La parole est produite par la pression des poumons.

Cela peut être modifié en utilisant le flux d'air par le nez dans un processus appelé nasalisation.

Cela implique l'abaissement du palais mou pour produire des voyelles et des consonnes nasales en permettant à l'air de s'échapper du nez et de la bouche.

Le flux d'air nasal est également utilisé pour produire une variété de clics nasaux appelés consonnes de clic.

Les grandes cavités creuses des sinus paranasaux agissent comme des chambres de résonance qui modifient et amplifient la parole et les autres vibrations vocales qui les traversent.


== Signification clinique ==

L'une des conditions médicales les plus courantes impliquant le nez est un saignement de nez (épistaxis).

La plupart des saignements de nez surviennent dans le plexus de Kiesselbach, un plexus vasculaire dans la partie avant inférieure du septum impliquant la convergence de quatre artères.

Une plus petite proportion de saignements de nez qui ont tendance à être non traumatiques se produisent dans le plexus de Woodruff.

Le plexus de Woodruff est un plexus veineux de grosses veines à parois minces situées dans la partie postérieure du méat inférieur.

Une autre affection courante est la congestion nasale, généralement un symptôme d'infection, en particulier une sinusite, ou une autre inflammation de la muqueuse nasale appelée rhinite, y compris la rhinite allergique et la rhinite non allergique.

L'obstruction nasale chronique entraînant une respiration par la bouche peut grandement altérer ou empêcher les narines de s'évaser.

L'une des causes du ronflement est l'obstruction nasale, et les dispositifs anti-ronflement tels qu'une bandelette nasale aident à dilater les narines et à maintenir les voies respiratoires ouvertes.

Le torchage nasal est généralement observé chez les enfants lorsque la respiration est difficile.

La plupart des conditions de congestion nasale entraînent également une perte de l'odorat (anosmie).

Cela peut également se produire dans d'autres conditions, par exemple après un traumatisme, dans le syndrome de Kallmann ou la maladie de Parkinson.

Un ostium de sinus bloqué, une ouverture d'un sinus paranasal, entraînera une accumulation de liquide dans le sinus.
Chez les enfants, le nez est un site commun de corps étrangers.

Le nez est l'une des zones exposées qui est sensible aux engelures.

En raison de la nature particulière de l'apport sanguin au nez humain et à la zone environnante, il est possible que des infections rétrogrades de la zone nasale se propagent au cerveau.

Pour cette raison, la zone allant des coins de la bouche à l'arête du nez, y compris le nez et le maxillaire, est connue sous le nom de triangle de danger du visage.

Les infections ou autres affections pouvant entraîner la destruction ou l'endommagement d'une partie du nez comprennent le rhinophyma, les cancers de la peau, en particulier le carcinome basocellulaire, le cancer des sinus paranasaux et des fosses nasales, la granulomatose avec polyangéite, la syphilis, la lèpre, l'usage récréatif de cocaïne, chrome et autres toxines.

Le nez peut être stimulé pour se développer dans l'acromégalie, une condition causée par un excès d'hormone de croissance. Une variante anatomique courante est une cavité remplie d'air dans une concha connue sous le nom de concha bullosa.

Dans de rares cas, un polype peut se former à l'intérieur d'une bulle.

Habituellement, une concha bullosa est petite et sans symptômes, mais lorsqu'elle est grande, elle peut obstruer le drainage des sinus.

Certains médicaments peuvent être administrés par voie nasale, y compris l'administration de médicaments au cerveau, notamment les vaporisateurs nasaux et les traitements topiques.

Le cartilage septal peut être détruit par l'inhalation répétée de drogues récréatives telles que la cocaïne.

Ceci, à son tour, peut entraîner un effondrement plus généralisé du squelette nasal. Les éternuements peuvent transmettre des infections portées par les gouttelettes expulsées.

Cette voie est appelée transmission aérienne ou transmission par aérosol.


=== Interventions chirurgicales ===


Les cartilages alaires mal positionnés manquent de soutien adéquat et peuvent affecter la fonction de la valve nasale externe.

Cela peut causer des problèmes respiratoires, en particulier lors d'inhalations profondes.

L'intervention chirurgicale pour corriger les problèmes respiratoires dus aux troubles des structures nasales s'appelle une rhinoplastie, et c'est aussi l'intervention utilisée pour une chirurgie esthétique lorsqu'elle est communément appelée « rhinoplastie ».

Pour les procédures chirurgicales de rhinoplastie, le nez est découpé en un certain nombre de sous-unités et de segments.

Celui-ci utilise neuf sous-unités nasales esthétiques et six segments nasaux esthétiques.

Une septoplastie est la chirurgie spécifique pour corriger une déviation de la cloison nasale.
Un nez cassé peut résulter d'un traumatisme.

Les fractures mineures peuvent guérir d'elles-mêmes.

Une chirurgie dite de réduction peut être pratiquée sur les fractures plus sévères qui provoquent une luxation. Plusieurs interventions nasales du nez et des sinus paranasaux peuvent être réalisées par endoscopie nasale mini-invasive.

Ces procédures visent à rétablir la ventilation des sinus, la clairance mucociliaire et à maintenir la santé de la muqueuse des sinus.

Certaines chirurgies non nasales peuvent également être effectuées à l'aide d'un endoscope introduit par le nez.

Ces chirurgies endonasales endoscopiques sont utilisées pour retirer les tumeurs de l'avant de la base du crâne.

Les conques enflées peuvent provoquer une obstruction et une congestion nasale et peuvent être traitées chirurgicalement par une turbinectomie.


== Société et culture ==

Certaines personnes choisissent de subir une chirurgie esthétique (appelée rhinoplastie) pour changer l'apparence de leur nez.

Les piercings au nez, comme dans la narine, le septum ou le pont, sont également courants.

Dans certains pays asiatiques comme la Chine, le Japon, la Corée du Sud, la Malaisie, la Thaïlande et le Bangladesh, les rhinoplasties sont couramment pratiquées pour créer un pont nasal plus développé ou un "nez haut".

De même, les "liftings de nez DIY" sous forme d'articles cosmétiques réutilisables sont devenus populaires et sont vendus dans de nombreux pays asiatiques tels que la Chine, le Japon, la Corée du Sud, Taïwan, le Sri Lanka et la Thaïlande.

Un nez à pont haut a été un idéal de beauté commun dans de nombreuses cultures asiatiques remontant aux idéaux de beauté de la Chine et de l'Inde anciennes.

En Nouvelle-Zélande, la pression du nez ("hongi") est une salutation traditionnelle originaire du peuple maori.

Cependant, il est désormais généralement cantonné à certaines fêtes traditionnelles.

Le monument Hanazuka consacre les nez mutilés d'au moins 38 000 Coréens tués lors des invasions japonaises de la Corée de 1592 à 1598. La cueillette du nez est une habitude courante et légèrement taboue.

Les risques médicaux comprennent la propagation des infections, les saignements de nez et, rarement, la perforation de la cloison nasale.

Lorsqu'elle devient compulsive, on parle de rhinotillexomanie.

L'essuyage du nez avec la main, communément appelé «salut allergique», est également légèrement tabou et peut également entraîner la propagation d'infections.

L'essuyage habituel, rapide ou brutal du nez peut également entraîner un pli (connu sous le nom de pli ou sillon nasal transversal) qui traverse le nez et peut entraîner une déformation physique permanente observable dans l'enfance et l'âge adulte. Le fétichisme du nez (ou nasophilie) est le partialisme sexuel pour le nez.


== Néandertaliens ==

Clive Finlayson du musée de Gibraltar a déclaré que les grands nez de Néandertal étaient une adaptation au froid, Todd C.

Rae du Musée américain d'histoire naturelle a déclaré que les études sur les primates et les animaux arctiques ont montré une réduction de la taille des sinus dans les zones de froid extrême plutôt qu'un élargissement conformément à la règle d'Allen.

Ainsi, Todd C.

Rae conclut que la conception du nez large et prognathique de Néandertal a été adaptée au climat plus chaud du Moyen-Orient et de l'Afrique et est restée inchangée lorsqu'ils sont entrés en Europe. Miquel Hernández du Département de biologie animale de l'Université de Barcelone a déclaré nez étroit des Esquimaux et des Néandertaliens" est une "adaptation à un environnement froid et sec", puisqu'il contribue au réchauffement et à l'hydratation de l'air et à la "récupération de la chaleur et de l'humidité de l'air expiré".



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Human_nose

