

EYE


Eyes are organs of the visual system. 

They provide living organisms with vision, the ability to receive and process visual detail, as well as enabling several photo response functions that are independent of vision. 

Eyes detect light and convert it into electro-chemical impulses in neurons. 

In higher organisms, the eye is a complex optical system which collects light from the surrounding environment, regulates its intensity through a diaphragm, focuses it through an adjustable assembly of lenses to form an image, converts this image into a set of electrical signals, and transmits these signals to the brain through complex neural pathways that connect the eye via the optic nerve to the visual cortex and other areas of the brain. 

Eyes with resolving power have come in ten fundamentally different forms, and 96% of animal species possess a complex optical system. 

Image-resolving eyes are present in molluscs, chordates and arthropods.The most simple eyes, pit eyes, are eye-spots which may be set into a pit to reduce the angles of light that enters and affects the eye-spot, to allow the organism to deduce the angle of incoming light. 

From more complex eyes, retinal photosensitive ganglion cells send signals along the retinohypothalamic tract to the suprachiasmatic nuclei to effect circadian adjustment and to the pretectal area to control the pupillary light reflex.


== Overview ==


Complex eyes can distinguish shapes and colours. 

The visual fields of many organisms, especially predators, involve large areas of binocular vision to improve depth perception. 

In other organisms, eyes are located so as to maximise the field of view, such as in rabbits and horses, which have monocular vision.
The first proto-eyes evolved among animals 600 million years ago about the time of the Cambrian explosion. 

The last common ancestor of animals possessed the biochemical toolkit necessary for vision, and more advanced eyes have evolved in 96% of animal species in six of the ~35 main phyla. 

In most vertebrates and some molluscs, the eye works by allowing light to enter and project onto a light-sensitive layer of cells at the end of the eye, known as the retina. 

The cone cells (for colour) and the rod cells (for low-light contrasts) in the retina detect and convert light into neural signals for vision. 

The visual signals are then transmitted to the brain via the optic nerve. 

Such eyes are typically roughly spherical, filled with a transparent gel-like substance called the vitreous humour, with a focusing lens and often an iris; the relaxing or tightening of the muscles around the iris change the size of the pupil, thereby regulating the amount of light that enters the eye, and reducing aberrations when there is enough light. 

The eyes of most cephalopods, fish, amphibians and snakes have fixed lens shapes, and focusing vision is achieved by telescoping the lens—similar to how a camera focuses.Compound eyes are found among the arthropods and are composed of many simple facets which, depending on the details of anatomy, may give either a single pixelated image or multiple images, per eye. 

Each sensor has its own lens and photosensitive cell(s). 

Some eyes have up to 28,000 such sensors, which are arranged hexagonally, and which can give a full 360° field of vision. 

Compound eyes are very sensitive to motion. 

Some arthropods, including many Strepsiptera, have compound eyes of only a few facets, each with a retina capable of creating an image, creating vision. 

With each eye viewing a different thing, a fused image from all the eyes is produced in the brain, providing very different, high-resolution images.
Possessing detailed hyperspectral colour vision, the Mantis shrimp has been reported to have the world's most complex colour vision system. 

Trilobites, which are now extinct, had unique compound eyes. 

They used clear calcite crystals to form the lenses of their eyes. 

In this, they differ from most other arthropods, which have soft eyes. 

The number of lenses in such an eye varied; however, some trilobites had only one, and some had thousands of lenses in one eye.
In contrast to compound eyes, simple eyes are those that have a single lens. 

For example, jumping spiders have a large pair of simple eyes with a narrow field of view, supported by an array of other, smaller eyes for peripheral vision. 

Some insect larvae, like caterpillars, have a different type of simple eye (stemmata) which usually provides only a rough image, but (as in sawfly larvae) can possess resolving powers of 4 degrees of arc, be polarization-sensitive and capable of increasing its absolute sensitivity at night by a factor of 1,000 or more. 

Some of the simplest eyes, called ocelli, can be found in animals like some of the snails, which cannot actually "see" in the normal sense. 

They do have photosensitive cells, but no lens and no other means of projecting an image onto these cells. 

They can distinguish between light and dark, but no more. 

This enables snails to keep out of direct sunlight.
In organisms dwelling near deep-sea vents, compound eyes have been secondarily simplified and adapted to see the infra-red light produced by the hot vents—in this way the bearers can avoid being boiled alive.


== Types ==

There are ten different eye layouts—indeed every technological method of capturing an optical image commonly used by human beings, with the exceptions of zoom and Fresnel lenses, occur in nature. 

Eye types can be categorised into "simple eyes", with one concave photoreceptive surface, and "compound eyes", which comprise a number of individual lenses laid out on a convex surface. 

Note that "simple" does not imply a reduced level of complexity or acuity. 

Indeed, any eye type can be adapted for almost any behaviour or environment. 

The only limitations specific to eye types are that of resolution—the physics of compound eyes prevents them from achieving a resolution better than 1°. 

Also, superposition eyes can achieve greater sensitivity than apposition eyes, so are better suited to dark-dwelling creatures. 

Eyes also fall into two groups on the basis of their photoreceptor's cellular construction, with the photoreceptor cells either being cilliated (as in the vertebrates) or rhabdomeric. 

These two groups are not monophyletic; the cnidaria also possess cilliated cells,
 and some gastropods, as well as some annelids possess both.Some organisms have photosensitive cells that do nothing but detect whether the surroundings are light or dark, which is sufficient for the entrainment of circadian rhythms. 

These are not considered eyes because they lack enough structure to be considered an organ, and do not produce an image.


=== Non-compound eyes ===

Simple eyes are rather ubiquitous, and lens-bearing eyes have evolved at least seven times in vertebrates, cephalopods, annelids, crustaceans and cubozoa.


==== Pit eyes ====
Pit eyes, also known as stemma, are eye-spots which may be set into a pit to reduce the angles of light that enters and affects the eye-spot, to allow the organism to deduce the angle of incoming light. 

Found in about 85% of phyla, these basic forms were probably the precursors to more advanced types of "simple eyes". 

They are small, comprising up to about 100 cells covering about 100 µm. 

The directionality can be improved by reducing the size of the aperture, by incorporating a reflective layer behind the receptor cells, or by filling the pit with a refractile material.Pit vipers have developed pits that function as eyes by sensing thermal infra-red radiation, in addition to their optical wavelength eyes like those of other vertebrates (see infrared sensing in snakes). 

However, pit organs are fitted with receptors rather different from photoreceptors, namely a specific transient receptor potential channel (TRP channels) called TRPV1. 

The main difference is that photoreceptors are G-protein coupled receptors but TRP are ion channels.


==== Spherical lens eye ====
The resolution of pit eyes can be greatly improved by incorporating a material with a higher refractive index to form a lens, which may greatly reduce the blur radius encountered—hence increasing the resolution obtainable. 

The most basic form, seen in some gastropods and annelids, consists of a lens of one refractive index. 

A far sharper image can be obtained using materials with a high refractive index, decreasing to the edges; this decreases the focal length and thus allows a sharp image to form on the retina. 

This also allows a larger aperture for a given sharpness of image, allowing more light to enter the lens; and a flatter lens, reducing spherical aberration. 

Such a non-homogeneous lens is necessary for the focal length to drop from about 4 times the lens radius, to 2.5 radii.Heterogeneous eyes have evolved at least nine times: four or more times in gastropods, once in the copepods, once in the annelids, once in the cephalopods, and once in the chitons, which have aragonite lenses. 

No extant aquatic organisms possess homogeneous lenses; presumably the evolutionary pressure for a heterogeneous lens is great enough for this stage to be quickly "outgrown".This eye creates an image that is sharp enough that motion of the eye can cause significant blurring. 

To minimise the effect of eye motion while the animal moves, most such eyes have stabilising eye muscles.The ocelli of insects bear a simple lens, but their focal point usually lies behind the retina; consequently, those can't form a sharp image. 

Ocelli (pit-type eyes of arthropods) blur the image across the whole retina, and are consequently excellent at responding to rapid changes in light intensity across the whole visual field; this fast response is further accelerated by the large nerve bundles which rush the information to the brain. 

Focusing the image would also cause the sun's image to be focused on a few receptors, with the possibility of damage under the intense light; shielding the receptors would block out some light and thus reduce their sensitivity.
This fast response has led to suggestions that the ocelli of insects are used mainly in flight, because they can be used to detect sudden changes in which way is up (because light, especially UV light which is absorbed by vegetation, usually comes from above).


==== Multiple lenses ====
Some marine organisms bear more than one lens; for instance the copepod Pontella has three. 

The outer has a parabolic surface, countering the effects of spherical aberration while allowing a sharp image to be formed. 

Another copepod, Copilia, has two lenses in each eye, arranged like those in a telescope. 

Such arrangements are rare and poorly understood, but represent an alternative construction.
Multiple lenses are seen in some hunters such as eagles and jumping spiders, which have a refractive cornea: these have a negative lens, enlarging the observed image by up to 50% over the receptor cells, thus increasing their optical resolution.


==== Refractive cornea ====
In the eyes of most mammals, birds, reptiles, and most other terrestrial vertebrates (along with spiders and some insect larvae) the vitreous fluid has a higher refractive index than the air. 

In general, the lens is not spherical. 

Spherical lenses produce spherical aberration. 

In refractive corneas, the lens tissue is corrected with inhomogeneous lens material (see Luneburg lens), or with an aspheric shape. 

Flattening the lens has a disadvantage; the quality of vision is diminished away from the main line of focus. 

Thus, animals that have evolved with a wide field-of-view often have eyes that make use of an inhomogeneous lens.As mentioned above, a refractive cornea is only useful out of water. 

In water, there is little difference in refractive index between the vitreous fluid and the surrounding water. 

Hence creatures that have returned to the water—penguins and seals, for example—lose their highly curved cornea and return to lens-based vision. 

An alternative solution, borne by some divers, is to have a very strongly focusing cornea.


==== Reflector eyes ====
An alternative to a lens is to line the inside of the eye with "mirrors", and reflect the image to focus at a central point. 

The nature of these eyes means that if one were to peer into the pupil of an eye, one would see the same image that the organism would see, reflected back out.Many small organisms such as rotifers, copepods and flatworms use such organs, but these are too small to produce usable images. 

Some larger organisms, such as scallops, also use reflector eyes. 

The scallop Pecten has up to 100 millimetre-scale reflector eyes fringing the edge of its shell. 

It detects moving objects as they pass successive lenses.There is at least one vertebrate, the spookfish, whose eyes include reflective optics for focusing of light. 

Each of the two eyes of a spookfish collects light from both above and below; the light coming from above is focused by a lens, while that coming from below, by a curved mirror composed of many layers of small reflective plates made of guanine crystals.


=== Compound eyes ===


A compound eye may consist of thousands of individual photoreceptor units or ommatidia (ommatidium, singular). 

The image perceived is a combination of inputs from the numerous ommatidia (individual "eye units"), which are located on a convex surface, thus pointing in slightly different directions. 

Compared with simple eyes, compound eyes possess a very large view angle, and can detect fast movement and, in some cases, the polarisation of light. 

Because the individual lenses are so small, the effects of diffraction impose a limit on the possible resolution that can be obtained (assuming that they do not function as phased arrays). 

This can only be countered by increasing lens size and number. 

To see with a resolution comparable to our simple eyes, humans would require very large compound eyes, around 11 metres (36 ft) in radius.Compound eyes fall into two groups: apposition eyes, which form multiple inverted images, and superposition eyes, which form a single erect image. 

Compound eyes are common in arthropods, annelids and some bivalved molluscs. 

Compound eyes in arthropods grow at their margins by the addition of new ommatidia.


==== Apposition eyes ====
Apposition eyes are the most common form of eyes and are presumably the ancestral form of compound eyes. 

They are found in all arthropod groups, although they may have evolved more than once within this phylum. 

Some annelids and bivalves also have apposition eyes. 

They are also possessed by Limulus, the horseshoe crab, and there are suggestions that other chelicerates developed their simple eyes by reduction from a compound starting point. (Some caterpillars appear to have evolved compound eyes from simple eyes in the opposite fashion.)
Apposition eyes work by gathering a number of images, one from each eye, and combining them in the brain, with each eye typically contributing a single point of information. 

The typical apposition eye has a lens focusing light from one direction on the rhabdom, while light from other directions is absorbed by the dark wall of the ommatidium.


==== Superposition eyes ====
The second type is named the superposition eye. 

The superposition eye is divided into three types:

refracting,
reflecting and
parabolic superpositionThe refracting superposition eye has a gap between the lens and the rhabdom, and no side wall. 

Each lens takes light at an angle to its axis and reflects it to the same angle on the other side. 

The result is an image at half the radius of the eye, which is where the tips of the rhabdoms are. 

This type of compound eye, for which a minimal size exists below which effective superposition cannot occur, is normally found in nocturnal insects, because it can create images up to 1000 times brighter than equivalent apposition eyes, though at the cost of reduced resolution. 

In the parabolic superposition compound eye type, seen in arthropods such as mayflies, the parabolic surfaces of the inside of each facet focus light from a reflector to a sensor array. 

Long-bodied decapod crustaceans such as shrimp, prawns, crayfish and lobsters are alone in having reflecting superposition eyes, which also have a transparent gap but use corner mirrors instead of lenses.


==== Parabolic superposition ====
This eye type functions by refracting light, then using a parabolic mirror to focus the image; it combines features of superposition and apposition eyes.


==== Other ====
Another kind of compound eye, found in males of Order Strepsiptera, employs a series of simple eyes—eyes having one opening that provides light for an entire image-forming retina. 

Several of these eyelets together form the strepsipteran compound eye, which is similar to the 'schizochroal' compound eyes of some trilobites. 

Because each eyelet is a simple eye, it produces an inverted image; those images are combined in the brain to form one unified image. 

Because the aperture of an eyelet is larger than the facets of a compound eye, this arrangement allows vision under low light levels.Good fliers such as flies or honey bees, or prey-catching insects such as praying mantis or dragonflies, have specialised zones of ommatidia organised into a fovea area which gives acute vision. 

In the acute zone, the eyes are flattened and the facets larger. 

The flattening allows more ommatidia to receive light from a spot and therefore higher resolution. 

The black spot that can be seen on the compound eyes of such insects, which always seems to look directly at the observer, is called a pseudopupil. 

This occurs because the ommatidia which one observes "head-on" (along their optical axes) absorb the incident light, while those to one side reflect it.There are some exceptions from the types mentioned above. 

Some insects have a so-called single lens compound eye, a transitional type which is something between a superposition type of the multi-lens compound eye and the single lens eye found in animals with simple eyes. 

Then there is the mysid shrimp, Dioptromysis paucispinosa. 

The shrimp has an eye of the refracting superposition type, in the rear behind this in each eye there is a single large facet that is three times in diameter the others in the eye and behind this is an enlarged crystalline cone. 

This projects an upright image on a specialised retina. 

The resulting eye is a mixture of a simple eye within a compound eye.
Another version is a compound eye often referred to as "pseudofaceted", as seen in Scutigera. 

This type of eye consists of a cluster of numerous ommatidia on each side of the head, organised in a way that resembles a true compound eye.
The body of Ophiocoma wendtii, a type of brittle star, is covered with ommatidia, turning its whole skin into a compound eye. 

The same is true of many chitons. 

The tube feet of sea urchins contain photoreceptor proteins, which together act as a compound eye; they lack screening pigments, but can detect the directionality of light by the shadow cast by its opaque body.


==== Nutrients ====
The ciliary body is triangular in horizontal section and is coated by a double layer, the ciliary epithelium. 

The inner layer is transparent and covers the vitreous body, and is continuous from the neural tissue of the retina. 

The outer layer is highly pigmented, continuous with the retinal pigment epithelium, and constitutes the cells of the dilator muscle.
The vitreous is the transparent, colourless, gelatinous mass that fills the space between the lens of the eye and the retina lining the back of the eye. 

It is produced by certain retinal cells. 

It is of rather similar composition to the cornea, but contains very few cells (mostly phagocytes which remove unwanted cellular debris in the visual field, as well as the hyalocytes of Balazs of the surface of the vitreous, which reprocess the hyaluronic acid), no blood vessels, and 98–99% of its volume is water (as opposed to 75% in the cornea) with salts, sugars, vitrosin (a type of collagen), a network of collagen type II fibres with the mucopolysaccharide hyaluronic acid, and also a wide array of proteins in micro amounts. 

Amazingly, with so little solid matter, it tautly holds the eye.


== Evolution ==


Photoreception is phylogenetically very old, with various theories of phylogenesis. 

The common origin (monophyly) of all animal eyes is now widely accepted as fact. 

This is based upon the shared genetic features of all eyes; that is, all modern eyes, varied as they are, have their origins in a proto-eye believed to have evolved some 650-600 million years ago, and the PAX6 gene is considered a key factor in this. 

The majority of the advancements in early eyes are believed to have taken only a few million years to develop, since the first predator to gain true imaging would have touched off an "arms race" among all species that did not flee the photopic environment. 

Prey animals and competing predators alike would be at a distinct disadvantage without such capabilities and would be less likely to survive and reproduce. 

Hence multiple eye types and subtypes developed in parallel (except those of groups, such as the vertebrates, that were only forced into the photopic environment at a late stage).
Eyes in various animals show adaptation to their requirements. 

For example, the eye of a bird of prey has much greater visual acuity than a human eye, and in some cases can detect ultraviolet radiation. 

The different forms of eye in, for example, vertebrates and molluscs are examples of parallel evolution, despite their distant common ancestry. 

Phenotypic convergence of the geometry of cephalopod and most vertebrate eyes creates the impression that the vertebrate eye evolved from an imaging cephalopod eye, but this is not the case, as the reversed roles of their respective ciliary and rhabdomeric opsin classes and different lens crystallins show.The very earliest "eyes", called eye-spots, were simple patches of photoreceptor protein in unicellular animals. 

In multicellular beings, multicellular eyespots evolved, physically similar to the receptor patches for taste and smell. 

These eyespots could only sense ambient brightness: they could distinguish light and dark, but not the direction of the light source.Through gradual change, the eye-spots of species living in well-lit environments depressed into a shallow "cup" shape. 

The ability to slightly discriminate directional brightness was achieved by using the angle at which the light hit certain cells to identify the source. 

The pit deepened over time, the opening diminished in size, and the number of photoreceptor cells increased, forming an effective pinhole camera that was capable of dimly distinguishing shapes. 

However, the ancestors of modern hagfish, thought to be the protovertebrate, were evidently pushed to very deep, dark waters, where they were less vulnerable to sighted predators, and where it is advantageous to have a convex eye-spot, which gathers more light than a flat or concave one. 

This would have led to a somewhat different evolutionary trajectory for the vertebrate eye than for other animal eyes.
The thin overgrowth of transparent cells over the eye's aperture, originally formed to prevent damage to the eyespot, allowed the segregated contents of the eye chamber to specialise into a transparent humour that optimised colour filtering, blocked harmful radiation, improved the eye's refractive index, and allowed functionality outside of water. 

The transparent protective cells eventually split into two layers, with circulatory fluid in between that allowed wider viewing angles and greater imaging resolution, and the thickness of the transparent layer gradually increased, in most species with the transparent crystallin protein.The gap between tissue layers naturally formed a biconvex shape, an optimally ideal structure for a normal refractive index. 

Independently, a transparent layer and a nontransparent layer split forward from the lens: the cornea and iris. 

Separation of the forward layer again formed a humour, the aqueous humour. 

This increased refractive power and again eased circulatory problems. 

Formation of a nontransparent ring allowed more blood vessels, more circulation, and larger eye sizes.


=== Relationship to life requirements ===

Eyes are generally adapted to the environment and life requirements of the organism which bears them. 

For instance, the distribution of photoreceptors tends to match the area in which the highest acuity is required, with horizon-scanning organisms, such as those that live on the African plains, having a horizontal line of high-density ganglia, while tree-dwelling creatures which require good all-round vision tend to have a symmetrical distribution of ganglia, with acuity decreasing outwards from the centre.
Of course, for most eye types, it is impossible to diverge from a spherical form, so only the density of optical receptors can be altered. 

In organisms with compound eyes, it is the number of ommatidia rather than ganglia that reflects the region of highest data acquisition.: 23–24  Optical superposition eyes are constrained to a spherical shape, but other forms of compound eyes may deform to a shape where more ommatidia are aligned to, say, the horizon, without altering the size or density of individual ommatidia. 

Eyes of horizon-scanning organisms have stalks so they can be easily aligned to the horizon when this is inclined, for example, if the animal is on a slope.An extension of this concept is that the eyes of predators typically have a zone of very acute vision at their centre, to assist in the identification of prey. 

In deep water organisms, it may not be the centre of the eye that is enlarged. 

The hyperiid amphipods are deep water animals that feed on organisms above them. 

Their eyes are almost divided into two, with the upper region thought to be involved in detecting the silhouettes of potential prey—or predators—against the faint light of the sky above. 

Accordingly, deeper water hyperiids, where the light against which the silhouettes must be compared is dimmer, have larger "upper-eyes", and may lose the lower portion of their eyes altogether. 

In the giant Antarctic isopod Glyptonotus a small ventral compound eye is physically completely separated from the much larger dorsal compound eye. 

Depth perception can be enhanced by having eyes which are enlarged in one direction; distorting the eye slightly allows the distance to the object to be estimated with a high degree of accuracy.Acuity is higher among male organisms that mate in mid-air, as they need to be able to spot and assess potential mates against a very large backdrop. 

On the other hand, the eyes of organisms which operate in low light levels, such as around dawn and dusk or in deep water, tend to be larger to increase the amount of light that can be captured.It is not only the shape of the eye that may be affected by lifestyle. 

Eyes can be the most visible parts of organisms, and this can act as a pressure on organisms to have more transparent eyes at the cost of function.Eyes may be mounted on stalks to provide better all-round vision, by lifting them above an organism's carapace; this also allows them to track predators or prey without moving the head.


== Physiology ==



=== Visual acuity ===


Visual acuity, or resolving power, is "the ability to distinguish fine detail" and is the property of cone cells. 

It is often measured in cycles per degree (CPD), which measures an angular resolution, or how much an eye can differentiate one object from another in terms of visual angles. 

Resolution in CPD can be measured by bar charts of different numbers of white/black stripe cycles. 

For example, if each pattern is 1.75 cm wide and is placed at 1 m distance from the eye, it will subtend an angle of 1 degree, so the number of white/black bar pairs on the pattern will be a measure of the cycles per degree of that pattern. 

The highest such number that the eye can resolve as stripes, or distinguish from a grey block, is then the measurement of visual acuity of the eye.
For a human eye with excellent acuity, the maximum theoretical resolution is 50 CPD (1.2 arcminute per line pair, or a 0.35 mm line pair, at 1 m). 

A rat can resolve only about 1 to 2 CPD. 

A horse has higher acuity through most of the visual field of its eyes than a human has, but does not match the high acuity of the human eye's central fovea region.Spherical aberration limits the resolution of a 7 mm pupil to about 3 arcminutes per line pair. 

At a pupil diameter of 3 mm, the spherical aberration is greatly reduced, resulting in an improved resolution of approximately 1.7 arcminutes per line pair. 

A resolution of 2 arcminutes per line pair, equivalent to a 1 arcminute gap in an optotype, corresponds to 20/20 (normal vision) in humans.
However, in the compound eye, the resolution is related to the size of individual ommatidia and the distance between neighbouring ommatidia. 

Physically these cannot be reduced in size to achieve the acuity seen with single lensed eyes as in mammals. 

Compound eyes have a much lower acuity than vertebrate eyes.


=== Colour perception ===


"Colour vision is the faculty of the organism to distinguish lights of different spectral qualities." All organisms are restricted to a small range of electromagnetic spectrum; this varies from creature to creature, but is mainly between wavelengths of 400 and 700 nm.
This is a rather small section of the electromagnetic spectrum, probably reflecting the submarine evolution of the organ: water blocks out all but two small windows of the EM spectrum, and there has been no evolutionary pressure among land animals to broaden this range.The most sensitive pigment, rhodopsin, has a peak response at 500 nm. 

Small changes to the genes coding for this protein can tweak the peak response by a few nm; pigments in the lens can also filter incoming light, changing the peak response. 

Many organisms are unable to discriminate between colours, seeing instead in shades of grey; colour vision necessitates a range of pigment cells which are primarily sensitive to smaller ranges of the spectrum. 

In primates, geckos, and other organisms, these take the form of cone cells, from which the more sensitive rod cells evolved. 

Even if organisms are physically capable of discriminating different colours, this does not necessarily mean that they can perceive the different colours; only with behavioural tests can this be deduced.Most organisms with colour vision can detect ultraviolet light. 

This high energy light can be damaging to receptor cells. 

With a few exceptions (snakes, placental mammals), most organisms avoid these effects by having absorbent oil droplets around their cone cells. 

The alternative, developed by organisms that had lost these oil droplets in the course of evolution, is to make the lens impervious to UV light—this precludes the possibility of any UV light being detected, as it does not even reach the retina.


=== Rods and cones ===

The retina contains two major types of light-sensitive photoreceptor cells used for vision: the rods and the cones.
Rods cannot distinguish colours, but are responsible for low-light (scotopic) monochrome (black-and-white) vision; they work well in dim light as they contain a pigment, rhodopsin (visual purple), which is sensitive at low light intensity, but saturates at higher (photopic) intensities. 

Rods are distributed throughout the retina but there are none at the fovea and none at the blind spot. 

Rod density is greater in the peripheral retina than in the central retina.
Cones are responsible for colour vision. 

They require brighter light to function than rods require. 

In humans, there are three types of cones, maximally sensitive to long-wavelength, medium-wavelength, and short-wavelength light (often referred to as red, green, and blue, respectively, though the sensitivity peaks are not actually at these colours). 

The colour seen is the combined effect of stimuli to, and responses from, these three types of cone cells. 

Cones are mostly concentrated in and near the fovea. 

Only a few are present at the sides of the retina. 

Objects are seen most sharply in focus when their images fall on the fovea, as when one looks at an object directly. 

Cone cells and rods are connected through intermediate cells in the retina to nerve fibres of the optic nerve. 

When rods and cones are stimulated by light, they connect through adjoining cells within the retina to send an electrical signal to the optic nerve fibres. 

The optic nerves send off impulses through these fibres to the brain.


== Pigmentation ==

The pigment molecules used in the eye are various, but can be used to define the evolutionary distance between different groups, and can also be an aid in determining which are closely related—although problems of convergence do exist.Opsins are the pigments involved in photoreception. 

Other pigments, such as melanin, are used to shield the photoreceptor cells from light leaking in from the sides.
The opsin protein group evolved long before the last common ancestor of animals, and has continued to diversify since.There are two types of opsin involved in vision; c-opsins, which are associated with ciliary-type photoreceptor cells, and r-opsins, associated with rhabdomeric photoreceptor cells. 

The eyes of vertebrates usually contain ciliary cells with c-opsins, and (bilaterian) invertebrates have rhabdomeric cells in the eye with r-opsins. 

However, some ganglion cells of vertebrates express r-opsins, suggesting that their ancestors used this pigment in vision, and that remnants survive in the eyes. 

Likewise, c-opsins have been found to be expressed in the brain of some invertebrates. 

They may have been expressed in ciliary cells of larval eyes, which were subsequently resorbed into the brain on metamorphosis to the adult form. 

C-opsins are also found in some derived bilaterian-invertebrate eyes, such as the pallial eyes of the bivalve molluscs; however, the lateral eyes (which were presumably the ancestral type for this group, if eyes evolved once there) always use r-opsins. 

Cnidaria, which are an outgroup to the taxa mentioned above, express c-opsins—but r-opsins are yet to be found in this group. 

Incidentally, the melanin produced in the cnidaria is produced in the same fashion as that in vertebrates, suggesting the common descent of this pigment.


== Notes ==



=== Bibliography ===

Ali, Mohamed Ather; Klyne, M.A. (1985). 

Vision in Vertebrates. 

New York: Plenum Press. 

ISBN 978-0-306-42065-8.


== Further reading ==

Yong, Ed (14 January 2016). "Inside the Eye: Nature's Most Exquisite Creation". 

National Geographic.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eye
;;;ES;;;



OJO


Los ojos son órganos del sistema visual.

Proporcionan a los organismos vivos visión, la capacidad de recibir y procesar detalles visuales, además de habilitar varias funciones de fotorrespuesta que son independientes de la visión.

Los ojos detectan la luz y la convierten en impulsos electroquímicos en las neuronas.

En los organismos superiores, el ojo es un sistema óptico complejo que recoge la luz del entorno que lo rodea, regula su intensidad a través de un diafragma, la enfoca a través de un conjunto ajustable de lentes para formar una imagen, convierte esta imagen en un conjunto de señales eléctricas y transmite estas señales al cerebro a través de vías neuronales complejas que conectan el ojo a través del nervio óptico con la corteza visual y otras áreas del cerebro.

Los ojos con poder de resolución se han presentado en diez formas fundamentalmente diferentes, y el 96% de las especies animales poseen un sistema óptico complejo.

Los ojos de resolución de imágenes están presentes en moluscos, cordados y artrópodos. Los ojos más simples, los ojos de fosa, son manchas oculares que pueden colocarse en una fosa para reducir los ángulos de luz que entran y afectan la mancha ocular, para permitir que la organismo para deducir el ángulo de la luz entrante.

Desde ojos más complejos, las células ganglionares fotosensibles de la retina envían señales a lo largo del tracto retinohipotalámico a los núcleos supraquiasmáticos para efectuar el ajuste circadiano y al área pretectal para controlar el reflejo de luz pupilar.


== Resumen ==


Los ojos complejos pueden distinguir formas y colores.

Los campos visuales de muchos organismos, especialmente los depredadores, involucran grandes áreas de visión binocular para mejorar la percepción de profundidad.

En otros organismos, los ojos están ubicados para maximizar el campo de visión, como en conejos y caballos, que tienen visión monocular.
Los primeros protoojos evolucionaron entre los animales hace 600 millones de años, en la época de la explosión del Cámbrico.

El último ancestro común de los animales poseía las herramientas bioquímicas necesarias para la visión, y se han desarrollado ojos más avanzados en el 96 % de las especies animales en seis de los ~35 filos principales.

En la mayoría de los vertebrados y algunos moluscos, el ojo funciona permitiendo que la luz entre y se proyecte sobre una capa de células sensibles a la luz al final del ojo, conocida como retina.

Los conos (para el color) y los bastones (para contrastes de poca luz) en la retina detectan y convierten la luz en señales neuronales para la visión.

Luego, las señales visuales se transmiten al cerebro a través del nervio óptico.

Estos ojos suelen ser más o menos esféricos, llenos de una sustancia similar a un gel transparente llamada humor vítreo, con una lente de enfoque y, a menudo, un iris; la relajación o el endurecimiento de los músculos alrededor del iris cambian el tamaño de la pupila, regulando así la cantidad de luz que ingresa al ojo y reduciendo las aberraciones cuando hay suficiente luz.

Los ojos de la mayoría de los cefalópodos, peces, anfibios y serpientes tienen formas de lentes fijas, y la visión enfocada se logra al extender la lente, de manera similar a como enfoca una cámara. Los ojos compuestos se encuentran entre los artrópodos y se componen de muchas facetas simples que, según en los detalles de la anatomía, puede dar una sola imagen pixelada o múltiples imágenes, por ojo.

Cada sensor tiene su propia lente y celda(s) fotosensible(s).

Algunos ojos tienen hasta 28.000 sensores de este tipo, que están dispuestos hexagonalmente y que pueden proporcionar un campo de visión completo de 360°.

Los ojos compuestos son muy sensibles al movimiento.

Algunos artrópodos, incluidos muchos Strepsiptera, tienen ojos compuestos de solo unas pocas facetas, cada una con una retina capaz de crear una imagen, crear una visión.

Con cada ojo viendo una cosa diferente, se produce una imagen fusionada de todos los ojos en el cerebro, proporcionando imágenes de alta resolución muy diferentes.
Al poseer una visión de color hiperespectral detallada, se ha informado que el camarón Mantis tiene el sistema de visión de color más complejo del mundo.

Los trilobites, que ahora están extintos, tenían ojos compuestos únicos.

Utilizaron cristales de calcita transparentes para formar las lentes de sus ojos.

En esto se diferencian de la mayoría de los otros artrópodos, que tienen ojos suaves.

El número de lentes en tal ojo variaba; sin embargo, algunos trilobites tenían solo uno y algunos tenían miles de lentes en un ojo.
A diferencia de los ojos compuestos, los ojos simples son aquellos que tienen una sola lente.

Por ejemplo, las arañas saltadoras tienen un gran par de ojos simples con un campo de visión estrecho, apoyados por una serie de otros ojos más pequeños para la visión periférica.

Algunas larvas de insectos, como las orugas, tienen un tipo diferente de ojo simple (stemmata) que generalmente proporciona solo una imagen aproximada, pero (como en las larvas de mosca de sierra) puede poseer poderes de resolución de 4 grados de arco, ser sensible a la polarización y capaz de aumentar su sensibilidad absoluta por la noche por un factor de 1.000 o más.

Algunos de los ojos más simples, llamados ocelos, se pueden encontrar en animales como algunos caracoles, que en realidad no pueden "ver" en el sentido normal.

Tienen células fotosensibles, pero no tienen lentes ni otros medios para proyectar una imagen en estas células.

Pueden distinguir entre la luz y la oscuridad, pero nada más.

Esto permite a los caracoles mantenerse alejados de la luz solar directa.
En los organismos que habitan cerca de los respiraderos de aguas profundas, los ojos compuestos se han simplificado y adaptado para ver la luz infrarroja producida por los respiraderos calientes; de esta manera, los portadores pueden evitar ser hervidos vivos.


== Tipos ==

Hay diez diseños de ojos diferentes; de hecho, todos los métodos tecnológicos para capturar una imagen óptica comúnmente utilizados por los seres humanos, con la excepción del zoom y las lentes de Fresnel, ocurren en la naturaleza.

Los tipos de ojos se pueden clasificar en "ojos simples", con una superficie fotorreceptora cóncava, y "ojos compuestos", que comprenden varias lentes individuales dispuestas en una superficie convexa.

Tenga en cuenta que "simple" no implica un nivel reducido de complejidad o agudeza.

De hecho, cualquier tipo de ojo puede adaptarse a casi cualquier comportamiento o entorno.

Las únicas limitaciones específicas de los tipos de ojos son la resolución: la física de los ojos compuestos les impide alcanzar una resolución superior a 1°.

Además, los ojos de superposición pueden lograr una mayor sensibilidad que los ojos de aposición, por lo que se adaptan mejor a las criaturas que habitan en la oscuridad.

Los ojos también se dividen en dos grupos según la construcción celular de sus fotorreceptores, siendo las células fotorreceptoras ciliadas (como en los vertebrados) o rabdoméricas.

Estos dos grupos no son monofiléticos; los cnidarios también poseen células ciliadas,
y algunos gasterópodos, así como algunos anélidos poseen ambos. Algunos organismos tienen células fotosensibles que no hacen más que detectar si el entorno es claro u oscuro, lo cual es suficiente para el arrastre de los ritmos circadianos.

Estos no se consideran ojos porque carecen de la estructura suficiente para ser considerados un órgano y no producen una imagen.


=== Ojos no compuestos ===

Los ojos simples son bastante ubicuos y los ojos con lentes han evolucionado al menos siete veces en vertebrados, cefalópodos, anélidos, crustáceos y cubozoos.


==== Ojos de pozo ====
Los ojos de pozo, también conocidos como stemma, son manchas oculares que se pueden colocar en un pozo para reducir los ángulos de luz que ingresan y afectan la mancha ocular, para permitir que el organismo deduzca el ángulo de la luz entrante.

Estas formas básicas, que se encuentran en aproximadamente el 85% de los filos, probablemente fueron las precursoras de tipos más avanzados de "ojos simples".

Son pequeños y comprenden hasta unas 100 células que cubren unas 100 µm.

La direccionalidad se puede mejorar reduciendo el tamaño de la apertura, incorporando una capa reflectante detrás de las células receptoras o llenando el pozo con un material refráctil. Las víboras han desarrollado pozos que funcionan como ojos al detectar la radiación infrarroja térmica, además de sus ojos de longitud de onda óptica como los de otros vertebrados (ver detección infrarroja en serpientes).

Sin embargo, los órganos de la fosa están equipados con receptores bastante diferentes de los fotorreceptores, a saber, un canal de potencial receptor transitorio específico (canales TRP) llamado TRPV1.

La principal diferencia es que los fotorreceptores son receptores acoplados a proteína G, pero los TRP son canales iónicos.


==== Ojo de lente esférica ====
La resolución de los ojos de pozo se puede mejorar en gran medida mediante la incorporación de un material con un índice de refracción más alto para formar una lente, lo que puede reducir en gran medida el radio de desenfoque encontrado y, por lo tanto, aumentar la resolución que se puede obtener.

La forma más básica, vista en algunos gasterópodos y anélidos, consiste en una lente de un índice de refracción.

Se puede obtener una imagen mucho más nítida usando materiales con un alto índice de refracción, decreciendo hacia los bordes; esto disminuye la distancia focal y, por lo tanto, permite que se forme una imagen nítida en la retina.

Esto también permite una mayor apertura para una determinada nitidez de la imagen, lo que permite que entre más luz en la lente; y una lente más plana, reduciendo la aberración esférica.

Tal lente no homogénea es necesaria para que la distancia focal caiga de aproximadamente 4 veces el radio de la lente a 2,5 radios. Los ojos heterogéneos han evolucionado al menos nueve veces: cuatro o más veces en los gasterópodos, una en los copépodos, una en el anélidos, una vez en los cefalópodos y otra en los quitones, que tienen lentes de aragonito.

Ningún organismo acuático existente posee lentes homogéneos; presumiblemente, la presión evolutiva para una lente heterogénea es lo suficientemente grande como para que esta etapa se "supere" rápidamente. Este ojo crea una imagen que es lo suficientemente nítida como para que el movimiento del ojo pueda causar una borrosidad significativa.

Para minimizar el efecto del movimiento ocular mientras el animal se mueve, la mayoría de estos ojos tienen músculos oculares estabilizadores. Los ocelos de los insectos tienen una lente simple, pero su punto focal generalmente se encuentra detrás de la retina; en consecuencia, esos no pueden formar una imagen nítida.

Los ocelos (ojos tipo fosa de los artrópodos) desenfocan la imagen en toda la retina y, en consecuencia, son excelentes para responder a cambios rápidos en la intensidad de la luz en todo el campo visual; esta respuesta rápida se acelera aún más por los grandes haces de nervios que envían la información al cerebro.

Enfocar la imagen también provocaría que la imagen del sol se enfocara en unos pocos receptores, con la posibilidad de daño bajo la luz intensa; proteger los receptores bloquearía parte de la luz y, por lo tanto, reduciría su sensibilidad.
Esta rápida respuesta ha llevado a sugerir que los ocelos de los insectos se usan principalmente en vuelo, porque pueden usarse para detectar cambios repentinos en la dirección hacia arriba (porque la luz, especialmente la luz ultravioleta que es absorbida por la vegetación, generalmente proviene de arriba) .


==== Múltiples lentes ====
Algunos organismos marinos tienen más de una lente; por ejemplo, el copépodo Pontella tiene tres.

El exterior tiene una superficie parabólica, que contrarresta los efectos de la aberración esférica y permite que se forme una imagen nítida.

Otro copépodo, Copilia, tiene dos lentes en cada ojo, dispuestos como los de un telescopio.

Estos arreglos son raros y poco conocidos, pero representan una construcción alternativa.
En algunos cazadores se ven lentes múltiples como las águilas y las arañas saltadoras, que tienen una córnea refractiva: estas tienen un lente negativo, agrandando la imagen observada hasta en un 50% sobre las células receptoras, aumentando así su resolución óptica.


==== Córnea refractiva ====
A los ojos de la mayoría de los mamíferos, aves, reptiles y la mayoría de los otros vertebrados terrestres (junto con las arañas y algunas larvas de insectos), el líquido vítreo tiene un índice de refracción más alto que el aire.

En general, la lente no es esférica.

Las lentes esféricas producen aberración esférica.

En las córneas refractivas, el tejido del cristalino se corrige con material de lente no homogéneo (ver lente de Luneburg), o con una forma asférica.

Aplanar la lente tiene una desventaja; la calidad de la visión disminuye lejos de la línea principal de enfoque.

Por lo tanto, los animales que han evolucionado con un amplio campo de visión a menudo tienen ojos que utilizan un cristalino no homogéneo. Como se mencionó anteriormente, una córnea refractiva solo es útil fuera del agua.

En el agua, hay poca diferencia en el índice de refracción entre el fluido vítreo y el agua circundante.

Por lo tanto, las criaturas que han regresado al agua (los pingüinos y las focas, por ejemplo) pierden su córnea altamente curvada y vuelven a la visión basada en lentes.

Una solución alternativa, propuesta por algunos buzos, es tener una córnea muy enfocada.


==== Ojos reflectores ====
Una alternativa a una lente es revestir el interior del ojo con "espejos" y reflejar la imagen para enfocarla en un punto central.

La naturaleza de estos ojos significa que si uno mirara dentro de la pupila de un ojo, vería la misma imagen que vería el organismo, reflejada hacia afuera. Muchos organismos pequeños como rotíferos, copépodos y platelmintos usan tales órganos, pero estos son demasiado pequeños para producir imágenes utilizables.

Algunos organismos más grandes, como las vieiras, también usan ojos reflectores.

La vieira Pecten tiene ojos reflectores de hasta 100 milímetros de escala que bordean el borde de su caparazón.

Detecta objetos en movimiento a medida que pasan por lentes sucesivas. Hay al menos un vertebrado, el spookfish, cuyos ojos incluyen óptica reflectante para enfocar la luz.

Cada uno de los dos ojos de un spookfish recoge la luz tanto de arriba como de abajo; la luz que viene de arriba es enfocada por una lente, mientras que la que viene de abajo, por un espejo curvo compuesto por muchas capas de pequeñas placas reflectantes hechas de cristales de guanina.


=== Ojos compuestos ===


Un ojo compuesto puede consistir en miles de unidades de fotorreceptores individuales u omatidios (ommatidium, singular).

La imagen percibida es una combinación de entradas de los numerosos omatidios ("unidades oculares" individuales), que se encuentran en una superficie convexa, apuntando así en direcciones ligeramente diferentes.

En comparación con los ojos simples, los ojos compuestos poseen un ángulo de visión muy grande y pueden detectar movimientos rápidos y, en algunos casos, la polarización de la luz.

Debido a que las lentes individuales son tan pequeñas, los efectos de la difracción imponen un límite a la posible resolución que se puede obtener (suponiendo que no funcionen como arreglos en fase).

Esto solo se puede contrarrestar aumentando el tamaño y el número de lentes.

Para ver con una resolución comparable a nuestros ojos simples, los humanos necesitarían ojos compuestos muy grandes, de alrededor de 11 metros (36 pies) de radio. Los ojos compuestos se dividen en dos grupos: ojos de aposición, que forman múltiples imágenes invertidas, y ojos de superposición, que formar una sola imagen erecta.

Los ojos compuestos son comunes en artrópodos, anélidos y algunos moluscos bivalvos.

Los ojos compuestos de los artrópodos crecen en sus márgenes mediante la adición de nuevos omatidios.


==== Ojos de aposición ====
Los ojos de aposición son la forma más común de ojos y presumiblemente son la forma ancestral de los ojos compuestos.

Se encuentran en todos los grupos de artrópodos, aunque pueden haber evolucionado más de una vez dentro de este filo.

Algunos anélidos y bivalvos también tienen ojos de aposición.

También están poseídos por Limulus, el cangrejo herradura, y hay sugerencias de que otros quelicerados desarrollaron sus ojos simples por reducción a partir de un punto de partida compuesto. (Algunas orugas parecen haber desarrollado ojos compuestos a partir de ojos simples de manera opuesta).
Los ojos de aposición funcionan reuniendo una serie de imágenes, una de cada ojo, y combinándolas en el cerebro, y cada ojo suele contribuir con un único punto de información.

El ojo de aposición típico tiene una lente que enfoca la luz desde una dirección sobre el rabdoma, mientras que la pared oscura del omatidio absorbe la luz de otras direcciones.


==== Ojos de superposición ====
El segundo tipo se denomina ojo de superposición.

El ojo de superposición se divide en tres tipos:

refractando,
reflexionando y
superposición parabólica El ojo de superposición de refracción tiene un espacio entre la lente y el rabdom, y no tiene pared lateral.

Cada lente toma la luz en un ángulo con respecto a su eje y la refleja con el mismo ángulo en el otro lado.

El resultado es una imagen en la mitad del radio del ojo, que es donde están las puntas de los rabdoms.

Este tipo de ojo compuesto, para el cual existe un tamaño mínimo por debajo del cual no puede ocurrir una superposición efectiva, se encuentra normalmente en los insectos nocturnos, porque puede crear imágenes hasta 1000 veces más brillantes que los ojos de aposición equivalentes, aunque a costa de una resolución reducida.

En el tipo de ojo compuesto de superposición parabólica, visto en artrópodos como las efímeras, las superficies parabólicas del interior de cada faceta enfocan la luz desde un reflector a una matriz de sensores.

Los crustáceos decápodos de cuerpo largo, como camarones, langostinos, cangrejos de río y langostas, son los únicos que tienen ojos reflectantes de superposición, que también tienen un espacio transparente pero usan espejos en las esquinas en lugar de lentes.


==== Superposición parabólica ====
Este tipo de ojo funciona refractando la luz y luego usando un espejo parabólico para enfocar la imagen; combina características de ojos de superposición y aposición.


==== Otro ====
Otro tipo de ojo compuesto, que se encuentra en los machos del orden Strepsiptera, emplea una serie de ojos simples: ojos que tienen una abertura que proporciona luz para toda la retina que forma la imagen.

Varios de estos ojales juntos forman el ojo compuesto estrepsíptero, que es similar a los ojos compuestos 'esquizocroales' de algunos trilobites.

Como cada ojal es un simple ojo, produce una imagen invertida; esas imágenes se combinan en el cerebro para formar una imagen unificada.

Debido a que la apertura de un ojal es más grande que las facetas de un ojo compuesto, esta disposición permite la visión en condiciones de poca luz. Los buenos voladores, como las moscas o las abejas melíferas, o los insectos que cazan presas, como las mantis religiosas o las libélulas, tienen zonas especializadas de omatidios organizados en un área de fóvea que da una visión aguda.

En la zona aguda, los ojos son aplanados y las facetas más grandes.

El aplanamiento permite que más omatidios reciban luz de un punto y, por lo tanto, una mayor resolución.

La mancha negra que se puede ver en los ojos compuestos de tales insectos, que siempre parece mirar directamente al observador, se llama pseudopupila.

Esto ocurre porque los omatidios que se observan "de frente" (a lo largo de sus ejes ópticos) absorben la luz incidente, mientras que los de un lado la reflejan. Hay algunas excepciones a los tipos mencionados anteriormente.

Algunos insectos tienen el llamado ojo compuesto de lente única, un tipo de transición que es algo entre un tipo de superposición del ojo compuesto de múltiples lentes y el ojo de lente única que se encuentra en animales con ojos simples.

Luego está el camarón mysid, Dioptromysis paucispinosa.

El camarón tiene un ojo del tipo de superposición refractiva, en la parte trasera detrás de este en cada ojo hay una sola faceta grande que tiene tres veces el diámetro de las otras en el ojo y detrás de esto hay un cono cristalino agrandado.

Esto proyecta una imagen vertical en una retina especializada.

El ojo resultante es una mezcla de un ojo simple dentro de un ojo compuesto.
Otra versión es un ojo compuesto a menudo denominado "pseudofacetado", como se ve en Scutigera.

Este tipo de ojo consiste en un grupo de numerosos omatidios a cada lado de la cabeza, organizados de manera que se asemeja a un verdadero ojo compuesto.
El cuerpo de Ophiocoma wendtii, un tipo de estrella quebradiza, está cubierto de omatidios, convirtiendo toda su piel en un ojo compuesto.

Lo mismo puede decirse de muchos chitones.

Los pies ambulacrales de los erizos de mar contienen proteínas fotorreceptoras, que juntas actúan como un ojo compuesto; carecen de pigmentos de detección, pero pueden detectar la direccionalidad de la luz por la sombra proyectada por su cuerpo opaco.


==== Nutrientes ====
El cuerpo ciliar es triangular en sección horizontal y está recubierto por una doble capa, el epitelio ciliar.

La capa interna es transparente y cubre el cuerpo vítreo, y es continua desde el tejido neural de la retina.

La capa exterior está muy pigmentada, se continúa con el epitelio pigmentario de la retina y constituye las células del músculo dilatador.
El vítreo es la masa gelatinosa transparente e incolora que llena el espacio entre el cristalino del ojo y la retina que recubre la parte posterior del ojo.

Es producida por ciertas células de la retina.

Tiene una composición bastante similar a la córnea, pero contiene muy pocas células (principalmente fagocitos que eliminan los restos celulares no deseados del campo visual, así como los hialocitos de Balazs de la superficie del vítreo, que reprocesan el ácido hialurónico), no vasos sanguíneos, y el 98-99% de su volumen es agua (frente al 75% en la córnea) con sales, azúcares, vitrosina (un tipo de colágeno), una red de fibras de colágeno tipo II con el mucopolisacárido ácido hialurónico y también una amplia gama de proteínas en micro cantidades.

Sorprendentemente, con tan poca materia sólida, mantiene la vista tensa.


== Evolución ==


La fotorrecepción es filogenéticamente muy antigua, con varias teorías de filogénesis.

El origen común (monofilia) de todos los ojos de los animales es ahora ampliamente aceptado como un hecho.

Esto se basa en las características genéticas compartidas de todos los ojos; es decir, todos los ojos modernos, por variados que sean, tienen su origen en un protoojo que se cree que evolucionó hace unos 650-600 millones de años, y el gen PAX6 se considera un factor clave en esto.

Se cree que la mayoría de los avances en los primeros ojos tardaron solo unos pocos millones de años en desarrollarse, ya que el primer depredador en obtener imágenes verdaderas habría desencadenado una "carrera armamentista" entre todas las especies que no huyeron del entorno fotópico.

Los animales de presa y los depredadores competidores estarían en clara desventaja sin tales capacidades y tendrían menos probabilidades de sobrevivir y reproducirse.

Por lo tanto, se desarrollaron en paralelo múltiples tipos y subtipos de ojos (excepto los de grupos, como los vertebrados, que solo fueron forzados al entorno fotópico en una etapa tardía).
Los ojos de varios animales muestran adaptación a sus requerimientos.

Por ejemplo, el ojo de un ave rapaz tiene una agudeza visual mucho mayor que el ojo humano, y en algunos casos puede detectar la radiación ultravioleta.

Las diferentes formas de ojo en, por ejemplo, vertebrados y moluscos son ejemplos de evolución paralela, a pesar de su distante ascendencia común.

La convergencia fenotípica de la geometría de los cefalópodos y la mayoría de los ojos de los vertebrados crea la impresión de que el ojo de los vertebrados evolucionó a partir de un ojo de cefalópodo de imágenes, pero este no es el caso, como muestran los roles inversos de sus respectivas clases de opsina ciliar y rabdomérica y diferentes cristales de lentes. Los primeros "ojos", llamados manchas oculares, eran simples parches de proteína fotorreceptora en animales unicelulares.

En los seres multicelulares evolucionaron manchas oculares multicelulares, físicamente similares a los parches receptores del gusto y el olfato.

Estas manchas oculares solo podían sentir el brillo ambiental: podían distinguir la luz y la oscuridad, pero no la dirección de la fuente de luz. A través de un cambio gradual, las manchas oculares de las especies que vivían en ambientes bien iluminados se deprimían en una forma de "copa" poco profunda.

La capacidad de discriminar ligeramente el brillo direccional se logró mediante el uso del ángulo en el que la luz golpea ciertas celdas para identificar la fuente.

El pozo se profundizó con el tiempo, la abertura disminuyó de tamaño y el número de células fotorreceptoras aumentó, formando una cámara estenopeica eficaz que era capaz de distinguir formas tenuemente.

Sin embargo, los ancestros de los mixinos modernos, que se pensaba que eran los protovertebrados, fueron empujados evidentemente a aguas muy profundas y oscuras, donde eran menos vulnerables a los depredadores avistados y donde es ventajoso tener una mancha ocular convexa, que capta más luz. que uno plano o cóncavo.

Esto habría llevado a una trayectoria evolutiva algo diferente para el ojo de los vertebrados que para los ojos de otros animales.
El sobrecrecimiento delgado de células transparentes sobre la apertura del ojo, formado originalmente para evitar daños en la mancha ocular, permitió que el contenido segregado de la cámara del ojo se especializara en un humor transparente que optimizó el filtrado de color, bloqueó la radiación dañina, mejoró el índice de refracción del ojo y funcionalidad permitida fuera del agua.

Las células protectoras transparentes finalmente se dividieron en dos capas, con líquido circulatorio en el medio que permitió ángulos de visión más amplios y una mayor resolución de imágenes, y el grosor de la capa transparente aumentó gradualmente, en la mayoría de las especies con la proteína cristalina transparente. La brecha entre las capas de tejido naturalmente formó una forma biconvexa, una estructura óptimamente ideal para un índice de refracción normal.

Independientemente, una capa transparente y una capa no transparente se separan hacia adelante del cristalino: la córnea y el iris.

La separación de la capa delantera formó de nuevo un humor, el humor acuoso.

Esto aumentó el poder de refracción y nuevamente alivió los problemas circulatorios.

La formación de un anillo no transparente permitió más vasos sanguíneos, más circulación y tamaños de ojos más grandes.


=== Relación con los requisitos de la vida ===

Los ojos generalmente se adaptan al medio ambiente ya los requisitos vitales del organismo que los porta.

Por ejemplo, la distribución de los fotorreceptores tiende a coincidir con el área en la que se requiere la mayor agudeza, con organismos que escanean el horizonte, como los que viven en las llanuras africanas, que tienen una línea horizontal de ganglios de alta densidad, mientras que los que habitan en los árboles. las criaturas que requieren una buena visión general tienden a tener una distribución simétrica de los ganglios, con una disminución de la agudeza hacia el exterior desde el centro.
Por supuesto, para la mayoría de los tipos de ojos, es imposible divergir de una forma esférica, por lo que solo se puede alterar la densidad de los receptores ópticos.

En organismos con ojos compuestos, es el número de omatidios en lugar de ganglios lo que refleja la región de mayor adquisición de datos.: 23–24 Los ojos de superposición óptica están restringidos a una forma esférica, pero otras formas de ojos compuestos pueden deformarse a una forma se alinean más omatidios con, digamos, el horizonte, sin alterar el tamaño o la densidad de los omatidios individuales.

Los ojos de los organismos que escanean el horizonte tienen tallos para que puedan alinearse fácilmente con el horizonte cuando este está inclinado, por ejemplo, si el animal está en una pendiente. Una extensión de este concepto es que los ojos de los depredadores suelen tener una zona de muy visión aguda en su centro, para ayudar en la identificación de presas.

En los organismos de aguas profundas, puede que no sea el centro del ojo el que esté agrandado.

Los anfípodos hipéridos son animales de aguas profundas que se alimentan de organismos que se encuentran por encima de ellos.

Sus ojos están casi divididos en dos, y se cree que la región superior está involucrada en la detección de siluetas de presas potenciales, o depredadores, contra la tenue luz del cielo.

En consecuencia, los hipéridos de aguas más profundas, donde la luz con la que se deben comparar las siluetas es más tenue, tienen "ojos superiores" más grandes y pueden perder la parte inferior de sus ojos por completo.

En el isópodo gigante antártico Glyptonotus, un pequeño ojo compuesto ventral está físicamente completamente separado del ojo compuesto dorsal mucho más grande.

La percepción de profundidad se puede mejorar teniendo ojos agrandados en una dirección; distorsionar ligeramente el ojo permite estimar la distancia al objeto con un alto grado de precisión. La agudeza es mayor entre los organismos machos que se aparean en el aire, ya que necesitan poder detectar y evaluar parejas potenciales en un contexto muy grande. .

Por otro lado, los ojos de los organismos que operan en niveles bajos de luz, como al amanecer y al anochecer o en aguas profundas, tienden a ser más grandes para aumentar la cantidad de luz que se puede capturar. No es solo la forma del ojo que puede verse afectado por el estilo de vida.

Los ojos pueden ser las partes más visibles de los organismos, y esto puede actuar como una presión sobre los organismos para que tengan ojos más transparentes a costa de la función. carapacho; esto también les permite rastrear depredadores o presas sin mover la cabeza.


== Fisiología ==



=== Agudeza visual ===


La agudeza visual, o poder de resolución, es "la capacidad de distinguir detalles finos" y es propiedad de las células cónicas.

A menudo se mide en ciclos por grado (CPD), que mide una resolución angular, o cuánto un ojo puede diferenciar un objeto de otro en términos de ángulos visuales.

La resolución en CPD se puede medir mediante gráficos de barras de diferentes números de ciclos de rayas blancas/negras.

Por ejemplo, si cada patrón tiene 1,75 cm de ancho y se coloca a 1 m de distancia del ojo, subtiende un ángulo de 1 grado, por lo que el número de pares de barras blancas/negras en el patrón será una medida de los ciclos por grado de ese patrón.

El número más alto que el ojo puede resolver como rayas, o distinguir de un bloque gris, es entonces la medida de la agudeza visual del ojo.
Para un ojo humano con una agudeza visual excelente, la resolución teórica máxima es de 50 CPD (1,2 minutos de arco por par de líneas, o un par de líneas de 0,35 mm, a 1 m).

Una rata puede resolver solo alrededor de 1 a 2 CPD.

Un caballo tiene una mayor agudeza en la mayor parte del campo visual de sus ojos que un ser humano, pero no iguala la alta agudeza de la región fóvea central del ojo humano. La aberración esférica limita la resolución de una pupila de 7 mm a unos 3 minutos de arco por línea. par.

Con un diámetro de pupila de 3 mm, la aberración esférica se reduce considerablemente, lo que da como resultado una resolución mejorada de aproximadamente 1,7 minutos de arco por par de líneas.

Una resolución de 2 minutos de arco por par de líneas, equivalente a un intervalo de 1 minuto de arco en un optotipo, corresponde a 20/20 (visión normal) en humanos.
Sin embargo, en el ojo compuesto, la resolución está relacionada con el tamaño de los omatidios individuales y la distancia entre los omatidios vecinos.

Físicamente, estos no se pueden reducir en tamaño para lograr la agudeza que se ve con ojos de una sola lente como en los mamíferos.

Los ojos compuestos tienen una agudeza mucho más baja que los ojos de los vertebrados.


=== Percepción del color ===


"La visión del color es la facultad del organismo para distinguir luces de diferentes calidades espectrales". Todos los organismos están restringidos a un pequeño rango de espectro electromagnético; esto varía de criatura a criatura, pero es principalmente entre longitudes de onda de 400 y 700 nm.
Esta es una sección bastante pequeña del espectro electromagnético, que probablemente refleja la evolución submarina del órgano: el agua bloquea todas las ventanas del espectro EM excepto dos pequeñas, y no ha habido presión evolutiva entre los animales terrestres para ampliar este rango. pigmento sensible, la rodopsina, tiene una respuesta máxima a 500 nm.

Pequeños cambios en los genes que codifican esta proteína pueden modificar la respuesta máxima en unos pocos nm; los pigmentos en la lente también pueden filtrar la luz entrante, cambiando la respuesta máxima.

Muchos organismos no pueden discriminar entre colores, sino que ven en tonos de gris; la visión del color requiere una gama de células pigmentarias que son principalmente sensibles a rangos más pequeños del espectro.

En primates, geckos y otros organismos, estos toman la forma de células cónicas, a partir de las cuales evolucionaron los bastones más sensibles.

Incluso si los organismos son físicamente capaces de discriminar diferentes colores, esto no significa necesariamente que puedan percibir los diferentes colores; solo con pruebas de comportamiento se puede deducir esto. La mayoría de los organismos con visión de color pueden detectar la luz ultravioleta.

Esta luz de alta energía puede dañar las células receptoras.

Con algunas excepciones (serpientes, mamíferos placentarios), la mayoría de los organismos evitan estos efectos al tener gotas de aceite absorbente alrededor de sus células cónicas.

La alternativa, desarrollada por organismos que habían perdido estas gotitas de aceite en el curso de la evolución, es hacer que el cristalino sea impermeable a la luz ultravioleta; esto excluye la posibilidad de que se detecte cualquier luz ultravioleta, ya que ni siquiera llega a la retina.


=== Bastones y conos ===

La retina contiene dos tipos principales de células fotorreceptoras sensibles a la luz que se utilizan para la visión: los bastones y los conos.
Los bastones no pueden distinguir los colores, pero son responsables de la visión monocromática (en blanco y negro) con poca luz (escotópica); funcionan bien con poca luz ya que contienen un pigmento, rodopsina (púrpura visual), que es sensible a baja intensidad de luz, pero se satura a intensidades más altas (fotópicas).

Los bastones se distribuyen por toda la retina, pero no hay ninguno en la fóvea ni en el punto ciego.

La densidad de bastones es mayor en la retina periférica que en la retina central.
Los conos son responsables de la visión del color.

Requieren una luz más brillante para funcionar que la que requieren las varillas.

En los seres humanos, hay tres tipos de conos, máximamente sensibles a la luz de longitud de onda larga, longitud de onda media y longitud de onda corta (a menudo denominados rojo, verde y azul, respectivamente, aunque los picos de sensibilidad no se encuentran en estos colores). ).

El color que se ve es el efecto combinado de los estímulos y las respuestas de estos tres tipos de células cónicas.

Los conos se concentran sobre todo en y cerca de la fóvea.

Solo unos pocos están presentes a los lados de la retina.

Los objetos se ven más nítidamente enfocados cuando sus imágenes caen sobre la fóvea, como cuando uno mira un objeto directamente.

Los conos y bastones están conectados a través de células intermedias en la retina a las fibras nerviosas del nervio óptico.

Cuando los bastones y los conos son estimulados por la luz, se conectan a través de células adyacentes dentro de la retina para enviar una señal eléctrica a las fibras del nervio óptico.

Los nervios ópticos envían impulsos a través de estas fibras al cerebro.


== Pigmentación ==

Las moléculas de pigmento utilizadas en el ojo son varias, pero se pueden usar para definir la distancia evolutiva entre diferentes grupos y también pueden ayudar a determinar cuáles están estrechamente relacionados, aunque existen problemas de convergencia. Las opsinas son los pigmentos involucrados en la fotorrecepción. .

Otros pigmentos, como la melanina, se utilizan para proteger las células fotorreceptoras de la luz que se filtra por los lados.
El grupo de proteínas opsina evolucionó mucho antes que el último ancestro común de los animales y ha continuado diversificándose desde entonces. Hay dos tipos de opsina involucradas en la visión; c-opsinas, que están asociadas con células fotorreceptoras de tipo ciliar, y r-opsinas, asociadas con células fotorreceptoras rabdoméricas.

Los ojos de los vertebrados suelen contener células ciliares con c-opsinas, y los invertebrados (bilaterales) tienen células rabdoméricas en el ojo con r-opsinas.

Sin embargo, algunas células ganglionares de vertebrados expresan r-opsinas, lo que sugiere que sus ancestros usaron este pigmento en la visión y que los restos sobreviven en los ojos.

Asimismo, se ha descubierto que las c-opsinas se expresan en el cerebro de algunos invertebrados.

Es posible que se hayan expresado en las células ciliares de los ojos de las larvas, que posteriormente se reabsorbieron en el cerebro en la metamorfosis a la forma adulta.

Las opsinas C también se encuentran en algunos ojos derivados de invertebrados bilaterales, como los ojos paleales de los moluscos bivalvos; sin embargo, los ojos laterales (que presumiblemente eran el tipo ancestral de este grupo, si los ojos evolucionaron una vez allí) siempre usan r-opsinas.

Los cnidarios, que son un grupo externo a los taxones mencionados anteriormente, expresan c-opsinas, pero aún no se han encontrado r-opsinas en este grupo.

Por cierto, la melanina producida en los cnidarios se produce de la misma manera que en los vertebrados, lo que sugiere la ascendencia común de este pigmento.


== Notas ==



=== Bibliografía ===

Ali, Mohamed Ather; Klyne, MA (1985).

Visión en Vertebrados.

Nueva York: Plenum Press.

ISBN 978-0-306-42065-8.


== Lectura adicional ==

Yong, Ed (14 de enero de 2016). "Dentro del ojo: la creación más exquisita de la naturaleza".

National Geographic.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ojo

;;;PT;;;



OLHO


Os olhos são órgãos do sistema visual.

Eles fornecem aos organismos vivos a visão, a capacidade de receber e processar detalhes visuais, além de permitir várias funções de foto-resposta que são independentes da visão.

Os olhos detectam a luz e a convertem em impulsos eletroquímicos nos neurônios.

Nos organismos superiores, o olho é um sistema óptico complexo que coleta a luz do ambiente circundante, regula sua intensidade por meio de um diafragma, focaliza-a por meio de um conjunto ajustável de lentes para formar uma imagem, converte essa imagem em um conjunto de sinais elétricos e transmite esses sinais ao cérebro através de vias neurais complexas que conectam o olho através do nervo óptico ao córtex visual e outras áreas do cérebro.

Olhos com poder de resolução vêm em dez formas fundamentalmente diferentes, e 96% das espécies animais possuem um sistema óptico complexo.

Os olhos de resolução de imagem estão presentes em moluscos, cordados e artrópodes. organismo para deduzir o ângulo da luz incidente.

De olhos mais complexos, as células ganglionares fotossensíveis da retina enviam sinais ao longo do trato retino-hipotalâmico para os núcleos supraquiasmáticos para efetuar o ajuste circadiano e para a área pré-tectal para controlar o reflexo pupilar à luz.


== Visão geral ==


Olhos complexos podem distinguir formas e cores.

Os campos visuais de muitos organismos, especialmente predadores, envolvem grandes áreas de visão binocular para melhorar a percepção de profundidade.

Em outros organismos, os olhos estão localizados de forma a maximizar o campo de visão, como em coelhos e cavalos, que possuem visão monocular.
Os primeiros proto-olhos evoluíram entre os animais há 600 milhões de anos, na época da explosão cambriana.

O último ancestral comum dos animais possuía o kit de ferramentas bioquímicas necessárias para a visão, e olhos mais avançados evoluíram em 96% das espécies animais em seis dos 35 filos principais.

Na maioria dos vertebrados e alguns moluscos, o olho funciona permitindo que a luz entre e se projete em uma camada de células sensíveis à luz no final do olho, conhecida como retina.

As células cone (para cor) e as células bastonetes (para contrastes de pouca luz) na retina detectam e convertem a luz em sinais neurais para a visão.

Os sinais visuais são então transmitidos ao cérebro através do nervo óptico.

Esses olhos são tipicamente esféricos, preenchidos com uma substância transparente semelhante a um gel chamada humor vítreo, com uma lente de foco e muitas vezes uma íris; o relaxamento ou a contração dos músculos ao redor da íris alteram o tamanho da pupila, regulando assim a quantidade de luz que entra no olho e reduzindo as aberrações quando há luz suficiente.

Os olhos da maioria dos cefalópodes, peixes, anfíbios e cobras têm formas de lentes fixas, e a visão focalizada é obtida pela lente telescópica - semelhante à forma como uma câmera focaliza. sobre os detalhes da anatomia, pode fornecer uma única imagem pixelizada ou várias imagens, por olho.

Cada sensor tem sua própria lente e células fotossensíveis.

Alguns olhos têm até 28.000 desses sensores, dispostos de forma hexagonal e que podem fornecer um campo de visão completo de 360°.

Os olhos compostos são muito sensíveis ao movimento.

Alguns artrópodes, incluindo muitos Strepsiptera, têm olhos compostos de apenas algumas facetas, cada uma com uma retina capaz de criar uma imagem, criando a visão.

Com cada olho vendo uma coisa diferente, uma imagem fundida de todos os olhos é produzida no cérebro, fornecendo imagens muito diferentes e de alta resolução.
Possuindo visão de cores hiperespectral detalhada, o camarão Mantis tem o sistema de visão de cores mais complexo do mundo.

As trilobitas, que agora estão extintas, tinham olhos compostos únicos.

Eles usaram cristais de calcita claros para formar as lentes de seus olhos.

Nisso, eles diferem da maioria dos outros artrópodes, que têm olhos suaves.

O número de lentes em tal olho variava; no entanto, alguns trilobitas tinham apenas um, e alguns tinham milhares de lentes em um olho.
Ao contrário dos olhos compostos, os olhos simples são aqueles que possuem uma única lente.

Por exemplo, as aranhas saltadoras têm um grande par de olhos simples com um campo de visão estreito, apoiados por uma série de outros olhos menores para visão periférica.

Algumas larvas de insetos, como lagartas, têm um tipo diferente de olho simples (stemmata) que geralmente fornece apenas uma imagem grosseira, mas (como nas larvas de mosca-serra) pode possuir poderes de resolução de 4 graus de arco, ser sensível à polarização e capaz de aumentar sua sensibilidade absoluta à noite por um fator de 1.000 ou mais.

Alguns dos olhos mais simples, chamados ocelos, podem ser encontrados em animais como alguns dos caracóis, que não podem realmente "ver" no sentido normal.

Eles têm células fotossensíveis, mas nenhuma lente e nenhum outro meio de projetar uma imagem nessas células.

Eles podem distinguir entre claro e escuro, mas não mais.

Isso permite que os caracóis fiquem longe da luz solar direta.
Em organismos que vivem perto de respiradouros do fundo do mar, os olhos compostos foram secundariamente simplificados e adaptados para ver a luz infravermelha produzida pelos respiradouros quentes - dessa forma, os portadores podem evitar ser fervidos vivos.


== Tipos ==

Existem dez layouts de olhos diferentes – de fato, todos os métodos tecnológicos de captura de uma imagem óptica comumente usados ​​por seres humanos, com exceção do zoom e das lentes Fresnel, ocorrem na natureza.

Os tipos de olhos podem ser categorizados em "olhos simples", com uma superfície fotorreceptora côncava, e "olhos compostos", que compreendem várias lentes individuais dispostas em uma superfície convexa.

Observe que "simples" não implica um nível reduzido de complexidade ou acuidade.

De fato, qualquer tipo de olho pode ser adaptado para quase qualquer comportamento ou ambiente.

As únicas limitações específicas dos tipos de olho são a resolução – a física dos olhos compostos os impede de alcançar uma resolução melhor que 1°.

Além disso, os olhos de superposição podem atingir maior sensibilidade do que os olhos de aposição, por isso são mais adequados para criaturas que vivem no escuro.

Os olhos também se dividem em dois grupos com base na construção celular de seus fotorreceptores, com as células fotorreceptoras sendo ciliadas (como nos vertebrados) ou rabdoméricas.

Esses dois grupos não são monofiléticos; os cnidários também possuem células ciliadas,
e alguns gastrópodes, assim como alguns anelídeos, possuem ambos. Alguns organismos possuem células fotossensíveis que não fazem nada além de detectar se o ambiente é claro ou escuro, o que é suficiente para o arrastamento dos ritmos circadianos.

Estes não são considerados olhos porque não têm estrutura suficiente para serem considerados um órgão e não produzem uma imagem.


=== Olhos não compostos ===

Os olhos simples são bastante onipresentes, e os olhos com lentes evoluíram pelo menos sete vezes em vertebrados, cefalópodes, anelídeos, crustáceos e cubozoários.


==== Olhos de cova ====
Pit eyes, também conhecido como stemma, são pontos oculares que podem ser colocados em um poço para reduzir os ângulos de luz que entram e afetam o ponto ocular, para permitir que o organismo deduza o ângulo da luz recebida.

Encontrado em cerca de 85% dos filos, essas formas básicas foram provavelmente os precursores de tipos mais avançados de "olhos simples".

Eles são pequenos, compreendendo até cerca de 100 células cobrindo cerca de 100 µm.

A direcionalidade pode ser melhorada reduzindo o tamanho da abertura, incorporando uma camada refletiva atrás das células receptoras ou preenchendo o buraco com um material refrátil. além de seus olhos de comprimento de onda óptico como os de outros vertebrados (veja detecção de infravermelho em cobras).

No entanto, os órgãos pit são equipados com receptores bastante diferentes dos fotorreceptores, ou seja, um canal de potencial receptor transitório específico (canais TRP) chamado TRPV1.

A principal diferença é que os fotorreceptores são receptores acoplados à proteína G, mas os TRP são canais iônicos.


==== Olho de lente esférica ====
A resolução dos pit eyes pode ser muito melhorada pela incorporação de um material com um índice de refração mais alto para formar uma lente, o que pode reduzir bastante o raio de desfoque encontrado - aumentando assim a resolução obtida.

A forma mais básica, vista em alguns gastrópodes e anelídeos, consiste em uma lente de um índice de refração.

Uma imagem muito mais nítida pode ser obtida usando materiais com alto índice de refração, diminuindo até as bordas; isso diminui a distância focal e, assim, permite que uma imagem nítida se forme na retina.

Isso também permite uma abertura maior para uma determinada nitidez de imagem, permitindo que mais luz entre na lente; e uma lente mais plana, reduzindo a aberração esférica.

Essa lente não homogênea é necessária para que a distância focal caia de cerca de 4 vezes o raio da lente para 2,5 raios. Olhos heterogêneos evoluíram pelo menos nove vezes: quatro ou mais vezes em gastrópodes, uma vez nos copépodes, uma vez no anelídeos, uma vez nos cefalópodes, e outra nos quítons, que possuem lentes de aragonita.

Nenhum organismo aquático existente possui lentes homogêneas; presumivelmente, a pressão evolutiva para uma lente heterogênea é grande o suficiente para que esse estágio seja rapidamente "superado". Esse olho cria uma imagem suficientemente nítida para que o movimento do olho possa causar um desfoque significativo.

Para minimizar o efeito do movimento dos olhos enquanto o animal se move, a maioria desses olhos tem músculos oculares estabilizadores. Os ocelos dos insetos possuem uma lente simples, mas seu ponto focal geralmente fica atrás da retina; consequentemente, eles não podem formar uma imagem nítida.

Ocelli (olhos do tipo pit dos artrópodes) borram a imagem em toda a retina e, consequentemente, são excelentes em responder a mudanças rápidas na intensidade da luz em todo o campo visual; essa resposta rápida é ainda mais acelerada pelos grandes feixes nervosos que levam a informação ao cérebro.

Focar a imagem também faria com que a imagem do sol fosse focada em alguns receptores, com possibilidade de dano sob a luz intensa; blindar os receptores bloquearia alguma luz e, assim, reduziria sua sensibilidade.
Essa resposta rápida levou a sugestões de que os ocelos dos insetos são usados ​​principalmente em voo, porque podem ser usados ​​para detectar mudanças repentinas na direção em que está para cima (porque a luz, especialmente a luz UV que é absorvida pela vegetação, geralmente vem de cima) .


==== Várias lentes ====
Alguns organismos marinhos possuem mais de uma lente; por exemplo, o copépode Pontella tem três.

O exterior tem uma superfície parabólica, contrariando os efeitos da aberração esférica enquanto permite a formação de uma imagem nítida.

Outro copépode, Copilia, tem duas lentes em cada olho, dispostas como as de um telescópio.

Tais arranjos são raros e pouco compreendidos, mas representam uma construção alternativa.
Múltiplas lentes são vistas em alguns caçadores, como águias e aranhas saltadoras, que possuem uma córnea refrativa: estas possuem uma lente negativa, ampliando a imagem observada em até 50% sobre as células receptoras, aumentando assim sua resolução óptica.


==== Córnea refrativa ====
Aos olhos da maioria dos mamíferos, pássaros, répteis e da maioria dos outros vertebrados terrestres (juntamente com aranhas e algumas larvas de insetos), o fluido vítreo tem um índice de refração mais alto que o ar.

Em geral, a lente não é esférica.

Lentes esféricas produzem aberrações esféricas.

Nas córneas refrativas, o tecido do cristalino é corrigido com material de lente não homogêneo (consulte Lente de Luneburg) ou com formato asférico.

Achatar a lente tem uma desvantagem; a qualidade da visão é diminuída longe da linha principal de foco.

Assim, os animais que evoluíram com um amplo campo de visão muitas vezes têm olhos que fazem uso de uma lente não homogênea. Como mencionado acima, uma córnea refrativa só é útil fora da água.

Na água, há pouca diferença no índice de refração entre o fluido vítreo e a água circundante.

Assim, as criaturas que retornaram à água – pinguins e focas, por exemplo – perdem sua córnea altamente curva e retornam à visão baseada em lentes.

Uma solução alternativa, adotada por alguns mergulhadores, é ter uma córnea com foco muito forte.


==== Olhos refletores ====
Uma alternativa para uma lente é alinhar o interior do olho com "espelhos" e refletir a imagem para focar em um ponto central.

A natureza desses olhos significa que, se alguém espiasse na pupila de um olho, veria a mesma imagem que o organismo veria, refletida de volta. Muitos organismos pequenos, como rotíferos, copépodes e vermes chatos, usam esses órgãos, mas estes são muito pequenos para produzir imagens utilizáveis.

Alguns organismos maiores, como vieiras, também usam olhos refletores.

A vieira Pecten tem olhos refletores de até 100 milímetros de escala na borda de sua concha.

Ele detecta objetos em movimento à medida que passam por lentes sucessivas. Há pelo menos um vertebrado, o peixe-espinho, cujos olhos incluem óptica reflexiva para focalizar a luz.

Cada um dos dois olhos de um spookfish coleta luz de cima e de baixo; a luz que vem de cima é focalizada por uma lente, enquanto a que vem de baixo, por um espelho curvo composto de muitas camadas de pequenas placas refletoras feitas de cristais de guanina.


=== Olhos compostos ===


Um olho composto pode consistir em milhares de unidades fotorreceptoras individuais ou omatídios (ommatídios, singular).

A imagem percebida é uma combinação de entradas dos numerosos omatídeos (unidades oculares individuais), que estão localizadas em uma superfície convexa, apontando para direções ligeiramente diferentes.

Em comparação com os olhos simples, os olhos compostos possuem um ângulo de visão muito grande e podem detectar movimentos rápidos e, em alguns casos, a polarização da luz.

Como as lentes individuais são tão pequenas, os efeitos da difração impõem um limite na resolução possível que pode ser obtida (assumindo que elas não funcionem como matrizes em fase).

Isso só pode ser combatido aumentando o tamanho e o número da lente.

Para ver com uma resolução comparável aos nossos olhos simples, os humanos precisariam de olhos compostos muito grandes, com cerca de 11 metros (36 pés) de raio. Os olhos compostos se dividem em dois grupos: olhos de aposição, que formam múltiplas imagens invertidas, e olhos de superposição, que formar uma única imagem ereta.

Olhos compostos são comuns em artrópodes, anelídeos e alguns moluscos bivalves.

Olhos compostos em artrópodes crescem em suas margens pela adição de novos omatídeos.


==== Olhos de aposição ====
Olhos de aposição são a forma mais comum de olhos e são presumivelmente a forma ancestral de olhos compostos.

Eles são encontrados em todos os grupos de artrópodes, embora possam ter evoluído mais de uma vez dentro deste filo.

Alguns anelídeos e bivalves também têm olhos de aposição.

Eles também são possuídos por Limulus, o caranguejo-ferradura, e há sugestões de que outros quelicerados desenvolveram seus olhos simples por redução de um ponto de partida composto. (Algumas lagartas parecem ter evoluído olhos compostos de olhos simples de forma oposta.)
Os olhos de aposição funcionam reunindo várias imagens, uma de cada olho, e combinando-as no cérebro, com cada olho contribuindo normalmente com um único ponto de informação.

O olho de aposição típico tem uma lente focalizando a luz de uma direção no rabdo, enquanto a luz de outras direções é absorvida pela parede escura do omatídio.


==== Olhos de superposição ====
O segundo tipo é chamado o olho de superposição.

O olho de superposição é dividido em três tipos:

refratando,
refletindo e
superposição parabólica O olho de superposição refratária tem um espaço entre a lente e o rabdome, e nenhuma parede lateral.

Cada lente recebe a luz em um ângulo em relação ao seu eixo e a reflete no mesmo ângulo do outro lado.

O resultado é uma imagem na metade do raio do olho, que é onde estão as pontas dos rabdomes.

Esse tipo de olho composto, para o qual existe um tamanho mínimo abaixo do qual a superposição efetiva não pode ocorrer, é normalmente encontrado em insetos noturnos, pois pode criar imagens até 1000 vezes mais brilhantes do que olhos de aposição equivalentes, embora ao custo de resolução reduzida.

No tipo de olho composto de superposição parabólica, visto em artrópodes como as efêmeras, as superfícies parabólicas do interior de cada faceta focam a luz de um refletor para uma matriz de sensores.

Os crustáceos decápodes de corpo longo, como camarões, camarões, lagostins e lagostas, são os únicos a ter olhos refletores de superposição, que também têm uma lacuna transparente, mas usam espelhos de canto em vez de lentes.


==== Superposição parabólica ====
Esse tipo de olho funciona refratando a luz e usando um espelho parabólico para focalizar a imagem; combina características de olhos de superposição e aposição.


==== Outro ====
Outro tipo de olho composto, encontrado em machos da Ordem Strepsiptera, emprega uma série de olhos simples – olhos com uma abertura que fornece luz para toda uma retina formadora de imagem.

Vários desses ilhós juntos formam o olho composto de estrepsiptera, que é semelhante aos olhos compostos 'esquizocroais' de alguns trilobitas.

Como cada ilhó é um olho simples, ele produz uma imagem invertida; essas imagens são combinadas no cérebro para formar uma imagem unificada.

Como a abertura de um ilhó é maior do que as facetas de um olho composto, esse arranjo permite a visão sob baixos níveis de luz. omatídeos organizados em uma área de fóvea que dá visão aguda.

Na zona aguda, os olhos são achatados e as facetas maiores.

O achatamento permite que mais omatídeos recebam luz de um ponto e, portanto, maior resolução.

A mancha preta que pode ser vista nos olhos compostos de tais insetos, que sempre parece olhar diretamente para o observador, é chamada de pseudopupila.

Isso ocorre porque os omatídeos que se observam "de frente" (ao longo de seus eixos ópticos) absorvem a luz incidente, enquanto os de um lado a refletem. Existem algumas exceções dos tipos citados acima.

Alguns insetos têm o chamado olho composto de lente única, um tipo de transição que é algo entre um tipo de superposição do olho composto de várias lentes e o olho de lente única encontrado em animais com olhos simples.

Depois, há o camarão mysid, Dioptromysis paucispinosa.

O camarão tem um olho do tipo superposição refratária, na parte traseira atrás deste em cada olho há uma única faceta grande que tem três vezes o diâmetro das outras no olho e atrás disso há um cone cristalino alargado.

Isso projeta uma imagem vertical em uma retina especializada.

O olho resultante é uma mistura de um olho simples dentro de um olho composto.
Outra versão é um olho composto, muitas vezes referido como "pseudofacetado", como visto em Scutigera.

Este tipo de olho consiste em um aglomerado de numerosos omatídeos em cada lado da cabeça, organizados de uma forma que se assemelha a um verdadeiro olho composto.
O corpo de Ophiocoma wendtii, um tipo de estrela quebradiça, é coberto com omatídeos, transformando toda a sua pele em um olho composto.

O mesmo acontece com muitos quítons.

Os pés tubulares dos ouriços-do-mar contêm proteínas fotorreceptoras, que juntas atuam como um olho composto; eles não possuem pigmentos de triagem, mas podem detectar a direcionalidade da luz pela sombra projetada por seu corpo opaco.


==== Nutrientes ====
O corpo ciliar é triangular em seção horizontal e é revestido por uma dupla camada, o epitélio ciliar.

A camada interna é transparente e cobre o corpo vítreo, e é contínua a partir do tecido neural da retina.

A camada externa é altamente pigmentada, contínua com o epitélio pigmentar da retina e constitui as células do músculo dilatador.
O vítreo é a massa transparente, incolor e gelatinosa que preenche o espaço entre a lente do olho e a retina que reveste a parte posterior do olho.

É produzido por certas células da retina.

É de composição bastante semelhante à córnea, mas contém muito poucas células (principalmente fagócitos que removem detritos celulares indesejados no campo visual, bem como os hialócitos de Balazs da superfície do vítreo, que reprocessam o ácido hialurônico), não vasos sanguíneos, e 98-99% de seu volume é água (em oposição a 75% na córnea) com sais, açúcares, vitrosina (um tipo de colágeno), uma rede de fibras de colágeno tipo II com o ácido hialurônico mucopolissacarídeo e também uma ampla gama de proteínas em micro quantidades.

Surpreendentemente, com tão pouca matéria sólida, ele prende a atenção.


== Evolução ==


A fotorrecepção é filogeneticamente muito antiga, com várias teorias de filogênese.

A origem comum (monofilia) de todos os olhos de animais é agora amplamente aceita como fato.

Isso se baseia nas características genéticas compartilhadas por todos os olhos; isto é, todos os olhos modernos, por mais variados que sejam, têm suas origens em um proto-olho que se acredita ter evoluído cerca de 650-600 milhões de anos atrás, e o gene PAX6 é considerado um fator-chave nisso.

Acredita-se que a maioria dos avanços nos primeiros olhos levou apenas alguns milhões de anos para se desenvolver, já que o primeiro predador a obter imagens verdadeiras teria desencadeado uma “corrida armamentista” entre todas as espécies que não fugiram do ambiente fotópico.

As presas e os predadores concorrentes estariam em clara desvantagem sem essas capacidades e teriam menos probabilidade de sobreviver e se reproduzir.

Assim, vários tipos e subtipos de olhos se desenvolveram em paralelo (exceto aqueles de grupos, como os vertebrados, que só foram forçados a entrar no ambiente fotópico em um estágio tardio).
Os olhos em vários animais mostram adaptação às suas necessidades.

Por exemplo, o olho de uma ave de rapina tem uma acuidade visual muito maior do que um olho humano e, em alguns casos, pode detectar radiação ultravioleta.

As diferentes formas de olho em, por exemplo, vertebrados e moluscos são exemplos de evolução paralela, apesar de sua ancestralidade comum distante.

A convergência fenotípica da geometria dos olhos dos cefalópodes e da maioria dos vertebrados cria a impressão de que o olho dos vertebrados evoluiu de um olho cefalópode de imagem, mas este não é o caso, como mostram os papéis invertidos de suas respectivas classes de opsinas ciliar e rabdomérica e diferentes cristalinos da lente. Os primeiros "olhos", chamados de manchas oculares, eram simples manchas de proteína fotorreceptora em animais unicelulares.

Em seres multicelulares, as manchas oculares multicelulares evoluíram, fisicamente semelhantes às manchas receptoras de paladar e olfato.

Essas manchas oculares só podiam sentir o brilho do ambiente: elas podiam distinguir a luz e a escuridão, mas não a direção da fonte de luz. Por meio de mudanças graduais, as manchas oculares das espécies que vivem em ambientes bem iluminados deprimidos em uma forma de "taça" rasa.

A capacidade de discriminar levemente o brilho direcional foi alcançada usando o ângulo em que a luz atingiu certas células para identificar a fonte.

O buraco se aprofundou com o tempo, a abertura diminuiu de tamanho e o número de células fotorreceptoras aumentou, formando uma câmera pinhole eficaz que era capaz de distinguir formas vagamente.

No entanto, os ancestrais dos peixes-bruxa modernos, que se acredita serem os protovertebrados, foram evidentemente empurrados para águas muito profundas e escuras, onde eram menos vulneráveis ​​a predadores avistados e onde é vantajoso ter um ponto ocular convexo, que reúne mais luz. do que um plano ou côncavo.

Isso teria levado a uma trajetória evolutiva um pouco diferente para o olho dos vertebrados do que para os olhos de outros animais.
O supercrescimento fino de células transparentes sobre a abertura do olho, originalmente formada para evitar danos à mancha ocular, permitiu que o conteúdo segregado da câmara do olho se especializasse em um humor transparente que otimizou a filtragem de cores, bloqueou a radiação prejudicial, melhorou o índice de refração do olho e funcionalidade permitida fora da água.

As células protetoras transparentes acabaram se dividindo em duas camadas, com fluido circulatório no meio que permitiu ângulos de visão mais amplos e maior resolução de imagem, e a espessura da camada transparente aumentou gradualmente, na maioria das espécies com a proteína cristalina transparente. formou uma forma biconvexa, uma estrutura idealmente ideal para um índice de refração normal.

Independentemente, uma camada transparente e uma camada não transparente se separam da lente: a córnea e a íris.

A separação da camada anterior formou novamente um humor, o humor aquoso.

Isso aumentou o poder de refração e novamente facilitou os problemas circulatórios.

A formação de um anel não transparente permitiu mais vasos sanguíneos, mais circulação e tamanhos de olhos maiores.


=== Relação com os requisitos de vida ===

Os olhos são geralmente adaptados ao ambiente e às necessidades de vida do organismo que os possui.

Por exemplo, a distribuição de fotorreceptores tende a coincidir com a área em que a acuidade mais alta é necessária, com organismos de varredura do horizonte, como aqueles que vivem nas planícies africanas, tendo uma linha horizontal de gânglios de alta densidade, enquanto os que vivem nas árvores criaturas que requerem boa visão geral tendem a ter uma distribuição simétrica de gânglios, com acuidade diminuindo para fora do centro.
É claro que, para a maioria dos tipos de olhos, é impossível divergir de uma forma esférica, portanto, apenas a densidade dos receptores ópticos pode ser alterada.

Em organismos com olhos compostos, é o número de omatídios em vez de gânglios que reflete a região de maior aquisição de dados. mais omatídeos são alinhados, digamos, ao horizonte, sem alterar o tamanho ou a densidade dos omatídeos individuais.

Os olhos dos organismos de varredura do horizonte têm hastes para que possam ser facilmente alinhados ao horizonte quando este está inclinado, por exemplo, se o animal estiver em uma encosta. visão aguda em seu centro, para auxiliar na identificação de presas.

Em organismos de águas profundas, pode não ser o centro do olho que está aumentado.

Os anfípodes hiperiídeos são animais de águas profundas que se alimentam de organismos acima deles.

Seus olhos são quase divididos em dois, com a região superior envolvida na detecção das silhuetas de presas em potencial – ou predadores – contra a luz fraca do céu acima.

Assim, os hiperiídeos de águas mais profundas, onde a luz contra a qual as silhuetas devem ser comparadas é mais fraca, têm "olhos superiores" maiores e podem perder completamente a parte inferior dos olhos.

No gigante isópode antártico Glyptonotus, um pequeno olho composto ventral é fisicamente completamente separado do olho composto dorsal muito maior.

A percepção de profundidade pode ser melhorada com olhos ampliados em uma direção; distorcer ligeiramente o olho permite que a distância até o objeto seja estimada com um alto grau de precisão. .

Por outro lado, os olhos de organismos que operam em baixos níveis de luz, como ao amanhecer e ao anoitecer ou em águas profundas, tendem a ser maiores para aumentar a quantidade de luz que pode ser capturada. olho que pode ser afetado pelo estilo de vida.

Os olhos podem ser as partes mais visíveis dos organismos, e isso pode atuar como uma pressão sobre os organismos para que tenham olhos mais transparentes ao custo da função. carapaça; isso também lhes permite rastrear predadores ou presas sem mover a cabeça.


== Fisiologia ==



=== Acuidade visual ===


A acuidade visual, ou poder de resolução, é "a capacidade de distinguir detalhes finos" e é propriedade das células cone.

Muitas vezes é medido em ciclos por grau (CPD), que mede uma resolução angular, ou quanto um olho pode diferenciar um objeto de outro em termos de ângulos visuais.

A resolução no CPD pode ser medida por gráficos de barras de diferentes números de ciclos de listras brancas/pretas.

Por exemplo, se cada padrão tiver 1,75 cm de largura e for colocado a 1 m de distância do olho, ele subtenderá um ângulo de 1 grau, de modo que o número de pares de barras brancas/pretas no padrão será uma medida dos ciclos por grau desse padrão.

O número mais alto que o olho pode resolver como listras, ou distinguir de um bloco cinza, é a medida da acuidade visual do olho.
Para um olho humano com excelente acuidade, a resolução teórica máxima é de 50 CPD (1,2 minutos de arco por par de linhas, ou um par de linhas de 0,35 mm, a 1 m).

Um rato pode resolver apenas cerca de 1 a 2 CPD.

Um cavalo tem maior acuidade através da maior parte do campo visual de seus olhos do que um humano, mas não corresponde à alta acuidade da região da fóvea central do olho humano. A aberração esférica limita a resolução de uma pupila de 7 mm a cerca de 3 minutos de arco por linha par.

Com um diâmetro de pupila de 3 mm, a aberração esférica é bastante reduzida, resultando em uma resolução melhorada de aproximadamente 1,7 minutos de arco por par de linhas.

Uma resolução de 2 minutos de arco por par de linhas, equivalente a um intervalo de 1 minuto de arco em um optotipo, corresponde a 20/20 (visão normal) em humanos.
No entanto, no olho composto, a resolução está relacionada ao tamanho dos omatídeos individuais e à distância entre os omatídios vizinhos.

Fisicamente, eles não podem ser reduzidos em tamanho para atingir a acuidade observada com olhos de lente única, como nos mamíferos.

Os olhos compostos têm uma acuidade muito menor do que os olhos dos vertebrados.


=== Percepção de cores ===


"A visão de cores é a faculdade do organismo de distinguir luzes de diferentes qualidades espectrais." Todos os organismos estão restritos a uma pequena faixa do espectro eletromagnético; isso varia de criatura para criatura, mas está principalmente entre os comprimentos de onda de 400 e 700 nm.
Esta é uma seção bastante pequena do espectro eletromagnético, provavelmente refletindo a evolução submarina do órgão: a água bloqueia todas, exceto duas pequenas janelas do espectro EM, e não houve pressão evolutiva entre os animais terrestres para ampliar esse alcance. pigmento sensível, rodopsina, tem um pico de resposta em 500 nm.

Pequenas mudanças nos genes que codificam essa proteína podem ajustar o pico de resposta em alguns nm; os pigmentos na lente também podem filtrar a luz recebida, alterando a resposta de pico.

Muitos organismos são incapazes de discriminar entre cores, vendo em vez disso em tons de cinza; a visão de cores necessita de uma gama de células de pigmento que são principalmente sensíveis a faixas menores do espectro.

Em primatas, lagartixas e outros organismos, estes assumem a forma de células cone, das quais evoluíram os bastonetes mais sensíveis.

Mesmo que os organismos sejam fisicamente capazes de discriminar cores diferentes, isso não significa necessariamente que eles possam perceber as diferentes cores; somente com testes comportamentais isso pode ser deduzido. A maioria dos organismos com visão de cores pode detectar a luz ultravioleta.

Esta luz de alta energia pode ser prejudicial às células receptoras.

Com algumas exceções (cobras, mamíferos placentários), a maioria dos organismos evita esses efeitos por ter gotículas de óleo absorvente ao redor de seus cones.

A alternativa, desenvolvida por organismos que perderam essas gotículas de óleo ao longo da evolução, é tornar o cristalino impermeável à luz UV – isso exclui a possibilidade de qualquer luz UV ser detectada, pois ela nem chega à retina.


=== Bastões e cones ===

A retina contém dois tipos principais de células fotorreceptoras sensíveis à luz usadas para a visão: os bastonetes e os cones.
Os bastonetes não distinguem as cores, mas são responsáveis ​​pela visão monocromática (preto e branco) com pouca luz (escotópica); eles funcionam bem com pouca luz, pois contêm um pigmento, rodopsina (roxo visual), que é sensível em baixa intensidade de luz, mas satura em intensidades mais altas (fotópicas).

Os bastonetes estão distribuídos por toda a retina, mas não há nenhum na fóvea e nenhum no ponto cego.

A densidade de bastonetes é maior na retina periférica do que na retina central.
Cones são responsáveis ​​pela visão colorida.

Eles exigem luz mais brilhante para funcionar do que as hastes exigem.

Em humanos, existem três tipos de cones, extremamente sensíveis à luz de comprimento de onda longo, comprimento de onda médio e comprimento de onda curto (muitas vezes referido como vermelho, verde e azul, respectivamente, embora os picos de sensibilidade não estejam realmente nessas cores ).

A cor vista é o efeito combinado de estímulos e respostas desses três tipos de células cone.

Os cones estão principalmente concentrados dentro e perto da fóvea.

Apenas alguns estão presentes nas laterais da retina.

Os objetos são vistos mais nitidamente em foco quando suas imagens caem na fóvea, como quando se olha para um objeto diretamente.

Células cônicas e bastonetes são conectadas através de células intermediárias na retina às fibras nervosas do nervo óptico.

Quando bastonetes e cones são estimulados pela luz, eles se conectam através de células adjacentes dentro da retina para enviar um sinal elétrico para as fibras do nervo óptico.

Os nervos ópticos enviam impulsos através dessas fibras para o cérebro.


== Pigmentação ==

As moléculas de pigmento usadas no olho são várias, mas podem ser usadas para definir a distância evolutiva entre diferentes grupos, e também podem ajudar a determinar quais estão intimamente relacionados, embora existam problemas de convergência. As opsinas são os pigmentos envolvidos na fotorrecepção .

Outros pigmentos, como a melanina, são usados ​​para proteger as células fotorreceptoras da luz que vaza pelos lados.
O grupo de proteínas opsinas evoluiu muito antes do último ancestral comum dos animais e continuou a se diversificar desde então. Existem dois tipos de opsinas envolvidos na visão; c-opsinas, que estão associadas a células fotorreceptoras do tipo ciliar, e r-opsinas, associadas a células fotorreceptoras rabdoméricas.

Os olhos dos vertebrados geralmente contêm células ciliares com c-opsinas, e os invertebrados (bilaterais) têm células rabdoméricas no olho com r-opsinas.

No entanto, algumas células ganglionares de vertebrados expressam r-opsinas, sugerindo que seus ancestrais usavam esse pigmento na visão e que os remanescentes sobrevivem nos olhos.

Da mesma forma, descobriu-se que as c-opsinas são expressas no cérebro de alguns invertebrados.

Eles podem ter sido expressos em células ciliares de olhos larvais, que foram posteriormente reabsorvidos no cérebro na metamorfose para a forma adulta.

C-opsinas também são encontradas em alguns olhos derivados de invertebrados bilaterais, como os olhos paliais dos moluscos bivalves; no entanto, os olhos laterais (que foram presumivelmente o tipo ancestral para este grupo, se os olhos evoluíram uma vez lá) sempre usam r-opsinas.

Os cnidários, que são um grupo externo aos táxons mencionados acima, expressam c-opsinas - mas r-opsinas ainda não foram encontradas neste grupo.

Aliás, a melanina produzida nos cnidários é produzida da mesma forma que nos vertebrados, sugerindo a descendência comum desse pigmento.


== Notas ==



=== Bibliografia ===

Ali, Mohamed Ather; Klyne, MA (1985).

Visão em Vertebrados.

Nova York: Plenum Press.

ISBN 978-0-306-42065-8.


== Leitura adicional ==

Yong, Ed (14 de janeiro de 2016). "Dentro do olho: a criação mais requintada da natureza".

Geografia nacional.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eye

;;;FR;;;



ŒIL


Les yeux sont des organes du système visuel.

Ils fournissent aux organismes vivants la vision, la capacité de recevoir et de traiter les détails visuels, ainsi que plusieurs fonctions de photoréponse indépendantes de la vision.

Les yeux détectent la lumière et la convertissent en impulsions électrochimiques dans les neurones.

Chez les organismes supérieurs, l'œil est un système optique complexe qui collecte la lumière du milieu environnant, régule son intensité à travers un diaphragme, la focalise à travers un ensemble réglable de lentilles pour former une image, convertit cette image en un ensemble de signaux électriques, et transmet ces signaux au cerveau par des voies neuronales complexes qui relient l'œil via le nerf optique au cortex visuel et à d'autres zones du cerveau.

Les yeux dotés d'un pouvoir de résolution se présentent sous dix formes fondamentalement différentes, et 96 % des espèces animales possèdent un système optique complexe.

Les yeux à résolution d'image sont présents chez les mollusques, les chordés et les arthropodes. organisme pour déduire l'angle de la lumière entrante.

À partir d'yeux plus complexes, les cellules ganglionnaires photosensibles rétiniennes envoient des signaux le long du tractus rétinohypothalamique aux noyaux suprachiasmatiques pour effectuer l'ajustement circadien et à la zone prétectale pour contrôler le réflexe lumineux pupillaire.


== Aperçu ==


Les yeux complexes peuvent distinguer les formes et les couleurs.

Les champs visuels de nombreux organismes, en particulier les prédateurs, impliquent de vastes zones de vision binoculaire pour améliorer la perception de la profondeur.

Dans d'autres organismes, les yeux sont situés de manière à maximiser le champ de vision, comme chez les lapins et les chevaux, qui ont une vision monoculaire.
Les premiers proto-yeux ont évolué chez les animaux il y a 600 millions d'années, à peu près au moment de l'explosion cambrienne.

Le dernier ancêtre commun des animaux possédait la boîte à outils biochimique nécessaire à la vision, et des yeux plus avancés ont évolué chez 96% des espèces animales dans six des ~35 principaux phylums.

Chez la plupart des vertébrés et certains mollusques, l'œil fonctionne en permettant à la lumière d'entrer et de se projeter sur une couche de cellules sensibles à la lumière à l'extrémité de l'œil, connue sous le nom de rétine.

Les cellules coniques (pour la couleur) et les cellules en bâtonnets (pour les contrastes de faible luminosité) de la rétine détectent et convertissent la lumière en signaux neuronaux pour la vision.

Les signaux visuels sont ensuite transmis au cerveau via le nerf optique.

Ces yeux sont généralement à peu près sphériques, remplis d'une substance transparente semblable à un gel appelée humeur vitrée , avec une lentille de focalisation et souvent un iris ; le relâchement ou le resserrement des muscles autour de l'iris modifie la taille de la pupille, régulant ainsi la quantité de lumière qui pénètre dans l'œil et réduisant les aberrations lorsqu'il y a suffisamment de lumière.

Les yeux de la plupart des céphalopodes, des poissons, des amphibiens et des serpents ont des formes de lentilles fixes, et la vision de mise au point est obtenue en télescopant la lentille, de la même manière qu'une caméra se concentre.Les yeux composés se trouvent parmi les arthropodes et sont composés de nombreuses facettes simples qui, selon sur les détails de l'anatomie, peut donner soit une seule image pixélisée, soit plusieurs images, par œil.

Chaque capteur possède sa propre lentille et sa ou ses cellules photosensibles.

Certains yeux ont jusqu'à 28 000 capteurs de ce type, qui sont disposés de manière hexagonale et qui peuvent donner un champ de vision complet à 360°.

Les yeux composés sont très sensibles au mouvement.

Certains arthropodes, dont de nombreux Strepsiptera, ont des yeux composés de quelques facettes seulement, chacun avec une rétine capable de créer une image, de créer une vision.

Chaque œil voyant une chose différente, une image fusionnée de tous les yeux est produite dans le cerveau, fournissant des images très différentes à haute résolution.
Possédant une vision des couleurs hyperspectrale détaillée, la crevette Mantis aurait le système de vision des couleurs le plus complexe au monde.

Les trilobites, aujourd'hui disparus, avaient des yeux composés uniques.

Ils ont utilisé des cristaux de calcite clairs pour former les lentilles de leurs yeux.

En cela, ils diffèrent de la plupart des autres arthropodes, qui ont des yeux doux.

Le nombre de lentilles dans un tel œil variait ; cependant, certains trilobites n'en avaient qu'un, et certains avaient des milliers de lentilles dans un œil.
Contrairement aux yeux composés, les yeux simples sont ceux qui ont une seule lentille.

Par exemple, les araignées sauteuses ont une grande paire d'yeux simples avec un champ de vision étroit, soutenus par un réseau d'autres yeux plus petits pour la vision périphérique.

Certaines larves d'insectes, comme les chenilles, ont un type différent d'œil simple (stemmates) qui ne fournit généralement qu'une image approximative, mais (comme chez les larves de tenthrède) peut posséder des pouvoirs de résolution de 4 degrés d'arc, être sensible à la polarisation et capable d'augmenter sa sensibilité absolue la nuit par un facteur de 1 000 ou plus.

Certains des yeux les plus simples, appelés ocelles, peuvent être trouvés chez des animaux comme certains escargots, qui ne peuvent pas réellement "voir" au sens normal du terme.

Ils ont des cellules photosensibles, mais pas de lentille et aucun autre moyen de projeter une image sur ces cellules.

Ils peuvent faire la distinction entre la lumière et l'obscurité, mais pas plus.

Cela permet aux escargots de rester à l'abri de la lumière directe du soleil.
Chez les organismes vivant près des évents en haute mer, les yeux composés ont été secondairement simplifiés et adaptés pour voir la lumière infrarouge produite par les évents chauds - de cette façon, les porteurs peuvent éviter d'être bouillis vivants.


== Genre ==

Il existe dix dispositions différentes des yeux - en effet, toutes les méthodes technologiques de capture d'une image optique couramment utilisées par les êtres humains, à l'exception des zooms et des lentilles de Fresnel, se produisent dans la nature.

Les types d'yeux peuvent être classés en "yeux simples", avec une surface photoréceptrice concave, et en "yeux composés", qui comprennent un certain nombre de lentilles individuelles disposées sur une surface convexe.

Notez que "simple" n'implique pas un niveau réduit de complexité ou d'acuité.

En effet, n'importe quel type d'œil peut être adapté à presque n'importe quel comportement ou environnement.

Les seules limitations spécifiques aux types d'yeux sont celles de la résolution - la physique des yeux composés les empêche d'atteindre une résolution meilleure que 1°.

De plus, les yeux de superposition peuvent atteindre une plus grande sensibilité que les yeux d'apposition, ils sont donc mieux adaptés aux créatures sombres.

Les yeux se répartissent également en deux groupes sur la base de la construction cellulaire de leur photorécepteur, les cellules photoréceptrices étant soit ciliées (comme chez les vertébrés) soit rhabdomériques.

Ces deux groupes ne sont pas monophylétiques ; les cnidaires possèdent également des cellules ciliées,
et certains gastéropodes, ainsi que certains annélides possèdent les deux. Certains organismes ont des cellules photosensibles qui ne font que détecter si l'environnement est clair ou sombre, ce qui est suffisant pour l'entraînement des rythmes circadiens.

Ceux-ci ne sont pas considérés comme des yeux car ils manquent de structure suffisante pour être considérés comme un organe et ne produisent pas d'image.


=== Yeux non composés ===

Les yeux simples sont plutôt omniprésents et les yeux porteurs de lentilles ont évolué au moins sept fois chez les vertébrés, les céphalopodes, les annélides, les crustacés et les cubozoa.


==== Yeux creux ====
Les yeux de fosse, également connus sous le nom de stemma, sont des taches oculaires qui peuvent être placées dans une fosse pour réduire les angles de lumière qui pénètrent et affectent la tache oculaire, pour permettre à l'organisme de déduire l'angle de la lumière entrante.

Trouvées dans environ 85% des phylums, ces formes de base étaient probablement les précurseurs de types plus avancés d '«yeux simples».

Ils sont petits, comprenant jusqu'à environ 100 cellules couvrant environ 100 µm.

La directionnalité peut être améliorée en réduisant la taille de l'ouverture, en incorporant une couche réfléchissante derrière les cellules réceptrices ou en remplissant la fosse avec un matériau réfringent. Les vipères ont développé des fosses qui fonctionnent comme des yeux en détectant le rayonnement infrarouge thermique, en plus de leurs yeux de longueur d'onde optique comme ceux des autres vertébrés (voir la détection infrarouge chez les serpents).

Cependant, les organes à fosse sont équipés de récepteurs assez différents des photorécepteurs, à savoir un canal potentiel de récepteur transitoire (canaux TRP) spécifique appelé TRPV1.

La principale différence est que les photorécepteurs sont des récepteurs couplés aux protéines G, mais que les TRP sont des canaux ioniques.


==== Oeil de lentille sphérique ====
La résolution des yeux creux peut être considérablement améliorée en incorporant un matériau avec un indice de réfraction plus élevé pour former une lentille, ce qui peut réduire considérablement le rayon de flou rencontré, augmentant ainsi la résolution pouvant être obtenue.

La forme la plus élémentaire, observée chez certains gastéropodes et annélides, consiste en une lentille d'un indice de réfraction.

Une image beaucoup plus nette peut être obtenue en utilisant des matériaux à indice de réfraction élevé, décroissant vers les bords ; cela diminue la distance focale et permet ainsi à une image nette de se former sur la rétine.

Cela permet également une plus grande ouverture pour une netteté d'image donnée, permettant à plus de lumière d'entrer dans l'objectif ; et une lentille plus plate, réduisant l'aberration sphérique.

Une telle lentille non homogène est nécessaire pour que la distance focale passe d'environ 4 fois le rayon de la lentille à 2,5 rayons. Les yeux hétérogènes ont évolué au moins neuf fois : quatre fois ou plus chez les gastéropodes, une fois chez les copépodes, une fois chez les annélides, une fois dans les céphalopodes, et une fois dans les chitons, qui ont des lentilles d'aragonite.

Aucun organisme aquatique existant ne possède de lentilles homogènes; on peut supposer que la pression évolutive d'une lentille hétérogène est suffisamment grande pour que cette étape soit rapidement "dépassée". Cet œil crée une image suffisamment nette pour que le mouvement de l'œil puisse provoquer un flou important.

Pour minimiser l'effet du mouvement des yeux pendant que l'animal bouge, la plupart de ces yeux ont des muscles oculaires stabilisateurs. Les ocelles des insectes portent une lentille simple, mais leur point focal se situe généralement derrière la rétine ; par conséquent, ceux-ci ne peuvent pas former une image nette.

Les ocelles (yeux de type fosse des arthropodes) brouillent l'image sur toute la rétine et sont par conséquent excellents pour répondre aux changements rapides d'intensité lumineuse sur l'ensemble du champ visuel; cette réponse rapide est encore accélérée par les gros faisceaux nerveux qui envoient l'information au cerveau.

La focalisation de l'image entraînerait également la focalisation de l'image du soleil sur quelques récepteurs, avec la possibilité de dommages sous la lumière intense; protéger les récepteurs bloquerait une partie de la lumière et réduirait ainsi leur sensibilité.
Cette réponse rapide a conduit à suggérer que les ocelles des insectes sont principalement utilisés en vol, car ils peuvent être utilisés pour détecter des changements soudains dans la direction vers le haut (parce que la lumière, en particulier la lumière UV qui est absorbée par la végétation, vient généralement d'en haut) .


==== Plusieurs lentilles ====
Certains organismes marins portent plus d'une lentille; par exemple le copépode Pontella en a trois.

L'extérieur a une surface parabolique, contrant les effets de l'aberration sphérique tout en permettant la formation d'une image nette.

Un autre copépode, Copilia, a deux lentilles dans chaque œil, disposées comme celles d'un télescope.

De tels agencements sont rares et mal compris, mais représentent une construction alternative.
Des lentilles multiples sont observées chez certains chasseurs tels que les aigles et les araignées sauteuses, qui ont une cornée réfractive : celles-ci ont une lentille négative, agrandissant l'image observée jusqu'à 50% sur les cellules réceptrices, augmentant ainsi leur résolution optique.


==== Cornée réfractive ====
Aux yeux de la plupart des mammifères, des oiseaux, des reptiles et de la plupart des autres vertébrés terrestres (ainsi que des araignées et de certaines larves d'insectes), le fluide vitreux a un indice de réfraction plus élevé que l'air.

En général, la lentille n'est pas sphérique.

Les lentilles sphériques produisent une aberration sphérique.

Dans les cornées réfractives, le tissu cristallinien est corrigé avec un matériau de lentille inhomogène (voir lentille de Luneburg) ou avec une forme asphérique.

L'aplatissement de la lentille présente un inconvénient; la qualité de la vision est diminuée loin de la ligne principale de mise au point.

Ainsi, les animaux qui ont évolué avec un large champ de vision ont souvent des yeux qui utilisent une lentille inhomogène. Comme mentionné ci-dessus, une cornée réfractive n'est utile que hors de l'eau.

Dans l'eau, il y a peu de différence d'indice de réfraction entre le fluide vitreux et l'eau environnante.

Ainsi, les créatures qui sont retournées dans l'eau - les pingouins et les phoques, par exemple - perdent leur cornée très incurvée et reviennent à une vision basée sur la lentille.

Une solution alternative, portée par certains plongeurs, est d'avoir une cornée très fortement focalisante.


==== Yeux réfléchissants ====
Une alternative à une lentille consiste à tapisser l'intérieur de l'œil de "miroirs" et à refléter l'image pour la focaliser en un point central.

La nature de ces yeux signifie que si l'on regardait dans la pupille d'un œil, on verrait la même image que l'organisme verrait, réfléchie. De nombreux petits organismes tels que les rotifères, les copépodes et les vers plats utilisent de tels organes, mais ceux-ci sont trop petits pour produire des images utilisables.

Certains organismes plus gros, comme les pétoncles, utilisent également des yeux réflecteurs.

Le pétoncle Pecten a jusqu'à 100 yeux réflecteurs à l'échelle millimétrique bordant le bord de sa coquille.

Il détecte les objets en mouvement lorsqu'ils passent devant des lentilles successives. Il existe au moins un vertébré, le poisson fantôme, dont les yeux comprennent des optiques réfléchissantes pour focaliser la lumière.

Chacun des deux yeux d'un poisson fantôme recueille la lumière du dessus et du dessous; la lumière venant d'en haut est focalisée par une lentille, tandis que celle venant d'en bas, par un miroir incurvé composé de plusieurs couches de petites plaques réfléchissantes faites de cristaux de guanine.


=== Yeux composés ===


Un œil composé peut être constitué de milliers d'unités photoréceptrices individuelles ou d'ommatidies (ommatidium, singulier).

L'image perçue est une combinaison d'entrées des nombreuses ommatidies ("unités oculaires" individuelles), qui sont situées sur une surface convexe, pointant ainsi dans des directions légèrement différentes.

Comparés aux yeux simples, les yeux composés possèdent un très grand angle de vue et peuvent détecter les mouvements rapides et, dans certains cas, la polarisation de la lumière.

Étant donné que les lentilles individuelles sont si petites, les effets de la diffraction imposent une limite à la résolution possible pouvant être obtenue (en supposant qu'elles ne fonctionnent pas comme des réseaux phasés).

Cela ne peut être contré qu'en augmentant la taille et le nombre de lentilles.

Pour voir avec une résolution comparable à nos yeux simples, les humains auraient besoin de très grands yeux composés, d'environ 11 mètres (36 pieds) de rayon. Les yeux composés se divisent en deux groupes : les yeux d'apposition, qui forment plusieurs images inversées, et les yeux de superposition, qui forment une seule image dressée.

Les yeux composés sont courants chez les arthropodes, les annélides et certains mollusques bivalves.

Les yeux composés chez les arthropodes se développent à leurs marges par l'ajout de nouvelles ommatidies.


==== Yeux d'apposition ====
Les yeux d'apposition sont la forme d'yeux la plus courante et sont vraisemblablement la forme ancestrale des yeux composés.

On les trouve dans tous les groupes d'arthropodes, bien qu'ils puissent avoir évolué plus d'une fois au sein de ce phylum.

Certains annélides et bivalves ont également des yeux d'apposition.

Ils sont également possédés par Limulus, le crabe en fer à cheval, et il y a des suggestions que d'autres chélicères ont développé leurs yeux simples par réduction à partir d'un point de départ composé. (Certaines chenilles semblent avoir développé des yeux composés à partir d'yeux simples dans le sens opposé.)
Les yeux d'apposition fonctionnent en rassemblant un certain nombre d'images, une de chaque œil, et en les combinant dans le cerveau, chaque œil apportant généralement un seul point d'information.

L'œil d'apposition typique a une lentille focalisant la lumière d'une direction sur le rhabdom, tandis que la lumière des autres directions est absorbée par la paroi sombre de l'ommatidium.


==== Superposition des yeux ====
Le deuxième type est nommé l'œil de superposition.

L'œil de superposition est divisé en trois types:

réfringent,
reflétant et
superposition paraboliqueL'œil de superposition réfringente a un espace entre la lentille et le rhabdom, et pas de paroi latérale.

Chaque lentille capte la lumière selon un angle par rapport à son axe et la réfléchit au même angle de l'autre côté.

Le résultat est une image à la moitié du rayon de l'œil, là où se trouvent les pointes des rhabdoms.

Ce type d'œil composé, pour lequel il existe une taille minimale en dessous de laquelle une superposition efficace ne peut se produire, se trouve normalement chez les insectes nocturnes, car il peut créer des images jusqu'à 1000 fois plus lumineuses que les yeux d'apposition équivalents, mais au prix d'une résolution réduite.

Dans le type d'œil composé à superposition parabolique, observé chez les arthropodes tels que les éphémères, les surfaces paraboliques de l'intérieur de chaque facette concentrent la lumière d'un réflecteur vers un réseau de capteurs.

Les crustacés décapodes à corps long tels que les crevettes, les crevettes, les écrevisses et les homards sont les seuls à avoir des yeux de superposition réfléchissants, qui ont également un espace transparent mais utilisent des miroirs d'angle au lieu de lentilles.


==== Superposition parabolique ====
Ce type d'œil fonctionne en réfractant la lumière, puis en utilisant un miroir parabolique pour focaliser l'image ; il combine les caractéristiques des yeux de superposition et d'apposition.


==== Autre ====
Un autre type d'œil composé, trouvé chez les mâles de l'ordre des strepsiptères, utilise une série d'yeux simples - des yeux ayant une ouverture qui fournit de la lumière à toute une rétine formant une image.

Plusieurs de ces œillets forment ensemble l'œil composé strepsipteran, qui est similaire aux yeux composés «schizochroal» de certains trilobites.

Parce que chaque œillet est un œil simple, il produit une image inversée ; ces images sont combinées dans le cerveau pour former une image unifiée.

Parce que l'ouverture d'un œillet est plus grande que les facettes d'un œil composé, cette disposition permet une vision sous de faibles niveaux de lumière. ommatidies organisées en une zone de fovéa qui donne une vision aiguë.

Dans la zone aiguë, les yeux sont aplatis et les facettes plus grandes.

L'aplatissement permet à plus d'ommatidies de recevoir la lumière d'un point et donc une résolution plus élevée.

La tache noire que l'on peut voir sur les yeux composés de ces insectes, qui semble toujours regarder directement l'observateur, s'appelle une pseudopupille.

Cela se produit parce que les ommatidies que l'on observe "de face" (le long de leurs axes optiques) absorbent la lumière incidente, tandis que celles d'un côté la réfléchissent. Il existe quelques exceptions aux types mentionnés ci-dessus.

Certains insectes ont un soi-disant œil composé à lentille unique, un type de transition qui se situe entre un type de superposition de l'œil composé à lentilles multiples et l'œil à lentille unique que l'on trouve chez les animaux aux yeux simples.

Ensuite, il y a la crevette mysidacée, Dioptromysis paucispinosa.

La crevette a un œil du type à superposition réfringente, à l'arrière derrière celui-ci dans chaque œil se trouve une seule grande facette qui a trois fois le diamètre des autres dans l'œil et derrière celle-ci se trouve un cône cristallin élargi.

Cela projette une image verticale sur une rétine spécialisée.

L'œil résultant est un mélange d'un œil simple dans un œil composé.
Une autre version est un œil composé souvent appelé "pseudofacetté", comme on le voit dans Scutigera.

Ce type d'œil consiste en un groupe de nombreuses ommatidies de chaque côté de la tête, organisées de manière à ressembler à un véritable œil composé.
Le corps d'Ophiocoma wendtii, un type d'étoile cassante, est recouvert d'ommatidies, transformant toute sa peau en un œil composé.

Il en va de même pour de nombreux chitons.

Les pieds tubulaires des oursins contiennent des protéines photoréceptrices, qui agissent ensemble comme un œil composé; ils manquent de pigments de filtrage, mais peuvent détecter la directionnalité de la lumière par l'ombre projetée par son corps opaque.


==== Nutriments ====
Le corps ciliaire est triangulaire en coupe horizontale et est recouvert d'une double couche, l'épithélium ciliaire.

La couche interne est transparente et recouvre le corps vitré, et est continue à partir du tissu neural de la rétine.

La couche externe est très pigmentée, en continuité avec l'épithélium pigmentaire rétinien, et constitue les cellules du muscle dilatateur.
Le vitré est la masse transparente, incolore et gélatineuse qui remplit l'espace entre le cristallin de l'œil et la rétine tapissant le fond de l'œil.

Il est produit par certaines cellules rétiniennes.

Elle est de composition assez proche de la cornée, mais contient très peu de cellules (principalement des phagocytes qui éliminent les débris cellulaires indésirables dans le champ visuel, ainsi que les hyalocytes de Balazs de la surface du vitré, qui retraitent l'acide hyaluronique), non vaisseaux sanguins, et 98 à 99 % de son volume est constitué d'eau (contre 75 % dans la cornée) avec des sels, des sucres, de la vitrosine (un type de collagène), un réseau de fibres de collagène de type II avec l'acide hyaluronique mucopolysaccharide, et également un large éventail de protéines en micro-quantités.

Étonnamment, avec si peu de matière solide, il tient fermement l'œil.


== Évolution ==


La photoréception est phylogénétiquement très ancienne, avec diverses théories de la phylogenèse.

L'origine commune (monophylie) de tous les yeux des animaux est maintenant largement acceptée comme un fait.

Ceci est basé sur les caractéristiques génétiques partagées de tous les yeux; c'est-à-dire que tous les yeux modernes, aussi variés soient-ils, ont leurs origines dans un proto-œil qui aurait évolué il y a environ 650 à 600 millions d'années, et le gène PAX6 est considéré comme un facteur clé à cet égard.

On pense que la majorité des progrès des premiers yeux n'ont mis que quelques millions d'années à se développer, puisque le premier prédateur à obtenir une véritable imagerie aurait déclenché une "course aux armements" parmi toutes les espèces qui n'ont pas fui l'environnement photopique.

Les proies et les prédateurs concurrents seraient nettement désavantagés sans de telles capacités et seraient moins susceptibles de survivre et de se reproduire.

Par conséquent, plusieurs types et sous-types d'yeux se sont développés en parallèle (sauf ceux de groupes, tels que les vertébrés, qui n'ont été contraints à l'environnement photopique qu'à un stade tardif).
Les yeux de divers animaux montrent une adaptation à leurs besoins.

Par exemple, l'œil d'un oiseau de proie a une acuité visuelle bien supérieure à celle d'un œil humain et, dans certains cas, peut détecter le rayonnement ultraviolet.

Les différentes formes d'œil chez, par exemple, les vertébrés et les mollusques sont des exemples d'évolution parallèle, malgré leur lointaine ascendance commune.

La convergence phénotypique de la géométrie des yeux des céphalopodes et de la plupart des vertébrés donne l'impression que l'œil des vertébrés a évolué à partir d'un œil de céphalopode d'imagerie, mais ce n'est pas le cas, comme le montrent les rôles inversés de leurs classes respectives d'opsine ciliaire et rhabdomérique et de cristallins différents. Les tout premiers "yeux", appelés taches oculaires, étaient de simples taches de protéine photoréceptrice chez les animaux unicellulaires.

Chez les êtres multicellulaires, les taches oculaires multicellulaires ont évolué, physiquement similaires aux patchs récepteurs du goût et de l'odorat.

Ces taches oculaires ne pouvaient détecter que la luminosité ambiante : elles pouvaient distinguer la lumière et l'obscurité, mais pas la direction de la source lumineuse. Grâce à un changement progressif, les taches oculaires des espèces vivant dans des environnements bien éclairés se sont abaissées en une forme de "tasse" peu profonde.

La capacité de discriminer légèrement la luminosité directionnelle a été obtenue en utilisant l'angle auquel la lumière a frappé certaines cellules pour identifier la source.

La fosse s'est approfondie avec le temps, l'ouverture a diminué de taille et le nombre de cellules photoréceptrices a augmenté, formant une caméra à sténopé efficace capable de distinguer faiblement les formes.

Cependant, les ancêtres de la myxine moderne, que l'on pense être les protovertébrés, ont évidemment été poussés vers des eaux très profondes et sombres, où ils étaient moins vulnérables aux prédateurs voyants, et où il est avantageux d'avoir une tache oculaire convexe, qui recueille plus de lumière. qu'un plat ou concave.

Cela aurait conduit à une trajectoire évolutive quelque peu différente pour l'œil des vertébrés que pour les autres yeux des animaux.
La fine prolifération de cellules transparentes au-dessus de l'ouverture de l'œil, formée à l'origine pour éviter d'endommager la tache oculaire, a permis au contenu séparé de la chambre oculaire de se spécialiser dans une humeur transparente qui optimisait le filtrage des couleurs, bloquait les rayonnements nocifs, améliorait l'indice de réfraction de l'œil et fonctionnalité autorisée en dehors de l'eau.

Les cellules protectrices transparentes se sont finalement divisées en deux couches, avec du liquide circulatoire entre les deux, ce qui a permis des angles de vision plus larges et une plus grande résolution d'imagerie, et l'épaisseur de la couche transparente a progressivement augmenté, chez la plupart des espèces avec la protéine cristalline transparente. L'écart entre les couches de tissus naturellement formé une forme biconvexe, une structure idéale optimale pour un indice de réfraction normal.

Indépendamment, une couche transparente et une couche non transparente se séparent vers l'avant du cristallin : la cornée et l'iris.

La séparation de la couche avant a formé à nouveau une humeur, l'humeur aqueuse.

Cette puissance de réfraction accrue et encore atténué les problèmes circulatoires.

La formation d'un anneau non transparent a permis plus de vaisseaux sanguins, plus de circulation et des yeux plus grands.


=== Relation avec les exigences de la vie ===

Les yeux sont généralement adaptés à l'environnement et aux exigences de vie de l'organisme qui les porte.

Par exemple, la distribution des photorécepteurs a tendance à correspondre à la zone dans laquelle l'acuité la plus élevée est requise, les organismes à balayage d'horizon, tels que ceux qui vivent dans les plaines africaines, ayant une ligne horizontale de ganglions à haute densité, tandis que les organismes arboricoles les créatures qui nécessitent une bonne vision panoramique ont tendance à avoir une distribution symétrique des ganglions, l'acuité diminuant vers l'extérieur à partir du centre.
Bien entendu, pour la plupart des types d'yeux, il est impossible de s'écarter d'une forme sphérique, de sorte que seule la densité des récepteurs optiques peut être modifiée.

Chez les organismes dotés d'yeux composés, c'est le nombre d'ommatidies plutôt que de ganglions qui reflète la région d'acquisition de données la plus élevée. plus d'ommatidies sont alignées sur, disons, l'horizon, sans modifier la taille ou la densité des ommatidies individuelles.

Les yeux des organismes à balayage d'horizon ont des tiges afin qu'ils puissent être facilement alignés sur l'horizon lorsqu'il est incliné, par exemple, si l'animal est sur une pente. Une extension de ce concept est que les yeux des prédateurs ont généralement une zone de très vision aiguë en leur centre, pour aider à l'identification des proies.

Chez les organismes des eaux profondes, ce n'est peut-être pas le centre de l'œil qui est agrandi.

Les amphipodes hyperiides sont des animaux d'eau profonde qui se nourrissent d'organismes au-dessus d'eux.

Leurs yeux sont presque divisés en deux, la région supérieure étant censée être impliquée dans la détection des silhouettes de proies potentielles - ou de prédateurs - contre la faible lumière du ciel au-dessus.

En conséquence, les hyperiides des eaux plus profondes, où la lumière à laquelle les silhouettes doivent être comparées est plus faible, ont des «yeux supérieurs» plus grands et peuvent perdre complètement la partie inférieure de leurs yeux.

Chez l' isopode antarctique géant Glyptonotus, un petit œil composé ventral est physiquement complètement séparé de l'œil composé dorsal beaucoup plus grand.

La perception de la profondeur peut être améliorée en ayant des yeux agrandis dans une direction; déformer légèrement l'œil permet d'estimer la distance à l'objet avec un haut degré de précision. .

D'autre part, les yeux des organismes qui fonctionnent dans des niveaux de faible luminosité, comme à l'aube et au crépuscule ou en eau profonde, ont tendance à être plus grands pour augmenter la quantité de lumière qui peut être capturée. Ce n'est pas seulement la forme du œil qui peut être affecté par le mode de vie.

Les yeux peuvent être les parties les plus visibles des organismes, ce qui peut exercer une pression sur les organismes pour qu'ils aient des yeux plus transparents au détriment de la fonction. Les yeux peuvent être montés sur des tiges pour offrir une meilleure vision panoramique, en les soulevant au-dessus d'un organisme carapace; cela leur permet également de suivre les prédateurs ou les proies sans bouger la tête.


== Physiologie ==



=== Acuité visuelle ===


L'acuité visuelle, ou pouvoir de résolution, est "la capacité de distinguer les détails fins" et est la propriété des cellules coniques.

Il est souvent mesuré en cycles par degré (CPD), qui mesure une résolution angulaire, ou combien un œil peut différencier un objet d'un autre en termes d'angles visuels.

La résolution en CPD peut être mesurée par des graphiques à barres de différents nombres de cycles de bandes blanches/noires.

Par exemple, si chaque motif mesure 1,75 cm de large et est placé à 1 m de distance de l'œil, il sous-tendra un angle de 1 degré, de sorte que le nombre de paires de barres blanches/noires sur le motif sera une mesure des cycles par degré de ce modèle.

Le nombre le plus élevé que l'œil peut résoudre en bandes ou distinguer d'un bloc gris est alors la mesure de l'acuité visuelle de l'œil.
Pour un œil humain avec une excellente acuité, la résolution théorique maximale est de 50 CPD (1,2 minute d'arc par paire de lignes, ou une paire de lignes de 0,35 mm, à 1 m).

Un rat ne peut résoudre qu'environ 1 à 2 CPD.

Un cheval a une acuité plus élevée dans la majeure partie du champ visuel de ses yeux qu'un humain, mais ne correspond pas à l'acuité élevée de la région de la fovéa centrale de l'œil humain. L'aberration sphérique limite la résolution d'une pupille de 7 mm à environ 3 minutes d'arc par ligne paire.

À un diamètre de pupille de 3 mm, l'aberration sphérique est considérablement réduite, ce qui se traduit par une résolution améliorée d'environ 1,7 minutes d'arc par paire de lignes.

Une résolution de 2 minutes d'arc par paire de lignes, équivalente à un écart de 1 minute d'arc dans un optotype, correspond à 20/20 (vision normale) chez l'homme.
Cependant, dans l'œil composé, la résolution est liée à la taille des ommatidies individuelles et à la distance entre les ommatidies voisines.

Physiquement, ceux-ci ne peuvent pas être réduits en taille pour atteindre l'acuité observée avec des yeux à lentille unique comme chez les mammifères.

Les yeux composés ont une acuité bien inférieure à celle des yeux des vertébrés.


=== Perception des couleurs ===


"La vision des couleurs est la faculté de l'organisme de distinguer les lumières de différentes qualités spectrales." Tous les organismes sont limités à une petite gamme de spectre électromagnétique; cela varie d'une créature à l'autre, mais se situe principalement entre les longueurs d'onde de 400 et 700 nm.
Il s'agit d'une section plutôt petite du spectre électromagnétique, reflétant probablement l'évolution sous-marine de l'organe : l'eau bloque toutes les fenêtres sauf deux petites fenêtres du spectre électromagnétique, et il n'y a eu aucune pression évolutive parmi les animaux terrestres pour élargir cette gamme. le pigment sensible, la rhodopsine, a un pic de réponse à 500 nm.

De petits changements dans les gènes codant pour cette protéine peuvent modifier la réponse maximale de quelques nm ; les pigments de la lentille peuvent également filtrer la lumière entrante, modifiant ainsi la réponse maximale.

De nombreux organismes sont incapables de faire la distinction entre les couleurs, voyant à la place des nuances de gris; la vision des couleurs nécessite une gamme de cellules pigmentaires qui sont principalement sensibles à des gammes plus petites du spectre.

Chez les primates, les geckos et d'autres organismes, ceux-ci prennent la forme de cellules coniques, à partir desquelles les cellules en bâtonnets les plus sensibles ont évolué.

Même si les organismes sont physiquement capables de discriminer différentes couleurs, cela ne signifie pas nécessairement qu'ils peuvent percevoir les différentes couleurs ; ce n'est qu'avec des tests comportementaux que cela peut être déduit. La plupart des organismes ayant une vision des couleurs peuvent détecter la lumière ultraviolette.

Cette lumière à haute énergie peut endommager les cellules réceptrices.

À quelques exceptions près (serpents, mammifères placentaires), la plupart des organismes évitent ces effets en ayant des gouttelettes d'huile absorbantes autour de leurs cellules coniques.

L'alternative, développée par des organismes qui avaient perdu ces gouttelettes d'huile au cours de l'évolution, est de rendre le cristallin imperméable à la lumière UV, ce qui exclut la possibilité que toute lumière UV soit détectée, car elle n'atteint même pas la rétine.


=== Bâtonnets et cônes ===

La rétine contient deux grands types de cellules photoréceptrices sensibles à la lumière utilisées pour la vision : les bâtonnets et les cônes.
Les bâtonnets ne peuvent pas distinguer les couleurs, mais sont responsables de la vision monochrome (noir et blanc) à faible luminosité (scotopique); ils fonctionnent bien dans la pénombre car ils contiennent un pigment, la rhodopsine (violet visuel), qui est sensible à une faible intensité lumineuse, mais sature à des intensités plus élevées (photopiques).

Les bâtonnets sont répartis dans toute la rétine mais il n'y en a aucun au niveau de la fovéa et aucun au niveau de la tache aveugle.

La densité des bâtonnets est plus élevée dans la rétine périphérique que dans la rétine centrale.
Les cônes sont responsables de la vision des couleurs.

Ils ont besoin d'une lumière plus vive pour fonctionner que les tiges.

Chez l'homme, il existe trois types de cônes, particulièrement sensibles à la lumière à longue longueur d'onde, à longueur d'onde moyenne et à courte longueur d'onde (souvent appelées respectivement rouge, vert et bleu, bien que les pics de sensibilité ne soient pas réellement à ces couleurs ).

La couleur observée est l'effet combiné des stimuli et des réponses de ces trois types de cellules coniques.

Les cônes sont principalement concentrés dans et près de la fovéa.

Seuls quelques-uns sont présents sur les côtés de la rétine.

Les objets sont plus nets lorsque leurs images tombent sur la fovéa, comme lorsque l'on regarde directement un objet.

Les cellules coniques et les bâtonnets sont reliés par des cellules intermédiaires de la rétine aux fibres nerveuses du nerf optique.

Lorsque les bâtonnets et les cônes sont stimulés par la lumière, ils se connectent via des cellules adjacentes dans la rétine pour envoyer un signal électrique aux fibres du nerf optique.

Les nerfs optiques envoient des impulsions à travers ces fibres vers le cerveau.


== Pigments ==

Les molécules de pigment utilisées dans l'œil sont diverses, mais peuvent être utilisées pour définir la distance évolutive entre différents groupes, et peuvent également aider à déterminer celles qui sont étroitement liées, bien que des problèmes de convergence existent. Les opsines sont les pigments impliqués dans la photoréception. .

D'autres pigments, tels que la mélanine, sont utilisés pour protéger les cellules photoréceptrices de la lumière qui s'infiltre par les côtés.
Le groupe de protéines opsines a évolué bien avant le dernier ancêtre commun des animaux et n'a cessé de se diversifier depuis. Il existe deux types d'opsines impliquées dans la vision ; les c-opsines, qui sont associées aux cellules photoréceptrices de type ciliaire, et les r-opsines, associées aux cellules photoréceptrices rhabdomériques.

Les yeux des vertébrés contiennent généralement des cellules ciliaires avec des c-opsines, et les invertébrés (bilatériens) ont des cellules rhabdomériques dans l'œil avec des r-opsines.

Cependant, certaines cellules ganglionnaires de vertébrés expriment des r-opsines, suggérant que leurs ancêtres utilisaient ce pigment dans la vision et que des restes survivent dans les yeux.

De même, les c-opsines se sont avérées être exprimées dans le cerveau de certains invertébrés.

Ils peuvent avoir été exprimés dans les cellules ciliaires des yeux larvaires, qui ont ensuite été résorbés dans le cerveau lors de la métamorphose en forme adulte.

Les c-opsines se trouvent également dans certains yeux dérivés d' invertébrés bilatéraux , tels que les yeux palléaux des mollusques bivalves ; cependant, les yeux latéraux (qui étaient vraisemblablement le type ancestral de ce groupe, si les yeux ont évolué une fois là-bas) utilisent toujours des r-opsines.

Les cnidaires, qui sont un groupe extérieur aux taxons mentionnés ci-dessus, expriment des c-opsines, mais les r-opsines n'ont pas encore été trouvées dans ce groupe.

Incidemment, la mélanine produite dans les cnidaires est produite de la même manière que celle des vertébrés, suggérant la descendance commune de ce pigment.


== Remarques ==



=== Bibliographie ===

Ali, Mohamed Ather; Klyne, MA (1985).

Vision chez les vertébrés.

New York : presse plénière.

ISBN 978-0-306-42065-8.


== Lectures complémentaires ==

Yong, Ed (14 janvier 2016). "À l'intérieur de l'œil : la création la plus exquise de la nature".

National géographique.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Œil
