

KIDNEY


The kidneys are two reddish-brown bean-shaped organs found in vertebrates. 

They are located on the left and right in the retroperitoneal space, and in adult humans are about 12 centimetres (4+1⁄2 inches) in length. 

They receive blood from the paired renal arteries; blood exits into the paired renal veins. 

Each kidney is attached to a ureter, a tube that carries excreted urine to the bladder.

The kidney participates in the control of the volume of various body fluids, fluid osmolality, acid–base balance, various electrolyte concentrations, and removal of toxins. 

Filtration occurs in the glomerulus: one-fifth of the blood volume that enters the kidneys is filtered. 

Examples of substances reabsorbed are solute-free water, sodium, bicarbonate, glucose, and amino acids. 

Examples of substances secreted are hydrogen, ammonium, potassium and uric acid. 

The kidneys also carry out functions independent of the nephron. 

For example, they convert a precursor of vitamin D to its active form, calcitriol; and synthesize the hormones erythropoietin and renin. 

The nephron is the structural and functional unit of the kidney. 

Each adult human kidney contains around 1 million nephrons, while a mouse kidney contains only about 12,500 nephrons.

Procedures used in the management of kidney disease include chemical and microscopic examination of the urine (urinalysis), measurement of kidney function by calculating the estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) using the serum creatinine; and kidney biopsy and CT scan to evaluate for abnormal anatomy. 

Dialysis and kidney transplantation are used to treat kidney failure; one (or both sequentially) of these are almost always used when renal function drops below 15%. 

Nephrectomy is frequently used to cure renal cell carcinoma.
Renal physiology is the study of kidney function. 

Nephrology is the medical specialty which addresses diseases of kidney function: these include chronic kidney disease, nephritic and nephrotic syndromes, acute kidney injury, and pyelonephritis. 

Urology addresses diseases of kidney (and urinary tract) anatomy: these include cancer, renal cysts, kidney stones and ureteral stones, and urinary tract obstruction. 

The word “renal” is an adjective meaning “relating to the kidneys”, and its roots are French or late Latin. 

Whereas according to some opinions, "renal" should be replaced with "kidney" in scientific writings such as "kidney artery", other experts have advocated preserving the use of renal as appropriate including in "renal artery".


== Structure ==


In humans, the kidneys are located high in the abdominal cavity, one on each side of the spine, and lie in a retroperitoneal position at a slightly oblique angle. 

The asymmetry within the abdominal cavity, caused by the position of the liver, typically results in the right kidney being slightly lower and smaller than the left, and being placed slightly more to the middle than the left kidney. 

The left kidney is approximately at the vertebral level T12 to L3, and the right is slightly lower. 

The right kidney sits just below the diaphragm and posterior to the liver. 

The left kidney sits below the diaphragm and posterior to the spleen. 

On top of each kidney is an adrenal gland. 

The upper parts of the kidneys are partially protected by the 11th and 12th ribs. 

Each kidney, with its adrenal gland is surrounded by two layers of fat: the perirenal fat present between renal fascia and renal capsule and pararenal fat superior to the renal fascia.

The kidney is a bean-shaped structure with a convex and a concave border. 

A recessed area on the concave border is the renal hilum, where the renal artery enters the kidney and the renal vein and ureter leave. 

The kidney is surrounded by tough fibrous tissue, the renal capsule, which is itself surrounded by perirenal fat, renal fascia, and pararenal fat. 

The anterior (front) surface of these tissues is the peritoneum, while the posterior (rear) surface is the transversalis fascia.

The superior pole of the right kidney is adjacent to the liver. 

For the left kidney, it is next to the spleen. 

Both, therefore, move down upon inhalation.

A Danish study measured the median renal length to be 11.2 cm (4+7⁄16 in) on the left side and 10.9 cm (4+5⁄16 in) on the right side in adults. 

Median renal volumes were 146 cm3 (8+15⁄16 cu in) on the left and 134 cm3 (8+3⁄16 cu in) on the right.


=== Gross anatomy ===


The functional substance, or parenchyma, of the kidney is divided into two major structures: the outer renal cortex and the inner renal medulla. 

Grossly, these structures take the shape of eight to 18 cone-shaped renal lobes, each containing renal cortex surrounding a portion of medulla called a renal pyramid. 

Between the renal pyramids are projections of cortex called renal columns. 

Nephrons, the urine-producing functional structures of the kidney, span the cortex and medulla. 

The initial filtering portion of a nephron is the renal corpuscle, which is located in the cortex. 

This is followed by a renal tubule that passes from the cortex deep into the medullary pyramids. 

Part of the renal cortex, a medullary ray is a collection of renal tubules that drain into a single collecting duct.

The tip, or papilla, of each pyramid empties urine into a minor calyx; minor calyces empty into major calyces, and major calyces empty into the renal pelvis. 

This becomes the ureter. 

At the hilum, the ureter and renal vein exit the kidney and the renal artery enters. 

Hilar fat and lymphatic tissue with lymph nodes surround these structures. 

The hilar fat is contiguous with a fat-filled cavity called the renal sinus. 

The renal sinus collectively contains the renal pelvis and calyces and separates these structures from the renal medullary tissue.The kidneys possess no overtly moving structures.



=== Blood supply ===


The kidneys receive blood from the renal arteries, left and right, which branch directly from the abdominal aorta. 

Despite their relatively small size, the kidneys receive approximately 20% of the cardiac output. 

Each renal artery branches into segmental arteries, dividing further into interlobar arteries, which penetrate the renal capsule and extend through the renal columns between the renal pyramids. 

The interlobar arteries then supply blood to the arcuate arteries that run through the boundary of the cortex and the medulla. 

Each arcuate artery supplies several interlobular arteries that feed into the afferent arterioles that supply the glomeruli.

Blood drains from the kidneys, ultimately into the inferior vena cava. 

After filtration occurs, the blood moves through a small network of small veins (venules) that converge into interlobular veins. 

As with the arteriole distribution, the veins follow the same pattern: the interlobular provide blood to the arcuate veins then back to the interlobar veins, which come to form the renal veins which exiting the kidney .


=== Nerve supply ===

The kidney and nervous system communicate via the renal plexus, whose fibers course along the renal arteries to reach each kidney. 

Input from the sympathetic nervous system triggers vasoconstriction in the kidney, thereby reducing renal blood flow. 

The kidney also receives input from the parasympathetic nervous system, by way of the renal branches of the vagus nerve; the function of this is yet unclear. 

Sensory input from the kidney travels to the T10-11 levels of the spinal cord and is sensed in the corresponding dermatome. 

Thus, pain in the flank region may be referred from corresponding kidney.


=== Microanatomy ===

Renal histology is the study of the microscopic structure of the kidney. 

Distinct cell types include:

Kidney glomerulus parietal cell
Kidney glomerulus podocyte
Kidney proximal tubule brush border cell
Loop of Henle thin segment cell
Thick ascending limb cell
Kidney distal tubule cell
Collecting duct principal cell
Collecting duct intercalated cell
Interstitial kidney cells


=== Gene and protein expression ===


About 20,000 protein coding genes are expressed in human cells and almost 70% of these genes are expressed in normal, adult kidneys. 

Just over 300 genes are more specifically expressed in the kidney, with only some 50 genes being highly specific for the kidney. 

Many of the corresponding kidney specific proteins are expressed in the cell membrane and function as transporter proteins. 

The highest expressed kidney specific protein is uromodulin, the most abundant protein in urine with functions that prevent calcification and growth of bacteria. 

Specific proteins are expressed in the different compartments of the kidney with podocin and nephrin expressed in glomeruli, Solute carrier family protein SLC22A8 expressed in proximal tubules, calbindin expressed in distal tubules and aquaporin 2 expressed in the collecting duct cells.


=== Development ===


The mammalian kidney develops from intermediate mesoderm. 

Kidney development, also called nephrogenesis, proceeds through a series of three successive developmental phases: the pronephros, mesonephros, and metanephros. 

The metanephros are primordia of the permanent kidney.


== Function ==


The kidneys excrete a variety of waste products produced by metabolism into the urine. 

The microscopic structural and functional unit of the kidney is the nephron. 

It processes the blood supplied to it via filtration, reabsorption, secretion and excretion; the consequence of those processes is the production of urine. 

These include the nitrogenous wastes urea, from protein catabolism, and uric acid, from nucleic acid metabolism. 

The ability of mammals and some birds to concentrate wastes into a volume of urine much smaller than the volume of blood from which the wastes were extracted is dependent on an elaborate countercurrent multiplication mechanism. 

This requires several independent nephron characteristics to operate: a tight hairpin configuration of the tubules, water and ion permeability in the descending limb of the loop, water impermeability in the ascending loop, and active ion transport out of most of the ascending limb. 

In addition, passive countercurrent exchange by the vessels carrying the blood supply to the nephron is essential for enabling this function.

The kidney participates in whole-body homeostasis, regulating acid–base balance, electrolyte concentrations, extracellular fluid volume, and blood pressure. 

The kidney accomplishes these homeostatic functions both independently and in concert with other organs, particularly those of the endocrine system. 

Various endocrine hormones coordinate these endocrine functions; these include renin, angiotensin II, aldosterone, antidiuretic hormone, and atrial natriuretic peptide, among others.


=== Formation of urine ===



==== Filtration ====

Filtration, which takes place at the renal corpuscle, is the process by which cells and large proteins are retained while materials of smaller molecular weights are filtered from the blood to make an ultrafiltrate that eventually becomes urine. 

The kidney generates 180 liters of filtrate a day. 

The process is also known as hydrostatic filtration due to the hydrostatic pressure exerted on the capillary walls.


==== Reabsorption ====

Reabsorption is the transport of molecules from this ultrafiltrate and into the peritubular capillary. 

It is accomplished via selective receptors on the luminal cell membrane. 

Water is 55% reabsorbed in the proximal tubule. 

Glucose at normal plasma levels is completely reabsorbed in the proximal tubule. 

The mechanism for this is the Na+/glucose cotransporter. 

A plasma level of 350 mg/dL will fully saturate the transporters and glucose will be lost in the urine. 

A plasma glucose level of approximately 160 is sufficient to allow glucosuria, which is an important clinical clue to diabetes mellitus.
Amino acids are reabsorbed by sodium dependent transporters in the proximal tubule. 

Hartnup disease is a deficiency of the tryptophan amino acid transporter, which results in pellagra.


==== Secretion ====

Secretion is the reverse of reabsorption: molecules are transported from the peritubular capillary through the interstitial fluid, then through the renal tubular cell and into the ultrafiltrate.


==== Excretion ====

The last step in the processing of the ultrafiltrate is excretion: the ultrafiltrate passes out of the nephron and travels through a tube called the collecting duct, which is part of the collecting duct system, and then to the ureters where it is renamed urine. 

In addition to transporting the ultrafiltrate, the collecting duct also takes part in reabsorption.


=== Hormone secretion ===

The kidneys secrete a variety of hormones, including erythropoietin, calcitriol, and renin. 

Erythropoietin is released in response to hypoxia (low levels of oxygen at tissue level) in the renal circulation. 

It stimulates erythropoiesis (production of red blood cells) in the bone marrow. 

Calcitriol, the activated form of vitamin D, promotes intestinal absorption of calcium and the renal reabsorption of phosphate. 

Renin is an enzyme which regulates angiotensin and aldosterone levels.


=== Blood pressure regulation ===


Although the kidney cannot directly sense blood, long-term regulation of blood pressure predominantly depends upon the kidney. 

This primarily occurs through maintenance of the extracellular fluid compartment, the size of which depends on the plasma sodium concentration. 

Renin is the first in a series of important chemical messengers that make up the renin–angiotensin system. 

Changes in renin ultimately alter the output of this system, principally the hormones angiotensin II and aldosterone. 

Each hormone acts via multiple mechanisms, but both increase the kidney's absorption of sodium chloride, thereby expanding the extracellular fluid compartment and raising blood pressure. 

When renin levels are elevated, the concentrations of angiotensin II and aldosterone increase, leading to increased sodium chloride reabsorption, expansion of the extracellular fluid compartment, and an increase in blood pressure. 

Conversely, when renin levels are low, angiotensin II and aldosterone levels decrease, contracting the extracellular fluid compartment, and decreasing blood pressure.


=== Acid–base balance ===


Two organ systems, the kidneys and lungs, maintain acid–base homeostasis, which is the maintenance of pH around a relatively stable value. 

The lungs contribute to acid–base homeostasis by regulating carbon dioxide (CO2) concentration. 

The kidneys have two very important roles in maintaining the acid–base balance: to reabsorb and regenerate bicarbonate from urine, and to excrete hydrogen ions and fixed acids (anions of acids) into urine.


=== Regulation of osmolality ===

The kidneys help maintain the water and salt level of the body. 

Any significant rise in plasma osmolality is detected by the hypothalamus, which communicates directly with the posterior pituitary gland. 

An increase in osmolality causes the gland to secrete antidiuretic hormone (ADH), resulting in water reabsorption by the kidney and an increase in urine concentration. 

The two factors work together to return the plasma osmolality to its normal levels.


=== Measuring function ===


Various calculations and methods are used to try to measure kidney function. 

Renal clearance is the volume of plasma from which the substance is completely cleared from the blood per unit time. 

The filtration fraction is the amount of plasma that is actually filtered through the kidney. 

This can be defined using the equation. 

The kidney is a very complex organ and mathematical modelling has been used to better understand kidney function at several scales, including fluid uptake and secretion.


== Clinical significance ==


Nephrology is the subspeciality under Internal Medicine that deals with kidney function and disease states related to renal malfunction and their management including dialysis and kidney transplantation. 

Urology is the specialty under Surgery that deals with kidney structure abnormalities such as kidney cancer and cysts and problems with urinary tract. 

Nephrologists are internists, and urologists are surgeons, whereas both are often called "kidney doctors". 

There are overlapping areas that both nephrologists and urologists can provide care such as kidney stones and kidney related infections.
There are many causes of kidney disease. 

Some causes are acquired over the course of life, such as diabetic nephropathy whereas others are congenital, such as polycystic kidney disease.

Medical terms related to the kidneys commonly use terms such as renal and the prefix nephro-. 

The adjective renal, meaning related to the kidney, is from the Latin rēnēs, meaning kidneys; the prefix nephro- is from the Ancient Greek word for kidney, nephros (νεφρός). 

For example, surgical removal of the kidney is a nephrectomy, while a reduction in kidney function is called renal dysfunction.


=== Acquired ===

Diabetic nephropathy
Glomerulonephritis
Hydronephrosis is the enlargement of one or both of the kidneys caused by obstruction of the flow of urine.
Interstitial nephritis
Kidney stones (nephrolithiasis) are a relatively common and particularly painful disorder. 

A chronic condition can result in scars to the kidneys. 

The removal of kidney stones involves ultrasound treatment to break up the stones into smaller pieces, which are then passed through the urinary tract. 

One common symptom of kidney stones is a sharp to disabling pain in the middle and sides of the lower back or groin.
Kidney tumour
Wilms tumor
Renal cell carcinoma
Lupus nephritis
Minimal change disease
In nephrotic syndrome, the glomerulus has been damaged so that a large amount of protein in the blood enters the urine. 

Other frequent features of the nephrotic syndrome include swelling, low serum albumin, and high cholesterol.

Pyelonephritis is infection of the kidneys and is frequently caused by complication of a urinary tract infection.
Kidney failure
Acute kidney failure
Stage 5 Chronic Kidney Disease
Renal artery stenosis
Renovascular hypertension


=== Kidney injury and failure ===


Generally, humans can live normally with just one kidney, as one has more functioning renal tissue than is needed to survive. 

Only when the amount of functioning kidney tissue is greatly diminished does one develop chronic kidney disease. 

Renal replacement therapy, in the form of dialysis or kidney transplantation, is indicated when the glomerular filtration rate has fallen very low or if the renal dysfunction leads to severe symptoms.


=== Dialysis ===


Dialysis is a treatment that substitutes for the function of normal kidneys. 

Dialysis may be instituted when approximately 85%-90% of kidney function is lost, as indicated by a glomerular filtration rate (GFR) of less than 15. 

Dialysis removes metabolic waste products as well as excess water and sodium (thereby contributing to regulating blood pressure); and maintains many chemical levels within the body. 

Life expectancy is 5–10 years for those on dialysis; some live up to 30 years. 

Dialysis can occur via the blood (through a catheter or arteriovenous fistula), or through the peritoneum (peritoneal dialysis) Dialysis is typically administered three times a week for several hours at free-standing dialysis centers, allowing recipients to lead an otherwise essentially normal life.


=== Congenital disease ===

Congenital hydronephrosis
Congenital obstruction of urinary tract
Duplex kidneys, or double kidneys, occur in approximately 1% of the population. 

This occurrence normally causes no complications, but can occasionally cause urinary tract infections.
Duplicated ureter occurs in approximately one in 100 live births
Horseshoe kidney occurs in approximately one in 400 live births
Nephroblastoma (Syndromic Wilm's tumour)
Nutcracker syndrome
Polycystic kidney disease
Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease afflicts patients later in life. 

Approximately one in 1000 people will develop this condition
Autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease is far less common, but more severe, than the dominant condition. 

It is apparent in utero or at birth.
Renal agenesis. 

Failure of one kidney to form occurs in approximately one in 750 live births. 

Failure of both kidneys to form used to be fatal; however, medical advances such as amnioinfusion therapy during pregnancy and peritoneal dialysis have made it possible to stay alive until a transplant can occur.
Renal dysplasia
Unilateral small kidney
Multicystic dysplastic kidney occurs in approximately one in every 2400 live births
Ureteropelvic Junction Obstruction or UPJO; although most cases are congenital, some are acquired.


=== Diagnosis ===

Many renal diseases are diagnosed on the basis of a detailed medical history, and physical examination. 

The medical history takes into account present and past symptoms, especially those of kidney disease; recent infections; exposure to substances toxic to the kidney; and family history of kidney disease.
Kidney function is tested by using blood tests and urine tests. 

The most common blood test are creatinine, urea and electrolytes. 

Urine tests such as urinalysis can evaluate for pH, protein, glucose, and the presence of blood. 

Microscopic analysis can also identify the presence of urinary casts and crystals. 

The glomerular filtration rate (GFR) can be directly measured ("measured GFR", or mGFR) but this rarely done in everyday practice. 

Instead, special equations are used to calculate GFR ("estimated GFR", or eGFR).


==== Imaging ====

Renal ultrasonography is essential in the diagnosis and management of kidney-related diseases. 

Other modalities, such as CT and MRI, should always be considered as supplementary imaging modalities in the assessment of renal disease.


==== Biopsy ====

The role of the renal biopsy is to diagnose renal disease in which the etiology is not clear based upon noninvasive means (clinical history, past medical history, medication history, physical exam, laboratory studies, imaging studies). 

In general, a renal pathologist will perform a detailed morphological evaluation and integrate the morphologic findings with the clinical history and laboratory data, ultimately arriving at a pathological diagnosis. 

A renal pathologist is a physician who has undergone general training in anatomic pathology and additional specially training in the interpretation of renal biopsy specimens.

Ideally, multiple core sections are obtained and evaluated for adequacy (presence of glomeruli) intraoperatively. 

A pathologist/pathology assistant divides the specimen(s) for submission for light microscopy, immunofluorescence microscopy and electron microscopy.

The pathologist will examine the specimen using light microscopy with multiple staining techniques (hematoxylin and eosin/H&E, PAS, trichrome, silver stain) on multiple level sections. 

Multiple immunofluorescence stains are performed to evaluate for antibody, protein and complement deposition. 

Finally, ultra-structural examination is performed with electron microscopy and may reveal the presence of electron-dense deposits or other characteristic abnormalities that may suggest an etiology for the patient's renal disease.


== Other animals ==

In the majority of vertebrates, the mesonephros persists into the adult, albeit usually fused with the more advanced metanephros; only in amniotes is the mesonephros restricted to the embryo. 

The kidneys of fish and amphibians are typically narrow, elongated organs, occupying a significant portion of the trunk. 

The collecting ducts from each cluster of nephrons usually drain into an archinephric duct, which is homologous with the vas deferens of amniotes. 

However, the situation is not always so simple; in cartilaginous fish and some amphibians, there is also a shorter duct, similar to the amniote ureter, which drains the posterior (metanephric) parts of the kidney, and joins with the archinephric duct at the bladder or cloaca. 

Indeed, in many cartilaginous fish, the anterior portion of the kidney may degenerate or cease to function altogether in the adult.In the most primitive vertebrates, the hagfish and lampreys, the kidney is unusually simple: it consists of a row of nephrons, each emptying directly into the archinephric duct. 

Invertebrates may possess excretory organs that are sometimes referred to as "kidneys", but, even in Amphioxus, these are never homologous with the kidneys of vertebrates, and are more accurately referred to by other names, such as nephridia. 

In amphibians, kidneys and the urinary bladder harbour specialized parasites, monogeneans of the family Polystomatidae.The kidneys of reptiles consist of a number of lobules arranged in a broadly linear pattern. 

Each lobule contains a single branch of the ureter in its centre, into which the collecting ducts empty. 

Reptiles have relatively few nephrons compared with other amniotes of a similar size, possibly because of their lower metabolic rate.Birds have relatively large, elongated kidneys, each of which is divided into three or more distinct lobes. 

The lobes consists of several small, irregularly arranged, lobules, each centred on a branch of the ureter. 

Birds have small glomeruli, but about twice as many nephrons as similarly sized mammals.The human kidney is fairly typical of that of mammals. 

Distinctive features of the mammalian kidney, in comparison with that of other vertebrates, include the presence of the renal pelvis and renal pyramids and a clearly distinguishable cortex and medulla. 

The latter feature is due to the presence of elongated loops of Henle; these are much shorter in birds, and not truly present in other vertebrates (although the nephron often has a short intermediate segment between the convoluted tubules). 

It is only in mammals that the kidney takes on its classical "kidney" shape, although there are some exceptions, such as the multilobed reniculate kidneys of pinnipeds and cetaceans.


=== Evolutionary adaptation ===

Kidneys of various animals show evidence of evolutionary adaptation and have long been studied in ecophysiology and comparative physiology. 

Kidney morphology, often indexed as the relative medullary thickness, is associated with habitat aridity among species of mammals and diet (e.g., carnivores have only long loops of Henle).


== Society and culture ==



=== Significance ===



==== Egyptian ====

In ancient Egypt, the kidneys, like the heart, were left inside the mummified bodies, unlike other organs which were removed. 

Comparing this to the biblical statements, and to drawings of human body with the heart and two kidneys portraying a set of scales for weighing justice, it seems that the Egyptian beliefs had also connected the kidneys with judgement and perhaps with moral decisions.


==== Hebrew ====

According to studies in modern and ancient Hebrew, various body organs in humans and animals served also an emotional or logical role, today mostly attributed to the brain and the endocrine system. 

The kidney is mentioned in several biblical verses in conjunction with the heart, much as the bowels were understood to be the "seat" of emotion – grief, joy and pain. 

Similarly, the Talmud (Berakhoth 61.a) states that one of the two kidneys counsels what is good, and the other evil.
In the sacrifices offered at the biblical Tabernacle and later on at the temple in Jerusalem, the priests were instructed to remove the kidneys and the adrenal gland covering the kidneys of the sheep, goat and cattle offerings, and to burn them on the altar, as the holy part of the "offering for God" never to be eaten.


==== India: Ayurvedic system ====

In ancient India, according to the Ayurvedic medical systems, the kidneys were considered the beginning of the excursion channels system, the 'head' of the Mutra Srotas, receiving from all other systems, and therefore important in determining a person's health balance and temperament by the balance and mixture of the three 'Dosha's – the three health elements: Vatha (or Vata) – air, Pitta – bile, and Kapha – mucus. 

The temperament and health of a person can then be seen in the resulting color of the urine.Modern Ayurveda practitioners, a practice which is characterized as pseudoscience, have attempted to revive these methods in medical procedures as part of Ayurveda Urine therapy. 

These procedures have been called "nonsensical" by skeptics.


==== Medieval Christianity ====

The Latin term renes is related to the English word "reins", a synonym for the kidneys in Shakespearean English (e.g. 

Merry Wives of Windsor 3.5), which was also the time when the King James Version of the Bible was translated. 

Kidneys were once popularly regarded as the seat of the conscience and reflection, and a number of verses in the Bible (e.g. 

Ps. 7:9, Rev. 2:23) state that God searches out and inspects the kidneys, or "reins", of humans, together with the heart.


== History ==

Kidney stones have been identified and recorded about as long as written historical records exist. 

The urinary tract including the ureters, as well as their function to drain urine from the kidneys, has been described by Galen in the second century AD.The first to examine the ureter through an internal approach, called ureteroscopy, rather than surgery was Hampton Young in 1929. 

This was improved on by VF Marshall who is the first published use of a flexible endoscope based on fiber optics, which occurred in 1964. 

The insertion of a drainage tube into the renal pelvis, bypassing the uterers and urinary tract, called nephrostomy, was first described in 1941. 

Such an approach differed greatly from the open surgical approaches within the urinary system employed during the preceding two millennia.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kidney
;;;ES;;;



RIÑÓN


Los riñones son dos órganos con forma de frijol de color marrón rojizo que se encuentran en los vertebrados.

Están ubicados a la izquierda y a la derecha en el espacio retroperitoneal, y en humanos adultos miden alrededor de 12 centímetros (4+1⁄2 pulgadas) de largo.

Reciben sangre de las arterias renales emparejadas; la sangre sale hacia las venas renales emparejadas.

Cada riñón está unido a un uréter, un tubo que lleva la orina excretada a la vejiga.

El riñón participa en el control del volumen de varios fluidos corporales, la osmolalidad de los fluidos, el equilibrio ácido-base, varias concentraciones de electrolitos y la eliminación de toxinas.

La filtración ocurre en el glomérulo: se filtra una quinta parte del volumen de sangre que ingresa a los riñones.

Ejemplos de sustancias reabsorbidas son agua libre de solutos, sodio, bicarbonato, glucosa y aminoácidos.

Ejemplos de sustancias secretadas son hidrógeno, amonio, potasio y ácido úrico.

Los riñones también realizan funciones independientes de la nefrona.

Por ejemplo, convierten un precursor de la vitamina D en su forma activa, calcitriol; y sintetizar las hormonas eritropoyetina y renina.

La nefrona es la unidad estructural y funcional del riñón.

Cada riñón humano adulto contiene alrededor de 1 millón de nefronas, mientras que un riñón de ratón contiene solo alrededor de 12.500 nefronas.

Los procedimientos utilizados en el tratamiento de la enfermedad renal incluyen el examen químico y microscópico de la orina (análisis de orina), la medición de la función renal mediante el cálculo de la tasa de filtración glomerular estimada (eGFR) utilizando la creatinina sérica; y biopsia renal y tomografía computarizada para evaluar la anatomía anormal.

La diálisis y el trasplante de riñón se utilizan para tratar la insuficiencia renal; uno (o ambos secuencialmente) de estos se utilizan casi siempre cuando la función renal cae por debajo del 15%.

La nefrectomía se utiliza con frecuencia para curar el carcinoma de células renales.
La fisiología renal es el estudio de la función renal.

La nefrología es la especialidad médica que se ocupa de las enfermedades de la función renal: estas incluyen la enfermedad renal crónica, los síndromes nefrítico y nefrótico, la lesión renal aguda y la pielonefritis.

La urología se ocupa de las enfermedades de la anatomía renal (y del tracto urinario): estas incluyen el cáncer, los quistes renales, los cálculos renales y ureterales, y la obstrucción del tracto urinario.

La palabra “renal” es un adjetivo que significa “relativo a los riñones”, y sus raíces son francesas o latinas tardías.

Mientras que según algunas opiniones, "renal" debería reemplazarse por "riñón" en escritos científicos como "arteria renal", otros expertos han abogado por preservar el uso de renal según corresponda, incluso en "arteria renal".


== Estructura ==


En los seres humanos, los riñones están ubicados en la parte superior de la cavidad abdominal, uno a cada lado de la columna vertebral, y se encuentran en una posición retroperitoneal en un ángulo ligeramente oblicuo.

La asimetría dentro de la cavidad abdominal, provocada por la posición del hígado, normalmente da como resultado que el riñón derecho sea un poco más bajo y más pequeño que el izquierdo, y que se coloque un poco más hacia el medio que el riñón izquierdo.

El riñón izquierdo está aproximadamente al nivel vertebral T12 a L3, y el derecho está ligeramente más bajo.

El riñón derecho se encuentra justo debajo del diafragma y posterior al hígado.

El riñón izquierdo se encuentra debajo del diafragma y posterior al bazo.

Encima de cada riñón hay una glándula suprarrenal.

Las partes superiores de los riñones están parcialmente protegidas por las costillas 11 y 12.

Cada riñón, con su glándula suprarrenal, está rodeado por dos capas de grasa: la grasa perirrenal presente entre la fascia renal y la cápsula renal y la grasa pararrenal superior a la fascia renal.

El riñón es una estructura en forma de frijol con un borde convexo y otro cóncavo.

Un área hundida en el borde cóncavo es el hilio renal, donde la arteria renal ingresa al riñón y la vena renal y el uréter salen.

El riñón está rodeado de tejido fibroso resistente, la cápsula renal, que a su vez está rodeada de grasa perirrenal, fascia renal y grasa pararrenal.

La superficie anterior (frontal) de estos tejidos es el peritoneo, mientras que la superficie posterior (trasera) es la fascia transversalis.

El polo superior del riñón derecho se encuentra junto al hígado.

Para el riñón izquierdo, está al lado del bazo.

Ambos, por lo tanto, se mueven hacia abajo al inhalar.

Un estudio danés midió la mediana de la longitud renal en 11,2 cm (4+7⁄16 pulgadas) en el lado izquierdo y 10,9 cm (4+5⁄16 pulgadas) en el lado derecho en adultos.

Los volúmenes renales medianos fueron 146 cm3 (8+15⁄16 pulgadas cúbicas) a la izquierda y 134 cm3 (8+3⁄16 pulgadas cúbicas) a la derecha.


=== Anatomía macroscópica ===


La sustancia funcional, o parénquima, del riñón se divide en dos estructuras principales: la corteza renal externa y la médula renal interna.

En términos generales, estas estructuras toman la forma de ocho a 18 lóbulos renales en forma de cono, cada uno de los cuales contiene la corteza renal que rodea una porción de la médula llamada pirámide renal.

Entre las pirámides renales hay proyecciones de la corteza llamadas columnas renales.

Las nefronas, las estructuras funcionales del riñón productoras de orina, abarcan la corteza y la médula.

La porción de filtración inicial de una nefrona es el corpúsculo renal, que se encuentra en la corteza.

A esto le sigue un túbulo renal que pasa desde la corteza hacia las profundidades de las pirámides medulares.

Parte de la corteza renal, un rayo medular es una colección de túbulos renales que drenan en un solo conducto colector.

La punta o papila de cada pirámide vierte la orina en un cáliz menor; los cálices menores desembocan en los cálices mayores y los cálices mayores desembocan en la pelvis renal.

Esto se convierte en el uréter.

En el hilio, el uréter y la vena renal salen del riñón y entra la arteria renal.

La grasa hiliar y el tejido linfático con ganglios linfáticos rodean estas estructuras.

La grasa hiliar es contigua a una cavidad llena de grasa llamada seno renal.

El seno renal contiene colectivamente la pelvis y los cálices renales y separa estas estructuras del tejido medular renal. Los riñones no poseen estructuras que se muevan abiertamente.



=== Suministro de sangre ===


Los riñones reciben sangre de las arterias renales, izquierda y derecha, que se ramifican directamente desde la aorta abdominal.

A pesar de su tamaño relativamente pequeño, los riñones reciben aproximadamente el 20% del gasto cardíaco.

Cada arteria renal se ramifica en arterias segmentarias, que luego se dividen en arterias interlobulares, que penetran en la cápsula renal y se extienden a través de las columnas renales entre las pirámides renales.

Las arterias interlobares luego suministran sangre a las arterias arqueadas que atraviesan el límite de la corteza y la médula.

Cada arteria arqueada irriga varias arterias interlobulillares que alimentan las arteriolas aferentes que irrigan los glomérulos.

La sangre drena desde los riñones, finalmente hacia la vena cava inferior.

Después de que ocurre la filtración, la sangre se mueve a través de una pequeña red de pequeñas venas (vénulas) que convergen en las venas interlobulillares.

Al igual que con la distribución de las arteriolas, las venas siguen el mismo patrón: las venas interlobulares suministran sangre a las venas arqueadas y luego regresan a las venas interlobulares, que llegan a formar las venas renales que salen del riñón.


=== Suministro nervioso ===

El riñón y el sistema nervioso se comunican a través del plexo renal, cuyas fibras discurren a lo largo de las arterias renales para llegar a cada riñón.

La entrada del sistema nervioso simpático desencadena la vasoconstricción en el riñón, lo que reduce el flujo sanguíneo renal.

El riñón también recibe información del sistema nervioso parasimpático, a través de las ramas renales del nervio vago; la función de esto aún no está clara.

La entrada sensorial del riñón viaja a los niveles T10-11 de la médula espinal y se detecta en el dermatoma correspondiente.

Por lo tanto, el dolor en la región del flanco puede derivarse del riñón correspondiente.


=== Microanatomía ===

La histología renal es el estudio de la estructura microscópica del riñón.

Los distintos tipos de células incluyen:

Célula parietal del glomérulo renal
Podocito del glomérulo renal
Célula del borde en cepillo del túbulo proximal del riñón
Célula de segmento delgado del asa de Henle
Célula gruesa de la rama ascendente
Célula del túbulo distal del riñón
Célula principal del conducto colector
Célula intercalada del conducto colector
Células renales intersticiales


=== Expresión de genes y proteínas ===


Alrededor de 20.000 genes que codifican proteínas se expresan en células humanas y casi el 70% de estos genes se expresan en riñones adultos normales.

Un poco más de 300 genes se expresan más específicamente en el riñón, y solo unos 50 genes son altamente específicos para el riñón.

Muchas de las proteínas específicas del riñón correspondientes se expresan en la membrana celular y funcionan como proteínas transportadoras.

La proteína específica del riñón expresada más alta es la uromodulina, la proteína más abundante en la orina con funciones que previenen la calcificación y el crecimiento de bacterias.

Las proteínas específicas se expresan en los diferentes compartimentos del riñón con podocina y nefrina expresadas en los glomérulos, proteína de la familia transportadora de solutos SLC22A8 expresada en los túbulos proximales, calbindina expresada en los túbulos distales y acuaporina 2 expresada en las células del conducto colector.


=== Desarrollo ===


El riñón de los mamíferos se desarrolla a partir del mesodermo intermedio.

El desarrollo renal, también llamado nefrogénesis, procede a través de una serie de tres fases de desarrollo sucesivas: pronefros, mesonefros y metanefros.

Los metanefros son primordios del riñón permanente.


== Función ==


Los riñones excretan una variedad de productos de desecho producidos por el metabolismo en la orina.

La unidad estructural y funcional microscópica del riñón es la nefrona.

Procesa la sangre que se le suministra por filtración, reabsorción, secreción y excreción; la consecuencia de esos procesos es la producción de orina.

Estos incluyen los desechos nitrogenados urea, del catabolismo de proteínas, y ácido úrico, del metabolismo de ácidos nucleicos.

La capacidad de los mamíferos y algunas aves para concentrar los desechos en un volumen de orina mucho menor que el volumen de sangre de la que se extrajeron los desechos depende de un elaborado mecanismo de multiplicación a contracorriente.

Esto requiere varias características independientes de la nefrona para operar: una configuración de horquilla apretada de los túbulos, permeabilidad al agua y a los iones en la rama descendente del asa, impermeabilidad al agua en la asa ascendente y transporte activo de iones fuera de la mayor parte de la rama ascendente.

Además, el intercambio pasivo de contracorriente por parte de los vasos que transportan el suministro de sangre a la nefrona es esencial para permitir esta función.

El riñón participa en la homeostasis de todo el cuerpo, regulando el equilibrio ácido-base, las concentraciones de electrolitos, el volumen de líquido extracelular y la presión arterial.

El riñón realiza estas funciones homeostáticas de forma independiente y en concierto con otros órganos, en particular los del sistema endocrino.

Varias hormonas endocrinas coordinan estas funciones endocrinas; estos incluyen renina, angiotensina II, aldosterona, hormona antidiurética y péptido natriurético auricular, entre otros.


=== Formación de orina ===



==== Filtración ====

La filtración, que tiene lugar en el corpúsculo renal, es el proceso mediante el cual las células y las proteínas grandes se retienen mientras que los materiales de menor peso molecular se filtran de la sangre para formar un ultrafiltrado que finalmente se convierte en orina.

El riñón genera 180 litros de filtrado al día.

El proceso también se conoce como filtración hidrostática debido a la presión hidrostática que se ejerce sobre las paredes de los capilares.


==== Reabsorción ====

La reabsorción es el transporte de moléculas desde este ultrafiltrado hacia el capilar peritubular.

Se logra a través de receptores selectivos en la membrana celular luminal.

El agua se reabsorbe en un 55% en el túbulo proximal.

La glucosa a niveles plasmáticos normales se reabsorbe por completo en el túbulo proximal.

El mecanismo para esto es el cotransportador Na+/glucosa.

Un nivel plasmático de 350 mg/dL saturará completamente los transportadores y la glucosa se perderá en la orina.

Un nivel de glucosa en plasma de aproximadamente 160 es suficiente para permitir la glucosuria, que es una pista clínica importante para la diabetes mellitus.
Los aminoácidos son reabsorbidos por transportadores dependientes de sodio en el túbulo proximal.

La enfermedad de Hartnup es una deficiencia del transportador de aminoácidos triptófano, que da lugar a la pelagra.


==== Secreción ====

La secreción es lo contrario de la reabsorción: las moléculas se transportan desde el capilar peritubular a través del líquido intersticial, luego a través de la célula tubular renal y hacia el ultrafiltrado.


==== Excreción ====

El último paso en el procesamiento del ultrafiltrado es la excreción: el ultrafiltrado sale de la nefrona y viaja a través de un tubo llamado conducto colector, que forma parte del sistema de conductos colectores, y luego a los uréteres, donde pasa a llamarse orina.

Además de transportar el ultrafiltrado, el conducto colector también participa en la reabsorción.


=== Secreción hormonal ===

Los riñones secretan una variedad de hormonas, que incluyen eritropoyetina, calcitriol y renina.

La eritropoyetina se libera en respuesta a la hipoxia (bajos niveles de oxígeno a nivel tisular) en la circulación renal.

Estimula la eritropoyesis (producción de glóbulos rojos) en la médula ósea.

El calcitriol, la forma activada de la vitamina D, promueve la absorción intestinal de calcio y la reabsorción renal de fosfato.

La renina es una enzima que regula los niveles de angiotensina y aldosterona.


=== Regulación de la presión arterial ===


Aunque el riñón no puede detectar directamente la sangre, la regulación a largo plazo de la presión arterial depende predominantemente del riñón.

Esto ocurre principalmente a través del mantenimiento del compartimento de líquido extracelular, cuyo tamaño depende de la concentración plasmática de sodio.

La renina es el primero de una serie de importantes mensajeros químicos que componen el sistema renina-angiotensina.

Los cambios en la renina finalmente alteran la producción de este sistema, principalmente las hormonas angiotensina II y aldosterona.

Cada hormona actúa a través de múltiples mecanismos, pero ambas aumentan la absorción renal de cloruro de sodio, expandiendo así el compartimento de líquido extracelular y elevando la presión arterial.

Cuando los niveles de renina están elevados, aumentan las concentraciones de angiotensina II y aldosterona, lo que conduce a una mayor reabsorción de cloruro de sodio, expansión del compartimento de líquido extracelular y aumento de la presión arterial.

Por el contrario, cuando los niveles de renina son bajos, los niveles de angiotensina II y aldosterona disminuyen, contrayendo el compartimiento de líquido extracelular y disminuyendo la presión arterial.


=== Equilibrio ácido-base ===


Dos sistemas de órganos, los riñones y los pulmones, mantienen la homeostasis ácido-base, que es el mantenimiento del pH en torno a un valor relativamente estable.

Los pulmones contribuyen a la homeostasis ácido-base al regular la concentración de dióxido de carbono (CO2).

Los riñones tienen dos funciones muy importantes en el mantenimiento del equilibrio ácido-base: reabsorber y regenerar bicarbonato de la orina y excretar iones de hidrógeno y ácidos fijos (aniones de ácidos) en la orina.


=== Regulación de la osmolaridad ===

Los riñones ayudan a mantener el nivel de agua y sal del cuerpo.

Cualquier aumento significativo de la osmolalidad plasmática es detectado por el hipotálamo, que se comunica directamente con la hipófisis posterior.

Un aumento en la osmolalidad hace que la glándula secrete hormona antidiurética (ADH), lo que provoca la reabsorción de agua por parte del riñón y un aumento en la concentración de orina.

Los dos factores trabajan juntos para devolver la osmolalidad del plasma a sus niveles normales.


=== Función de medición ===


Se utilizan varios cálculos y métodos para tratar de medir la función renal.

El aclaramiento renal es el volumen de plasma del que la sustancia se elimina completamente de la sangre por unidad de tiempo.

La fracción de filtración es la cantidad de plasma que realmente se filtra a través del riñón.

Esto se puede definir usando la ecuación.

El riñón es un órgano muy complejo y se han utilizado modelos matemáticos para comprender mejor la función renal en varias escalas, incluida la captación y secreción de líquidos.


== Importancia clínica ==


La nefrología es la subespecialidad de Medicina Interna que se ocupa de la función renal y los estados de enfermedad relacionados con el mal funcionamiento renal y su manejo, incluida la diálisis y el trasplante de riñón.

La urología es la especialidad de la Cirugía que se ocupa de las anomalías de la estructura renal, como el cáncer de riñón y los quistes, y los problemas de las vías urinarias.

Los nefrólogos son internistas y los urólogos son cirujanos, mientras que a ambos se les llama a menudo "médicos renales".

Hay áreas superpuestas en las que tanto los nefrólogos como los urólogos pueden brindar atención, como cálculos renales e infecciones relacionadas con los riñones.
Hay muchas causas de enfermedad renal.

Algunas causas se adquieren a lo largo de la vida, como la nefropatía diabética, mientras que otras son congénitas, como la poliquistosis renal.

Los términos médicos relacionados con los riñones suelen utilizar términos como renal y el prefijo nefro-.

El adjetivo renal, que significa relacionado con el riñón, proviene del latín rēnēs, que significa riñones; el prefijo nephro- proviene de la palabra griega antigua para riñón, nephros (νεφρός).

Por ejemplo, la extirpación quirúrgica del riñón es una nefrectomía, mientras que una reducción de la función renal se denomina disfunción renal.


=== Adquirido ===

Nefropatía diabética
Glomerulonefritis
La hidronefrosis es el agrandamiento de uno o ambos riñones causado por la obstrucción del flujo de orina.
Nefritis intersticial
Los cálculos renales (nefrolitiasis) son un trastorno relativamente común y particularmente doloroso.

Una condición crónica puede resultar en cicatrices en los riñones.

La extracción de cálculos renales implica un tratamiento con ultrasonido para romper los cálculos en pedazos más pequeños, que luego se pasan a través del tracto urinario.

Un síntoma común de los cálculos renales es un dolor agudo o incapacitante en la mitad y los costados de la parte baja de la espalda o en la ingle.
tumor renal
Tumor de Wilms
Carcinoma de células renales
Nefritis lúpica
Enfermedad de cambios mínimos
En el síndrome nefrótico, el glomérulo se daña de modo que una gran cantidad de proteína en la sangre pasa a la orina.

Otras características frecuentes del síndrome nefrótico incluyen hinchazón, albúmina sérica baja y colesterol alto.

La pielonefritis es una infección de los riñones y con frecuencia es causada por una complicación de una infección del tracto urinario.
Insuficiencia renal
Insuficiencia renal aguda
Enfermedad renal crónica en estadio 5
Estenosis de la arteria renal
Hipertensión renovascular


=== Lesión e insuficiencia renal ===


En general, los humanos pueden vivir normalmente con un solo riñón, ya que uno tiene más tejido renal funcional del que se necesita para sobrevivir.

Solo cuando la cantidad de tejido renal en funcionamiento disminuye considerablemente, se desarrolla una enfermedad renal crónica.

La terapia de reemplazo renal, en forma de diálisis o trasplante renal, está indicada cuando la tasa de filtración glomerular ha disminuido mucho o si la disfunción renal conduce a síntomas severos.


=== Diálisis ===


La diálisis es un tratamiento que sustituye la función de los riñones normales.

Se puede iniciar la diálisis cuando se pierde aproximadamente el 85%-90% de la función renal, según lo indica una tasa de filtración glomerular (TFG) de menos de 15.

La diálisis elimina los productos de desecho metabólicos, así como el exceso de agua y sodio (lo que contribuye a regular la presión arterial); y mantiene muchos niveles químicos dentro del cuerpo.

La esperanza de vida es de 5 a 10 años para quienes se someten a diálisis; algunos viven hasta 30 años.

La diálisis puede ocurrir a través de la sangre (a través de un catéter o fístula arteriovenosa), o a través del peritoneo (diálisis peritoneal) La diálisis generalmente se administra tres veces por semana durante varias horas en centros de diálisis independientes, lo que permite a los receptores llevar una vida esencialmente normal. .


=== Enfermedad congénita ===

hidronefrosis congénita
Obstrucción congénita del tracto urinario
Los riñones dúplex, o riñones dobles, ocurren en aproximadamente el 1% de la población.

Esta ocurrencia normalmente no causa complicaciones, pero ocasionalmente puede causar infecciones del tracto urinario.
El uréter duplicado ocurre en aproximadamente uno de cada 100 nacidos vivos
El riñón en herradura ocurre en aproximadamente uno de cada 400 nacidos vivos
Nefroblastoma (tumor de Wilm sindrómico)
síndrome del cascanueces
Poliquistico enfermedad en los riñones
La poliquistosis renal autosómica dominante afecta a los pacientes más adelante en la vida.

Aproximadamente una de cada 1000 personas desarrollará esta condición.
La poliquistosis renal autosómica recesiva es mucho menos común, pero más grave que la condición dominante.

Es evidente en el útero o al nacer.
Agenesia renal.

La falta de formación de un riñón ocurre en aproximadamente uno de cada 750 nacidos vivos.

La falta de formación de ambos riñones solía ser fatal; sin embargo, los avances médicos, como la terapia de amnioinfusión durante el embarazo y la diálisis peritoneal, han hecho posible mantenerse con vida hasta que se pueda realizar un trasplante.
displasia renal
Riñón pequeño unilateral
El riñón displásico multiquístico ocurre en aproximadamente uno de cada 2400 nacidos vivos
Obstrucción de la unión ureteropélvica o UPJO; aunque la mayoría de los casos son congénitos, algunos son adquiridos.


=== Diagnóstico ===

Muchas enfermedades renales se diagnostican sobre la base de una historia clínica detallada y un examen físico.

La historia clínica tiene en cuenta los síntomas presentes y pasados, especialmente los de enfermedad renal; infecciones recientes; exposición a sustancias tóxicas para el riñón; y antecedentes familiares de enfermedad renal.
La función renal se evalúa mediante análisis de sangre y análisis de orina.

Los análisis de sangre más comunes son creatinina, urea y electrolitos.

Las pruebas de orina, como el análisis de orina, pueden evaluar el pH, las proteínas, la glucosa y la presencia de sangre.

El análisis microscópico también puede identificar la presencia de cilindros y cristales urinarios.

La tasa de filtración glomerular (TFG) se puede medir directamente ("TFG medida" o TFGm), pero esto rara vez se hace en la práctica diaria.

En su lugar, se utilizan ecuaciones especiales para calcular la TFG ("TFG estimada" o eGFR).


==== Imágenes ====

La ecografía renal es fundamental en el diagnóstico y tratamiento de las enfermedades relacionadas con los riñones.

Otras modalidades, como la TC y la RM, siempre deben considerarse como modalidades de imagen complementarias en la evaluación de la enfermedad renal.


==== Biopsia ====

El papel de la biopsia renal es diagnosticar la enfermedad renal en la que la etiología no está clara con base en medios no invasivos (antecedentes clínicos, antecedentes médicos, historial de medicamentos, examen físico, estudios de laboratorio, estudios de imágenes).

En general, un patólogo renal realizará una evaluación morfológica detallada e integrará los hallazgos morfológicos con la historia clínica y los datos de laboratorio, llegando finalmente a un diagnóstico patológico.

Un patólogo renal es un médico que ha recibido capacitación general en patología anatómica y capacitación especial adicional en la interpretación de muestras de biopsia renal.

Idealmente, se obtienen múltiples secciones centrales y se evalúa su adecuación (presencia de glomérulos) intraoperatoriamente.

Un patólogo/asistente de patología divide las muestras para someterlas a microscopía óptica, microscopía de inmunofluorescencia y microscopía electrónica.

El patólogo examinará la muestra usando microscopía óptica con múltiples técnicas de tinción (hematoxilina y eosina/H&E, PAS, tricrómico, tinción de plata) en secciones de múltiples niveles.

Se realizan múltiples tinciones de inmunofluorescencia para evaluar la deposición de anticuerpos, proteínas y complemento.

Finalmente, el examen ultraestructural se realiza con microscopía electrónica y puede revelar la presencia de depósitos densos en electrones u otras anormalidades características que pueden sugerir una etiología para la enfermedad renal del paciente.


== Otros animales ==

En la mayoría de los vertebrados, el mesonefros persiste en el adulto, aunque generalmente se fusiona con el metanefros más avanzado; solo en los amniotas el mesonefros está restringido al embrión.

Los riñones de los peces y los anfibios suelen ser órganos estrechos y alargados que ocupan una parte importante del tronco.

Los conductos colectores de cada grupo de nefronas suelen drenar en un conducto arquinéfrico, que es homólogo a los conductos deferentes de los amniotas.

Sin embargo, la situación no siempre es tan simple; en los peces cartilaginosos y algunos anfibios, también hay un conducto más corto, similar al uréter amniota, que drena las partes posteriores (metanéfricas) del riñón y se une con el conducto arquinéfrico en la vejiga o cloaca.

De hecho, en muchos peces cartilaginosos, la porción anterior del riñón puede degenerar o dejar de funcionar por completo en el adulto. En los vertebrados más primitivos, los mixinos y las lampreas, el riñón es inusualmente simple: consta de una fila de nefronas, vaciándose directamente en el conducto archinéfrico.

Los invertebrados pueden poseer órganos excretores que a veces se denominan "riñones", pero, incluso en Amphioxus, estos nunca son homólogos a los riñones de los vertebrados, y se los denomina con mayor precisión con otros nombres, como nefridia.

En los anfibios, los riñones y la vejiga urinaria albergan parásitos especializados, monogéneos de la familia Polystomatidae. Los riñones de los reptiles constan de una serie de lóbulos dispuestos en un patrón ampliamente lineal.

Cada lobulillo contiene una sola rama del uréter en su centro, en la que desembocan los conductos colectores.

Los reptiles tienen relativamente pocas nefronas en comparación con otros amniotas de un tamaño similar, posiblemente debido a su tasa metabólica más baja. Las aves tienen riñones relativamente grandes y alargados, cada uno de los cuales está dividido en tres o más lóbulos distintos.

Los lóbulos consisten en varios lobulillos pequeños, dispuestos irregularmente, cada uno centrado en una rama del uréter.

Las aves tienen glomérulos pequeños, pero aproximadamente el doble de nefronas que los mamíferos de tamaño similar. El riñón humano es bastante típico del de los mamíferos.

Las características distintivas del riñón de los mamíferos, en comparación con el de otros vertebrados, incluyen la presencia de la pelvis renal y las pirámides renales y una corteza y una médula claramente distinguibles.

Esta última característica se debe a la presencia de asas de Henle alargadas; estos son mucho más cortos en las aves y no están realmente presentes en otros vertebrados (aunque la nefrona a menudo tiene un segmento intermedio corto entre los túbulos contorneados).

Solo en los mamíferos el riñón adopta su forma clásica de "riñón", aunque hay algunas excepciones, como los riñones multilobulados reniculados de pinnípedos y cetáceos.


=== Adaptación evolutiva ===

Los riñones de varios animales muestran evidencia de adaptación evolutiva y se han estudiado durante mucho tiempo en ecofisiología y fisiología comparativa.

La morfología renal, a menudo indexada como el espesor medular relativo, se asocia con la aridez del hábitat entre las especies de mamíferos y la dieta (p. ej., los carnívoros solo tienen asas de Henle largas).


== Sociedad y cultura ==



=== Importancia ===



==== egipcio ====

En el antiguo Egipto, los riñones, al igual que el corazón, se dejaban dentro de los cuerpos momificados, a diferencia de otros órganos que se extirpaban.

Comparando esto con las declaraciones bíblicas y con los dibujos del cuerpo humano con el corazón y dos riñones que representan una balanza para pesar la justicia, parece que las creencias egipcias también habían conectado los riñones con el juicio y quizás con decisiones morales.


==== Hebreo ====

Según estudios en hebreo moderno y antiguo, varios órganos del cuerpo en humanos y animales cumplían también un papel emocional o lógico, hoy atribuido principalmente al cerebro y al sistema endocrino.

El riñón se menciona en varios versículos bíblicos junto con el corazón, al igual que se entendía que los intestinos eran el "asiento" de las emociones: pena, alegría y dolor.

De manera similar, el Talmud (Berajot 61.a) afirma que uno de los dos riñones aconseja lo que es bueno y el otro lo que es malo.
En los sacrificios ofrecidos en el Tabernáculo bíblico y posteriormente en el templo de Jerusalén, se instruía a los sacerdotes a quitar los riñones y la glándula suprarrenal que cubría los riñones de las ofrendas de ovejas, cabras y vacas, y quemarlos en el altar, como la parte sagrada de la "ofrenda para Dios" nunca debe ser comida.


==== India: sistema ayurvédico ====

En la antigua India, según los sistemas médicos ayurvédicos, los riñones se consideraban el comienzo del sistema de canales de excursión, la 'cabeza' de los Mutra Srotas, que recibían de todos los demás sistemas y, por lo tanto, eran importantes para determinar el equilibrio y el temperamento de la salud de una persona. el equilibrio y la mezcla de los tres 'Dosha's - los tres elementos de la salud: Vatha (o Vata) - aire, Pitta - bilis y Kapha - moco.

El temperamento y la salud de una persona se pueden ver en el color resultante de la orina. Los practicantes modernos de Ayurveda, una práctica caracterizada como pseudociencia, han intentado revivir estos métodos en procedimientos médicos como parte de la terapia de Ayurveda con orina.

Estos procedimientos han sido llamados "sin sentido" por los escépticos.


==== cristianismo medieval ====

El término latino renes está relacionado con la palabra inglesa "riendas", un sinónimo de los riñones en el inglés de Shakespeare (por ejemplo,

Merry Wives of Windsor 3.5), que también fue la época en que se tradujo la versión King James de la Biblia.

Los riñones alguna vez fueron considerados popularmente como el asiento de la conciencia y la reflexión, y varios versículos de la Biblia (por ejemplo,

PD. 7:9, Apocalipsis 2:23) declaran que Dios busca e inspecciona los riñones, o "riendas", de los humanos, junto con el corazón.


== Historia ==

Los cálculos renales se han identificado y registrado desde que existen registros históricos escritos.

Galeno describió el tracto urinario, incluidos los uréteres, así como su función para drenar la orina de los riñones, en el siglo II d. en 1929.

Esto fue mejorado por VF Marshall, quien es el primer uso publicado de un endoscopio flexible basado en fibra óptica, que ocurrió en 1964.

La inserción de un tubo de drenaje en la pelvis renal, sin pasar por el útero y el tracto urinario, llamada nefrostomía, se describió por primera vez en 1941.

Tal enfoque difería mucho de los enfoques quirúrgicos abiertos dentro del sistema urinario empleados durante los dos milenios anteriores.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Riñón

;;;PT;;;



RIM


Os rins são dois órgãos em forma de feijão marrom-avermelhados encontrados em vertebrados.

Eles estão localizados à esquerda e à direita no espaço retroperitoneal, e em humanos adultos têm cerca de 12 centímetros (4+1⁄2 polegadas) de comprimento.

Eles recebem sangue das artérias renais pareadas; o sangue sai para as veias renais pareadas.

Cada rim está ligado a um ureter, um tubo que transporta a urina excretada para a bexiga.

O rim participa do controle do volume de vários fluidos corporais, osmolalidade do fluido, equilíbrio ácido-base, várias concentrações de eletrólitos e remoção de toxinas.

A filtração ocorre no glomérulo: um quinto do volume de sangue que entra nos rins é filtrado.

Exemplos de substâncias reabsorvidas são água livre de solutos, sódio, bicarbonato, glicose e aminoácidos.

Exemplos de substâncias secretadas são hidrogênio, amônio, potássio e ácido úrico.

Os rins também realizam funções independentes do néfron.

Por exemplo, convertem um precursor da vitamina D em sua forma ativa, o calcitriol; e sintetizam os hormônios eritropoietina e renina.

O néfron é a unidade estrutural e funcional do rim.

Cada rim humano adulto contém cerca de 1 milhão de néfrons, enquanto um rim de camundongo contém apenas cerca de 12.500 néfrons.

Os procedimentos utilizados no manejo da doença renal incluem exame químico e microscópico da urina (urinálise), medição da função renal pelo cálculo da taxa de filtração glomerular estimada (eGFR) usando a creatinina sérica; e biópsia renal e tomografia computadorizada para avaliar anatomia anormal.

A diálise e o transplante renal são usados ​​para tratar a insuficiência renal; um (ou ambos sequencialmente) são quase sempre usados ​​quando a função renal cai abaixo de 15%.

A nefrectomia é frequentemente usada para curar o carcinoma de células renais.
A fisiologia renal é o estudo da função renal.

A nefrologia é a especialidade médica que trata das doenças da função renal: estas incluem doença renal crônica, síndromes nefríticas e nefróticas, lesão renal aguda e pielonefrite.

A urologia aborda doenças da anatomia do rim (e do trato urinário): estas incluem câncer, cistos renais, cálculos renais e ureterais e obstrução do trato urinário.

A palavra “renal” é um adjetivo que significa “relativo aos rins”, e suas raízes são francesas ou latinas tardias.

Considerando que, de acordo com algumas opiniões, "renal" deve ser substituído por "rim" em escritos científicos como "artéria renal", outros especialistas têm defendido a preservação do uso de renal conforme apropriado inclusive em "artéria renal".


== Estrutura ==


Em humanos, os rins estão localizados no alto da cavidade abdominal, um de cada lado da coluna, e ficam em uma posição retroperitoneal em um ângulo ligeiramente oblíquo.

A assimetria dentro da cavidade abdominal, causada pela posição do fígado, geralmente resulta no rim direito ligeiramente mais baixo e menor que o esquerdo, e sendo colocado um pouco mais no meio do que o rim esquerdo.

O rim esquerdo está aproximadamente no nível vertebral de T12 a L3, e o direito é ligeiramente inferior.

O rim direito fica logo abaixo do diafragma e posterior ao fígado.

O rim esquerdo fica abaixo do diafragma e posterior ao baço.

No topo de cada rim há uma glândula adrenal.

As partes superiores dos rins são parcialmente protegidas pelas 11ª e 12ª costelas.

Cada rim, com sua glândula adrenal, é circundado por duas camadas de gordura: a gordura perirrenal presente entre a fáscia renal e a cápsula renal e a gordura pararrenal superior à fáscia renal.

O rim é uma estrutura em forma de feijão com uma borda convexa e côncava.

Uma área recuada na borda côncava é o hilo renal, onde a artéria renal entra no rim e a veia renal e o ureter saem.

O rim é circundado por tecido fibroso resistente, a cápsula renal, que é circundada por gordura perirrenal, fáscia renal e gordura pararrenal.

A superfície anterior (frontal) desses tecidos é o peritônio, enquanto a superfície posterior (traseira) é a fáscia transversal.

O pólo superior do rim direito é adjacente ao fígado.

Para o rim esquerdo, fica ao lado do baço.

Ambos, portanto, descem após a inalação.

Um estudo dinamarquês mediu o comprimento renal médio em 11,2 cm (4+7⁄16 in) no lado esquerdo e 10,9 cm (4+5⁄16 in) no lado direito em adultos.

Os volumes renais medianos foram 146 cm3 (8+15⁄16 cu in) à esquerda e 134 cm3 (8+3⁄16 cu in) à direita.


=== Anatomia geral ===


A substância funcional, ou parênquima, do rim é dividida em duas estruturas principais: o córtex renal externo e a medula renal interna.

Macroscopicamente, essas estruturas assumem a forma de oito a 18 lobos renais em forma de cone, cada um contendo córtex renal circundando uma porção da medula chamada pirâmide renal.

Entre as pirâmides renais estão projeções do córtex chamadas colunas renais.

Os néfrons, as estruturas funcionais produtoras de urina do rim, abrangem o córtex e a medula.

A porção filtrante inicial de um néfron é o corpúsculo renal, que está localizado no córtex.

Isto é seguido por um túbulo renal que passa do córtex profundamente para as pirâmides medulares.

Parte do córtex renal, um raio medular é uma coleção de túbulos renais que drenam para um único ducto coletor.

A ponta, ou papila, de cada pirâmide esvazia a urina em um cálice menor; cálices menores desembocam em cálices maiores e cálices maiores desembocam na pelve renal.

Isso se torna o ureter.

No hilo, o ureter e a veia renal saem do rim e a artéria renal entra.

Gordura hilar e tecido linfático com linfonodos circundam essas estruturas.

A gordura hilar é contígua a uma cavidade cheia de gordura chamada seio renal.

O seio renal contém coletivamente a pelve renal e os cálices e separa essas estruturas do tecido medular renal. Os rins não possuem estruturas abertamente móveis.



=== Suprimento sanguíneo ===


Os rins recebem sangue das artérias renais, esquerda e direita, que se ramificam diretamente da aorta abdominal.

Apesar de seu tamanho relativamente pequeno, os rins recebem aproximadamente 20% do débito cardíaco.

Cada artéria renal se ramifica em artérias segmentares, dividindo-se ainda em artérias interlobares, que penetram na cápsula renal e se estendem através das colunas renais entre as pirâmides renais.

As artérias interlobares então fornecem sangue para as artérias arqueadas que atravessam o limite do córtex e da medula.

Cada artéria arqueada supre várias artérias interlobulares que alimentam as arteríolas aferentes que suprem os glomérulos.

O sangue é drenado dos rins para a veia cava inferior.

Após a filtração, o sangue se move através de uma pequena rede de pequenas veias (vénulas) que convergem para as veias interlobulares.

Assim como na distribuição das arteríolas, as veias seguem o mesmo padrão: as interlobulares fornecem sangue para as veias arqueadas e depois voltam para as veias interlobares, que passam a formar as veias renais que saem do rim.


=== Suprimento nervoso ===

O rim e o sistema nervoso se comunicam através do plexo renal, cujas fibras seguem ao longo das artérias renais para alcançar cada rim.

A entrada do sistema nervoso simpático desencadeia vasoconstrição no rim, reduzindo assim o fluxo sanguíneo renal.

O rim também recebe estímulos do sistema nervoso parassimpático, por meio dos ramos renais do nervo vago; a função disso ainda não está clara.

A entrada sensorial do rim viaja para os níveis T10-11 da medula espinhal e é detectada no dermátomo correspondente.

Assim, a dor na região do flanco pode ser referida do rim correspondente.


=== Microanatomia ===

A histologia renal é o estudo da estrutura microscópica do rim.

Tipos de células distintos incluem:

Célula parietal do glomérulo renal
podócito do glomérulo renal
Célula da borda em escova do túbulo proximal do rim
Alça de célula de segmento fino de Henle
Célula do membro ascendente espesso
Célula do túbulo distal do rim
Célula principal do duto coletor
Célula intercalada do ducto coletor
Células renais intersticiais


=== Expressão de genes e proteínas ===


Cerca de 20.000 genes codificadores de proteínas são expressos em células humanas e quase 70% desses genes são expressos em rins adultos normais.

Pouco mais de 300 genes são expressos mais especificamente no rim, com apenas cerca de 50 genes sendo altamente específicos para o rim.

Muitas das proteínas específicas do rim correspondentes são expressas na membrana celular e funcionam como proteínas transportadoras.

A proteína específica renal mais expressa é a uromodulina, a proteína mais abundante na urina com funções que previnem a calcificação e o crescimento de bactérias.

Proteínas específicas são expressas nos diferentes compartimentos do rim com podocina e nefrina expressas nos glomérulos, proteína da família de transportadores de soluto SLC22A8 expressa em túbulos proximais, calbindina expressa em túbulos distais e aquaporina 2 expressa nas células do ducto coletor.


=== Desenvolvimento ===


O rim dos mamíferos se desenvolve a partir do mesoderma intermediário.

O desenvolvimento do rim, também chamado de nefrogênese, prossegue através de uma série de três fases sucessivas de desenvolvimento: o pronefro, o mesonefro e o metanefro.

Os metanefros são primórdios do rim permanente.


== Função ==


Os rins excretam na urina uma variedade de produtos residuais produzidos pelo metabolismo.

A unidade microscópica estrutural e funcional do rim é o néfron.

Processa o sangue que lhe é fornecido por filtração, reabsorção, secreção e excreção; a consequência desses processos é a produção de urina.

Estes incluem os resíduos nitrogenados uréia, do catabolismo de proteínas, e ácido úrico, do metabolismo do ácido nucléico.

A capacidade dos mamíferos e de algumas aves de concentrar os dejetos em um volume de urina muito menor do que o volume de sangue do qual os dejetos foram extraídos depende de um elaborado mecanismo de multiplicação em contracorrente.

Isso requer várias características independentes do néfron para operar: uma configuração em forma de grampo dos túbulos, permeabilidade à água e íons no ramo descendente da alça, impermeabilidade à água na alça ascendente e transporte ativo de íons para fora da maior parte do ramo ascendente.

Além disso, a troca passiva de contracorrente pelos vasos que transportam o suprimento sanguíneo para o néfron é essencial para permitir essa função.

O rim participa da homeostase de todo o corpo, regulando o equilíbrio ácido-base, as concentrações de eletrólitos, o volume de líquido extracelular e a pressão arterial.

O rim realiza essas funções homeostáticas independentemente e em conjunto com outros órgãos, particularmente os do sistema endócrino.

Vários hormônios endócrinos coordenam essas funções endócrinas; estes incluem renina, angiotensina II, aldosterona, hormônio antidiurético e peptídeo natriurético atrial, entre outros.


=== Formação de urina ===



==== Filtração ====

A filtração, que ocorre no corpúsculo renal, é o processo pelo qual células e grandes proteínas são retidas enquanto materiais de menor peso molecular são filtrados do sangue para fazer um ultrafiltrado que eventualmente se torna urina.

O rim gera 180 litros de filtrado por dia.

O processo também é conhecido como filtração hidrostática devido à pressão hidrostática exercida nas paredes capilares.


==== Reabsorção ====

A reabsorção é o transporte de moléculas deste ultrafiltrado para o capilar peritubular.

É realizado através de receptores seletivos na membrana celular luminal.

A água é 55% reabsorvida no túbulo proximal.

A glicose em níveis plasmáticos normais é completamente reabsorvida no túbulo proximal.

O mecanismo para isso é o cotransportador Na+/glicose.

Um nível plasmático de 350 mg/dL saturará totalmente os transportadores e a glicose será perdida na urina.

Um nível de glicose plasmática de aproximadamente 160 é suficiente para permitir a glicosúria, que é um importante indício clínico do diabetes mellitus.
Os aminoácidos são reabsorvidos por transportadores dependentes de sódio no túbulo proximal.

A doença de Hartnup é uma deficiência do transportador de aminoácidos triptofano, que resulta em pelagra.


==== Secreção ====

A secreção é o inverso da reabsorção: as moléculas são transportadas do capilar peritubular através do líquido intersticial, depois através da célula tubular renal e para o ultrafiltrado.


==== Excreção ====

A última etapa do processamento do ultrafiltrado é a excreção: o ultrafiltrado sai do néfron e viaja através de um tubo chamado ducto coletor, que faz parte do sistema de ductos coletores, e depois para os ureteres, onde é renomeado como urina.

Além de transportar o ultrafiltrado, o ducto coletor também participa da reabsorção.


=== Secreção hormonal ===

Os rins secretam uma variedade de hormônios, incluindo eritropoietina, calcitriol e renina.

A eritropoietina é libertada em resposta à hipóxia (baixos níveis de oxigénio ao nível dos tecidos) na circulação renal.

Estimula a eritropoiese (produção de glóbulos vermelhos) na medula óssea.

O calcitriol, a forma ativada da vitamina D, promove a absorção intestinal de cálcio e a reabsorção renal de fosfato.

A renina é uma enzima que regula os níveis de angiotensina e aldosterona.


=== Regulação da pressão arterial ===


Embora o rim não possa sentir diretamente o sangue, a regulação a longo prazo da pressão arterial depende predominantemente do rim.

Isso ocorre principalmente pela manutenção do compartimento do líquido extracelular, cujo tamanho depende da concentração plasmática de sódio.

A renina é o primeiro de uma série de mensageiros químicos importantes que compõem o sistema renina-angiotensina.

Alterações na renina acabam alterando a produção desse sistema, principalmente os hormônios angiotensina II e aldosterona.

Cada hormônio atua por meio de múltiplos mecanismos, mas ambos aumentam a absorção de cloreto de sódio pelo rim, expandindo assim o compartimento do líquido extracelular e elevando a pressão arterial.

Quando os níveis de renina estão elevados, as concentrações de angiotensina II e aldosterona aumentam, levando ao aumento da reabsorção de cloreto de sódio, expansão do compartimento do líquido extracelular e aumento da pressão arterial.

Por outro lado, quando os níveis de renina estão baixos, os níveis de angiotensina II e aldosterona diminuem, contraindo o compartimento do líquido extracelular e diminuindo a pressão arterial.


=== Equilíbrio ácido-base ===


Dois sistemas de órgãos, os rins e os pulmões, mantêm a homeostase ácido-base, que é a manutenção do pH em torno de um valor relativamente estável.

Os pulmões contribuem para a homeostase ácido-base regulando a concentração de dióxido de carbono (CO2).

Os rins têm dois papéis muito importantes na manutenção do equilíbrio ácido-base: reabsorver e regenerar o bicarbonato da urina e excretar íons de hidrogênio e ácidos fixos (ânions de ácidos) na urina.


=== Regulação da osmolalidade ===

Os rins ajudam a manter o nível de água e sal do corpo.

Qualquer aumento significativo na osmolalidade plasmática é detectado pelo hipotálamo, que se comunica diretamente com a hipófise posterior.

Um aumento na osmolalidade faz com que a glândula secrete o hormônio antidiurético (ADH), resultando em reabsorção de água pelo rim e aumento na concentração de urina.

Os dois fatores trabalham juntos para retornar a osmolalidade plasmática aos seus níveis normais.


=== Função de medição ===


Vários cálculos e métodos são usados ​​para tentar medir a função renal.

A depuração renal é o volume de plasma do qual a substância é completamente eliminada do sangue por unidade de tempo.

A fração de filtração é a quantidade de plasma que é realmente filtrada através do rim.

Isso pode ser definido usando a equação.

O rim é um órgão muito complexo e a modelagem matemática tem sido usada para entender melhor a função renal em várias escalas, incluindo captação e secreção de líquidos.


== Significado clínico ==


A nefrologia é a subespecialidade da Medicina Interna que lida com a função renal e os estados de doença relacionados ao mau funcionamento renal e seu gerenciamento, incluindo diálise e transplante renal.

Urologia é a especialidade da Cirurgia que trata de anormalidades da estrutura renal, como câncer e cistos renais e problemas com o trato urinário.

Os nefrologistas são internistas e os urologistas são cirurgiões, enquanto ambos são frequentemente chamados de "médicos renais".

Existem áreas sobrepostas que nefrologistas e urologistas podem fornecer cuidados, como cálculos renais e infecções relacionadas aos rins.
Existem muitas causas de doença renal.

Algumas causas são adquiridas ao longo da vida, como a nefropatia diabética, enquanto outras são congênitas, como a doença renal policística.

Os termos médicos relacionados aos rins geralmente usam termos como renal e o prefixo nefro-.

O adjetivo renal, que significa relacionado ao rim, vem do latim rēnēs, que significa rins; o prefixo nephro- é da palavra grega antiga para rim, nephros (νεφρός).

Por exemplo, a remoção cirúrgica do rim é uma nefrectomia, enquanto uma redução na função renal é chamada de disfunção renal.


=== Adquirido ===

Nefropatia diabética
Glomerulonefrite
A hidronefrose é o aumento de um ou ambos os rins causado pela obstrução do fluxo de urina.
Nefrite intersticial
Os cálculos renais (nefrolitíase) são um distúrbio relativamente comum e particularmente doloroso.

Uma condição crônica pode resultar em cicatrizes nos rins.

A remoção de cálculos renais envolve o tratamento com ultra-som para quebrar os cálculos em pedaços menores, que são então passados ​​pelo trato urinário.

Um sintoma comum de pedras nos rins é uma dor aguda a incapacitante no meio e nas laterais da parte inferior das costas ou na virilha.
Tumor renal
Tumor de Wilms
Carcinoma de células renais
Doença de Lupus
Doença de mudança mínima
Na síndrome nefrótica, o glomérulo foi danificado de modo que uma grande quantidade de proteína no sangue entra na urina.

Outras características frequentes da síndrome nefrótica incluem edema, albumina sérica baixa e colesterol alto.

A pielonefrite é uma infecção dos rins e é frequentemente causada por complicação de uma infecção do trato urinário.
Falência renal
Insuficiência renal aguda
Estágio 5 Doença Renal Crônica
Estenose da artéria renal
Hipertensão renovascular


=== Lesão e insuficiência renal ===


Geralmente, os humanos podem viver normalmente com apenas um rim, pois tem mais tecido renal funcional do que o necessário para sobreviver.

Somente quando a quantidade de tecido renal funcional é muito diminuída é que se desenvolve doença renal crônica.

A terapia de substituição renal, na forma de diálise ou transplante renal, é indicada quando a taxa de filtração glomerular caiu muito ou se a disfunção renal levar a sintomas graves.


=== Diálise ===


A diálise é um tratamento que substitui a função dos rins normais.

A diálise pode ser instituída quando aproximadamente 85%-90% da função renal é perdida, conforme indicado por uma taxa de filtração glomerular (TFG) inferior a 15.

A diálise remove os resíduos metabólicos, bem como o excesso de água e sódio (contribuindo assim para regular a pressão arterial); e mantém muitos níveis químicos dentro do corpo.

A expectativa de vida é de 5 a 10 anos para aqueles em diálise; alguns vivem até 30 anos.

A diálise pode ocorrer através do sangue (através de um cateter ou fístula arteriovenosa) ou através do peritônio (diálise peritoneal) A diálise é normalmente administrada três vezes por semana durante várias horas em centros de diálise independentes, permitindo que os receptores levem uma vida essencialmente normal .


=== Doença congênita ===

Hidronefrose congênita
Obstrução congênita do trato urinário
Os rins duplex, ou rins duplos, ocorrem em aproximadamente 1% da população.

Esta ocorrência normalmente não causa complicações, mas ocasionalmente pode causar infecções do trato urinário.
A duplicação do ureter ocorre em aproximadamente um em cada 100 nascidos vivos
O rim em ferradura ocorre em aproximadamente um em cada 400 nascidos vivos
Nefroblastoma (tumor de Wilm sindrômico)
Síndrome do quebra-nozes
Doença renal policística
A doença renal policística autossômica dominante afeta os pacientes mais tarde na vida.

Aproximadamente uma em cada 1.000 pessoas desenvolverá essa condição
A doença renal policística autossômica recessiva é muito menos comum, mas mais grave, do que a condição dominante.

É aparente no útero ou no nascimento.
Agenesia renal.

A falha na formação de um rim ocorre em aproximadamente um em 750 nascidos vivos.

A falha de formação de ambos os rins costumava ser fatal; no entanto, os avanços médicos, como a terapia de amnioinfusão durante a gravidez e a diálise peritoneal, tornaram possível permanecer vivo até que um transplante possa ocorrer.
Displasia renal
Rim pequeno unilateral
Rim displásico multicístico ocorre em aproximadamente um em cada 2.400 nascidos vivos
Obstrução da Junção Ureteropélvica ou UPJO; embora a maioria dos casos seja congênita, alguns são adquiridos.


=== Diagnóstico ===

Muitas doenças renais são diagnosticadas com base em um histórico médico detalhado e exame físico.

A história médica leva em conta os sintomas presentes e passados, especialmente os de doença renal; infecções recentes; exposição a substâncias tóxicas para os rins; e história familiar de doença renal.
A função renal é testada usando exames de sangue e exames de urina.

Os exames de sangue mais comuns são creatinina, uréia e eletrólitos.

Testes de urina, como urinálise, podem avaliar pH, proteínas, glicose e a presença de sangue.

A análise microscópica também pode identificar a presença de cilindros e cristais urinários.

A taxa de filtração glomerular (TFG) pode ser medida diretamente ("taxa de filtração glomerular", ou mGFR), mas isso raramente é feito na prática cotidiana.

Em vez disso, equações especiais são usadas para calcular a TFG ("GFR estimada", ou eGFR).


==== Imagens ====

A ultrassonografia renal é essencial no diagnóstico e tratamento de doenças relacionadas aos rins.

Outras modalidades, como TC e RM, devem sempre ser consideradas como modalidades complementares de imagem na avaliação da doença renal.


==== Biópsia ====

O papel da biópsia renal é diagnosticar a doença renal em que a etiologia não é clara com base em meios não invasivos (história clínica, história médica pregressa, história de medicação, exame físico, exames laboratoriais, exames de imagem).

Em geral, um patologista renal realizará uma avaliação morfológica detalhada e integrará os achados morfológicos com a história clínica e os dados laboratoriais, chegando a um diagnóstico patológico.

Um patologista renal é um médico que recebeu treinamento geral em patologia anatômica e treinamento adicional especialmente na interpretação de amostras de biópsia renal.

Idealmente, múltiplas seções centrais são obtidas e avaliadas quanto à adequação (presença de glomérulos) no intraoperatório.

Um patologista/assistente de patologia divide a(s) amostra(s) para submissão para microscopia de luz, microscopia de imunofluorescência e microscopia eletrônica.

O patologista examinará a amostra usando microscopia de luz com várias técnicas de coloração (hematoxilina e eosina/H&E, PAS, tricrômio, coloração de prata) em seções de vários níveis.

Múltiplas manchas de imunofluorescência são realizadas para avaliar a deposição de anticorpos, proteínas e complemento.

Por fim, o exame ultraestrutural é realizado com microscopia eletrônica e pode revelar a presença de depósitos eletrodensos ou outras anormalidades características que podem sugerir uma etiologia para a doença renal do paciente.


== Outros animais ==

Na maioria dos vertebrados, o mesonefro persiste no adulto, embora geralmente fundido com o metanefro mais avançado; somente nos amniotas o mesonefro está restrito ao embrião.

Os rins de peixes e anfíbios são órgãos tipicamente estreitos e alongados, ocupando uma porção significativa do tronco.

Os ductos coletores de cada aglomerado de néfrons geralmente drenam para um ducto arquinéfrico, que é homólogo ao ducto deferente dos amniotas.

No entanto, a situação nem sempre é tão simples; em peixes cartilaginosos e alguns anfíbios, há também um ducto mais curto, semelhante ao ureter amniota, que drena as partes posteriores (metanéfricas) do rim e se une ao ducto arquinéfrico na bexiga ou cloaca.

De fato, em muitos peixes cartilaginosos, a porção anterior do rim pode degenerar ou deixar de funcionar completamente no adulto. desembocando diretamente no ducto arquinéfrico.

Os invertebrados podem possuir órgãos excretores que às vezes são chamados de "rins", mas, mesmo em Amphioxus, estes nunca são homólogos aos rins dos vertebrados, e são mais precisamente referidos por outros nomes, como nefrídios.

Nos anfíbios, os rins e a bexiga urinária abrigam parasitas especializados, monogenéticos da família Polystomatidae. Os rins dos répteis consistem em vários lóbulos dispostos em um padrão amplamente linear.

Cada lóbulo contém um único ramo do ureter em seu centro, no qual os ductos coletores desembocam.

Os répteis têm relativamente poucos néfrons em comparação com outros amniotas de tamanho semelhante, possivelmente por causa de sua taxa metabólica mais baixa. As aves têm rins relativamente grandes e alongados, cada um dos quais dividido em três ou mais lobos distintos.

Os lobos consistem em vários lóbulos pequenos, dispostos irregularmente, cada um centrado em um ramo do ureter.

As aves têm glomérulos pequenos, mas cerca de duas vezes mais néfrons do que os mamíferos de tamanho semelhante. O rim humano é bastante típico dos mamíferos.

Características distintivas do rim de mamífero, em comparação com o de outros vertebrados, incluem a presença da pelve renal e pirâmides renais e um córtex e medula claramente distinguíveis.

Esta última característica deve-se à presença de alças de Henle alongadas; estes são muito mais curtos nas aves e não estão realmente presentes em outros vertebrados (embora o néfron geralmente tenha um segmento intermediário curto entre os túbulos contorcidos).

É apenas nos mamíferos que o rim assume a forma clássica de "rim", embora existam algumas exceções, como os rins reniculados multilobados de pinípedes e cetáceos.


=== Adaptação evolutiva ===

Os rins de vários animais mostram evidências de adaptação evolutiva e têm sido estudados há muito tempo em ecofisiologia e fisiologia comparativa.

A morfologia do rim, muitas vezes indexada como a espessura medular relativa, está associada à aridez do habitat entre espécies de mamíferos e dieta (por exemplo, carnívoros têm apenas longas alças de Henle).


== Sociedade e cultura ==



=== Significado ===



==== egípcio ====

No antigo Egito, os rins, como o coração, eram deixados dentro dos corpos mumificados, ao contrário de outros órgãos que eram removidos.

Comparando isso com as declarações bíblicas e com os desenhos do corpo humano com o coração e dois rins representando um conjunto de balanças para pesar a justiça, parece que as crenças egípcias também ligaram os rins ao julgamento e talvez às decisões morais.


==== hebraico ====

De acordo com estudos em hebraico moderno e antigo, vários órgãos do corpo em humanos e animais também desempenhavam um papel emocional ou lógico, hoje atribuído principalmente ao cérebro e ao sistema endócrino.

O rim é mencionado em vários versículos bíblicos em conjunto com o coração, assim como as entranhas eram entendidas como a “sede” da emoção – tristeza, alegria e dor.

Da mesma forma, o Talmud (Berakhoth 61.a) afirma que um dos dois rins aconselha o que é bom e o outro o que é mau.
Nos sacrifícios oferecidos no Tabernáculo bíblico e mais tarde no templo de Jerusalém, os sacerdotes eram instruídos a retirar os rins e a glândula suprarrenal que cobria os rins das ovelhas, cabras e gado, e queimá-los no altar, como a parte sagrada da "oferta para Deus" nunca deve ser comida.


==== Índia: sistema ayurvédico ====

Na Índia antiga, de acordo com os sistemas médicos ayurvédicos, os rins eram considerados o início do sistema de canais de excursão, a 'cabeça' dos Mutra Srotas, recebendo de todos os outros sistemas e, portanto, importantes para determinar o equilíbrio e o temperamento da saúde de uma pessoa. o equilíbrio e a mistura dos três 'Dosha's – os três elementos da saúde: Vatha (ou Vata) – ar, Pitta – bile e Kapha – muco.

O temperamento e a saúde de uma pessoa podem então ser vistos na cor resultante da urina. Os praticantes modernos de Ayurveda, uma prática caracterizada como pseudociência, tentaram reviver esses métodos em procedimentos médicos como parte da terapia de urina Ayurveda.

Esses procedimentos foram chamados de "sem sentido" pelos céticos.


==== Cristianismo medieval ====

O termo latino renes está relacionado com a palavra inglesa "reins", um sinônimo para os rins em inglês shakespeariano (por exemplo,

Merry Wives of Windsor 3.5), que também foi a época em que a versão King James da Bíblia foi traduzida.

Os rins já foram popularmente considerados como a sede da consciência e reflexão, e vários versículos da Bíblia (por exemplo,

Ps. 7:9, Apoc. 2:23) afirmam que Deus procura e inspeciona os rins, ou "rédeas", dos humanos, juntamente com o coração.


== História ==

Pedras nos rins foram identificadas e registradas desde que existam registros históricos escritos.

O trato urinário, incluindo os ureteres, bem como sua função de drenar a urina dos rins, foi descrito por Galeno no século II d.C. O primeiro a examinar o ureter por meio de uma abordagem interna, chamada ureteroscopia, em vez de cirurgia foi Hampton Young em 1929.

Isso foi aprimorado por VF Marshall, que é o primeiro uso publicado de um endoscópio flexível baseado em fibra óptica, que ocorreu em 1964.

A inserção de um tubo de drenagem na pelve renal, contornando os úteros e o trato urinário, denominada nefrostomia, foi descrita pela primeira vez em 1941.

Tal abordagem diferia muito das abordagens cirúrgicas abertas dentro do sistema urinário empregadas durante os dois milênios anteriores.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kidney

;;;FR;;;



UN REIN


Les reins sont deux organes en forme de haricot brun rougeâtre que l'on trouve chez les vertébrés.

Ils sont situés à gauche et à droite dans l'espace rétropéritonéal et chez l'homme adulte, ils mesurent environ 12 centimètres (4 + 1⁄2 pouces) de longueur.

Ils reçoivent le sang des artères rénales appariées ; le sang sort dans les veines rénales appariées.

Chaque rein est attaché à un uretère, un tube qui transporte l'urine excrétée vers la vessie.

Le rein participe au contrôle du volume de divers fluides corporels, de l'osmolalité des fluides, de l'équilibre acido-basique, de diverses concentrations d'électrolytes et de l'élimination des toxines.

La filtration se produit dans le glomérule : un cinquième du volume sanguin qui pénètre dans les reins est filtré.

Des exemples de substances réabsorbées sont l'eau sans soluté, le sodium, le bicarbonate, le glucose et les acides aminés.

Des exemples de substances sécrétées sont l'hydrogène, l'ammonium, le potassium et l'acide urique.

Les reins remplissent également des fonctions indépendantes du néphron.

Par exemple, ils convertissent un précurseur de la vitamine D en sa forme active, le calcitriol ; et synthétiser les hormones érythropoïétine et rénine.

Le néphron est l'unité structurelle et fonctionnelle du rein.

Chaque rein humain adulte contient environ 1 million de néphrons, tandis qu'un rein de souris ne contient qu'environ 12 500 néphrons.

Les procédures utilisées dans la prise en charge des maladies rénales comprennent l'examen chimique et microscopique de l'urine (analyse d'urine), la mesure de la fonction rénale en calculant le débit de filtration glomérulaire estimé (DFGe) à l'aide de la créatinine sérique ; et biopsie rénale et tomodensitométrie pour évaluer l'anatomie anormale.

La dialyse et la transplantation rénale sont utilisées pour traiter l'insuffisance rénale; l'un (ou les deux séquentiellement) d'entre eux est presque toujours utilisé lorsque la fonction rénale tombe en dessous de 15 %.

La néphrectomie est fréquemment utilisée pour soigner le carcinome à cellules rénales.
La physiologie rénale est l'étude de la fonction rénale.

La néphrologie est la spécialité médicale qui traite les maladies de la fonction rénale : il s'agit notamment des maladies rénales chroniques, des syndromes néphrotiques et néphrotiques, des lésions rénales aiguës et des pyélonéphrites.

L'urologie traite des maladies de l'anatomie des reins (et des voies urinaires) : celles-ci comprennent le cancer, les kystes rénaux, les calculs rénaux et urétéraux, et l'obstruction des voies urinaires.

Le mot « rénal » est un adjectif signifiant « relatif aux reins », et ses racines sont françaises ou latines tardives.

Alors que selon certains avis, "rénal" devrait être remplacé par "rein" dans les écrits scientifiques tels que "artère rénale", d'autres experts ont préconisé de conserver l'utilisation de rénal le cas échéant y compris dans "artère rénale".


== Structure ==


Chez l'homme, les reins sont situés haut dans la cavité abdominale, un de chaque côté de la colonne vertébrale, et se trouvent dans une position rétropéritonéale à un angle légèrement oblique.

L'asymétrie dans la cavité abdominale, causée par la position du foie, se traduit généralement par un rein droit légèrement plus bas et plus petit que le rein gauche, et placé légèrement plus au milieu que le rein gauche.

Le rein gauche est approximativement au niveau vertébral T12 à L3, et le droit est légèrement plus bas.

Le rein droit se trouve juste en dessous du diaphragme et derrière le foie.

Le rein gauche se trouve sous le diaphragme et en arrière de la rate.

Au-dessus de chaque rein se trouve une glande surrénale.

Les parties supérieures des reins sont partiellement protégées par les 11e et 12e côtes.

Chaque rein, avec sa glande surrénale, est entouré de deux couches de graisse : la graisse périrénale présente entre le fascia rénal et la capsule rénale et la graisse pararénale supérieure au fascia rénal.

Le rein est une structure en forme de haricot avec une bordure convexe et concave.

Une zone en retrait sur le bord concave est le hile rénal, où l'artère rénale pénètre dans le rein et la veine rénale et l'uretère partent.

Le rein est entouré d'un tissu fibreux résistant, la capsule rénale, elle-même entourée de graisse périrénale, de fascia rénal et de graisse pararénale.

La surface antérieure (avant) de ces tissus est le péritoine, tandis que la surface postérieure (arrière) est le fascia transversalis.

Le pôle supérieur du rein droit est adjacent au foie.

Pour le rein gauche, il est à côté de la rate.

Les deux, par conséquent, descendent lors de l'inhalation.

Une étude danoise a mesuré la longueur rénale médiane à 11,2 cm (4 + 7⁄16 po) du côté gauche et à 10,9 cm (4 + 5⁄16 po) du côté droit chez l'adulte.

Les volumes rénaux médians étaient de 146 cm3 (8+15⁄16 cu in) à gauche et de 134 cm3 (8+3⁄16 cu in) à droite.


=== Anatomie brute ===


La substance fonctionnelle, ou parenchyme, du rein est divisée en deux structures principales : le cortex rénal externe et la médulla rénale interne.

Grossièrement, ces structures prennent la forme de huit à 18 lobes rénaux en forme de cône, chacun contenant un cortex rénal entourant une partie de la moelle appelée pyramide rénale.

Entre les pyramides rénales se trouvent des projections de cortex appelées colonnes rénales.

Les néphrons, les structures fonctionnelles productrices d'urine du rein, couvrent le cortex et la moelle.

La partie filtrante initiale d'un néphron est le corpuscule rénal, situé dans le cortex.

Ceci est suivi d'un tubule rénal qui passe du cortex profondément dans les pyramides médullaires.

Faisant partie du cortex rénal, un rayon médullaire est un ensemble de tubules rénaux qui se drainent dans un seul canal collecteur.

La pointe, ou papille, de chaque pyramide vide l'urine dans un calice mineur; les calices mineurs se vident dans les calices majeurs et les calices majeurs se vident dans le bassinet du rein.

Cela devient l'uretère.

Au niveau du hile, l'uretère et la veine rénale sortent du rein et l'artère rénale y pénètre.

La graisse hilaire et le tissu lymphatique avec des ganglions lymphatiques entourent ces structures.

La graisse hilaire est contiguë à une cavité remplie de graisse appelée sinus rénal.

Le sinus rénal contient collectivement le bassinet et les calices rénaux et sépare ces structures du tissu médullaire rénal. Les reins ne possèdent pas de structures manifestement mobiles.



=== Approvisionnement en sang ===


Les reins reçoivent le sang des artères rénales, gauche et droite, qui se ramifient directement à partir de l'aorte abdominale.

Malgré leur taille relativement petite, les reins reçoivent environ 20 % du débit cardiaque.

Chaque artère rénale se ramifie en artères segmentaires, se divisant ensuite en artères interlobaires, qui pénètrent dans la capsule rénale et s'étendent à travers les colonnes rénales entre les pyramides rénales.

Les artères interlobaires alimentent ensuite en sang les artères arquées qui traversent la limite du cortex et de la moelle.

Chaque artère arquée alimente plusieurs artères interlobulaires qui alimentent les artérioles afférentes qui alimentent les glomérules.

Le sang s'écoule des reins, finalement dans la veine cave inférieure.

Après la filtration, le sang se déplace à travers un petit réseau de petites veines (veinules) qui convergent dans les veines interlobulaires.

Comme pour la distribution artériolaire, les veines suivent le même schéma : les interlobulaires alimentent en sang les veines arquées puis remontent vers les veines interlobaires, qui viennent former les veines rénales qui sortent du rein.


=== Innervation ===

Le rein et le système nerveux communiquent via le plexus rénal, dont les fibres cheminent le long des artères rénales pour atteindre chaque rein.

L'entrée du système nerveux sympathique déclenche une vasoconstriction dans le rein, réduisant ainsi le débit sanguin rénal.

Le rein reçoit également des informations du système nerveux parasympathique, par le biais des branches rénales du nerf vague ; la fonction de celui-ci n'est pas encore claire.

L'entrée sensorielle du rein se déplace vers les niveaux T10-11 de la moelle épinière et est détectée dans le dermatome correspondant.

Ainsi, la douleur dans la région du flanc peut provenir du rein correspondant.


=== Microanatomie ===

L'histologie rénale est l'étude de la structure microscopique du rein.

Les types de cellules distincts comprennent :

Cellule pariétale du glomérule rénal
Podocyte du glomérule rénal
Cellule de bordure en brosse du tubule proximal du rein
Boucle de cellule à segment mince de Henle
Cellule épaisse du membre ascendant
Cellule du tubule distal du rein
Cellule principale du conduit collecteur
Cellule intercalée du conduit collecteur
Cellules rénales interstitielles


=== Expression génique et protéique ===


Environ 20 000 gènes codant pour les protéines sont exprimés dans les cellules humaines et près de 70 % de ces gènes sont exprimés dans les reins adultes normaux.

Un peu plus de 300 gènes sont plus spécifiquement exprimés dans le rein, avec seulement une cinquantaine de gènes hautement spécifiques pour le rein.

De nombreuses protéines spécifiques du rein correspondantes sont exprimées dans la membrane cellulaire et fonctionnent comme des protéines de transport.

La protéine spécifique du rein la plus exprimée est l'uromoduline, la protéine la plus abondante dans l'urine avec des fonctions qui empêchent la calcification et la croissance des bactéries.

Des protéines spécifiques sont exprimées dans les différents compartiments du rein avec la podocine et la néphrine exprimées dans les glomérules, la protéine porteuse de soluté SLC22A8 exprimée dans les tubules proximaux, la calbindine exprimée dans les tubules distaux et l'aquaporine 2 exprimée dans les cellules du canal collecteur.


=== Développement ===


Le rein de mammifère se développe à partir du mésoderme intermédiaire.

Le développement du rein, également appelé néphrogénèse, passe par une série de trois phases de développement successives : le pronéphros, le mésonéphros et le métanéphros.

Les métanéphros sont les ébauches du rein permanent.


== Fonction ==


Les reins excrètent une variété de déchets produits par le métabolisme dans l'urine.

L'unité structurelle et fonctionnelle microscopique du rein est le néphron.

Il traite le sang qui lui est fourni par filtration, réabsorption, sécrétion et excrétion ; la conséquence de ces processus est la production d'urine.

Ceux-ci comprennent les déchets azotés urée, provenant du catabolisme des protéines, et l'acide urique, provenant du métabolisme des acides nucléiques.

La capacité des mammifères et de certains oiseaux à concentrer les déchets dans un volume d'urine beaucoup plus petit que le volume de sang dont les déchets ont été extraits dépend d'un mécanisme élaboré de multiplication à contre-courant.

Cela nécessite plusieurs caractéristiques indépendantes du néphron pour fonctionner : une configuration en épingle à cheveux serrée des tubules, une perméabilité à l'eau et aux ions dans la branche descendante de la boucle, une imperméabilité à l'eau dans la boucle ascendante et un transport actif des ions hors de la majeure partie de la branche ascendante.

De plus, l'échange passif à contre-courant par les vaisseaux transportant l'apport sanguin au néphron est essentiel pour permettre cette fonction.

Le rein participe à l'homéostasie du corps entier, régulant l'équilibre acido-basique, les concentrations d'électrolytes, le volume de liquide extracellulaire et la pression artérielle.

Le rein accomplit ces fonctions homéostatiques à la fois indépendamment et de concert avec d'autres organes, en particulier ceux du système endocrinien.

Diverses hormones endocrines coordonnent ces fonctions endocrines ; ceux-ci comprennent la rénine, l'angiotensine II, l'aldostérone, l'hormone antidiurétique et le peptide natriurétique auriculaire, entre autres.


=== Formation d'urine ===



==== Filtration ====

La filtration, qui a lieu au niveau du corpuscule rénal, est le processus par lequel les cellules et les grosses protéines sont retenues tandis que les matériaux de plus petits poids moléculaires sont filtrés du sang pour former un ultrafiltrat qui finit par devenir de l'urine.

Le rein génère 180 litres de filtrat par jour.

Le processus est également connu sous le nom de filtration hydrostatique en raison de la pression hydrostatique exercée sur les parois capillaires.


==== Réabsorption ====

La réabsorption est le transport des molécules de cet ultrafiltrat vers le capillaire péritubulaire.

Il est accompli via des récepteurs sélectifs sur la membrane cellulaire luminale.

L'eau est réabsorbée à 55% dans le tubule proximal.

Le glucose à des taux plasmatiques normaux est complètement réabsorbé dans le tubule proximal.

Le mécanisme en est le cotransporteur Na+/glucose.

Un taux plasmatique de 350 mg/dL saturera complètement les transporteurs et le glucose sera perdu dans l'urine.

Un niveau de glucose plasmatique d'environ 160 est suffisant pour permettre la glucosurie, qui est un indice clinique important du diabète sucré.
Les acides aminés sont réabsorbés par des transporteurs dépendants du sodium dans le tubule proximal.

La maladie de Hartnup est une déficience du transporteur d'acides aminés tryptophane, qui entraîne la pellagre.


==== Sécrétion ====

La sécrétion est l'inverse de la réabsorption : les molécules sont transportées du capillaire péritubulaire à travers le liquide interstitiel, puis à travers la cellule tubulaire rénale et dans l'ultrafiltrat.


==== Excrétion ====

La dernière étape du traitement de l'ultrafiltrat est l'excrétion : l'ultrafiltrat sort du néphron et se déplace à travers un tube appelé conduit collecteur, qui fait partie du système de conduits collecteurs, puis vers les uretères où il est renommé urine.

Outre le transport de l'ultrafiltrat, le conduit collecteur participe également à la réabsorption.


=== Sécrétion hormonale ===

Les reins sécrètent diverses hormones, dont l'érythropoïétine, le calcitriol et la rénine.

L'érythropoïétine est libérée en réponse à l'hypoxie (faibles niveaux d'oxygène au niveau des tissus) dans la circulation rénale.

Il stimule l'érythropoïèse (production de globules rouges) dans la moelle osseuse.

Le calcitriol, forme activée de la vitamine D, favorise l'absorption intestinale du calcium et la réabsorption rénale du phosphate.

La rénine est une enzyme qui régule les taux d'angiotensine et d'aldostérone.


=== Régulation de la pression artérielle ===


Bien que le rein ne puisse pas détecter directement le sang, la régulation à long terme de la pression artérielle dépend principalement du rein.

Cela se produit principalement par le maintien du compartiment liquidien extracellulaire, dont la taille dépend de la concentration plasmatique de sodium.

La rénine est le premier d'une série de messagers chimiques importants qui composent le système rénine-angiotensine.

Les modifications de la rénine modifient finalement la production de ce système, principalement les hormones angiotensine II et aldostérone.

Chaque hormone agit via plusieurs mécanismes, mais les deux augmentent l'absorption du chlorure de sodium par les reins, élargissant ainsi le compartiment liquide extracellulaire et augmentant la pression artérielle.

Lorsque les taux de rénine sont élevés, les concentrations d'angiotensine II et d'aldostérone augmentent, entraînant une augmentation de la réabsorption du chlorure de sodium, une expansion du compartiment liquidien extracellulaire et une augmentation de la pression artérielle.

Inversement, lorsque les taux de rénine sont faibles, les taux d'angiotensine II et d'aldostérone diminuent, contractant le compartiment liquide extracellulaire et diminuant la pression artérielle.


=== Équilibre acido-basique ===


Deux systèmes d'organes, les reins et les poumons, maintiennent l'homéostasie acido-basique, c'est-à-dire le maintien du pH autour d'une valeur relativement stable.

Les poumons contribuent à l'homéostasie acido-basique en régulant la concentration de dioxyde de carbone (CO2).

Les reins ont deux rôles très importants dans le maintien de l'équilibre acido-basique : réabsorber et régénérer le bicarbonate de l'urine et excréter les ions hydrogène et les acides fixes (anions d'acides) dans l'urine.


=== Régulation de l'osmolalité ===

Les reins aident à maintenir le niveau d'eau et de sel du corps.

Toute augmentation significative de l'osmolalité plasmatique est détectée par l'hypothalamus, qui communique directement avec l'hypophyse postérieure.

Une augmentation de l'osmolalité amène la glande à sécréter l'hormone antidiurétique (ADH), entraînant une réabsorption d'eau par le rein et une augmentation de la concentration de l'urine.

Les deux facteurs travaillent ensemble pour ramener l'osmolalité plasmatique à ses niveaux normaux.


=== Fonction de mesure ===


Divers calculs et méthodes sont utilisés pour essayer de mesurer la fonction rénale.

La clairance rénale est le volume de plasma à partir duquel la substance est complètement éliminée du sang par unité de temps.

La fraction de filtration est la quantité de plasma réellement filtrée par le rein.

Cela peut être défini à l'aide de l'équation.

Le rein est un organe très complexe et la modélisation mathématique a été utilisée pour mieux comprendre la fonction rénale à plusieurs échelles, y compris l'absorption et la sécrétion de liquide.


== Signification clinique ==


La néphrologie est la sous-spécialité de la médecine interne qui traite de la fonction rénale et des états pathologiques liés au dysfonctionnement rénal et de leur prise en charge, y compris la dialyse et la transplantation rénale.

L'urologie est la spécialité de la chirurgie qui traite des anomalies de la structure rénale telles que le cancer du rein, les kystes et les problèmes des voies urinaires.

Les néphrologues sont des internistes et les urologues sont des chirurgiens, alors que les deux sont souvent appelés "médecins du rein".

Il existe des domaines qui se chevauchent dans lesquels les néphrologues et les urologues peuvent fournir des soins, tels que les calculs rénaux et les infections rénales.
Il existe de nombreuses causes de maladie rénale.

Certaines causes sont acquises au cours de la vie, comme la néphropathie diabétique alors que d'autres sont congénitales, comme la polykystose rénale.

Les termes médicaux liés aux reins utilisent couramment des termes tels que rénal et le préfixe néphro-.

L'adjectif rénal, signifiant lié au rein, vient du latin rēnēs, signifiant reins ; le préfixe nephro- vient du mot grec ancien pour rein, nephros (νεφρός).

Par exemple, l'ablation chirurgicale du rein est une néphrectomie, tandis qu'une réduction de la fonction rénale est appelée dysfonction rénale.


=== Acquis ===

Néphropathie diabétique
Glomérulonéphrite
L'hydronéphrose est l'hypertrophie d'un ou des deux reins causée par l'obstruction de l'écoulement de l'urine.
Néphrite interstitielle
Les calculs rénaux (néphrolithiase) sont une affection relativement fréquente et particulièrement douloureuse.

Une maladie chronique peut entraîner des cicatrices sur les reins.

L'élimination des calculs rénaux implique un traitement par ultrasons pour briser les calculs en plus petits morceaux, qui sont ensuite passés dans les voies urinaires.

Un symptôme courant des calculs rénaux est une douleur aiguë à invalidante au milieu et sur les côtés du bas du dos ou de l'aine.
Tumeur rénale
Tumeur de Wilms
Carcinome à cellules rénales
Néphrite lupique
Maladie à changement minime
Dans le syndrome néphrotique, le glomérule a été endommagé de sorte qu'une grande quantité de protéines dans le sang pénètre dans l'urine.

D'autres caractéristiques fréquentes du syndrome néphrotique comprennent un gonflement, un faible taux d'albumine sérique et un taux de cholestérol élevé.

La pyélonéphrite est une infection des reins et est souvent causée par une complication d'une infection des voies urinaires.
Insuffisance rénale
Insuffisance rénale aiguë
Maladie rénale chronique de stade 5
Sténose de l'artère rénale
Hypertension rénovasculaire


=== Lésion et insuffisance rénales ===


Généralement, les humains peuvent vivre normalement avec un seul rein, car ils ont plus de tissu rénal fonctionnel qu'il n'en faut pour survivre.

Ce n'est que lorsque la quantité de tissu rénal fonctionnel est considérablement réduite que l'on développe une maladie rénale chronique.

La thérapie de remplacement rénal, sous forme de dialyse ou de transplantation rénale, est indiquée lorsque le débit de filtration glomérulaire est tombé très bas ou si la dysfonction rénale entraîne des symptômes sévères.


=== Dialyse ===


La dialyse est un traitement qui remplace la fonction des reins normaux.

La dialyse peut être instituée lorsqu'environ 85 % à 90 % de la fonction rénale est perdue, comme indiqué par un taux de filtration glomérulaire (DFG) inférieur à 15.

La dialyse élimine les déchets métaboliques ainsi que l'excès d'eau et de sodium (contribuant ainsi à réguler la pression artérielle) ; et maintient de nombreux niveaux chimiques dans le corps.

L'espérance de vie est de 5 à 10 ans pour les personnes sous dialyse; certains vivent jusqu'à 30 ans.

La dialyse peut se produire par le sang (par un cathéter ou une fistule artério-veineuse) ou par le péritoine (dialyse péritonéale) La dialyse est généralement administrée trois fois par semaine pendant plusieurs heures dans des centres de dialyse autonomes, permettant aux receveurs de mener une vie par ailleurs essentiellement normale .


=== Maladie congénitale ===

Hydronéphrose congénitale
Obstruction congénitale des voies urinaires
Les reins duplex, ou doubles reins, surviennent chez environ 1 % de la population.

Cet événement ne provoque normalement aucune complication, mais peut parfois provoquer des infections des voies urinaires.
L'uretère dupliqué se produit dans environ une naissance vivante sur 100
Le rein en fer à cheval survient dans environ une naissance vivante sur 400
Néphroblastome (tumeur de Wilm syndromique)
Syndrome de Casse-Noisette
Polykystose rénale
La polykystose rénale autosomique dominante affecte les patients plus tard dans la vie.

Environ une personne sur 1000 développera cette condition
La polykystose rénale autosomique récessive est beaucoup moins fréquente, mais plus grave, que la maladie dominante.

Elle se manifeste in utero ou à la naissance.
Agénésie rénale.

L'échec de la formation d'un rein se produit dans environ une naissance vivante sur 750.

L'échec des deux reins à se former était autrefois mortel; cependant, les progrès médicaux tels que la thérapie par amnioinfusion pendant la grossesse et la dialyse péritonéale ont permis de rester en vie jusqu'à ce qu'une greffe puisse avoir lieu.
Dysplasie rénale
Petit rein unilatéral
Le rein dysplasique multikystique survient dans environ une naissance vivante sur 2400
Obstruction de la jonction urétéro-pelvienne ou UPJO ; bien que la plupart des cas soient congénitaux, certains sont acquis.


=== Diagnostic ===

De nombreuses maladies rénales sont diagnostiquées sur la base d'antécédents médicaux détaillés et d'un examen physique.

Les antécédents médicaux tiennent compte des symptômes présents et passés, en particulier ceux de la maladie rénale ; infections récentes; exposition à des substances toxiques pour les reins; et des antécédents familiaux de maladie rénale.
La fonction rénale est testée à l'aide de tests sanguins et d'analyses d'urine.

Les tests sanguins les plus courants sont la créatinine, l'urée et les électrolytes.

Les tests d'urine tels que l'analyse d'urine peuvent évaluer le pH, les protéines, le glucose et la présence de sang.

L'analyse microscopique peut également identifier la présence de cylindres et de cristaux urinaires.

Le débit de filtration glomérulaire (DFG) peut être directement mesuré (« GFR mesuré », ou mGFR) mais cela est rarement fait en pratique courante.

Au lieu de cela, des équations spéciales sont utilisées pour calculer le GFR ("GFR estimé", ou eGFR).


==== Imagerie ====

L'échographie rénale est essentielle dans le diagnostic et la prise en charge des maladies rénales.

D'autres modalités, telles que la tomodensitométrie et l'IRM, doivent toujours être considérées comme des modalités d'imagerie supplémentaires dans l'évaluation de la maladie rénale.


==== Biopsie ====

Le rôle de la biopsie rénale est de diagnostiquer une maladie rénale dont l'étiologie n'est pas claire sur la base de moyens non invasifs (antécédents cliniques, antécédents médicaux, antécédents médicamenteux, examen physique, études de laboratoire, études d'imagerie).

En général, un pathologiste rénal effectuera une évaluation morphologique détaillée et intégrera les résultats morphologiques aux antécédents cliniques et aux données de laboratoire, pour finalement arriver à un diagnostic pathologique.

Un pathologiste rénal est un médecin qui a suivi une formation générale en pathologie anatomique et une formation complémentaire spécialisée dans l'interprétation des échantillons de biopsie rénale.

Idéalement, plusieurs sections centrales sont obtenues et évaluées pour leur adéquation (présence de glomérules) en peropératoire.

Un pathologiste/assistant en pathologie divise le(s) spécimen(s) à soumettre pour la microscopie optique, la microscopie par immunofluorescence et la microscopie électronique.

Le pathologiste examinera le spécimen en utilisant la microscopie optique avec plusieurs techniques de coloration (hématoxyline et éosine/H&E, PAS, trichrome, coloration à l'argent) sur des coupes à plusieurs niveaux.

Plusieurs taches d'immunofluorescence sont effectuées pour évaluer le dépôt d'anticorps, de protéines et de complément.

Enfin, l'examen ultra-structural est réalisé en microscopie électronique et peut révéler la présence de dépôts denses aux électrons ou d'autres anomalies caractéristiques pouvant évoquer une étiologie de l'insuffisance rénale du patient.


== Autres animaux ==

Chez la majorité des vertébrés, le mésonéphros persiste chez l'adulte, bien qu'il soit généralement fusionné avec le métanéphros plus avancé; ce n'est que chez les amniotes que le mésonéphros est limité à l'embryon.

Les reins des poissons et des amphibiens sont généralement des organes étroits et allongés, occupant une partie importante du tronc.

Les canaux collecteurs de chaque groupe de néphrons se drainent généralement dans un canal archinéphrique, qui est homologue au canal déférent des amniotes.

Cependant, la situation n'est pas toujours aussi simple ; chez les poissons cartilagineux et certains amphibiens, il existe également un canal plus court, similaire à l' uretère amniote , qui draine les parties postérieures ( métanéphriques ) du rein et se joint au canal archinéphrique au niveau de la vessie ou du cloaque .

En effet, chez de nombreux poissons cartilagineux, la partie antérieure du rein peut dégénérer ou cesser complètement de fonctionner chez l'adulte.Chez les vertébrés les plus primitifs, la myxine et la lamproie, le rein est exceptionnellement simple : il consiste en une rangée de néphrons, chacun se déversant directement dans le conduit archinéphrique.

Les invertébrés peuvent posséder des organes excréteurs parfois appelés «reins», mais, même chez Amphioxus, ceux-ci ne sont jamais homologues aux reins des vertébrés et sont plus précisément désignés par d'autres noms, tels que néphridies.

Chez les amphibiens, les reins et la vessie hébergent des parasites spécialisés, des monogènes de la famille des Polystomatidae. Les reins des reptiles sont constitués d'un certain nombre de lobules disposés selon un schéma largement linéaire.

Chaque lobule contient en son centre une seule branche de l'uretère dans laquelle se déversent les canaux collecteurs.

Les reptiles ont relativement peu de néphrons par rapport aux autres amniotes de taille similaire, peut-être en raison de leur taux métabolique plus faible. Les oiseaux ont des reins allongés relativement gros, chacun étant divisé en trois lobes distincts ou plus.

Les lobes sont constitués de plusieurs petits lobules disposés irrégulièrement, chacun centré sur une branche de l'uretère.

Les oiseaux ont de petits glomérules, mais environ deux fois plus de néphrons que les mammifères de taille similaire. Le rein humain est assez typique de celui des mammifères.

Les caractéristiques distinctives du rein des mammifères, par rapport à celui des autres vertébrés, comprennent la présence du bassinet du rein et des pyramides rénales ainsi qu'un cortex et une moelle clairement distincts.

Cette dernière caractéristique est due à la présence de boucles allongées de Henle ; ceux-ci sont beaucoup plus courts chez les oiseaux et ne sont pas vraiment présents chez les autres vertébrés (bien que le néphron ait souvent un court segment intermédiaire entre les tubules contournés).

Ce n'est que chez les mammifères que le rein prend sa forme classique de "rein", bien qu'il y ait quelques exceptions, comme les reins multilobés réniculés des pinnipèdes et des cétacés.


=== Adaptation évolutive ===

Les reins de divers animaux montrent des signes d'adaptation évolutive et ont longtemps été étudiés en écophysiologie et en physiologie comparée.

La morphologie des reins, souvent indexée comme l'épaisseur médullaire relative, est associée à l'aridité de l'habitat chez les espèces de mammifères et au régime alimentaire (par exemple, les carnivores n'ont que de longues boucles de Henle).


== Société et culture ==



=== Signification ===



==== Égyptien ====

Dans l'Égypte ancienne, les reins, comme le cœur, étaient laissés à l'intérieur des corps momifiés, contrairement à d'autres organes qui étaient prélevés.

En comparant cela aux déclarations bibliques et aux dessins du corps humain avec le cœur et deux reins représentant une balance pour peser la justice, il semble que les croyances égyptiennes avaient également lié les reins au jugement et peut-être aux décisions morales.


==== Hébreu ====

Selon des études en hébreu moderne et ancien, divers organes du corps humain et animal ont également joué un rôle émotionnel ou logique, aujourd'hui principalement attribué au cerveau et au système endocrinien.

Le rein est mentionné dans plusieurs versets bibliques en conjonction avec le cœur, tout comme les intestins étaient considérés comme le "siège" de l'émotion - le chagrin, la joie et la douleur.

De même, le Talmud (Berakhoth 61.a) déclare que l'un des deux reins conseille ce qui est bien, et l'autre ce qui est mal.
Dans les sacrifices offerts au Tabernacle biblique et plus tard au temple de Jérusalem, les prêtres avaient pour instruction d'enlever les reins et la glande surrénale recouvrant les reins des offrandes de mouton, de chèvre et de bétail, et de les brûler sur l'autel, comme la partie sainte de "l'offrande pour Dieu" ne doit jamais être mangée.


==== Inde : système ayurvédique ====

Dans l'Inde ancienne, selon les systèmes médicaux ayurvédiques, les reins étaient considérés comme le début du système des canaux d'excursion, la «tête» des Mutra Srotas, recevant de tous les autres systèmes, et donc importants pour déterminer l'équilibre de santé et le tempérament d'une personne en l'équilibre et le mélange des trois 'Dosha's – les trois éléments de santé : Vatha (ou Vata) – air, Pitta – bile, et Kapha – mucus.

Le tempérament et la santé d'une personne peuvent alors être vus dans la couleur résultante de l'urine. Les praticiens modernes de l'Ayurveda, une pratique qualifiée de pseudoscience, ont tenté de faire revivre ces méthodes dans les procédures médicales dans le cadre de la thérapie ayurvédique de l'urine.

Ces procédures ont été qualifiées d'"absurdes" par les sceptiques.


==== Christianisme médiéval ====

Le terme latin renes est lié au mot anglais "reins", synonyme des reins en anglais shakespearien (par exemple

Merry Wives of Windsor 3.5), qui était aussi le moment où la version King James de la Bible a été traduite.

Les reins étaient autrefois considérés comme le siège de la conscience et de la réflexion, et un certain nombre de versets de la Bible (par exemple

Ps. 7:9, Apoc. 2:23) déclarent que Dieu recherche et inspecte les reins, ou "rênes", des humains, ainsi que le cœur.


== Historique ==

Les calculs rénaux ont été identifiés et enregistrés depuis aussi longtemps qu'il existe des documents historiques écrits.

Les voies urinaires, y compris les uretères, ainsi que leur fonction de drainer l'urine des reins, ont été décrites par Galen au IIe siècle après JC. en 1929.

Cela a été amélioré par VF Marshall qui est la première utilisation publiée d'un endoscope flexible basé sur la fibre optique, qui s'est produite en 1964.

L'insertion d'un tube de drainage dans le bassinet du rein, contournant les utérus et les voies urinaires, appelée néphrostomie, a été décrite pour la première fois en 1941.

Une telle approche différait grandement des approches chirurgicales ouvertes dans le système urinaire employées au cours des deux millénaires précédents.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rein
