

LUNG


The lungs are the primary organs of the respiratory system in humans and most other animals including a few fish, and some snails. 

In mammals and most other vertebrates, two lungs are located near the backbone on either side of the heart. 

Their function in the respiratory system is to extract oxygen from the air and transfer it into the bloodstream, and to release carbon dioxide from the bloodstream into the atmosphere, in a process of gas exchange. 

Respiration is driven by different muscular systems in different species. 

Mammals, reptiles and birds use their different muscles to support and foster breathing. 

In earlier tetrapods, air was driven into the lungs by the pharyngeal muscles via buccal pumping, a mechanism still seen in amphibians. 

In humans, the main muscle of respiration that drives breathing is the diaphragm. 

The lungs also provide airflow that makes vocal sounds including human speech possible.
Humans have two lungs, a right lung, and a left lung. 

They are situated within the thoracic cavity of the chest. 

The right lung is bigger than the left, which shares space in the chest with the heart. 

The lungs together weigh approximately 1.3 kilograms (2.9 lb), and the right is heavier. 

The lungs are part of the lower respiratory tract that begins at the trachea and branches into the bronchi and bronchioles, and which receive air breathed in via the conducting zone. 

The conducting zone ends at the terminal bronchioles. 

These divide into the respiratory bronchioles of the respiratory zone which divide into alveolar ducts that give rise to the alveolar sacs that contain the alveoli, where gas exchange takes place. 

Alveoli are also sparsely present on the walls of the respiratory bronchioles and alveolar ducts. 

Together, the lungs contain approximately 2,400 kilometres (1,500 mi) of airways and 300 to 500 million alveoli. 

Each lung is enclosed within a pleural sac of two membranes called pleurae; the membranes are separated by a film of pleural fluid, which allows the inner and outer membranes to slide over each other whilst breathing takes place, without much friction. 

The inner pleura also divides each lung into sections called lobes. 

The right lung has three lobes and the left has two. 

The lobes are further divided into bronchopulmonary segments and pulmonary lobules. 

The lungs have a unique blood supply, receiving deoxygenated blood from the heart in the pulmonary circulation for the purposes of receiving oxygen and releasing carbon dioxide, and a separate supply of oxygenated blood to the tissue of the lungs, in the bronchial circulation.
The tissue of the lungs can be affected by a number of respiratory diseases, including pneumonia and lung cancer. 

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease includes chronic bronchitis and emphysema, and can be related to smoking or exposure to harmful substances. 

A number of occupational lung diseases can be caused by substances such as coal dust, asbestos fibres, and crystalline silica dust. 

Diseases such as bronchitis can also affect the respiratory tract. 

Medical terms related to the lung often begin with pulmo-, from the Latin pulmonarius (of the lungs) as in pulmonology, or with pneumo- (from Greek πνεύμων "lung") as in pneumonia.
In embryonic development, the lungs begin to develop as an outpouching of the foregut, a tube which goes on to form the upper part of the digestive system. 

When the lungs are formed the fetus is held in the fluid-filled amniotic sac and so they do not function to breathe. 

Blood is also diverted from the lungs through the ductus arteriosus. 

At birth however, air begins to pass through the lungs, and the diversionary duct closes, so that the lungs can begin to respire. 

The lungs only fully develop in early childhood.


== Structure ==



=== Anatomy ===


The lungs are located in the chest on either side of the heart in the rib cage. 

They are conical in shape with a narrow rounded apex at the top, and a broad concave base that rests on the convex surface of the diaphragm. 

The apex of the lung extends into the root of the neck, reaching shortly above the level of the sternal end of the first rib. 

The lungs stretch from close to the backbone in the rib cage to the front of the chest and downwards from the lower part of the trachea to the diaphragm. 

The left lung shares space with the heart, and has an indentation in its border called the cardiac notch of the left lung to accommodate this. 

The front and outer sides of the lungs face the ribs, which make light indentations on their surfaces. 

The medial surfaces of the lungs face towards the centre of the chest, and lie against the heart, great vessels, and the carina where the trachea divides into the two main bronchi. 

The cardiac impression is an indentation formed on the surfaces of the lungs where they rest against the heart.
Both lungs have a central recession called the hilum, where the blood vessels and airways pass into the lungs making up the root of the lung. 

There are also bronchopulmonary lymph nodes on the hilum.The lungs are surrounded by the pulmonary pleurae. 

The pleurae are two serous membranes; the outer parietal pleura lines the inner wall of the rib cage and the inner visceral pleura directly lines the surface of the lungs. 

Between the pleurae is a potential space called the pleural cavity containing a thin layer of lubricating pleural fluid.


==== Lobes ====
Each lung is divided into sections called lobes by the infoldings of the visceral pleura as fissures. 

Lobes are divided into segments, and segments have further divisions as lobules. 

There are three lobes in the right lung and two lobes in the left lung. 


==== Fissures ====
The fissures are formed in early prenatal development by invaginations of the visceral pleura that divide the lobar bronchi, and section the lungs into lobes that helps in their expansion. 

The right lung is divided into three lobes by a horizontal fissure, and an oblique fissure. 

The left lung is divided into two lobes by an oblique fissure which is closely aligned with the oblique fissure in the right lung. 

In the right lung the upper horizontal fissure, separates the upper (superior) lobe from the middle lobe. 

The lower, oblique fissure separates the lower lobe from the middle and upper lobes.Variations in the fissures are fairly common being either incompletely formed 
or present as an extra fissure as in the azygos fissure, or absent. 

Incomplete fissures are responsible for interlobar collateral ventilation, airflow between lobes which is unwanted in some lung volume reduction procedures.


==== Segments ====
The main or primary bronchi enter the lungs at the hilum and initially branch into secondary bronchi also known as lobar bronchi that supply air to each lobe of the lung. 

The lobar bronchi branch into tertiary bronchi also known as segmental bronchi and these supply air to the further divisions of the lobes known as bronchopulmonary segments. 

Each bronchopulmonary segment has its own (segmental) bronchus and arterial supply. 

Segments for the left and right lung are shown in the table. 

The segmental anatomy is useful clinically for localising disease processes in the lungs. 

A segment is a discrete unit that can be surgically removed without seriously affecting surrounding tissue.


=== Right lung ===

The right lung has both more lobes and segments than the left. 

It is divided into three lobes, an upper, middle, and a lower lobe by two fissures, one oblique and one horizontal. 

The upper, horizontal fissure, separates the upper from the middle lobe. 

It begins in the lower oblique fissure near the posterior border of the lung, and, running horizontally forward, cuts the anterior border on a level with the sternal end of the fourth costal cartilage; on the mediastinal surface it may be traced back to the hilum. 

The lower, oblique fissure, separates the lower from the middle and upper lobes and is closely aligned with the oblique fissure in the left lung.The mediastinal surface of the right lung is indented by a number of nearby structures. 

The heart sits in an impression called the cardiac impression. 

Above the hilum of the lung is an arched groove for the azygos vein, and above this is a wide groove for the superior vena cava and right brachiocephalic vein; behind this, and close to the top of the lung is a groove for the brachiocephalic artery. 

There is a groove for the esophagus behind the hilum and the pulmonary ligament, and near the lower part of the esophageal groove is a deeper groove for the inferior vena cava before it enters the heart.The weight of the right lung varies between individuals, with a standard reference range in men of 155–720 g (0.342–1.587 lb) and in women of 100–590 g (0.22–1.30 lb).


=== Left lung ===

The left lung is divided into two lobes, an upper and a lower lobe, by the oblique fissure, which extends from the costal to the mediastinal surface of the lung both above and below the hilum. 

The left lung, unlike the right, does not have a middle lobe, though it does have a homologous feature, a projection of the upper lobe termed the lingula. 

Its name means "little tongue". 

The lingula on the left lung serves as an anatomic parallel to the middle lobe on the right lung, with both areas being predisposed to similar infections and anatomic complications. 

There are two bronchopulmonary segments of the lingula: superior and inferior.The mediastinal surface of the left lung has a large cardiac impression where the heart sits. 

This is deeper and larger than that on the right lung, at which level the heart projects to the left.On the same surface, immediately above the hilum, is a well-marked curved groove for the aortic arch, and a groove below it for the descending aorta. 

The left subclavian artery, a branch off the aortic arch, sits in a groove from the arch to near the apex of the lung. 

A shallower groove in front of the artery and near the edge of the lung, lodges the left brachiocephalic vein. 

The esophagus may sit in a wider shallow impression at the base of the lung.The weight of the left lung, by standard reference range, in men is 110–675 g (0.243–1.488 lb) in women 105–515 g (0.231–1.135 lb).


== Microanatomy ==


The lungs are part of the lower respiratory tract, and accommodate the bronchial airways when they branch from the trachea. 

The bronchial airways terminate in alveoli which make up the functional tissue (parenchyma) of the lung, and veins, arteries, nerves, and lymphatic vessels. 

The trachea and bronchi have plexuses of lymph capillaries in their mucosa and submucosa. 

The smaller bronchi have a single layer of lymph capillaries, and they are absent in the alveoli. 

The lungs are supplied with the largest lymphatic drainage system of any other organ in the body. 

Each lung is surrounded by a serous membrane of visceral pleura, which has an underlying layer of loose connective tissue attached to the substance of the lung.


=== Connective tissue ===


The connective tissue of the lungs is made up of elastic and collagen fibres that are interspersed between the capillaries and the alveolar walls. 

Elastin is the key protein of the extracellular matrix and is the main component of the elastic fibres. 

Elastin gives the necessary elasticity and resilience required for the persistent stretching involved in breathing, known as lung compliance. 

It is also responsible for the elastic recoil needed. 

Elastin is more concentrated in areas of high stress such as the openings of the alveoli, and alveolar junctions. 

The connective tissue links all the alveoli to form the lung parenchyma which has a sponge-like appearance. 

The alveoli have interconnecting air passages in their walls known as the pores of Kohn.


=== Respiratory epithelium ===


All of the lower respiratory tract including the trachea, bronchi, and bronchioles is lined with respiratory epithelium. 

This is a ciliated epithelium interspersed with goblet cells which produce mucin the main component of mucus, ciliated cells, basal cells, and in the terminal bronchioles–club cells with actions similar to basal cells, and macrophages. 

The epithelial cells, and the submucosal glands throughout the respiratory tract secrete airway surface liquid (ASL), the composition of which is tightly regulated and determines how well mucociliary clearance works.Pulmonary neuroendocrine cells are found throughout the respiratory epithelium including the alveolar epithelium, though they only account for around 0.5 per cent of the total epithelial population. 

PNECs are innervated airway epithelial cells that are particularly focused at airway junction points. 

These cells can produce serotonin, dopamine, and norepinephrine, as well as polypeptide products. 

Cytoplasmic processes from the pulmonary neuroendocrine cells extend into the airway lumen where they may sense the composition of inspired gas.


=== Bronchial airways ===

In the bronchi there are incomplete tracheal rings of cartilage and smaller plates of cartilage that keep them open.: 472  Bronchioles are too narrow to support cartilage and their walls are of smooth muscle, and this is largely absent in the narrower respiratory bronchioles which are mainly just of epithelium.: 472  The absence of cartilage in the terminal bronchioles gives them an alternative name of membranous bronchioles.


=== Respiratory zone ===

The conducting zone of the respiratory tract ends at the terminal bronchioles when they branch into the respiratory bronchioles. 

This marks the beginning of the terminal respiratory unit called the acinus which includes the respiratory bronchioles, the alveolar ducts, alveolar sacs, and alveoli. 

An acinus measures up to 10 mm in diameter. 

A primary pulmonary lobule is that part of the acinus that includes the alveolar ducts, sacs, and alveoli but does not include the respiratory bronchioles. 

The unit described as the secondary pulmonary lobule is the lobule most referred to as the pulmonary lobule or respiratory lobule.: 489  This lobule is a discrete unit that is the smallest component of the lung that can be seen without aid. 

The secondary pulmonary lobule is likely to be made up of between 30 and 50 primary lobules. 

The lobule is supplied by a terminal bronchiole that branches into respiratory bronchioles. 

The respiratory bronchioles supply the alveoli in each acinus and is accompanied by a pulmonary artery branch. 

Each lobule is enclosed by an interlobular septa. 

Each acinus is incompletely separated by an interlobular septa.The respiratory bronchiole gives rise to the alveolar ducts that lead to the alveolar sacs, which contain two or more alveoli. 

The walls of the alveoli are extremely thin allowing a fast rate of diffusion. 

The alveoli have interconnecting small air passages in their walls known as the pores of Kohn.


=== Alveoli ===


Alveoli consist of two types of alveolar cell and an alveolar macrophage. 

The two types of cell are known as type I and type II cells (also known as pneumocytes). 

Types I and II make up the walls and alveolar septa. 

Type I cells provide 95% of the surface area of each alveoli and are flat ("squamous"), and Type II cells generally cluster in the corners of the alveoli and have a cuboidal shape. 

Despite this, cells occur in a roughly equal ratio of 1:1 or 6:4.Type I are squamous epithelial cells that make up the alveolar wall structure. 

They have extremely thin walls that enable an easy gas exchange. 

These type I cells also make up the alveolar septa which separate each alveolus. 

The septa consist of an epithelial lining and associated basement membranes. 

Type I cells are not able to divide, and consequently rely on differentiation from Type II cells.Type II are larger and they line the alveoli and produce and secrete epithelial lining fluid, and lung surfactant. 

Type II cells are able to divide and differentiate to Type I cells.The alveolar macrophages have an important role in the immune system. 

They remove substances which deposit in the alveoli including loose red blood cells that have been forced out from blood vessels.


=== Microbiota ===


There is a large presence of microorganisms in the lungs known as the lung microbiota that interacts with the airway epithelial cells; an interaction of probable importance in maintaining homeostasis. 

The microbiota is complex and dynamic in healthy people, and altered in diseases such as asthma and COPD. 

For example significant changes can take place in COPD following infection with rhinovirus. 

Fungal genera that are commonly found as mycobiota in the microbiota include Candida, Malassezia, Saccharomyces, and Aspergillus.


=== Respiratory tract ===


The lower respiratory tract is part of the respiratory system, and consists of the trachea and the structures below this including the lungs. 

The trachea receives air from the pharynx and travels down to a place where it splits (the carina) into a right and left primary bronchus. 

These supply air to the right and left lungs, splitting progressively into the secondary and tertiary bronchi for the lobes of the lungs, and into smaller and smaller bronchioles until they become the respiratory bronchioles. 

These in turn supply air through alveolar ducts into the alveoli, where the exchange of gases take place. 

Oxygen breathed in, diffuses through the walls of the alveoli into the enveloping capillaries and into the circulation, and carbon dioxide diffuses from the blood into the lungs to be breathed out.
Estimates of the total surface area of lungs vary from 50 to 75 square metres (540 to 810 sq ft); although this is often quoted in textbooks and the media being "the size of a tennis court", it is actually less than half the size of a singles court.The bronchi in the conducting zone are reinforced with hyaline cartilage in order to hold open the airways. 

The bronchioles have no cartilage and are surrounded instead by smooth muscle. 

Air is warmed to 37 °C (99 °F), humidified and cleansed by the conducting zone. 

Particles from the air being removed by the cilia on the respiratory epithelium lining the passageways, in a process called mucociliary clearance.
Pulmonary stretch receptors in the smooth muscle of the airways initiate a reflex known as the Hering–Breuer reflex that prevents the lungs from over-inflation, during forceful inspiration.


=== Blood supply ===


The lungs have a dual blood supply provided by a bronchial and a pulmonary circulation. 

The bronchial circulation supplies oxygenated blood to the airways of the lungs, through the bronchial arteries that leave the aorta. 

There are usually three arteries, two to the left lung and one to the right, and they branch alongside the bronchi and bronchioles. 

The pulmonary circulation carries deoxygenated blood from the heart to the lungs and returns the oxygenated blood to the heart to supply the rest of the body.The blood volume of the lungs is about 450 millilitres on average, about 9% of the total blood volume of the entire circulatory system. 

This quantity can easily fluctuate from between one-half and twice the normal volume. 

Also, in the event of blood loss through hemorrhage, blood from the lungs can partially compensate by automatically transferring to the systemic circulation.


=== Nerve supply ===

The lungs are supplied by nerves of the autonomic nervous system. 

Input from the parasympathetic nervous system occurs via the vagus nerve. 

When stimulated by acetylcholine, this causes constriction of the smooth muscle lining the bronchus and bronchioles, and increases the secretions from glands. 

The lungs also have a sympathetic tone from norepinephrine acting on the beta 2 adrenoceptors in the respiratory tract, which causes bronchodilation.The action of breathing takes place because of nerve signals sent by the respiratory center in the brainstem, along the phrenic nerve from the cervical plexus to the diaphragm.


=== Variation ===

The lobes of the lung are subject to anatomical variations. 

A horizontal interlobar fissure was found to be incomplete in 25% of right lungs, or even absent in 11% of all cases. 

An accessory fissure was also found in 14% and 22% of left and right lungs, respectively. 

An oblique fissure was found to be incomplete in 21% to 47% of left lungs. 

In some cases a fissure is absent, or extra, resulting in a right lung with only two lobes, or a left lung with three lobes.A variation in the airway branching structure has been found specifically in the central airway
branching. 

This variation is associated with the development of COPD in adulthood.


== Development ==


The development of the human lungs arise from the laryngotracheal groove and develop to maturity over several weeks in the foetus and for several years following birth.The larynx, trachea, bronchi and lungs that make up the respiratory tract, begin to form during the fourth week of embryogenesis from the lung bud which appears ventrally to the caudal portion of the foregut.

The respiratory tract has a branching structure, and is also known as the respiratory tree. 

In the embryo this structure is developed in the process of branching morphogenesis, and is generated by the repeated splitting of the tip of the branch. 

In the development of the lungs (as in some other organs) the epithelium forms branching tubes. 

The lung has a left-right symmetry and each bud known as a bronchial bud grows out as a tubular epithelium that becomes a bronchus. 

Each bronchus branches into bronchioles. 

The branching is a result of the tip of each tube bifurcating. 

The branching process forms the bronchi, bronchioles, and ultimately the alveoli. 

The four genes mostly associated with branching morphogenesis in the lung are the intercellular signalling protein – sonic hedgehog (SHH), fibroblast growth factors FGF10 and FGFR2b, and bone morphogenetic protein BMP4. 

FGF10 is seen to have the most prominent role. 

FGF10 is a paracrine signalling molecule needed for epithelial branching, and SHH inhibits FGF10. 

The development of the alveoli is influenced by a different mechanism whereby continued bifurcation is stopped and the distal tips become dilated to form the alveoli.
At the end of the fourth week the lung bud divides into two, the right and left primary bronchial buds on each side of the trachea. 

During the fifth week the right bud branches into three secondary bronchial buds and the left branches into two secondary bronchial buds. 

These give rise to the lobes of the lungs, three on the right and two on the left. 

Over the following week, the secondary buds branch into tertiary buds, about ten on each side. 

From the sixth week to the sixteenth week, the major elements of the lungs appear except the alveoli. 

From week 16 to week 26, the bronchi enlarge and lung tissue becomes highly vascularised. 

Bronchioles and alveolar ducts also develop. 

By week 26 the terminal bronchioles have formed which branch into two respiratory bronchioles. 

During the period covering the 26th week until birth the important blood–air barrier is established. 

Specialised type I alveolar cells where gas exchange will take place, together with the type II alveolar cells that secrete pulmonary surfactant, appear. 

The surfactant reduces the surface tension at the air-alveolar surface which allows expansion of the alveolar sacs. 

The alveolar sacs contain the primitive alveoli that form at the end of the alveolar ducts,
and their appearance around the seventh month marks the point at which limited respiration would be possible, and the premature baby could survive.


=== Vitamin A deficiency ===


The developing lung is particularly vulnerable to changes in the levels of vitamin A. 

Vitamin A deficiency has been linked to changes in the epithelial lining of the lung and in the lung parenchyma. 

This can disrupt the normal physiology of the lung and predispose to respiratory diseases. 

Severe nutritional deficiency in vitamin A results in a reduction in the formation of the alveolar walls (septa) and to notable changes in the respiratory epithelium; alterations are noted in the extracellular matrix and in the protein content of the basement membrane. 

The extracellular matrix maintains lung elasticity; the basement membrane is associated with alveolar epithelium and is important in the blood-air barrier. 

The deficiency is associated with functional defects and disease states. 

Vitamin A is crucial in the development of the alveoli which continues for several years after birth.


=== After birth ===

At birth, the baby's lungs are filled with fluid secreted by the lungs and are not inflated. 

After birth the infant's central nervous system reacts to the sudden change in temperature and environment. 

This triggers the first breath, within about 10 seconds after delivery. 

Before birth, the lungs are filled with fetal lung fluid.   After the first breath, the fluid is quickly absorbed into the body or exhaled. 

The resistance in the lung's blood vessels decreases giving an increased surface area for gas exchange, and the lungs begin to breathe spontaneously. 

This accompanies other changes which result in an increased amount of blood entering the lung tissues.At birth the lungs are very undeveloped with only around one sixth of the alveoli of the adult lung present. 

The alveoli continue to form into early adulthood, and their ability to form when necessary is seen in the regeneration of the lung. 

Alveolar septa have a double capillary network instead of the single network of the developed lung. 

Only after the maturation of the capillary network can the lung enter a normal phase of growth. 

Following the early growth in numbers of alveoli there is another stage of the alveoli being enlarged.


== Function ==



=== Gas exchange ===

The major function of the lungs is gas exchange between the lungs and the blood. 

The alveolar and pulmonary capillary gases equilibrate across the thin blood–air barrier. 

This thin membrane (about 0.5 –2 μm thick) is folded into about 300 million alveoli, providing an extremely large surface area (estimates varying between 70 and 145 m2) for gas exchange to occur.

The lungs are not capable of expanding to breathe on their own, and will only do so when there is an increase in the volume of the thoracic cavity. 

This is achieved by the muscles of respiration, through the contraction of the diaphragm, and the intercostal muscles which pull the rib cage upwards as shown in the diagram. 

During breathing out the muscles relax, returning the lungs to their resting position. 

At this point the lungs contain the functional residual capacity (FRC) of air, which, in the adult human, has a volume of about 2.5–3.0 litres.During heavy breathing as in exertion, a large number of accessory muscles in the neck and abdomen are recruited, that during exhalation pull the ribcage down, decreasing the volume of the thoracic cavity. 

The FRC is now decreased, but since the lungs cannot be emptied completely there is still about a litre of residual air left. 

Lung function testing is carried out to evaluate lung volumes and capacities.


=== Protection ===

The lungs possess several characteristics which protect against infection. 

The respiratory tract is lined by respiratory epithelium or respiratory mucosa, with hair-like projections called cilia that beat rhythmically and carry mucus. 

This mucociliary clearance is an important defence system against air-borne infection. 

The dust particles and bacteria in the inhaled air are caught in the mucosal surface of the airways, and are moved up towards the pharynx by the rhythmic upward beating action of the cilia.: 661–730  The lining of the lung also secretes immunoglobulin A which protects against respiratory infections; goblet cells secrete mucus which also contains several antimicrobial compounds such as defensins, antiproteases, and antioxidants. 

A rare type of specialised cell called a pulmonary ionocyte that is suggested may regulate mucus viscosity has been described. 

In addition, the lining of the lung also contains macrophages, immune cells which engulf and destroy debris and microbes that enter the lung in a process known as phagocytosis; and dendritic cells which present antigens to activate components of the adaptive immune system such as T cells and B cells.The size of the respiratory tract and the flow of air also protect the lungs from larger particles. 

Smaller particles deposit in the mouth and behind the mouth in the oropharynx, and larger particles are trapped in nasal hair after inhalation.


=== Other ===

In addition to their function in respiration, the lungs have a number of other functions. 

They are involved in maintaining homeostasis, helping in the regulation of blood pressure as part of the renin–angiotensin system. 

The inner lining of the blood vessels secretes angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) an enzyme that catalyses the conversion of angiotensin I to angiotensin II. 

The lungs are involved in the blood's acid–base homeostasis by expelling carbon dioxide when breathing.The lungs also serve a protective role. 

Several blood-borne substances, such as a few types of prostaglandins, leukotrienes, serotonin and bradykinin, are excreted through the lungs. 

Drugs and other substances can be absorbed, modified or excreted in the lungs. 

The lungs filter out small blood clots from veins and prevent them from entering arteries and causing strokes.The lungs also play a pivotal role in speech by providing air and airflow for the creation of vocal sounds, and other paralanguage communications such as sighs and gasps.
Research suggests a role of the lungs in the production of blood platelets.


== Gene and protein expression ==


About 20,000 protein coding genes are expressed in human cells and almost 75% of these genes are expressed in the normal lung. 

A little less than 200 of these genes are more specifically expressed in the lung with less than 20 genes being highly lung specific. 

The highest expression of lung specific proteins are different surfactant proteins, such as SFTPA1, SFTPB and SFTPC, and napsin, expressed in type II pneumocytes. 

Other proteins with elevated expression in the lung are the dynein protein DNAH5 in ciliated cells, and the secreted SCGB1A1 protein in mucus-secreting goblet cells of the airway mucosa.


== Clinical significance ==


Lungs can be affected by a number of diseases and disorders. 

Pulmonology is the medical speciality that deals with respiratory diseases involving the lungs and respiratory system. 

Cardiothoracic surgery deals with surgery of the lungs including lung volume reduction surgery, lobectomy, pneumectomy and lung transplantation.


=== Inflammation and infection ===

Inflammatory conditions of the lung tissue are pneumonia, of the respiratory tract are bronchitis and bronchiolitis, and of the pleurae surrounding the lungs pleurisy. 

Inflammation is usually caused by infections due to bacteria or viruses. 

When the lung tissue is inflamed due to other causes it is called pneumonitis. 

One major cause of bacterial pneumonia is tuberculosis. 

Chronic infections often occur in those with immunodeficiency and can include a fungal infection by Aspergillus fumigatus that can lead to an aspergilloma forming in the lung.Alcohol affects the lungs and can cause inflammatory alcoholic lung disease. 

Acute exposure to alcohol stimulates the beating of cilia in the respiratory epithelium. 

However, chronic exposure has the effect of desensitising the ciliary response which reduces mucociliary clearance (MCC). 

MCC is an innate defense system protecting against pollutants and pathogens, and when this is disrupted the numbers of alveolar macrophages are decreased. 

A subsequent inflammatory response is the release of cytokines. 

Another consequence is the susceptibility to infection.


=== Blood-supply changes ===


A pulmonary embolism is a blood clot that becomes lodged in the pulmonary arteries. 

The majority of emboli arise because of deep vein thrombosis in the legs. 

Pulmonary emboli may be investigated using a ventilation/perfusion scan, a CT scan of the arteries of the lung, or blood tests such as the D-dimer. 

Pulmonary hypertension describes an increased pressure at the beginning of the pulmonary artery that has a large number of differing causes. 

Other rarer conditions may also affect the blood supply of the lung, such as granulomatosis with polyangiitis, which causes inflammation of the small blood vessels of the lungs and kidneys.A lung contusion is a bruise caused by chest trauma. 

It results in hemorrhage of the alveoli causing a build-up of fluid which can impair breathing, and this can be either mild or severe.
The function of the lungs can also be affected by compression from fluid in the pleural cavity pleural effusion, or other substances such as air (pneumothorax), blood (hemothorax), or rarer causes. 

These may be investigated using a chest X-ray or CT scan, and may require the insertion of a surgical drain until the underlying cause is identified and treated.


=== Obstructive lung diseases ===


Asthma, chronic bronchitis, bronchiectasis and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) are all obstructive lung diseases characterised by airway obstruction. 

This limits the amount of air that is able to enter alveoli because of constriction of the bronchial tree, due to inflammation. 

Obstructive lung diseases are often identified because of symptoms and diagnosed with pulmonary function tests such as spirometry. 

Many obstructive lung diseases are managed by avoiding triggers (such as dust mites or smoking), with symptom control such as bronchodilators, and with suppression of inflammation (such as through corticosteroids) in severe cases. 

A common cause of chronic bronchitis, and emphysema, is smoking; and common causes of bronchiectasis include severe infections and cystic fibrosis. 

The definitive cause of asthma is not yet known.The breakdown of alveolar tissue, often as a result of tobacco-smoking leads to emphysema, which can become severe enough to develop into COPD. 

Elastase breaks down the elastin in the lung's connective tissue that can also result in emphysema. 

Elastase is inhibited by the acute-phase protein, alpha-1 antitrypsin, and when there is a deficiency in this, emphysema can develop. 

With persistent stress from smoking, the airway basal cells become disarranged and lose their regenerative ability needed to repair the epithelial barrier. 

The disorganised basal cells are seen to be responsible for the major airway changes that are characteristic of COPD, and with continued stress can undergo a malignant transformation. 

Studies have shown that the initial development of emphysema is centred on the early changes in the airway epithelium of the small airways. 

Basal cells become further deranged in a smoker's transition to clinically defined COPD.


=== Restrictive lung diseases ===

Some types of chronic lung diseases are classified as restrictive lung disease, because of a restriction in the amount of lung tissue involved in respiration. 

These include pulmonary fibrosis which can occur when the lung is inflamed for a long period of time. 

Fibrosis in the lung replaces functioning lung tissue with fibrous connective tissue. 

This can be due to a large variety of occupational lung diseases such as Coalworker's pneumoconiosis, autoimmune diseases or more rarely to a reaction to medication. 

Severe respiratory disorders, where spontaneous breathing is not enough to maintain life, may need the use of mechanical ventilation to ensure an adequate supply of air.


=== Cancers ===

Lung cancer can either arise directly from lung tissue or as a result of metastasis from another part of the body. 

There are two main types of primary tumour described as either small-cell or non-small-cell lung carcinomas. 

The major risk factor for cancer is smoking. 

Once a cancer is identified it is staged using scans such as a CT scan and a sample of tissue from a biopsy is taken. 

Cancers may be treated surgically by removing the tumour, the use of radiotherapy, chemotherapy or a combination, or with the aim of symptom control. 

Lung cancer screening is being recommended in the United States for high-risk populations.


=== Congenital disorders ===

Congenital disorders include cystic fibrosis, pulmonary hypoplasia (an incomplete development of the lungs)congenital diaphragmatic hernia, and infant respiratory distress syndrome caused by a deficiency in lung surfactant. 

An azygos lobe is a congenital anatomical variation which though usually without effect can cause problems in thoracoscopic procedures.


=== Others ===

A pneumothorax (collapsed lung) is an abnormal collection of air in the pleural space that causes an uncoupling of the lung from the chest wall. 

The lung cannot expand against the air pressure inside the pleural space. 

An easy to understand example is a traumatic pneumothorax, where air enters the pleural space from outside the body, as occurs with puncture to the chest wall. 

Similarly, scuba divers ascending while holding their breath with their lungs fully inflated can cause air sacs (alveoli) to burst and leak high pressure air into the pleural space.


=== Lung examination ===


As part of a physical examination in response to respiratory symptoms of shortness of breath, and cough, a lung examination may be carried out. 

This exam includes palpation and auscultation. 

The areas of the lungs that can be listened to using a stethoscope are called the lung fields, and these are the posterior, lateral, and anterior lung fields. 

The posterior fields can be listened to from the back and include: the lower lobes (taking up three quarters of the posterior fields); the anterior fields taking up the other quarter; and the lateral fields under the axillae, the left axilla for the lingual, the right axilla for the middle right lobe. 

The anterior fields can also be auscultated from the front. 

An area known as the triangle of auscultation is an area of thinner musculature on the back which allows improved listening. 

Abnormal breathing sounds heard during a lung exam can indicate the presence of a lung condition; wheezing for example is commonly associated with asthma and COPD.


=== Lung function testing ===


Lung function testing is carried out by evaluating a person's capacity to inhale and exhale in different circumstances. 

The volume of air inhaled and exhaled by a person at rest is the tidal volume (normally 500-750mL); the inspiratory reserve volume and expiratory reserve volume are the additional amounts a person is able to forcibly inhale and exhale respectively. 

The summed total of forced inspiration and expiration is a person's vital capacity. 

Not all air is expelled from the lungs even after a forced breath out; the remainder of the air is called the residual volume. 

Together these terms are referred to as lung volumes.Pulmonary plethysmographs are used to measure functional residual capacity. 

Functional residual capacity cannot be measured by tests that rely on breathing out, as a person is only able to breathe a maximum of 80% of their total functional capacity. 

The total lung capacity depends on the person's age, height, weight, and sex, and normally ranges between 4 and 6 litres. 

Females tend to have a 20–25% lower capacity than males. 

Tall people tend to have a larger total lung capacity than shorter people. 

Smokers have a lower capacity than nonsmokers. 

Thinner persons tend to have a larger capacity. 

Lung capacity can be increased by physical training as much as 40% but the effect may be modified by exposure to air pollution.Other lung function tests include spirometry, measuring the amount (volume) and flow of air that can be inhaled and exhaled. 

The maximum volume of breath that can be exhaled is called the vital capacity. 

In particular, how much a person is able to exhale in one second (called forced expiratory volume (FEV1)) as a proportion of how much they are able to exhale in total (FEV). 

This ratio, the FEV1/FEV ratio, is important to distinguish whether a lung disease is restrictive or obstructive. 

Another test is that of the lung's diffusing capacity – this is a measure of the transfer of gas from air to the blood in the lung capillaries.


== Other animals ==



=== Birds ===


 
The lungs of birds are relatively small, but are connected to 8 or 9 air sacs that extend through much of the body, and are in turn connected to air spaces within the bones. 

On inhalation, air travels through the trachea of a bird into the air sacs. 

Air then travels continuously from the air sacs at the back, through the lungs, which are relatively fixed in size, to the air sacs at the front. 

From here, the air is exhaled. 

These fixed size lungs are called "circulatory lungs", as distinct from the "bellows-type lungs" found in most other animals.The lungs of birds contain millions of tiny parallel passages called parabronchi. 

Small sacs called atria radiate from the walls of the tiny passages; these, like the alveoli in other lungs, are the site of gas exchange by simple diffusion. 

The blood flow around the parabronchi and their atria forms a cross-current process of gas exchange (see diagram on the right).The air sacs, which hold air, do not contribute much to gas exchange, despite being thin-walled, as they are poorly vascularised. 

The air sacs expand and contract due to changes in the volume in the thorax and abdomen. 

This volume change is caused by the movement of the sternum and ribs and this movement is often synchronised with movement of the flight muscles.Parabronchi in which the air flow is unidirectional are called paleopulmonic parabronchi and are found in all birds. 

Some birds, however, have, in addition, a lung structure where the air flow in the parabronchi is bidirectional. 

These are termed neopulmonic parabronchi.


=== Reptiles ===


The lungs of most reptiles have a single bronchus running down the centre, from which numerous branches reach out to individual pockets throughout the lungs. 

These pockets are similar to alveoli in mammals, but much larger and fewer in number. 

These give the lung a sponge-like texture. 

In tuataras, snakes, and some lizards, the lungs are simpler in structure, similar to that of typical amphibians.Snakes and limbless lizards typically possess only the right lung as a major respiratory organ; the left lung is greatly reduced, or even absent. 

Amphisbaenians, however, have the opposite arrangement, with a major left lung, and a reduced or absent right lung.Both crocodilians and monitor lizards have developed lungs similar to those of birds, providing a unidirectional airflow and even possessing air sacs. 

The now extinct pterosaurs have seemingly even further refined this type of lung, extending the airsacs into the wing membranes and, in the case of lonchodectids, tupuxuara, and azhdarchoids, the hindlimbs.Reptilian lungs typically receive air via expansion and contraction of the ribs driven by axial muscles and buccal pumping. 

Crocodilians also rely on the hepatic piston method, in which the liver is pulled back by a muscle anchored to the pubic bone (part of the pelvis) called the diaphragmaticus, which in turn creates negative pressure in the crocodile's thoracic cavity, allowing air to be moved into the lungs by Boyle's law. 

Turtles, which are unable to move their ribs, instead use their forelimbs and pectoral girdle to force air in and out of the lungs.


=== Amphibians ===


The lungs of most frogs and other amphibians are simple and balloon-like, with gas exchange limited to the outer surface of the lung. 

This is not very efficient, but amphibians have low metabolic demands and can also quickly dispose of carbon dioxide by diffusion across their skin in water, and supplement their oxygen supply by the same method. 

Amphibians employ a positive pressure system to get air to their lungs, forcing air down into the lungs by buccal pumping. 

This is distinct from most higher vertebrates, who use a breathing system driven by negative pressure where the lungs are inflated by expanding the rib cage. 

In buccal pumping, the floor of the mouth is lowered, filling the mouth cavity with air. 

The throat muscles then presses the throat against the underside of the skull, forcing the air into the lungs.Due to the possibility of respiration across the skin combined with small size, all known lungless tetrapods are amphibians. 

The majority of salamander species are lungless salamanders, which respirate through their skin and tissues lining their mouth. 

This necessarily restricts their size: all are small and rather thread-like in appearance, maximising skin surface relative to body volume. 

Other known lungless tetrapods are the Bornean flat-headed frog and Atretochoana eiselti, a caecilian.The lungs of amphibians typically have a few narrow internal walls (septa) of soft tissue around the outer walls, increasing the respiratory surface area and giving the lung a honeycomb appearance. 

In some salamanders even these are lacking, and the lung has a smooth wall. 

In caecilians, as in snakes, only the right lung attains any size or development.


=== Lungfish ===

The lungs of lungfish are similar to those of amphibians, with few, if any, internal septa. 

In the Australian lungfish, there is only a single lung, albeit divided into two lobes. 

Other lungfish and Polypterus, however, have two lungs, which are located in the upper part of the body, with the connecting duct curving around and above the esophagus. 

The blood supply also twists around the esophagus, suggesting that the lungs originally evolved in the ventral part of the body, as in other vertebrates.


=== Invertebrates ===


Some invertebrates have lung-like structures that serve a similar respiratory purpose as, but are not evolutionarily related to, vertebrate lungs. 

Some arachnids, such as spiders and scorpions, have structures called book lungs used for atmospheric gas exchange. 

Some species of spider have four pairs of book lungs but most have two pairs. 

Scorpions have spiracles on their body for the entrance of air to the book lungs.The coconut crab is terrestrial and uses structures called branchiostegal lungs to breathe air. 

They cannot swim and would drown in water, yet they possess a rudimentary set of gills. 

They can breathe on land and hold their breath underwater. 

The branchiostegal lungs are seen as a developmental adaptive stage from water-living to enable land-living, or from fish to amphibian.Pulmonates are mostly land snails and slugs that have developed a simple lung from the mantle cavity. 

An externally located opening called the pneumostome allows air to be taken into the mantle cavity lung.


== Evolutionary origins ==

The lungs of today's terrestrial vertebrates and the gas bladders of today's fish are believed to have evolved from simple sacs, as outpocketings of the esophagus, that allowed early fish to gulp air under oxygen-poor conditions. 

These outpocketings first arose in the bony fish. 

In most of the ray-finned fish the sacs evolved into closed off gas bladders, while a number of carp, trout, herring, catfish, and eels have retained the physostome condition with the sac being open to the esophagus. 

In more basal bony fish, such as the gar, bichir, bowfin and the lobe-finned fish, the bladders have evolved to primarily function as lungs. 

The lobe-finned fish gave rise to the land-based tetrapods. 

Thus, the lungs of vertebrates are homologous to the gas bladders of fish (but not to their gills).


== Further reading ==




https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lung
;;;ES;;;



PULMÓN


Los pulmones son los órganos primarios del sistema respiratorio en humanos y la mayoría de los otros animales, incluidos algunos peces y algunos caracoles.

En los mamíferos y la mayoría de los otros vertebrados, dos pulmones se encuentran cerca de la columna vertebral a cada lado del corazón.

Su función en el sistema respiratorio es extraer oxígeno del aire y transferirlo al torrente sanguíneo, y liberar dióxido de carbono del torrente sanguíneo a la atmósfera, en un proceso de intercambio de gases.

La respiración es impulsada por diferentes sistemas musculares en diferentes especies.

Los mamíferos, los reptiles y las aves utilizan sus diferentes músculos para apoyar y fomentar la respiración.

En los tetrápodos anteriores, los músculos faríngeos impulsaban el aire hacia los pulmones a través del bombeo bucal, un mecanismo que aún se observa en los anfibios.

En los humanos, el músculo principal de la respiración que impulsa la respiración es el diafragma.

Los pulmones también proporcionan un flujo de aire que hace posible los sonidos vocales, incluido el habla humana.
Los humanos tenemos dos pulmones, un pulmón derecho y un pulmón izquierdo.

Están situados dentro de la cavidad torácica del tórax.

El pulmón derecho es más grande que el izquierdo, que comparte espacio en el pecho con el corazón.

Los pulmones juntos pesan aproximadamente 1,3 kilogramos (2,9 libras) y el derecho es más pesado.

Los pulmones son parte del tracto respiratorio inferior que comienza en la tráquea y se ramifica en los bronquios y bronquiolos, y que reciben el aire inspirado a través de la zona de conducción.

La zona conductora termina en los bronquiolos terminales.

Estos se dividen en los bronquiolos respiratorios de la zona respiratoria que se dividen en conductos alveolares que dan lugar a los sacos alveolares que contienen los alvéolos, donde se produce el intercambio gaseoso.

Los alvéolos también están escasamente presentes en las paredes de los bronquiolos respiratorios y los conductos alveolares.

Juntos, los pulmones contienen aproximadamente 2400 kilómetros (1500 millas) de vías respiratorias y de 300 a 500 millones de alvéolos.

Cada pulmón está encerrado dentro de un saco pleural de dos membranas llamadas pleuras; las membranas están separadas por una película de líquido pleural, que permite que las membranas interna y externa se deslicen una sobre otra mientras se respira, sin mucha fricción.

La pleura interna también divide cada pulmón en secciones llamadas lóbulos.

El pulmón derecho tiene tres lóbulos y el izquierdo tiene dos.

Los lóbulos se dividen a su vez en segmentos broncopulmonares y lóbulos pulmonares.

Los pulmones tienen un suministro de sangre único, recibiendo sangre desoxigenada del corazón en la circulación pulmonar con el fin de recibir oxígeno y liberar dióxido de carbono, y un suministro separado de sangre oxigenada al tejido de los pulmones, en la circulación bronquial.
El tejido de los pulmones puede verse afectado por una serie de enfermedades respiratorias, como la neumonía y el cáncer de pulmón.

La enfermedad pulmonar obstructiva crónica incluye bronquitis crónica y enfisema, y ​​puede estar relacionada con el tabaquismo o la exposición a sustancias nocivas.

Una serie de enfermedades pulmonares profesionales pueden ser causadas por sustancias como el polvo de carbón, las fibras de amianto y el polvo de sílice cristalina.

Enfermedades como la bronquitis también pueden afectar las vías respiratorias.

Los términos médicos relacionados con el pulmón a menudo comienzan con pulmo-, del latín pulmonarius (de los pulmones) como en neumología, o con pneumo- (del griego πνεύμων "pulmón") como en neumonía.
En el desarrollo embrionario, los pulmones comienzan a desarrollarse como una evaginación del intestino anterior, un tubo que pasa a formar la parte superior del sistema digestivo.

Cuando se forman los pulmones, el feto se mantiene en el saco amniótico lleno de líquido y, por lo tanto, no funcionan para respirar.

La sangre también se desvía de los pulmones a través del conducto arterioso.

Sin embargo, al nacer, el aire comienza a pasar a través de los pulmones y el conducto de desviación se cierra para que los pulmones puedan comenzar a respirar.

Los pulmones solo se desarrollan completamente en la primera infancia.


== Estructura ==



=== Anatomía ===


Los pulmones están ubicados en el tórax a cada lado del corazón en la caja torácica.

Tienen forma cónica con un vértice estrecho y redondeado en la parte superior y una base cóncava ancha que descansa sobre la superficie convexa del diafragma.

El vértice del pulmón se extiende hacia la raíz del cuello, llegando poco más arriba del nivel del extremo esternal de la primera costilla.

Los pulmones se extienden desde cerca de la columna vertebral en la caja torácica hasta el frente del tórax y hacia abajo desde la parte inferior de la tráquea hasta el diafragma.

El pulmón izquierdo comparte espacio con el corazón y tiene una hendidura en su borde llamada muesca cardíaca del pulmón izquierdo para acomodarlo.

Los lados frontal y exterior de los pulmones miran hacia las costillas, que hacen ligeras hendiduras en sus superficies.

Las superficies mediales de los pulmones miran hacia el centro del tórax y descansan contra el corazón, los grandes vasos y la carina donde la tráquea se divide en los dos bronquios principales.

La impresión cardíaca es una hendidura formada en las superficies de los pulmones donde descansan contra el corazón.
Ambos pulmones tienen una recesión central llamada hilio, donde los vasos sanguíneos y las vías respiratorias pasan a los pulmones y forman la raíz del pulmón.

También hay ganglios linfáticos broncopulmonares en el hilio. Los pulmones están rodeados por las pleuras pulmonares.

Las pleuras son dos membranas serosas; la pleura parietal externa recubre la pared interna de la caja torácica y la pleura visceral interna recubre directamente la superficie de los pulmones.

Entre las pleuras hay un espacio potencial llamado cavidad pleural que contiene una fina capa de líquido pleural lubricante.


==== Lóbulos ====
Cada pulmón está dividido en secciones llamadas lóbulos por los pliegues de la pleura visceral como fisuras.

Los lóbulos se dividen en segmentos, y los segmentos tienen divisiones adicionales como lóbulos.

Hay tres lóbulos en el pulmón derecho y dos lóbulos en el pulmón izquierdo.


==== Fisuras ====
Las fisuras se forman en el desarrollo prenatal temprano por invaginaciones de la pleura visceral que dividen los bronquios lobares y seccionan los pulmones en lóbulos que ayudan a su expansión.

El pulmón derecho está dividido en tres lóbulos por una fisura horizontal y una fisura oblicua.

El pulmón izquierdo está dividido en dos lóbulos por una fisura oblicua que está estrechamente alineada con la fisura oblicua del pulmón derecho.

En el pulmón derecho, la fisura horizontal superior separa el lóbulo superior (superior) del lóbulo medio.

La fisura oblicua inferior separa el lóbulo inferior de los lóbulos medio y superior. Las variaciones en las fisuras son bastante comunes y se forman de forma incompleta.
o presente como una fisura adicional como en la fisura ácigos, o ausente.

Las fisuras incompletas son responsables de la ventilación colateral interlobular, flujo de aire entre lóbulos que no es deseado en algunos procedimientos de reducción de volumen pulmonar.


==== Segmentos ====
Los bronquios principales o primarios ingresan a los pulmones en el hilio e inicialmente se ramifican en bronquios secundarios, también conocidos como bronquios lobulares, que suministran aire a cada lóbulo del pulmón.

Los bronquios lobulares se ramifican en bronquios terciarios, también conocidos como bronquios segmentarios, y estos suministran aire a las divisiones adicionales de los lóbulos conocidas como segmentos broncopulmonares.

Cada segmento broncopulmonar tiene su propio bronquio (segmentario) e irrigación arterial.

Los segmentos para el pulmón izquierdo y derecho se muestran en la tabla.

La anatomía segmentaria es útil clínicamente para localizar procesos patológicos en los pulmones.

Un segmento es una unidad discreta que se puede extirpar quirúrgicamente sin afectar seriamente el tejido circundante.


=== Pulmón derecho ===

El pulmón derecho tiene más lóbulos y segmentos que el izquierdo.

Está dividido en tres lóbulos, un lóbulo superior, medio e inferior por dos fisuras, una oblicua y otra horizontal.

La fisura superior, horizontal, separa el lóbulo superior del medio.

Comienza en la fisura oblicua inferior cerca del borde posterior del pulmón y, corriendo horizontalmente hacia adelante, corta el borde anterior al nivel del extremo esternal del cuarto cartílago costal; en la superficie mediastínica puede rastrearse hasta el hilio.

La fisura oblicua inferior separa el lóbulo inferior del medio y el superior y está estrechamente alineada con la fisura oblicua del pulmón izquierdo. La superficie mediastínica del pulmón derecho está indentada por varias estructuras cercanas.

El corazón se asienta en una impresión llamada impresión cardíaca.

Por encima del hilio del pulmón hay un surco arqueado para la vena ácigos, y encima hay un surco ancho para la vena cava superior y la vena braquiocefálica derecha; detrás de esto, y cerca de la parte superior del pulmón hay un surco para la arteria braquiocefálica.

Hay un surco para el esófago detrás del hilio y el ligamento pulmonar, y cerca de la parte inferior del surco esofágico hay un surco más profundo para la vena cava inferior antes de que ingrese al corazón. El peso del pulmón derecho varía entre individuos, con un rango de referencia estándar en hombres de 155 a 720 g (0,342 a 1,587 lb) y en mujeres de 100 a 590 g (0,22 a 1,30 lb).


=== Pulmón izquierdo ===

El pulmón izquierdo está dividido en dos lóbulos, uno superior y otro inferior, por la fisura oblicua, que se extiende desde la superficie costal hasta la mediastínica del pulmón, tanto por encima como por debajo del hilio.

El pulmón izquierdo, a diferencia del derecho, no tiene un lóbulo medio, aunque tiene una característica homóloga, una proyección del lóbulo superior denominada língula.

Su nombre significa "lengua pequeña".

La língula del pulmón izquierdo sirve como paralelo anatómico al lóbulo medio del pulmón derecho, y ambas áreas están predispuestas a infecciones y complicaciones anatómicas similares.

Hay dos segmentos broncopulmonares de la língula: superior e inferior. La superficie mediastínica del pulmón izquierdo tiene una gran impresión cardíaca donde se asienta el corazón.

Este es más profundo y más grande que el del pulmón derecho, a cuyo nivel el corazón se proyecta hacia la izquierda. En la misma superficie, inmediatamente encima del hilio, hay un surco curvo bien marcado para el arco aórtico y un surco debajo para la aorta descendente.

La arteria subclavia izquierda, una rama del arco aórtico, se asienta en un surco desde el arco hasta cerca del vértice del pulmón.

Un surco menos profundo frente a la arteria y cerca del borde del pulmón alberga la vena braquiocefálica izquierda.

El esófago puede asentarse en una impresión más amplia y poco profunda en la base del pulmón. El peso del pulmón izquierdo, según el rango de referencia estándar, en los hombres es de 110 a 675 g (0,243 a 1,488 lb) en las mujeres de 105 a 515 g (0,231 a 1.135 libras).


== Microanatomía ==


Los pulmones son parte del tracto respiratorio inferior y acomodan las vías respiratorias bronquiales cuando se ramifican desde la tráquea.

Las vías respiratorias bronquiales terminan en alvéolos que constituyen el tejido funcional (parénquima) del pulmón y las venas, arterias, nervios y vasos linfáticos.

La tráquea y los bronquios tienen plexos de capilares linfáticos en su mucosa y submucosa.

Los bronquios más pequeños tienen una sola capa de capilares linfáticos y están ausentes en los alvéolos.

Los pulmones cuentan con el sistema de drenaje linfático más grande de cualquier otro órgano del cuerpo.

Cada pulmón está rodeado por una membrana serosa de pleura visceral, que tiene una capa subyacente de tejido conjuntivo laxo unido a la sustancia del pulmón.


=== Tejido conectivo ===


El tejido conectivo de los pulmones está formado por fibras elásticas y de colágeno que se intercalan entre los capilares y las paredes alveolares.

La elastina es la proteína clave de la matriz extracelular y es el principal componente de las fibras elásticas.

La elastina brinda la elasticidad y la resiliencia necesarias para el estiramiento persistente que implica la respiración, conocido como distensibilidad pulmonar.

También es responsable del retroceso elástico necesario.

La elastina está más concentrada en áreas de alto estrés, como las aberturas de los alvéolos y las uniones alveolares.

El tejido conectivo une todos los alvéolos para formar el parénquima pulmonar que tiene una apariencia de esponja.

Los alvéolos tienen pasajes de aire interconectados en sus paredes conocidos como poros de Kohn.


=== Epitelio respiratorio ===


Todo el tracto respiratorio inferior, incluida la tráquea, los bronquios y los bronquiolos, está revestido con epitelio respiratorio.

Este es un epitelio ciliado intercalado con células caliciformes que producen mucina, el componente principal del moco, células ciliadas, células basales y en los bronquiolos terminales, células club con acciones similares a las células basales y macrófagos.

Las células epiteliales y las glándulas submucosas en todo el tracto respiratorio secretan líquido de la superficie de las vías respiratorias (ASL), cuya composición está estrictamente regulada y determina qué tan bien funciona la eliminación mucociliar. Las células neuroendocrinas pulmonares se encuentran en todo el epitelio respiratorio, incluido el epitelio alveolar, aunque solo representan alrededor del 0,5 por ciento de la población epitelial total.

Las PNEC son células epiteliales de las vías respiratorias inervadas que están particularmente enfocadas en los puntos de unión de las vías respiratorias.

Estas células pueden producir serotonina, dopamina y noradrenalina, así como productos polipeptídicos.

Los procesos citoplasmáticos de las células neuroendocrinas pulmonares se extienden hacia la luz de las vías respiratorias, donde pueden detectar la composición del gas inspirado.


=== Vías respiratorias bronquiales ===

En los bronquios existen anillos traqueales incompletos de cartílago y placas de cartílago más pequeñas que los mantienen abiertos. sólo de epitelio.: 472 La ausencia de cartílago en los bronquiolos terminales les da un nombre alternativo de bronquiolos membranosos.


=== Zona respiratoria ===

La zona de conducción del tracto respiratorio termina en los bronquiolos terminales cuando se ramifican en los bronquiolos respiratorios.

Esto marca el comienzo de la unidad respiratoria terminal llamada acino, que incluye los bronquiolos respiratorios, los conductos alveolares, los sacos alveolares y los alvéolos.

Un acino mide hasta 10 mm de diámetro.

Un lobulillo pulmonar primario es la parte del ácino que incluye los conductos alveolares, los sacos y los alvéolos, pero no incluye los bronquiolos respiratorios.

La unidad descrita como lobulillo pulmonar secundario es el lobulillo más conocido como lobulillo pulmonar o lobulillo respiratorio.: 489 Este lobulillo es una unidad discreta que es el componente más pequeño del pulmón que se puede ver sin ayuda.

Es probable que el lobulillo pulmonar secundario esté formado por entre 30 y 50 lobulillos primarios.

El lobulillo está irrigado por un bronquiolo terminal que se ramifica en bronquiolos respiratorios.

Los bronquiolos respiratorios irrigan los alvéolos en cada acino y se acompañan de una rama de la arteria pulmonar.

Cada lóbulo está encerrado por un tabique interlobulillar.

Cada acino está incompletamente separado por un tabique interlobulillar. El bronquiolo respiratorio da origen a los conductos alveolares que conducen a los sacos alveolares, que contienen dos o más alvéolos.

Las paredes de los alvéolos son extremadamente delgadas, lo que permite una rápida tasa de difusión.

Los alvéolos tienen pequeños pasajes de aire interconectados en sus paredes conocidos como poros de Kohn.


=== Alvéolos ===


Los alvéolos consisten en dos tipos de células alveolares y un macrófago alveolar.

Los dos tipos de células se conocen como células tipo I y tipo II (también conocidas como neumocitos).

Los tipos I y II constituyen las paredes y tabiques alveolares.

Las células de tipo I proporcionan el 95 % del área de superficie de cada alvéolo y son planas ("escamosas"), y las células de tipo II generalmente se agrupan en las esquinas de los alvéolos y tienen una forma cúbica.

A pesar de esto, las células se encuentran en una proporción aproximadamente igual de 1:1 o 6:4. El tipo I son células epiteliales escamosas que forman la estructura de la pared alveolar.

Tienen paredes extremadamente delgadas que permiten un fácil intercambio de gases.

Estas células de tipo I también forman los tabiques alveolares que separan cada alvéolo.

Los tabiques consisten en un revestimiento epitelial y membranas basales asociadas.

Las células de tipo I no pueden dividirse y, en consecuencia, dependen de la diferenciación de las células de tipo II. Las de tipo II son más grandes y recubren los alvéolos y producen y secretan líquido de revestimiento epitelial y surfactante pulmonar.

Las células de tipo II pueden dividirse y diferenciarse en células de tipo I. Los macrófagos alveolares tienen un papel importante en el sistema inmunitario.

Eliminan sustancias que se depositan en los alvéolos, incluidos los glóbulos rojos sueltos que han sido expulsados ​​de los vasos sanguíneos.


=== Microbiota ===


Hay una gran presencia de microorganismos en los pulmones conocidos como microbiota pulmonar que interactúa con las células epiteliales de las vías respiratorias; una interacción de probable importancia en el mantenimiento de la homeostasis.

La microbiota es compleja y dinámica en personas sanas, y alterada en enfermedades como el asma y la EPOC.

Por ejemplo, pueden tener lugar cambios significativos en la EPOC tras la infección por rinovirus.

Los géneros de hongos que se encuentran comúnmente como micobiota en la microbiota incluyen Candida, Malassezia, Saccharomyces y Aspergillus.


=== Tracto respiratorio ===


El tracto respiratorio inferior es parte del sistema respiratorio y consta de la tráquea y las estructuras debajo de esta, incluidos los pulmones.

La tráquea recibe aire de la faringe y desciende hasta un lugar donde se divide (la carina) en un bronquio principal derecho e izquierdo.

Éstos suministran aire a los pulmones derecho e izquierdo, dividiéndose progresivamente en bronquios secundarios y terciarios para los lóbulos de los pulmones, y en bronquiolos cada vez más pequeños hasta convertirse en los bronquiolos respiratorios.

Estos a su vez suministran aire a través de los conductos alveolares hacia los alvéolos, donde tiene lugar el intercambio de gases.

El oxígeno inhalado se difunde a través de las paredes de los alvéolos hacia los capilares envolventes y hacia la circulación, y el dióxido de carbono se difunde desde la sangre hacia los pulmones para ser exhalado.
Las estimaciones del área de superficie total de los pulmones varían de 50 a 75 metros cuadrados (540 a 810 pies cuadrados); aunque esto se cita a menudo en los libros de texto y los medios son "del tamaño de una cancha de tenis", en realidad es menos de la mitad del tamaño de una cancha de individuales. Los bronquios en la zona de conducción están reforzados con cartílago hialino para mantener abierta la vías respiratorias

Los bronquiolos no tienen cartílago y están rodeados de músculo liso.

El aire se calienta a 37 °C (99 °F), se humedece y se limpia en la zona conductora.

Las partículas del aire son eliminadas por los cilios del epitelio respiratorio que recubre los conductos, en un proceso llamado limpieza mucociliar.
Los receptores de estiramiento pulmonar en el músculo liso de las vías respiratorias inician un reflejo conocido como reflejo de Hering-Breuer que evita que los pulmones se inflen demasiado durante la inspiración forzada.


=== Suministro de sangre ===


Los pulmones tienen un suministro de sangre dual proporcionado por una circulación bronquial y pulmonar.

La circulación bronquial suministra sangre oxigenada a las vías respiratorias de los pulmones, a través de las arterias bronquiales que salen de la aorta.

Por lo general, hay tres arterias, dos hacia el pulmón izquierdo y una hacia el derecho, y se ramifican junto a los bronquios y los bronquiolos.

La circulación pulmonar transporta sangre desoxigenada desde el corazón a los pulmones y devuelve la sangre oxigenada al corazón para abastecer al resto del cuerpo. El volumen de sangre de los pulmones es de unos 450 mililitros en promedio, alrededor del 9% del volumen total de sangre de todo el sistema circulatorio.

Esta cantidad puede fluctuar fácilmente entre la mitad y el doble del volumen normal.

Además, en caso de pérdida de sangre por hemorragia, la sangre de los pulmones puede compensar parcialmente al transferirse automáticamente a la circulación sistémica.


=== Suministro nervioso ===

Los pulmones están irrigados por nervios del sistema nervioso autónomo.

La entrada del sistema nervioso parasimpático se produce a través del nervio vago.

Cuando es estimulado por la acetilcolina, provoca la constricción del músculo liso que recubre los bronquios y los bronquiolos, y aumenta las secreciones de las glándulas.

Los pulmones también tienen un tono simpático debido a que la norepinefrina actúa sobre los adrenoceptores beta 2 en el tracto respiratorio, lo que causa broncodilatación. plexo al diafragma.


=== Variación ===

Los lóbulos del pulmón están sujetos a variaciones anatómicas.

Se encontró una fisura interlobular horizontal incompleta en el 25% de los pulmones derechos, o incluso ausente en el 11% de todos los casos.

También se encontró una fisura accesoria en el 14% y el 22% de los pulmones izquierdo y derecho, respectivamente.

Se encontró una fisura oblicua incompleta en el 21% al 47% de los pulmones izquierdos.

En algunos casos, no hay una fisura o hay más, lo que da como resultado un pulmón derecho con solo dos lóbulos o un pulmón izquierdo con tres lóbulos. Se ha encontrado una variación en la estructura de ramificación de las vías respiratorias específicamente en las vías respiratorias centrales.
derivación.

Esta variación está asociada con el desarrollo de EPOC en la edad adulta.


== Desarrollo ==


El desarrollo de los pulmones humanos surge del surco laringotraqueal y se desarrolla hasta la madurez durante varias semanas en el feto y durante varios años después del nacimiento. La laringe, la tráquea, los bronquios y los pulmones que forman el tracto respiratorio comienzan a formarse durante la cuarta semana. de la embriogénesis a partir de la yema pulmonar que aparece ventralmente a la porción caudal del intestino anterior.

El tracto respiratorio tiene una estructura ramificada y también se conoce como el árbol respiratorio.

En el embrión, esta estructura se desarrolla en el proceso de morfogénesis de la ramificación y se genera por la división repetida de la punta de la rama.

En el desarrollo de los pulmones (como en algunos otros órganos) el epitelio forma tubos ramificados.

El pulmón tiene una simetría izquierda-derecha y cada yema conocida como yema bronquial crece como un epitelio tubular que se convierte en bronquio.

Cada bronquio se ramifica en bronquiolos.

La ramificación es el resultado de la bifurcación de la punta de cada tubo.

El proceso de ramificación forma los bronquios, los bronquiolos y, en última instancia, los alvéolos.

Los cuatro genes asociados principalmente con la morfogénesis de ramificación en el pulmón son la proteína de señalización intercelular: erizo sónico (SHH), los factores de crecimiento de fibroblastos FGF10 y FGFR2b, y la proteína morfogenética ósea BMP4.

Se considera que FGF10 tiene el papel más destacado.

FGF10 es una molécula de señalización paracrina necesaria para la ramificación epitelial, y SHH inhibe FGF10.

El desarrollo de los alvéolos está influido por un mecanismo diferente mediante el cual se detiene la bifurcación continua y las puntas distales se dilatan para formar los alvéolos.
Al final de la cuarta semana, la yema pulmonar se divide en dos, las yemas bronquiales primarias derecha e izquierda a cada lado de la tráquea.

Durante la quinta semana, la yema derecha se ramifica en tres yemas bronquiales secundarias y la izquierda se ramifica en dos yemas bronquiales secundarias.

Estos dan origen a los lóbulos de los pulmones, tres a la derecha y dos a la izquierda.

Durante la semana siguiente, los brotes secundarios se ramifican en brotes terciarios, unos diez de cada lado.

Desde la sexta semana hasta la decimosexta semana, aparecen los principales elementos de los pulmones excepto los alvéolos.

Desde la semana 16 hasta la semana 26, los bronquios se agrandan y el tejido pulmonar se vuelve muy vascularizado.

También se desarrollan bronquiolos y conductos alveolares.

En la semana 26 se han formado los bronquiolos terminales que se ramifican en dos bronquiolos respiratorios.

Durante el período que abarca la semana 26 hasta el nacimiento se establece la importante barrera hemato-aérea.

Aparecen las células alveolares tipo I especializadas donde se producirá el intercambio gaseoso, junto con las células alveolares tipo II que secretan surfactante pulmonar.

El surfactante reduce la tensión superficial en la superficie aire-alveolar, lo que permite la expansión de los sacos alveolares.

Los sacos alveolares contienen los alvéolos primitivos que se forman al final de los conductos alveolares,
y su aparición alrededor del séptimo mes marca el punto en el que sería posible una respiración limitada y el bebé prematuro podría sobrevivir.


=== Deficiencia de vitamina A ===


El pulmón en desarrollo es particularmente vulnerable a los cambios en los niveles de vitamina A.

La deficiencia de vitamina A se ha relacionado con cambios en el revestimiento epitelial del pulmón y en el parénquima pulmonar.

Esto puede alterar la fisiología normal del pulmón y predisponer a enfermedades respiratorias.

La deficiencia nutricional severa en vitamina A resulta en una reducción en la formación de las paredes alveolares (tabiques) y cambios notables en el epitelio respiratorio; se notan alteraciones en la matriz extracelular y en el contenido proteico de la membrana basal.

La matriz extracelular mantiene la elasticidad pulmonar; la membrana basal está asociada con el epitelio alveolar y es importante en la barrera sangre-aire.

La deficiencia se asocia con defectos funcionales y estados de enfermedad.

La vitamina A es crucial en el desarrollo de los alvéolos que continúa durante varios años después del nacimiento.


=== Después del nacimiento ===

Al nacer, los pulmones del bebé están llenos de líquido secretado por los pulmones y no están inflados.

Después del nacimiento, el sistema nervioso central del bebé reacciona al cambio repentino de temperatura y ambiente.

Esto desencadena la primera respiración, dentro de unos 10 segundos después del parto.

Antes del nacimiento, los pulmones están llenos de líquido pulmonar fetal. Después de la primera respiración, el líquido se absorbe rápidamente en el cuerpo o se exhala.

La resistencia en los vasos sanguíneos de los pulmones disminuye, lo que aumenta el área de superficie para el intercambio de gases y los pulmones comienzan a respirar espontáneamente.

Esto acompaña a otros cambios que dan como resultado una mayor cantidad de sangre que ingresa a los tejidos pulmonares. Al nacer, los pulmones están muy poco desarrollados y solo está presente alrededor de una sexta parte de los alvéolos del pulmón adulto.

Los alvéolos continúan formándose hasta la edad adulta temprana, y su capacidad para formarse cuando es necesario se observa en la regeneración del pulmón.

Los tabiques alveolares tienen una doble red capilar en lugar de la red única del pulmón desarrollado.

Solo después de la maduración de la red capilar, el pulmón puede entrar en una fase normal de crecimiento.

Después del crecimiento temprano en el número de alvéolos, hay otra etapa de agrandamiento de los alvéolos.


== Función ==



=== Intercambio de gases ===

La función principal de los pulmones es el intercambio de gases entre los pulmones y la sangre.

Los gases alveolares y capilares pulmonares se equilibran a través de la delgada barrera sangre-aire.

Esta membrana delgada (alrededor de 0,5 a 2 μm de espesor) se pliega en aproximadamente 300 millones de alvéolos, lo que proporciona un área de superficie extremadamente grande (las estimaciones varían entre 70 y 145 m2) para que se produzca el intercambio de gases.

Los pulmones no son capaces de expandirse para respirar por sí solos, y solo lo harán cuando haya un aumento en el volumen de la cavidad torácica.

Esto lo logran los músculos de la respiración, a través de la contracción del diafragma, y ​​los músculos intercostales que tiran de la caja torácica hacia arriba, como se muestra en el diagrama.

Durante la exhalación, los músculos se relajan y los pulmones vuelven a su posición de reposo.

En este punto, los pulmones contienen la capacidad residual funcional (FRC, por sus siglas en inglés) de aire, que, en el ser humano adulto, tiene un volumen de aproximadamente 2,5 a 3,0 litros. se reclutan en el abdomen, que durante la exhalación tiran de la caja torácica hacia abajo, disminuyendo el volumen de la cavidad torácica.

El FRC ahora está disminuido, pero dado que los pulmones no se pueden vaciar por completo, todavía queda alrededor de un litro de aire residual.

Las pruebas de función pulmonar se llevan a cabo para evaluar los volúmenes y capacidades pulmonares.


=== Protección ===

Los pulmones poseen varias características que protegen contra la infección.

El tracto respiratorio está revestido por epitelio respiratorio o mucosa respiratoria, con proyecciones similares a pelos llamadas cilios que laten rítmicamente y transportan moco.

Este aclaramiento mucociliar es un importante sistema de defensa contra las infecciones transmitidas por el aire.

Las partículas de polvo y las bacterias en el aire inhalado quedan atrapadas en la superficie de la mucosa de las vías respiratorias y son movidas hacia la faringe por la acción rítmica de los cilios hacia arriba: 661–730 El revestimiento del pulmón también secreta inmunoglobulina A que protege contra infecciones respiratorias; Las células caliciformes secretan moco que también contiene varios compuestos antimicrobianos como defensinas, antiproteasas y antioxidantes.

Se ha descrito un tipo raro de célula especializada llamada ionocito pulmonar que se sugiere que puede regular la viscosidad del moco.

Además, el revestimiento del pulmón también contiene macrófagos, células inmunitarias que engullen y destruyen desechos y microbios que ingresan al pulmón en un proceso conocido como fagocitosis; y células dendríticas que presentan antígenos para activar componentes del sistema inmunitario adaptativo, como las células T y las células B. El tamaño de las vías respiratorias y el flujo de aire también protegen los pulmones de partículas más grandes.

Las partículas más pequeñas se depositan en la boca y detrás de la boca en la orofaringe, y las partículas más grandes quedan atrapadas en el vello nasal después de la inhalación.


=== Otro ===

Además de su función en la respiración, los pulmones tienen otras funciones.

Están involucrados en el mantenimiento de la homeostasis, ayudando en la regulación de la presión arterial como parte del sistema renina-angiotensina.

El revestimiento interno de los vasos sanguíneos secreta la enzima convertidora de angiotensina (ECA), una enzima que cataliza la conversión de angiotensina I en angiotensina II.

Los pulmones participan en la homeostasis ácido-base de la sangre al expulsar dióxido de carbono al respirar. Los pulmones también cumplen una función protectora.

Varias sustancias transportadas por la sangre, como algunos tipos de prostaglandinas, leucotrienos, serotonina y bradicinina, se excretan a través de los pulmones.

Las drogas y otras sustancias pueden ser absorbidas, modificadas o excretadas en los pulmones.

Los pulmones filtran los pequeños coágulos de sangre de las venas y evitan que ingresen a las arterias y provoquen accidentes cerebrovasculares. Los pulmones también desempeñan un papel fundamental en el habla al proporcionar aire y flujo de aire para la creación de sonidos vocales y otras comunicaciones de paralenguaje, como suspiros y jadeos.
La investigación sugiere un papel de los pulmones en la producción de plaquetas sanguíneas.


== Expresión de genes y proteínas ==


Alrededor de 20.000 genes que codifican proteínas se expresan en células humanas y casi el 75% de estos genes se expresan en el pulmón normal.

Un poco menos de 200 de estos genes se expresan de manera más específica en el pulmón, siendo menos de 20 genes altamente específicos de pulmón.

La expresión más alta de proteínas específicas de pulmón son diferentes proteínas de surfactante, como SFTPA1, SFTPB y SFTPC, y napsina, expresadas en neumocitos tipo II.

Otras proteínas con expresión elevada en el pulmón son la proteína dineína DNAH5 en las células ciliadas y la proteína SCGB1A1 secretada en las células caliciformes secretoras de moco de la mucosa de las vías respiratorias.


== Importancia clínica ==


Los pulmones pueden verse afectados por una serie de enfermedades y trastornos.

La neumología es la especialidad médica que se ocupa de las enfermedades respiratorias que involucran los pulmones y el aparato respiratorio.

La cirugía cardiotorácica se ocupa de la cirugía de los pulmones, incluida la cirugía de reducción del volumen pulmonar, la lobectomía, la neumectomía y el trasplante de pulmón.


=== Inflamación e infección ===

Las condiciones inflamatorias del tejido pulmonar son la neumonía, las del tracto respiratorio son la bronquitis y la bronquiolitis, y las pleuras que rodean los pulmones son la pleuresía.

La inflamación generalmente es causada por infecciones debidas a bacterias o virus.

Cuando el tejido pulmonar se inflama por otras causas se denomina neumonitis.

Una de las principales causas de neumonía bacteriana es la tuberculosis.

Las infecciones crónicas a menudo ocurren en personas con inmunodeficiencia y pueden incluir una infección fúngica por Aspergillus fumigatus que puede provocar la formación de un aspergiloma en el pulmón. El alcohol afecta los pulmones y puede causar enfermedad pulmonar alcohólica inflamatoria.

La exposición aguda al alcohol estimula el latido de los cilios en el epitelio respiratorio.

Sin embargo, la exposición crónica tiene el efecto de desensibilizar la respuesta ciliar, lo que reduce el aclaramiento mucociliar (MCC).

MCC es un sistema de defensa innato que protege contra contaminantes y patógenos, y cuando esto se interrumpe, la cantidad de macrófagos alveolares disminuye.

Una respuesta inflamatoria posterior es la liberación de citoquinas.

Otra consecuencia es la susceptibilidad a la infección.


=== Cambios en el suministro de sangre ===


Una embolia pulmonar es un coágulo de sangre que se aloja en las arterias pulmonares.

La mayoría de los émbolos surgen debido a una trombosis venosa profunda en las piernas.

La embolia pulmonar se puede investigar mediante una exploración de ventilación/perfusión, una tomografía computarizada de las arterias del pulmón o análisis de sangre como el dímero D.

La hipertensión pulmonar describe un aumento de la presión al comienzo de la arteria pulmonar que tiene un gran número de causas diferentes.

Otras afecciones más raras también pueden afectar el suministro de sangre a los pulmones, como la granulomatosis con poliangeítis, que provoca la inflamación de los pequeños vasos sanguíneos de los pulmones y los riñones. Una contusión pulmonar es un hematoma causado por un traumatismo torácico.

Da como resultado una hemorragia de los alvéolos que provoca una acumulación de líquido que puede dificultar la respiración, y esto puede ser leve o grave.
La función de los pulmones también puede verse afectada por la compresión del líquido en la cavidad pleural, derrame pleural u otras sustancias como aire (neumotórax), sangre (hemotórax) o causas más raras.

Estos pueden investigarse mediante una radiografía de tórax o una tomografía computarizada, y pueden requerir la inserción de un drenaje quirúrgico hasta que se identifique y trate la causa subyacente.


=== Enfermedades pulmonares obstructivas ===


El asma, la bronquitis crónica, las bronquiectasias y la enfermedad pulmonar obstructiva crónica (EPOC) son enfermedades pulmonares obstructivas caracterizadas por la obstrucción de las vías respiratorias.

Esto limita la cantidad de aire que puede ingresar a los alvéolos debido a la constricción del árbol bronquial debido a la inflamación.

Las enfermedades pulmonares obstructivas a menudo se identifican debido a los síntomas y se diagnostican con pruebas de función pulmonar como la espirometría.

Muchas enfermedades pulmonares obstructivas se tratan evitando los factores desencadenantes (como los ácaros del polvo o fumar), controlando los síntomas como los broncodilatadores y suprimiendo la inflamación (como los corticosteroides) en los casos graves.

Una causa común de bronquitis crónica y enfisema es fumar; y las causas comunes de bronquiectasias incluyen infecciones graves y fibrosis quística.

Todavía no se conoce la causa definitiva del asma. La descomposición del tejido alveolar, a menudo como resultado del tabaquismo, provoca enfisema, que puede volverse lo suficientemente grave como para convertirse en EPOC.

La elastasa descompone la elastina en el tejido conectivo del pulmón, lo que también puede provocar enfisema.

La elastasa es inhibida por la proteína de fase aguda, alfa-1 antitripsina, y cuando hay una deficiencia de esta, puede desarrollarse enfisema.

Con el estrés persistente del tabaquismo, las células basales de las vías respiratorias se desorganizan y pierden su capacidad regenerativa necesaria para reparar la barrera epitelial.

Se considera que las células basales desorganizadas son responsables de los principales cambios en las vías respiratorias que son característicos de la EPOC y, con el estrés continuo, pueden sufrir una transformación maligna.

Los estudios han demostrado que el desarrollo inicial del enfisema se centra en los primeros cambios en el epitelio de las vías respiratorias pequeñas.

Las células basales se alteran aún más en la transición de un fumador a una EPOC clínicamente definida.


=== Enfermedades pulmonares restrictivas ===

Algunos tipos de enfermedades pulmonares crónicas se clasifican como enfermedad pulmonar restrictiva, debido a una restricción en la cantidad de tejido pulmonar involucrado en la respiración.

Estos incluyen fibrosis pulmonar que puede ocurrir cuando el pulmón está inflamado durante un largo período de tiempo.

La fibrosis en el pulmón reemplaza el tejido pulmonar funcional con tejido conectivo fibroso.

Esto puede deberse a una gran variedad de enfermedades pulmonares ocupacionales como la neumoconiosis del trabajador del carbón, enfermedades autoinmunes o, más raramente, a una reacción a la medicación.

Los trastornos respiratorios graves, en los que la respiración espontánea no es suficiente para mantener la vida, pueden necesitar el uso de ventilación mecánica para garantizar un suministro adecuado de aire.


=== Cánceres ===

El cáncer de pulmón puede surgir directamente del tejido pulmonar o como resultado de metástasis de otra parte del cuerpo.

Hay dos tipos principales de tumores primarios descritos como carcinomas de pulmón de células pequeñas o de células no pequeñas.

El principal factor de riesgo para el cáncer es el tabaquismo.

Una vez que se identifica un cáncer, se clasifica por etapas mediante exploraciones como una tomografía computarizada y se toma una muestra de tejido de una biopsia.

Los cánceres pueden tratarse quirúrgicamente mediante la extirpación del tumor, el uso de radioterapia, quimioterapia o una combinación, o con el objetivo de controlar los síntomas.

Las pruebas de detección de cáncer de pulmón se recomiendan en los Estados Unidos para poblaciones de alto riesgo.


=== Trastornos congénitos ===

Los trastornos congénitos incluyen fibrosis quística, hipoplasia pulmonar (un desarrollo incompleto de los pulmones), hernia diafragmática congénita y síndrome de dificultad respiratoria infantil causado por una deficiencia de surfactante pulmonar.

Un lóbulo ácigos es una variación anatómica congénita que, aunque generalmente sin efecto, puede causar problemas en los procedimientos toracoscópicos.


=== Otros ===

Un neumotórax (pulmón colapsado) es una acumulación anormal de aire en el espacio pleural que provoca un desacoplamiento del pulmón de la pared torácica.

El pulmón no puede expandirse contra la presión del aire dentro del espacio pleural.

Un ejemplo fácil de entender es un neumotórax traumático, donde el aire ingresa al espacio pleural desde el exterior del cuerpo, como ocurre con la punción en la pared torácica.

De manera similar, los buzos que ascienden mientras contienen la respiración con los pulmones completamente inflados pueden hacer que los sacos de aire (alvéolos) revienten y filtren aire a alta presión en el espacio pleural.


=== Examen pulmonar ===


Como parte de un examen físico en respuesta a los síntomas respiratorios de dificultad para respirar y tos, se puede realizar un examen de los pulmones.

Este examen incluye palpación y auscultación.

Las áreas de los pulmones que se pueden escuchar con un estetoscopio se denominan campos pulmonares, y estos son los campos pulmonares posterior, lateral y anterior.

Los campos posteriores se pueden escuchar desde atrás e incluyen: los lóbulos inferiores (que ocupan las tres cuartas partes de los campos posteriores); los campos anteriores ocupando el otro cuarto; y los campos laterales debajo de las axilas, la axila izquierda para el lingual, la axila derecha para el lóbulo medio derecho.

Los campos anteriores también se pueden auscultar desde el frente.

Un área conocida como el triángulo de auscultación es un área de musculatura más delgada en la espalda que permite una mejor escucha.

Los sonidos respiratorios anormales que se escuchan durante un examen pulmonar pueden indicar la presencia de una afección pulmonar; las sibilancias, por ejemplo, se asocian comúnmente con el asma y la EPOC.


=== Pruebas de función pulmonar ===


Las pruebas de función pulmonar se llevan a cabo evaluando la capacidad de una persona para inhalar y exhalar en diferentes circunstancias.

El volumen de aire inhalado y exhalado por una persona en reposo es el volumen corriente (normalmente 500-750 ml); el volumen de reserva inspiratorio y el volumen de reserva espiratorio son las cantidades adicionales que una persona puede inhalar y exhalar por la fuerza, respectivamente.

La suma total de inspiración forzada y espiración es la capacidad vital de una persona.

No todo el aire es expulsado de los pulmones incluso después de una exhalación forzada; el resto del aire se llama volumen residual.

Juntos, estos términos se denominan volúmenes pulmonares. Los pletismógrafos pulmonares se utilizan para medir la capacidad residual funcional.

La capacidad residual funcional no se puede medir mediante pruebas que se basan en la exhalación, ya que una persona solo puede respirar un máximo del 80 % de su capacidad funcional total.

La capacidad pulmonar total depende de la edad, altura, peso y sexo de la persona, y normalmente oscila entre 4 y 6 litros.

Las hembras tienden a tener una capacidad entre un 20% y un 25% menor que los machos.

Las personas altas tienden a tener una capacidad pulmonar total mayor que las personas más bajas.

Los fumadores tienen una capacidad menor que los no fumadores.

Las personas más delgadas tienden a tener una mayor capacidad.

La capacidad pulmonar se puede aumentar con el entrenamiento físico hasta en un 40 %, pero el efecto se puede modificar con la exposición a la contaminación del aire. Otras pruebas de función pulmonar incluyen la espirometría, que mide la cantidad (volumen) y el flujo de aire que se puede inhalar y exhalar.

El volumen máximo de respiración que se puede exhalar se llama capacidad vital.

En particular, cuánto puede exhalar una persona en un segundo (llamado volumen espiratorio forzado (FEV1)) como una proporción de cuánto puede exhalar en total (FEV).

Esta relación, la relación FEV1/FEV, es importante para distinguir si una enfermedad pulmonar es restrictiva u obstructiva.

Otra prueba es la de la capacidad de difusión del pulmón: esta es una medida de la transferencia de gas del aire a la sangre en los capilares pulmonares.


== Otros animales ==



=== Aves ===


 
Los pulmones de las aves son relativamente pequeños, pero están conectados a 8 o 9 sacos de aire que se extienden por gran parte del cuerpo y, a su vez, están conectados a espacios de aire dentro de los huesos.

Al inhalar, el aire viaja a través de la tráquea de un ave hacia los alvéolos.

Luego, el aire viaja continuamente desde los sacos de aire en la parte posterior, a través de los pulmones, que tienen un tamaño relativamente fijo, hasta los sacos de aire en la parte delantera.

A partir de aquí, se exhala el aire.

Estos pulmones de tamaño fijo se denominan "pulmones circulatorios", a diferencia de los "pulmones tipo fuelle" que se encuentran en la mayoría de los otros animales. Los pulmones de las aves contienen millones de diminutos pasajes paralelos llamados parabronquios.

Pequeños sacos llamados aurículas irradian desde las paredes de los diminutos pasajes; éstos, al igual que los alvéolos en otros pulmones, son el sitio de intercambio de gases por difusión simple.

El flujo de sangre alrededor de los parabronquios y sus aurículas forma un proceso de intercambio de gases de corriente cruzada (vea el diagrama a la derecha). Los sacos de aire, que contienen aire, no contribuyen mucho al intercambio de gases, a pesar de tener paredes delgadas, ya que están poco vascularizados.

Los alvéolos se expanden y contraen debido a los cambios de volumen en el tórax y el abdomen.

Este cambio de volumen es causado por el movimiento del esternón y las costillas y este movimiento a menudo está sincronizado con el movimiento de los músculos del vuelo. Los parabronquios en los que el flujo de aire es unidireccional se denominan parabronquios paleopulmónicos y se encuentran en todas las aves.

Algunas aves, sin embargo, tienen además una estructura pulmonar donde el flujo de aire en los parabronquios es bidireccional.

Estos se denominan parabronquios neopulmonares.


=== Reptiles ===


Los pulmones de la mayoría de los reptiles tienen un solo bronquio que corre por el centro, desde el cual numerosas ramas llegan a los bolsillos individuales a lo largo de los pulmones.

Estos bolsillos son similares a los alvéolos de los mamíferos, pero mucho más grandes y menos numerosos.

Estos le dan al pulmón una textura similar a una esponja.

En tuátaras, serpientes y algunas lagartijas, los pulmones tienen una estructura más simple, similar a la de los anfibios típicos. Las serpientes y las lagartijas sin extremidades suelen poseer solo el pulmón derecho como órgano respiratorio principal; el pulmón izquierdo está muy reducido, o incluso ausente.

Los anfisbenos, sin embargo, tienen la disposición opuesta, con un pulmón izquierdo principal y un pulmón derecho reducido o ausente. Tanto los cocodrilos como los lagartos monitores han desarrollado pulmones similares a los de las aves, proporcionando un flujo de aire unidireccional e incluso poseyendo sacos de aire.

Los pterosaurios ahora extintos aparentemente han refinado aún más este tipo de pulmón, extendiendo los sacos de aire hacia las membranas de las alas y, en el caso de los lonchodectids, tupuxuara y azhdarchoids, las patas traseras. Los pulmones de los reptiles típicamente reciben aire a través de la expansión y contracción de las costillas impulsadas por los músculos axiales y el bombeo bucal.

Los cocodrílidos también se basan en el método del pistón hepático, en el que el hígado es retraído por un músculo anclado al hueso púbico (parte de la pelvis) llamado diafragmaticus, que a su vez crea una presión negativa en la cavidad torácica del cocodrilo, lo que permite que el aire sea expulsado. trasladado a los pulmones por la ley de Boyle.

Las tortugas, que no pueden mover las costillas, en su lugar utilizan las extremidades anteriores y la cintura pectoral para forzar el aire dentro y fuera de los pulmones.


=== Anfibios ===


Los pulmones de la mayoría de las ranas y otros anfibios son simples y con forma de globo, con el intercambio de gases limitado a la superficie exterior del pulmón.

Esto no es muy eficiente, pero los anfibios tienen demandas metabólicas bajas y también pueden eliminar rápidamente el dióxido de carbono mediante la difusión a través de su piel en el agua y complementar su suministro de oxígeno por el mismo método.

Los anfibios emplean un sistema de presión positiva para llevar aire a sus pulmones, forzando el aire hacia los pulmones mediante el bombeo bucal.

Esto es distinto de la mayoría de los vertebrados superiores, que usan un sistema de respiración impulsado por presión negativa donde los pulmones se inflan al expandir la caja torácica.

En el bombeo bucal, se baja el piso de la boca, llenando la cavidad bucal con aire.

Luego, los músculos de la garganta presionan la garganta contra la parte inferior del cráneo, forzando el aire hacia los pulmones. Debido a la posibilidad de respirar a través de la piel combinada con el tamaño pequeño, todos los tetrápodos sin pulmones conocidos son anfibios.

La mayoría de las especies de salamandras son salamandras sin pulmones, que respiran a través de la piel y los tejidos que recubren la boca.

Esto restringe necesariamente su tamaño: todos son pequeños y tienen una apariencia más bien parecida a un hilo, lo que maximiza la superficie de la piel en relación con el volumen corporal.

Otros tetrápodos sin pulmones conocidos son la rana de cabeza plana de Borneo y Atretochoana eiselti, una ceciliana. Los pulmones de los anfibios suelen tener unas pocas paredes internas estrechas (tabiques) de tejido blando alrededor de las paredes externas, lo que aumenta el área de superficie respiratoria y le da al pulmón una apariencia de panal.

En algunas salamandras faltan incluso éstas, y el pulmón tiene una pared lisa.

En las cecilias, como en las serpientes, sólo el pulmón derecho alcanza algún tamaño o desarrollo.


=== Pez pulmonado ===

Los pulmones del pez pulmonado son similares a los de los anfibios, con pocos o ningún tabique interno.

En el pez pulmonado australiano, solo hay un pulmón, aunque dividido en dos lóbulos.

Sin embargo, otros peces pulmonados y Polypterus tienen dos pulmones, que están ubicados en la parte superior del cuerpo, con el conducto de conexión curvándose alrededor y por encima del esófago.

El suministro de sangre también gira alrededor del esófago, lo que sugiere que los pulmones evolucionaron originalmente en la parte ventral del cuerpo, como en otros vertebrados.


=== Invertebrados ===


Algunos invertebrados tienen estructuras similares a pulmones que cumplen un propósito respiratorio similar al de los pulmones de los vertebrados, pero no están relacionados evolutivamente con ellos.

Algunos arácnidos, como las arañas y los escorpiones, tienen estructuras llamadas pulmones de libro que se utilizan para el intercambio de gases atmosféricos.

Algunas especies de arañas tienen cuatro pares de pulmones en libro, pero la mayoría tiene dos pares.

Los escorpiones tienen espiráculos en su cuerpo para la entrada de aire a los pulmones del libro. El cangrejo cocotero es terrestre y utiliza estructuras llamadas pulmones branquióstecos para respirar aire.

No pueden nadar y se ahogarían en el agua, pero poseen un conjunto rudimentario de branquias.

Pueden respirar en tierra y aguantar la respiración bajo el agua.

Los pulmones branquiostegales se consideran una etapa de desarrollo adaptativo de la vida acuática para permitir la vida terrestre, o de los peces a los anfibios. Los pulmonados son en su mayoría caracoles terrestres y babosas que han desarrollado un pulmón simple a partir de la cavidad del manto.

Una abertura ubicada externamente llamada neumostoma permite que el aire ingrese al pulmón de la cavidad del manto.


== Orígenes evolutivos ==

Se cree que los pulmones de los vertebrados terrestres de hoy y las vejigas de gas de los peces de hoy evolucionaron a partir de simples sacos, como bolsas externas del esófago, que permitieron a los primeros peces tragar aire en condiciones de escasez de oxígeno.

Estos desembolsos surgieron por primera vez en los peces óseos.

En la mayoría de los peces con aletas radiadas, los sacos se convirtieron en vejigas de gas cerradas, mientras que varias carpas, truchas, arenques, bagres y anguilas han conservado la condición de fisostoma con el saco abierto al esófago.

En los peces óseos más basales, como el gar, bichir, bowfin y el pez con aletas lobuladas, las vejigas han evolucionado para funcionar principalmente como pulmones.

Los peces con aletas lobuladas dieron origen a los tetrápodos terrestres.

Así, los pulmones de los vertebrados son homólogos a las vejigas de gases de los peces (pero no a sus branquias).


== Lectura adicional ==




https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lung

;;;PT;;;



PULMÃO


Os pulmões são os órgãos primários do sistema respiratório em humanos e na maioria dos outros animais, incluindo alguns peixes e alguns caracóis.

Nos mamíferos e na maioria dos outros vertebrados, dois pulmões estão localizados perto da coluna vertebral em ambos os lados do coração.

Sua função no sistema respiratório é extrair oxigênio do ar e transferi-lo para a corrente sanguínea, e liberar dióxido de carbono da corrente sanguínea para a atmosfera, em um processo de troca gasosa.

A respiração é impulsionada por diferentes sistemas musculares em diferentes espécies.

Mamíferos, répteis e pássaros usam seus diferentes músculos para apoiar e estimular a respiração.

Em tetrápodes anteriores, o ar era levado para os pulmões pelos músculos faríngeos por meio de bombeamento bucal, um mecanismo ainda visto em anfíbios.

Nos humanos, o principal músculo da respiração que impulsiona a respiração é o diafragma.

Os pulmões também fornecem fluxo de ar que possibilita sons vocais, incluindo a fala humana.
Os seres humanos têm dois pulmões, um pulmão direito e um pulmão esquerdo.

Eles estão situados dentro da cavidade torácica do tórax.

O pulmão direito é maior que o esquerdo, que divide espaço no peito com o coração.

Os pulmões juntos pesam aproximadamente 1,3 kg (2,9 lb), e o direito é mais pesado.

Os pulmões fazem parte do trato respiratório inferior que começa na traqueia e se ramifica nos brônquios e bronquíolos, e recebe o ar inspirado pela zona de condução.

A zona de condução termina nos bronquíolos terminais.

Estes se dividem nos bronquíolos respiratórios da zona respiratória que se dividem em ductos alveolares que dão origem aos sacos alveolares que contêm os alvéolos, onde ocorrem as trocas gasosas.

Os alvéolos também estão esparsamente presentes nas paredes dos bronquíolos respiratórios e ductos alveolares.

Juntos, os pulmões contêm aproximadamente 2.400 quilômetros (1.500 milhas) de vias aéreas e 300 a 500 milhões de alvéolos.

Cada pulmão é encerrado dentro de um saco pleural de duas membranas chamadas pleuras; as membranas são separadas por uma película de líquido pleural, que permite que as membranas interna e externa deslizem uma sobre a outra enquanto a respiração ocorre, sem muita fricção.

A pleura interna também divide cada pulmão em seções chamadas lobos.

O pulmão direito tem três lobos e o esquerdo tem dois.

Os lobos são divididos em segmentos broncopulmonares e lóbulos pulmonares.

Os pulmões têm um suprimento sanguíneo único, recebendo sangue desoxigenado do coração na circulação pulmonar com a finalidade de receber oxigênio e liberar dióxido de carbono, e um suprimento separado de sangue oxigenado para o tecido dos pulmões, na circulação brônquica.
O tecido dos pulmões pode ser afetado por uma série de doenças respiratórias, incluindo pneumonia e câncer de pulmão.

A doença pulmonar obstrutiva crônica inclui bronquite crônica e enfisema, e pode estar relacionada ao tabagismo ou exposição a substâncias nocivas.

Várias doenças pulmonares ocupacionais podem ser causadas por substâncias como pó de carvão, fibras de amianto e pó de sílica cristalina.

Doenças como bronquite também podem afetar o trato respiratório.

Os termos médicos relacionados ao pulmão geralmente começam com pulmo-, do latim pulmonarius (dos pulmões) como em pneumologia, ou com pneumo- (do grego πνεύμων "pulmão") como em pneumonia.
No desenvolvimento embrionário, os pulmões começam a se desenvolver como uma bolsa do intestino anterior, um tubo que passa a formar a parte superior do sistema digestivo.

Quando os pulmões são formados, o feto é mantido no saco amniótico cheio de líquido e, portanto, não funciona para respirar.

O sangue também é desviado dos pulmões através do canal arterial.

No nascimento, no entanto, o ar começa a passar pelos pulmões e o ducto de desvio se fecha, de modo que os pulmões podem começar a respirar.

Os pulmões só se desenvolvem completamente na primeira infância.


== Estrutura ==



=== Anatomia ===


Os pulmões estão localizados no peito em ambos os lados do coração na caixa torácica.

Eles são de forma cônica com um ápice arredondado estreito no topo e uma base côncava larga que repousa sobre a superfície convexa do diafragma.

O ápice do pulmão se estende até a raiz do pescoço, alcançando um pouco acima do nível da extremidade esternal da primeira costela.

Os pulmões se estendem de perto da coluna vertebral na caixa torácica até a frente do tórax e para baixo da parte inferior da traqueia até o diafragma.

O pulmão esquerdo compartilha espaço com o coração e tem uma reentrância em sua borda chamada incisura cardíaca do pulmão esquerdo para acomodar isso.

Os lados frontal e externo dos pulmões estão voltados para as costelas, que fazem leves reentrâncias em suas superfícies.

As superfícies mediais dos pulmões estão voltadas para o centro do tórax e encostam-se ao coração, aos grandes vasos e à carina, onde a traqueia se divide nos dois brônquios principais.

A impressão cardíaca é uma reentrância formada nas superfícies dos pulmões onde eles repousam contra o coração.
Ambos os pulmões têm uma recessão central chamada hilo, onde os vasos sanguíneos e as vias aéreas passam para os pulmões, formando a raiz do pulmão.

Há também linfonodos broncopulmonares no hilo. Os pulmões são circundados pelas pleuras pulmonares.

As pleuras são duas membranas serosas; a pleura parietal externa reveste a parede interna da caixa torácica e a pleura visceral interna reveste diretamente a superfície dos pulmões.

Entre as pleuras existe um espaço potencial chamado cavidade pleural contendo uma fina camada de líquido pleural lubrificante.


==== Lobos ====
Cada pulmão é dividido em seções chamadas lobos pelas dobras internas da pleura visceral como fissuras.

Os lobos são divididos em segmentos, e os segmentos têm outras divisões como lóbulos.

Existem três lobos no pulmão direito e dois lobos no pulmão esquerdo.


==== Fissuras ====
As fissuras são formadas no início do desenvolvimento pré-natal por invaginações da pleura visceral que dividem os brônquios lobares e seccionam os pulmões em lobos que auxiliam na sua expansão.

O pulmão direito é dividido em três lobos por uma fissura horizontal e uma fissura oblíqua.

O pulmão esquerdo é dividido em dois lobos por uma fissura oblíqua que está intimamente alinhada com a fissura oblíqua do pulmão direito.

No pulmão direito, a fissura horizontal superior separa o lobo superior (superior) do lobo médio.

A fissura oblíqua inferior separa o lobo inferior dos lobos médio e superior.
ou presente como uma fissura extra como na fissura ázigos, ou ausente.

As fissuras incompletas são responsáveis ​​pela ventilação colateral interlobar, fluxo de ar entre os lobos que é indesejado em alguns procedimentos de redução do volume pulmonar.


==== Segmentos ====
Os brônquios principais ou primários entram nos pulmões no hilo e inicialmente se ramificam em brônquios secundários, também conhecidos como brônquios lobares, que fornecem ar para cada lobo do pulmão.

Os brônquios lobares se ramificam em brônquios terciários também conhecidos como brônquios segmentares e estes fornecem ar para as divisões posteriores dos lobos conhecidos como segmentos broncopulmonares.

Cada segmento broncopulmonar tem seu próprio brônquio (segmentar) e suprimento arterial.

Segmentos para o pulmão esquerdo e direito são mostrados na tabela.

A anatomia segmentar é útil clinicamente para localizar processos patológicos nos pulmões.

Um segmento é uma unidade discreta que pode ser removida cirurgicamente sem afetar seriamente o tecido circundante.


=== Pulmão direito ===

O pulmão direito tem mais lobos e segmentos do que o esquerdo.

É dividido em três lobos, um lobo superior, médio e inferior por duas fissuras, uma oblíqua e outra horizontal.

A fissura horizontal superior separa o lobo superior do lobo médio.

Começa na fissura oblíqua inferior perto da borda posterior do pulmão e, seguindo horizontalmente para frente, corta a borda anterior no nível da extremidade esternal da quarta cartilagem costal; na superfície mediastinal pode ser rastreado até o hilo.

A fissura oblíqua inferior separa os lobos inferior do médio e superior e está intimamente alinhada com a fissura oblíqua do pulmão esquerdo. A superfície mediastinal do pulmão direito é recortada por várias estruturas próximas.

O coração fica em uma impressão chamada impressão cardíaca.

Acima do hilo do pulmão há um sulco arqueado para a veia ázigos e, acima deste, um sulco largo para a veia cava superior e a veia braquiocefálica direita; atrás disso, e próximo ao topo do pulmão, há um sulco para a artéria braquiocefálica.

Há um sulco para o esôfago atrás do hilo e do ligamento pulmonar, e próximo à parte inferior do sulco esofágico há um sulco mais profundo para a veia cava inferior antes de entrar no coração. um intervalo de referência padrão em homens de 155–720 g (0,342–1,587 lb) e em mulheres de 100–590 g (0,22–1,30 lb).


=== Pulmão esquerdo ===

O pulmão esquerdo é dividido em dois lobos, um superior e um inferior, pela fissura oblíqua, que se estende da face costal à mediastinal do pulmão, acima e abaixo do hilo.

O pulmão esquerdo, ao contrário do direito, não possui um lobo médio, embora tenha uma característica homóloga, uma projeção do lobo superior denominada língula.

Seu nome significa "língua pequena".

A língula no pulmão esquerdo serve como um paralelo anatômico ao lobo médio no pulmão direito, com ambas as áreas predispostas a infecções e complicações anatômicas semelhantes.

Existem dois segmentos broncopulmonares da língula: superior e inferior. A superfície mediastinal do pulmão esquerdo tem uma grande impressão cardíaca onde o coração se encontra.

Este é mais profundo e maior do que o do pulmão direito, no qual o coração se projeta para a esquerda. a aorta descendente.

A artéria subclávia esquerda, um ramo do arco aórtico, situa-se em um sulco do arco próximo ao ápice do pulmão.

Um sulco mais raso na frente da artéria e próximo à borda do pulmão, aloja a veia braquiocefálica esquerda.

O esôfago pode ficar em uma impressão rasa mais ampla na base do pulmão. 1,135 libras).


== Microanatomia ==


Os pulmões fazem parte do trato respiratório inferior e acomodam as vias aéreas brônquicas quando se ramificam da traqueia.

As vias aéreas brônquicas terminam em alvéolos que compõem o tecido funcional (parênquima) do pulmão e veias, artérias, nervos e vasos linfáticos.

A traqueia e os brônquios possuem plexos de capilares linfáticos em sua mucosa e submucosa.

Os brônquios menores têm uma única camada de capilares linfáticos e estão ausentes nos alvéolos.

Os pulmões são supridos com o maior sistema de drenagem linfática de qualquer outro órgão do corpo.

Cada pulmão é circundado por uma membrana serosa de pleura visceral, que possui uma camada subjacente de tecido conjuntivo frouxo ligado à substância do pulmão.


=== Tecido conjuntivo ===


O tecido conjuntivo dos pulmões é constituído por fibras elásticas e colágenas que se intercalam entre os capilares e as paredes alveolares.

A elastina é a proteína chave da matriz extracelular e é o principal componente das fibras elásticas.

A elastina dá a elasticidade e resiliência necessárias para o alongamento persistente envolvido na respiração, conhecido como complacência pulmonar.

Também é responsável pelo recuo elástico necessário.

A elastina está mais concentrada em áreas de alto estresse, como as aberturas dos alvéolos e junções alveolares.

O tecido conjuntivo liga todos os alvéolos para formar o parênquima pulmonar que tem uma aparência esponjosa.

Os alvéolos têm passagens de ar interconectadas em suas paredes conhecidas como poros de Kohn.


=== Epitélio respiratório ===


Todo o trato respiratório inferior, incluindo a traqueia, brônquios e bronquíolos, é revestido por epitélio respiratório.

Trata-se de um epitélio ciliado intercalado com células caliciformes que produzem mucina, o principal componente do muco, células ciliadas, células basais, e nos bronquíolos terminais – células clavas com ações semelhantes às células basais e macrófagos.

As células epiteliais e as glândulas submucosas em todo o trato respiratório secretam líquido de superfície das vias aéreas (ASL), cuja composição é fortemente regulada e determina o quão bem a depuração mucociliar funciona. eles representam apenas cerca de 0,5 por cento da população epitelial total.

PNECs são células epiteliais das vias aéreas inervadas que são particularmente focadas nos pontos de junção das vias aéreas.

Essas células podem produzir serotonina, dopamina e norepinefrina, bem como produtos polipeptídicos.

Os processos citoplasmáticos das células neuroendócrinas pulmonares se estendem até o lúmen das vias aéreas, onde podem sentir a composição do gás inspirado.


=== Vias aéreas brônquicas ===

Nos brônquios há anéis traqueais incompletos de cartilagem e placas menores de cartilagem que os mantêm abertos. apenas de epitélio.: 472 A ausência de cartilagem nos bronquíolos terminais dá-lhes um nome alternativo de bronquíolos membranosos.


=== Zona respiratória ===

A zona condutora do trato respiratório termina nos bronquíolos terminais quando eles se ramificam nos bronquíolos respiratórios.

Isso marca o início da unidade respiratória terminal chamada ácino, que inclui os bronquíolos respiratórios, os ductos alveolares, os sacos alveolares e os alvéolos.

Um ácino mede até 10 mm de diâmetro.

Um lóbulo pulmonar primário é a parte do ácino que inclui os ductos alveolares, sacos e alvéolos, mas não inclui os bronquíolos respiratórios.

A unidade descrita como lóbulo pulmonar secundário é o lóbulo mais referido como lóbulo pulmonar ou lóbulo respiratório.: 489 Este lóbulo é uma unidade discreta que é o menor componente do pulmão que pode ser visto sem auxílio.

O lóbulo pulmonar secundário provavelmente é composto de 30 a 50 lóbulos primários.

O lóbulo é suprido por um bronquíolo terminal que se ramifica em bronquíolos respiratórios.

Os bronquíolos respiratórios suprem os alvéolos em cada ácino e são acompanhados por um ramo da artéria pulmonar.

Cada lóbulo é envolvido por um septo interlobular.

Cada ácino está incompletamente separado por um septo interlobular. O bronquíolo respiratório dá origem aos ductos alveolares que levam aos sacos alveolares, que contêm dois ou mais alvéolos.

As paredes dos alvéolos são extremamente finas, permitindo uma rápida taxa de difusão.

Os alvéolos têm pequenas passagens de ar interligadas em suas paredes, conhecidas como poros de Kohn.


=== Alvéolos ===


Os alvéolos consistem em dois tipos de células alveolares e um macrófago alveolar.

Os dois tipos de células são conhecidos como células tipo I e tipo II (também conhecidas como pneumócitos).

Os tipos I e II compõem as paredes e os septos alveolares.

As células do tipo I fornecem 95% da área de superfície de cada alvéolo e são planas ("escamosas"), e as células do tipo II geralmente se agrupam nos cantos dos alvéolos e têm forma cúbica.

Apesar disso, as células ocorrem em uma proporção aproximadamente igual de 1:1 ou 6:4. Tipo I são células epiteliais escamosas que compõem a estrutura da parede alveolar.

Possuem paredes extremamente finas que permitem uma fácil troca gasosa.

Essas células do tipo I também compõem os septos alveolares que separam cada alvéolo.

Os septos consistem em um revestimento epitelial e membranas basais associadas.

As células do tipo I não são capazes de se dividir e, consequentemente, dependem da diferenciação das células do tipo II. As células do tipo II são maiores e revestem os alvéolos e produzem e secretam fluido de revestimento epitelial e surfactante pulmonar.

As células do tipo II são capazes de se dividir e diferenciar em células do tipo I. Os macrófagos alveolares têm um papel importante no sistema imunológico.

Eles removem substâncias que se depositam nos alvéolos, incluindo glóbulos vermelhos soltos que foram forçados a sair dos vasos sanguíneos.


=== Microbiota ===


Existe uma grande presença de microrganismos nos pulmões conhecidos como microbiota pulmonar que interage com as células epiteliais das vias aéreas; uma interação de provável importância na manutenção da homeostase.

A microbiota é complexa e dinâmica em pessoas saudáveis, e alterada em doenças como asma e DPOC.

Por exemplo, mudanças significativas podem ocorrer na DPOC após infecção por rinovírus.

Os gêneros fúngicos que são comumente encontrados como micobiota na microbiota incluem Candida, Malassezia, Saccharomyces e Aspergillus.


=== Trato respiratório ===


O trato respiratório inferior faz parte do sistema respiratório e consiste na traqueia e nas estruturas abaixo dela, incluindo os pulmões.

A traqueia recebe ar da faringe e desce até um local onde se divide (a carina) em um brônquio primário direito e esquerdo.

Estes fornecem ar para os pulmões direito e esquerdo, dividindo-se progressivamente em brônquios secundários e terciários para os lobos dos pulmões e em bronquíolos cada vez menores até se tornarem os bronquíolos respiratórios.

Estes, por sua vez, fornecem ar através dos ductos alveolares para os alvéolos, onde ocorre a troca de gases.

O oxigênio inspirado se difunde através das paredes dos alvéolos para os capilares envolventes e para a circulação, e o dióxido de carbono se difunde do sangue para os pulmões para ser expirado.
As estimativas da área de superfície total dos pulmões variam de 50 a 75 metros quadrados (540 a 810 pés quadrados); embora isso seja frequentemente citado em livros didáticos e na mídia sendo "do tamanho de uma quadra de tênis", na verdade é menos da metade do tamanho de uma quadra de simples. Os brônquios na zona de condução são reforçados com cartilagem hialina para manter aberto o vias aéreas.

Os bronquíolos não têm cartilagem e são circundados por músculo liso.

O ar é aquecido a 37°C (99°F), umidificado e purificado pela zona condutora.

Partículas do ar sendo removidas pelos cílios no epitélio respiratório que revestem as passagens, em um processo chamado de limpeza mucociliar.
Os receptores de estiramento pulmonar no músculo liso das vias aéreas iniciam um reflexo conhecido como reflexo de Hering-Breuer, que impede que os pulmões insuflam excessivamente durante a inspiração forçada.


=== Suprimento sanguíneo ===


Os pulmões têm um suprimento sanguíneo duplo fornecido por uma circulação brônquica e pulmonar.

A circulação brônquica fornece sangue oxigenado para as vias aéreas dos pulmões, através das artérias brônquicas que saem da aorta.

Geralmente existem três artérias, duas para o pulmão esquerdo e uma para a direita, e elas se ramificam ao longo dos brônquios e bronquíolos.

A circulação pulmonar transporta sangue desoxigenado do coração para os pulmões e retorna o sangue oxigenado ao coração para suprir o resto do corpo. todo o sistema circulatório.

Esta quantidade pode flutuar facilmente entre metade e o dobro do volume normal.

Além disso, no caso de perda de sangue por hemorragia, o sangue dos pulmões pode compensar parcialmente transferindo-se automaticamente para a circulação sistêmica.


=== Suprimento nervoso ===

Os pulmões são supridos por nervos do sistema nervoso autônomo.

A entrada do sistema nervoso parassimpático ocorre através do nervo vago.

Quando estimulado pela acetilcolina, causa constrição do músculo liso que reveste os brônquios e bronquíolos e aumenta as secreções das glândulas.

Os pulmões também têm um tom simpático da norepinefrina atuando nos adrenoceptores beta 2 no trato respiratório, o que causa broncodilatação. plexo ao diafragma.


=== Variação ===

Os lobos do pulmão estão sujeitos a variações anatômicas.

A fissura interlobar horizontal foi encontrada incompleta em 25% dos pulmões direitos, ou mesmo ausente em 11% de todos os casos.

Uma fissura acessória também foi encontrada em 14% e 22% dos pulmões esquerdo e direito, respectivamente.

Uma fissura oblíqua foi encontrada incompleta em 21% a 47% dos pulmões esquerdos.

Em alguns casos, uma fissura está ausente ou extra, resultando em um pulmão direito com apenas dois lobos, ou um pulmão esquerdo com três lobos.
ramificação.

Essa variação está associada ao desenvolvimento de DPOC na idade adulta.


== Desenvolvimento ==


O desenvolvimento dos pulmões humanos surge a partir do sulco laringotraqueal e se desenvolve até a maturidade ao longo de várias semanas no feto e por vários anos após o nascimento. da embriogênese do broto pulmonar que aparece ventralmente à porção caudal do intestino anterior.

O trato respiratório tem uma estrutura ramificada e também é conhecido como árvore respiratória.

No embrião, essa estrutura se desenvolve no processo de morfogênese de ramificação e é gerada pela divisão repetida da ponta do ramo.

No desenvolvimento dos pulmões (como em alguns outros órgãos), o epitélio forma tubos ramificados.

O pulmão tem uma simetria esquerda-direita e cada broto conhecido como broto brônquico cresce como um epitélio tubular que se torna um brônquio.

Cada brônquio se ramifica em bronquíolos.

A ramificação é resultado da bifurcação da ponta de cada tubo.

O processo de ramificação forma os brônquios, bronquíolos e, finalmente, os alvéolos.

Os quatro genes mais associados à morfogênese ramificada no pulmão são a proteína de sinalização intercelular – hedgehog sônico (SHH), fatores de crescimento de fibroblastos FGF10 e FGFR2b e proteína morfogenética óssea BMP4.

FGF10 é visto como tendo o papel mais proeminente.

O FGF10 é uma molécula sinalizadora parácrina necessária para a ramificação epitelial, e o SHH inibe o FGF10.

O desenvolvimento dos alvéolos é influenciado por um mecanismo diferente pelo qual a bifurcação contínua é interrompida e as pontas distais se dilatam para formar os alvéolos.
No final da quarta semana, o broto pulmonar se divide em dois, os brotos brônquicos primários direito e esquerdo em cada lado da traqueia.

Durante a quinta semana, o broto direito se ramifica em três brotos brônquicos secundários e os ramos esquerdos em dois brotos brônquicos secundários.

Estes dão origem aos lobos dos pulmões, três à direita e dois à esquerda.

Ao longo da semana seguinte, os botões secundários se ramificam em botões terciários, cerca de dez de cada lado.

Da sexta à décima sexta semana, os principais elementos dos pulmões aparecem, exceto os alvéolos.

Da semana 16 à semana 26, os brônquios aumentam e o tecido pulmonar torna-se altamente vascularizado.

Bronquíolos e ductos alveolares também se desenvolvem.

Na semana 26, os bronquíolos terminais se formaram, que se ramificam em dois bronquíolos respiratórios.

Durante o período que abrange a 26ª semana até o nascimento, a importante barreira sangue-ar é estabelecida.

Surgem células alveolares do tipo I especializadas onde ocorrerão as trocas gasosas, juntamente com as células alveolares do tipo II que secretam surfactante pulmonar.

O surfactante reduz a tensão superficial na superfície ar-alveolar que permite a expansão dos sacos alveolares.

Os sacos alveolares contêm os alvéolos primitivos que se formam na extremidade dos ductos alveolares,
e seu aparecimento por volta do sétimo mês marca o ponto em que a respiração limitada seria possível e o bebê prematuro poderia sobreviver.


=== Deficiência de vitamina A ===


O pulmão em desenvolvimento é particularmente vulnerável a mudanças nos níveis de vitamina A.

A deficiência de vitamina A tem sido associada a alterações no revestimento epitelial do pulmão e no parênquima pulmonar.

Isso pode perturbar a fisiologia normal do pulmão e predispor a doenças respiratórias.

A deficiência nutricional grave em vitamina A resulta na redução da formação das paredes alveolares (septos) e em alterações notáveis ​​no epitélio respiratório; observam-se alterações na matriz extracelular e no conteúdo proteico da membrana basal.

A matriz extracelular mantém a elasticidade pulmonar; a membrana basal está associada ao epitélio alveolar e é importante na barreira sangue-ar.

A deficiência está associada a defeitos funcionais e estados de doença.

A vitamina A é crucial no desenvolvimento dos alvéolos, que continua por vários anos após o nascimento.


=== Após o nascimento ===

Ao nascer, os pulmões do bebê estão cheios de fluido secretado pelos pulmões e não são inflados.

Após o nascimento, o sistema nervoso central do bebê reage à mudança repentina de temperatura e ambiente.

Isso desencadeia a primeira respiração, cerca de 10 segundos após o parto.

Antes do nascimento, os pulmões são preenchidos com fluido pulmonar fetal. Após a primeira respiração, o fluido é rapidamente absorvido pelo corpo ou exalado.

A resistência nos vasos sanguíneos do pulmão diminui, aumentando a área de superfície para as trocas gasosas, e os pulmões começam a respirar espontaneamente.

Isso acompanha outras mudanças que resultam em um aumento da quantidade de sangue que entra nos tecidos pulmonares. Ao nascimento, os pulmões são muito subdesenvolvidos, com apenas cerca de um sexto dos alvéolos do pulmão adulto presente.

Os alvéolos continuam a se formar no início da idade adulta, e sua capacidade de se formar quando necessário é vista na regeneração do pulmão.

Os septos alveolares têm uma rede capilar dupla em vez da rede única do pulmão desenvolvido.

Somente após a maturação da rede capilar o pulmão pode entrar em uma fase normal de crescimento.

Após o crescimento inicial do número de alvéolos, há outro estágio dos alvéolos sendo aumentados.


== Função ==



=== Troca gasosa ===

A principal função dos pulmões é a troca gasosa entre os pulmões e o sangue.

Os gases capilares alveolares e pulmonares equilibram-se através da fina barreira sangue-ar.

Esta membrana fina (cerca de 0,5-2 μm de espessura) é dobrada em cerca de 300 milhões de alvéolos, fornecendo uma área de superfície extremamente grande (estimativas variando entre 70 e 145 m2) para que ocorram as trocas gasosas.

Os pulmões não são capazes de se expandir para respirar sozinhos, e só o farão quando houver aumento do volume da cavidade torácica.

Isso é conseguido pelos músculos da respiração, através da contração do diafragma, e pelos músculos intercostais que puxam a caixa torácica para cima, conforme mostrado no diagrama.

Durante a expiração, os músculos relaxam, retornando os pulmões à sua posição de repouso.

Neste ponto, os pulmões contêm a capacidade residual funcional (CRF) do ar, que, no humano adulto, tem um volume de cerca de 2,5 a 3,0 litros. abdominal são recrutados, que durante a expiração puxam a caixa torácica para baixo, diminuindo o volume da cavidade torácica.

A CRF agora está diminuída, mas como os pulmões não podem ser esvaziados completamente, ainda resta cerca de um litro de ar residual.

O teste de função pulmonar é realizado para avaliar os volumes e capacidades pulmonares.


=== Proteção ===

Os pulmões possuem várias características que protegem contra infecções.

O trato respiratório é revestido por epitélio respiratório ou mucosa respiratória, com projeções semelhantes a pelos chamados cílios que batem ritmicamente e carregam muco.

Essa depuração mucociliar é um importante sistema de defesa contra infecções transmitidas pelo ar.

As partículas de poeira e bactérias no ar inalado são capturadas na superfície da mucosa das vias aéreas e são movidas para cima em direção à faringe pela ação rítmica ascendente dos cílios.: 661-730 O revestimento do pulmão também secreta imunoglobulina A, que protege contra infecções respiratórias; As células caliciformes secretam muco que também contém vários compostos antimicrobianos, como defensinas, antiproteases e antioxidantes.

Foi descrito um tipo raro de célula especializada chamada ionócito pulmonar que pode regular a viscosidade do muco.

Além disso, o revestimento do pulmão também contém macrófagos, células imunes que engolfam e destroem detritos e micróbios que entram no pulmão em um processo conhecido como fagocitose; e células dendríticas que apresentam antígenos para ativar componentes do sistema imune adaptativo, como células T e células B. O tamanho do trato respiratório e o fluxo de ar também protegem os pulmões de partículas maiores.

Partículas menores se depositam na boca e atrás da boca na orofaringe, e partículas maiores ficam presas nos pelos nasais após a inalação.


=== Outro ===

Além de sua função na respiração, os pulmões têm várias outras funções.

Eles estão envolvidos na manutenção da homeostase, auxiliando na regulação da pressão arterial como parte do sistema renina-angiotensina.

O revestimento interno dos vasos sanguíneos secreta a enzima conversora da angiotensina (ECA), uma enzima que catalisa a conversão da angiotensina I em angiotensina II.

Os pulmões estão envolvidos na homeostase ácido-base do sangue, expelindo dióxido de carbono ao respirar. Os pulmões também desempenham um papel protetor.

Várias substâncias transmitidas pelo sangue, como alguns tipos de prostaglandinas, leucotrienos, serotonina e bradicinina, são excretadas pelos pulmões.

Drogas e outras substâncias podem ser absorvidas, modificadas ou excretadas nos pulmões.

Os pulmões filtram pequenos coágulos de sangue das veias e os impedem de entrar nas artérias e causar derrames.
Pesquisas sugerem um papel dos pulmões na produção de plaquetas sanguíneas.


== Expressão de genes e proteínas ==


Cerca de 20.000 genes codificadores de proteínas são expressos em células humanas e quase 75% desses genes são expressos no pulmão normal.

Um pouco menos de 200 desses genes são expressos mais especificamente no pulmão, com menos de 20 genes sendo altamente específicos do pulmão.

A maior expressão de proteínas específicas do pulmão são diferentes proteínas surfactantes, como SFTPA1, SFTPB e SFTPC, e napsina, expressa em pneumócitos tipo II.

Outras proteínas com expressão elevada no pulmão são a proteína dineína DNAH5 em células ciliadas e a proteína SCGB1A1 secretada em células caliciformes secretoras de muco da mucosa das vias aéreas.


== Significado clínico ==


Os pulmões podem ser afetados por uma série de doenças e distúrbios.

Pneumologia é a especialidade médica que trata das doenças respiratórias que envolvem os pulmões e o sistema respiratório.

A cirurgia cardiotorácica trata da cirurgia dos pulmões, incluindo cirurgia de redução do volume pulmonar, lobectomia, pneumectomia e transplante de pulmão.


=== Inflamação e infecção ===

As condições inflamatórias do tecido pulmonar são pneumonia, do trato respiratório são bronquite e bronquiolite e das pleuras ao redor dos pulmões pleurisia.

A inflamação é geralmente causada por infecções causadas por bactérias ou vírus.

Quando o tecido pulmonar está inflamado devido a outras causas, é chamado de pneumonite.

Uma das principais causas de pneumonia bacteriana é a tuberculose.

As infecções crônicas geralmente ocorrem em pessoas com imunodeficiência e podem incluir uma infecção fúngica por Aspergillus fumigatus que pode levar à formação de um aspergiloma no pulmão. O álcool afeta os pulmões e pode causar doença pulmonar alcoólica inflamatória.

A exposição aguda ao álcool estimula o batimento dos cílios no epitélio respiratório.

No entanto, a exposição crônica tem o efeito de dessensibilizar a resposta ciliar, o que reduz a depuração mucociliar (MCC).

O MCC é um sistema de defesa inato que protege contra poluentes e patógenos, e quando isso é interrompido, o número de macrófagos alveolares diminui.

Uma resposta inflamatória subsequente é a liberação de citocinas.

Outra consequência é a suscetibilidade à infecção.


=== Alterações no suprimento de sangue ===


A embolia pulmonar é um coágulo de sangue que se aloja nas artérias pulmonares.

A maioria dos êmbolos surge devido à trombose venosa profunda nas pernas.

Os êmbolos pulmonares podem ser investigados usando uma varredura de ventilação/perfusão, uma tomografia computadorizada das artérias do pulmão ou exames de sangue, como o D-dímero.

A hipertensão pulmonar descreve um aumento da pressão no início da artéria pulmonar que tem um grande número de causas diferentes.

Outras condições mais raras também podem afetar o suprimento de sangue do pulmão, como a granulomatose com poliangeíte, que causa inflamação dos pequenos vasos sanguíneos dos pulmões e dos rins. A contusão pulmonar é uma contusão causada por trauma torácico.

Isso resulta em hemorragia dos alvéolos causando um acúmulo de líquido que pode prejudicar a respiração, e isso pode ser leve ou grave.
A função dos pulmões também pode ser afetada pela compressão do líquido na cavidade pleural, derrame pleural ou outras substâncias, como ar (pneumotórax), sangue (hemotórax) ou causas mais raras.

Estes podem ser investigados usando uma radiografia de tórax ou tomografia computadorizada e podem exigir a inserção de um dreno cirúrgico até que a causa subjacente seja identificada e tratada.


=== Doenças pulmonares obstrutivas ===


Asma, bronquite crônica, bronquiectasia e doença pulmonar obstrutiva crônica (DPOC) são doenças pulmonares obstrutivas caracterizadas por obstrução das vias aéreas.

Isso limita a quantidade de ar que pode entrar nos alvéolos devido à constrição da árvore brônquica, devido à inflamação.

As doenças pulmonares obstrutivas são frequentemente identificadas por causa dos sintomas e diagnosticadas com testes de função pulmonar, como a espirometria.

Muitas doenças pulmonares obstrutivas são tratadas evitando os fatores desencadeantes (como ácaros ou tabagismo), com controle de sintomas, como broncodilatadores, e com supressão da inflamação (como por meio de corticosteróides) em casos graves.

Uma causa comum de bronquite crônica e enfisema é o tabagismo; e as causas comuns de bronquiectasias incluem infecções graves e fibrose cística.

A causa definitiva da asma ainda não é conhecida. A ruptura do tecido alveolar, muitas vezes como resultado do tabagismo, leva ao enfisema, que pode se tornar grave o suficiente para evoluir para DPOC.

A elastase quebra a elastina no tecido conjuntivo do pulmão que também pode resultar em enfisema.

A elastase é inibida pela proteína de fase aguda, alfa-1 antitripsina, e quando há deficiência desta, pode se desenvolver enfisema.

Com o estresse persistente do tabagismo, as células basais das vias aéreas se desorganizam e perdem sua capacidade regenerativa necessária para reparar a barreira epitelial.

As células basais desorganizadas são consideradas responsáveis ​​pelas principais alterações das vias aéreas características da DPOC e, com o estresse contínuo, podem sofrer uma transformação maligna.

Estudos têm demonstrado que o desenvolvimento inicial do enfisema está centrado nas alterações precoces no epitélio das vias aéreas de pequeno porte.

As células basais tornam-se ainda mais perturbadas na transição de um fumante para DPOC clinicamente definida.


=== Doenças pulmonares restritivas ===

Alguns tipos de doenças pulmonares crônicas são classificados como doenças pulmonares restritivas, devido a uma restrição na quantidade de tecido pulmonar envolvido na respiração.

Estes incluem fibrose pulmonar que pode ocorrer quando o pulmão está inflamado por um longo período de tempo.

A fibrose no pulmão substitui o tecido pulmonar funcional por tecido conjuntivo fibroso.

Isso pode ser devido a uma grande variedade de doenças pulmonares ocupacionais, como a pneumoconiose de Coalworker, doenças autoimunes ou, mais raramente, a uma reação à medicação.

Distúrbios respiratórios graves, em que a respiração espontânea não é suficiente para manter a vida, podem necessitar do uso de ventilação mecânica para garantir um suprimento adequado de ar.


=== Câncer ===

O câncer de pulmão pode surgir diretamente do tecido pulmonar ou como resultado de metástase de outra parte do corpo.

Existem dois tipos principais de tumor primário descritos como carcinomas pulmonares de pequenas células ou não pequenas células.

O principal fator de risco para o câncer é o tabagismo.

Uma vez que um câncer é identificado, ele é encenado usando exames como uma tomografia computadorizada e uma amostra de tecido de uma biópsia é retirada.

Os cânceres podem ser tratados cirurgicamente com a remoção do tumor, o uso de radioterapia, quimioterapia ou uma combinação, ou com o objetivo de controle dos sintomas.

O rastreamento do câncer de pulmão está sendo recomendado nos Estados Unidos para populações de alto risco.


=== Distúrbios congênitos ===

Os distúrbios congênitos incluem fibrose cística, hipoplasia pulmonar (desenvolvimento incompleto dos pulmões), hérnia diafragmática congênita e síndrome do desconforto respiratório infantil causada por deficiência no surfactante pulmonar.

Um lobo ázigos é uma variação anatômica congênita que, embora geralmente sem efeito, pode causar problemas em procedimentos toracoscópicos.


=== Outros ===

Um pneumotórax (pulmão colapsado) é uma coleção anormal de ar no espaço pleural que causa um desacoplamento do pulmão da parede torácica.

O pulmão não pode se expandir contra a pressão do ar dentro do espaço pleural.

Um exemplo de fácil compreensão é o pneumotórax traumático, onde o ar entra no espaço pleural vindo de fora do corpo, como ocorre com a punção da parede torácica.

Da mesma forma, os mergulhadores que sobem enquanto prendem a respiração com os pulmões totalmente inflados podem fazer com que os sacos de ar (alvéolos) estourem e vazem ar de alta pressão para o espaço pleural.


=== Exame pulmonar ===


Como parte de um exame físico em resposta a sintomas respiratórios de falta de ar e tosse, um exame pulmonar pode ser realizado.

Este exame inclui palpação e ausculta.

As áreas dos pulmões que podem ser ouvidas usando um estetoscópio são chamadas de campos pulmonares, e estes são os campos pulmonares posteriores, laterais e anteriores.

Os campos posteriores podem ser ouvidos por trás e incluem: os lobos inferiores (tomando três quartos dos campos posteriores); os campos anteriores ocupando o outro quarto; e os campos laterais sob as axilas, a axila esquerda para o lingual, a axila direita para o lobo médio direito.

Os campos anteriores também podem ser auscultados pela frente.

Uma área conhecida como triângulo de auscultação é uma área de musculatura mais fina nas costas que permite uma melhor audição.

Sons respiratórios anormais ouvidos durante um exame pulmonar podem indicar a presença de uma doença pulmonar; a sibilância, por exemplo, é comumente associada à asma e à DPOC.


=== Teste de função pulmonar ===


O teste de função pulmonar é realizado avaliando a capacidade de uma pessoa para inspirar e expirar em diferentes circunstâncias.

O volume de ar inspirado e expirado por uma pessoa em repouso é o volume corrente (normalmente 500-750mL); o volume de reserva inspiratório e o volume de reserva expiratório são as quantidades adicionais que uma pessoa é capaz de inspirar e expirar forçadamente, respectivamente.

O total somado de inspiração e expiração forçadas é a capacidade vital de uma pessoa.

Nem todo o ar é expelido dos pulmões mesmo após uma expiração forçada; o restante do ar é chamado de volume residual.

Juntos, esses termos são chamados de volumes pulmonares. Os pletismógrafos pulmonares são usados ​​para medir a capacidade residual funcional.

A capacidade residual funcional não pode ser medida por testes que dependem da expiração, pois uma pessoa só consegue respirar no máximo 80% de sua capacidade funcional total.

A capacidade pulmonar total depende da idade, altura, peso e sexo da pessoa, e normalmente varia entre 4 e 6 litros.

As fêmeas tendem a ter uma capacidade de 20 a 25% menor do que os machos.

Pessoas altas tendem a ter uma capacidade pulmonar total maior do que pessoas mais baixas.

Fumantes têm uma capacidade menor do que não fumantes.

Pessoas mais magras tendem a ter uma capacidade maior.

A capacidade pulmonar pode ser aumentada pelo treinamento físico em até 40%, mas o efeito pode ser modificado pela exposição à poluição do ar. Outros testes de função pulmonar incluem espirometria, medindo a quantidade (volume) e o fluxo de ar que pode ser inalado e exalado.

O volume máximo de respiração que pode ser exalado é chamado de capacidade vital.

Em particular, quanto uma pessoa é capaz de expirar em um segundo (chamado volume expiratório forçado (VEF1)) como proporção de quanto ela consegue expirar no total (VEF).

Essa relação, a relação VEF1/VEF, é importante para distinguir se uma doença pulmonar é restritiva ou obstrutiva.

Outro teste é o da capacidade de difusão do pulmão – esta é uma medida da transferência de gás do ar para o sangue nos capilares pulmonares.


== Outros animais ==



=== Aves ===


 
Os pulmões das aves são relativamente pequenos, mas estão conectados a 8 ou 9 sacos aéreos que se estendem por grande parte do corpo e, por sua vez, estão conectados a espaços aéreos dentro dos ossos.

Na inalação, o ar viaja através da traqueia de uma ave para os sacos aéreos.

O ar então viaja continuamente dos sacos aéreos na parte de trás, através dos pulmões, que são relativamente fixos em tamanho, até os sacos aéreos na frente.

A partir daqui, o ar é exalado.

Esses pulmões de tamanho fixo são chamados de "pulmões circulatórios", diferentemente dos "pulmões tipo fole" encontrados na maioria dos outros animais. Os pulmões das aves contêm milhões de pequenas passagens paralelas chamadas parabrônquios.

Pequenos sacos chamados átrios irradiam das paredes das pequenas passagens; estes, como os alvéolos em outros pulmões, são o local das trocas gasosas por difusão simples.

O fluxo sanguíneo ao redor dos parabrônquios e seus átrios forma um processo de troca gasosa em corrente cruzada (veja o diagrama à direita). são pouco vascularizados.

Os sacos aéreos se expandem e se contraem devido a mudanças no volume do tórax e do abdome.

Esta mudança de volume é causada pelo movimento do esterno e das costelas e este movimento é muitas vezes sincronizado com o movimento dos músculos de voo. Os parabrônquios em que o fluxo de ar é unidirecional são chamados de parabrônquios paleopulmônicos e são encontrados em todas as aves.

Algumas aves, no entanto, possuem, além disso, uma estrutura pulmonar onde o fluxo de ar nos parabrônquios é bidirecional.

Estes são denominados parabrônquios neopulmônicos.


=== Répteis ===


Os pulmões da maioria dos répteis têm um único brônquio que desce no centro, do qual numerosos ramos alcançam bolsas individuais em todos os pulmões.

Esses bolsões são semelhantes aos alvéolos dos mamíferos, mas muito maiores e em menor número.

Estes dão ao pulmão uma textura esponjosa.

Em tuataras, cobras e alguns lagartos, os pulmões são mais simples em estrutura, semelhantes aos dos anfíbios típicos. Cobras e lagartos sem membros normalmente possuem apenas o pulmão direito como principal órgão respiratório; o pulmão esquerdo está muito reduzido, ou mesmo ausente.

Os anfisbenídeos, no entanto, têm a disposição oposta, com um pulmão esquerdo maior e um pulmão direito reduzido ou ausente. Tanto os crocodilianos quanto os lagartos-monitores desenvolveram pulmões semelhantes aos das aves, proporcionando um fluxo de ar unidirecional e até possuindo sacos aéreos.

Os agora extintos pterossauros aparentemente refinaram ainda mais esse tipo de pulmão, estendendo os sacos aéreos nas membranas das asas e, no caso dos lonchodectídeos, tupuxuara e azhdarcoids, os membros posteriores. por músculos axiais e bombeamento bucal.

Os crocodilianos também contam com o método do pistão hepático, no qual o fígado é puxado para trás por um músculo ancorado no osso púbico (parte da pelve) chamado diafragma, que por sua vez cria pressão negativa na cavidade torácica do crocodilo, permitindo que o ar seja movido para os pulmões pela lei de Boyle.

As tartarugas, que são incapazes de mover suas costelas, usam seus membros anteriores e cintura peitoral para forçar o ar para dentro e para fora dos pulmões.


=== Anfíbios ===


Os pulmões da maioria dos sapos e outros anfíbios são simples e semelhantes a balões, com trocas gasosas limitadas à superfície externa do pulmão.

Isso não é muito eficiente, mas os anfíbios têm baixas demandas metabólicas e também podem eliminar rapidamente o dióxido de carbono por difusão pela pele na água e suplementar seu suprimento de oxigênio pelo mesmo método.

Os anfíbios empregam um sistema de pressão positiva para levar ar aos pulmões, forçando o ar para dentro dos pulmões por bombeamento bucal.

Isso é diferente da maioria dos vertebrados superiores, que usam um sistema respiratório impulsionado por pressão negativa, onde os pulmões são inflados pela expansão da caixa torácica.

No bombeamento bucal, o assoalho da boca é abaixado, enchendo a cavidade bucal com ar.

Os músculos da garganta então pressionam a garganta contra a parte inferior do crânio, forçando o ar para dentro dos pulmões. Devido à possibilidade de respiração através da pele combinada com o pequeno tamanho, todos os tetrápodes sem pulmões conhecidos são anfíbios.

A maioria das espécies de salamandras são salamandras sem pulmões, que respiram através da pele e dos tecidos que revestem a boca.

Isso necessariamente restringe seu tamanho: todos são pequenos e com aparência de fios, maximizando a superfície da pele em relação ao volume do corpo.

Outros tetrápodes sem pulmões conhecidos são a rã de cabeça chata de Bornéu e Atretochoana eiselti, uma cecília. aparência de favo de mel.

Em algumas salamandras, mesmo estes estão ausentes, e o pulmão tem uma parede lisa.

Nas cecílias, como nas cobras, apenas o pulmão direito atinge qualquer tamanho ou desenvolvimento.


=== Peixe-pulmão ===

Os pulmões dos peixes pulmonados são semelhantes aos dos anfíbios, com poucos, se houver, septos internos.

No lungfish australiano, há apenas um único pulmão, embora dividido em dois lobos.

Outros peixes pulmonados e Polypterus, no entanto, têm dois pulmões, localizados na parte superior do corpo, com o duto de conexão curvando-se ao redor e acima do esôfago.

O suprimento de sangue também gira em torno do esôfago, sugerindo que os pulmões evoluíram originalmente na parte ventral do corpo, como em outros vertebrados.


=== Invertebrados ===


Alguns invertebrados têm estruturas semelhantes a pulmões que servem a um propósito respiratório semelhante, mas não estão evolutivamente relacionadas aos pulmões dos vertebrados.

Alguns aracnídeos, como aranhas e escorpiões, têm estruturas chamadas pulmões de livros usados ​​para trocas gasosas atmosféricas.

Algumas espécies de aranhas têm quatro pares de pulmões de livro, mas a maioria tem dois pares.

Os escorpiões têm espiráculos em seu corpo para a entrada de ar para os pulmões do livro. O caranguejo-dos-coqueiros é terrestre e usa estruturas chamadas pulmões branquiostegais para respirar o ar.

Eles não podem nadar e se afogariam na água, mas possuem um conjunto rudimentar de guelras.

Eles podem respirar em terra e prender a respiração debaixo d'água.

Os pulmões branquiostegais são vistos como um estágio adaptativo de desenvolvimento da vida aquática para permitir a vida na terra, ou de peixes para anfíbios. Pulmonados são principalmente caracóis terrestres e lesmas que desenvolveram um pulmão simples da cavidade do manto.

Uma abertura localizada externamente chamada pneumóstomo permite que o ar seja levado para o pulmão da cavidade do manto.


== Origens evolutivas ==

Acredita-se que os pulmões dos vertebrados terrestres de hoje e as bexigas de gás dos peixes de hoje evoluíram a partir de sacos simples, como bolsas do esôfago, que permitiam que os primeiros peixes engolissem ar sob condições pobres em oxigênio.

Essas bolsas surgiram primeiro nos peixes ósseos.

Na maioria dos peixes com nadadeiras raiadas, os sacos evoluíram para bexigas de gás fechadas, enquanto várias carpas, trutas, arenques, bagres e enguias mantiveram a condição fisóstomo com o saco aberto para o esôfago.

Em peixes ósseos mais basais, como o gar, bichir, bowfin e os peixes com nadadeiras lobadas, as bexigas evoluíram para funcionar principalmente como pulmões.

Os peixes com nadadeiras lobadas deram origem aos tetrápodes terrestres.

Assim, os pulmões dos vertebrados são homólogos às bexigas de gás dos peixes (mas não às suas brânquias).


== Leitura adicional ==




https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lung

;;;FR;;;



POUMON


Les poumons sont les principaux organes du système respiratoire chez l'homme et la plupart des autres animaux, y compris quelques poissons et certains escargots.

Chez les mammifères et la plupart des autres vertébrés, deux poumons sont situés près de la colonne vertébrale de chaque côté du cœur.

Leur fonction dans le système respiratoire est d'extraire l'oxygène de l'air et de le transférer dans la circulation sanguine, et de libérer le dioxyde de carbone de la circulation sanguine dans l'atmosphère, dans un processus d'échange gazeux.

La respiration est commandée par différents systèmes musculaires chez différentes espèces.

Les mammifères, les reptiles et les oiseaux utilisent leurs différents muscles pour soutenir et favoriser la respiration.

Chez les tétrapodes antérieurs, l'air était entraîné dans les poumons par les muscles pharyngés via un pompage buccal, un mécanisme encore observé chez les amphibiens.

Chez l'homme, le principal muscle respiratoire responsable de la respiration est le diaphragme.

Les poumons fournissent également un flux d'air qui rend possible les sons vocaux, y compris la parole humaine.
Les humains ont deux poumons, un poumon droit et un poumon gauche.

Ils sont situés dans la cavité thoracique de la poitrine.

Le poumon droit est plus gros que le gauche, qui partage l'espace de la poitrine avec le cœur.

Les poumons pèsent ensemble environ 1,3 kg (2,9 lb) et le droit est plus lourd.

Les poumons font partie des voies respiratoires inférieures qui partent de la trachée et se ramifient dans les bronches et les bronchioles, et qui reçoivent l'air inspiré par la zone conductrice.

La zone conductrice se termine aux bronchioles terminales.

Celles-ci se divisent en bronchioles respiratoires de la zone respiratoire qui se divisent en conduits alvéolaires qui donnent naissance aux sacs alvéolaires contenant les alvéoles, où se produisent les échanges gazeux.

Les alvéoles sont également peu présentes sur les parois des bronchioles respiratoires et des canaux alvéolaires.

Ensemble, les poumons contiennent environ 2 400 kilomètres (1 500 mi) de voies respiratoires et 300 à 500 millions d'alvéoles.

Chaque poumon est enfermé dans un sac pleural de deux membranes appelées plèvres ; les membranes sont séparées par un film de liquide pleural, qui permet aux membranes interne et externe de glisser l'une sur l'autre pendant la respiration, sans trop de friction.

La plèvre interne divise également chaque poumon en sections appelées lobes.

Le poumon droit a trois lobes et le gauche en a deux.

Les lobes sont ensuite divisés en segments bronchopulmonaires et en lobules pulmonaires.

Les poumons ont un apport sanguin unique, recevant du sang désoxygéné du cœur dans la circulation pulmonaire dans le but de recevoir de l'oxygène et de libérer du dioxyde de carbone, et un apport séparé de sang oxygéné aux tissus des poumons, dans la circulation bronchique.
Le tissu des poumons peut être affecté par un certain nombre de maladies respiratoires, notamment la pneumonie et le cancer du poumon.

La maladie pulmonaire obstructive chronique comprend la bronchite chronique et l'emphysème, et peut être liée au tabagisme ou à l'exposition à des substances nocives.

Un certain nombre de maladies pulmonaires professionnelles peuvent être causées par des substances telles que la poussière de charbon, les fibres d'amiante et la poussière de silice cristalline.

Des maladies telles que la bronchite peuvent également affecter les voies respiratoires.

Les termes médicaux liés au poumon commencent souvent par pulmo-, du latin pulmonarius (des poumons) comme en pneumologie, ou par pneumo- (du grec πνεύμων "poumon") comme dans la pneumonie.
Au cours du développement embryonnaire, les poumons commencent à se développer sous la forme d'une poche de l'intestin antérieur, un tube qui forme ensuite la partie supérieure du système digestif.

Lorsque les poumons sont formés, le fœtus est maintenu dans le sac amniotique rempli de liquide et ne fonctionne donc pas pour respirer.

Le sang est également dévié des poumons par le canal artériel.

À la naissance, cependant, l'air commence à traverser les poumons et le conduit de dérivation se ferme, de sorte que les poumons peuvent commencer à respirer.

Les poumons ne se développent pleinement que dans la petite enfance.


== Structure ==



=== Anatomie ===


Les poumons sont situés dans la poitrine de chaque côté du cœur dans la cage thoracique.

Ils sont de forme conique avec un sommet étroit et arrondi au sommet et une large base concave qui repose sur la surface convexe du diaphragme.

L'apex du poumon s'étend dans la racine du cou, atteignant peu au-dessus du niveau de l'extrémité sternale de la première côte.

Les poumons s'étendent de près de la colonne vertébrale dans la cage thoracique à l'avant de la poitrine et vers le bas de la partie inférieure de la trachée au diaphragme.

Le poumon gauche partage l'espace avec le cœur et a une indentation dans sa bordure appelée l'encoche cardiaque du poumon gauche pour s'adapter à cela.

Les côtés avant et extérieur des poumons font face aux côtes, qui font de légères indentations sur leurs surfaces.

Les surfaces médiales des poumons sont tournées vers le centre de la poitrine et reposent contre le cœur, les gros vaisseaux et la carène où la trachée se divise en deux bronches principales.

L'impression cardiaque est une indentation formée sur les surfaces des poumons où ils reposent contre le cœur.
Les deux poumons ont une récession centrale appelée hile, où les vaisseaux sanguins et les voies respiratoires passent dans les poumons constituant la racine du poumon.

Il existe également des ganglions lymphatiques broncho-pulmonaires sur le hile. Les poumons sont entourés par la plèvre pulmonaire.

Les plèvres sont deux membranes séreuses ; la plèvre pariétale externe tapisse la paroi interne de la cage thoracique et la plèvre viscérale interne tapisse directement la surface des poumons.

Entre la plèvre se trouve un espace potentiel appelé la cavité pleurale contenant une fine couche de liquide pleural lubrifiant.


==== Lobes ====
Chaque poumon est divisé en sections appelées lobes par les replis de la plèvre viscérale sous forme de fissures.

Les lobes sont divisés en segments et les segments ont d'autres divisions sous forme de lobules.

Il y a trois lobes dans le poumon droit et deux lobes dans le poumon gauche.


==== Fissures ====
Les fissures sont formées au début du développement prénatal par des invaginations de la plèvre viscérale qui divisent les bronches lobaires et sectionnent les poumons en lobes qui contribuent à leur expansion.

Le poumon droit est divisé en trois lobes par une fissure horizontale et une fissure oblique.

Le poumon gauche est divisé en deux lobes par une fissure oblique étroitement alignée avec la fissure oblique du poumon droit.

Dans le poumon droit, la fissure horizontale supérieure sépare le lobe supérieur (supérieur) du lobe moyen.

La fissure oblique inférieure sépare le lobe inférieur des lobes moyen et supérieur. Les variations dans les fissures sont assez courantes étant soit incomplètement formées
ou présente comme une fissure supplémentaire comme dans la fissure azygos, ou absente.

Les fissures incomplètes sont responsables de la ventilation collatérale interlobaire, du flux d'air entre les lobes qui est indésirable dans certaines procédures de réduction du volume pulmonaire.


==== Segments ====
Les bronches principales ou primaires pénètrent dans les poumons au niveau du hile et se ramifient initialement dans des bronches secondaires également appelées bronches lobaires qui fournissent de l'air à chaque lobe du poumon.

Les bronches lobaires se ramifient en bronches tertiaires également appelées bronches segmentaires et celles-ci fournissent de l'air aux autres divisions des lobes appelées segments broncho-pulmonaires.

Chaque segment broncho-pulmonaire a sa propre bronche (segmentaire) et sa propre alimentation artérielle.

Les segments pour les poumons gauche et droit sont indiqués dans le tableau.

L'anatomie segmentaire est cliniquement utile pour localiser les processus pathologiques dans les poumons.

Un segment est une unité discrète qui peut être enlevée chirurgicalement sans affecter sérieusement les tissus environnants.


=== Poumon droit ===

Le poumon droit a à la fois plus de lobes et de segments que le gauche.

Il est divisé en trois lobes, un lobe supérieur, moyen et inférieur par deux fissures, une oblique et une horizontale.

La fissure horizontale supérieure sépare le lobe supérieur du lobe moyen.

Il commence dans la fissure oblique inférieure près du bord postérieur du poumon et, s'étendant horizontalement vers l'avant, coupe le bord antérieur au niveau de l'extrémité sternale du quatrième cartilage costal ; sur la surface médiastinale, il peut remonter jusqu'au hile.

La fissure oblique inférieure sépare les lobes inférieurs des lobes moyen et supérieur et est étroitement alignée avec la fissure oblique du poumon gauche. La surface médiastinale du poumon droit est en retrait par un certain nombre de structures voisines.

Le cœur siège dans une empreinte appelée empreinte cardiaque.

Au-dessus du hile du poumon se trouve un sillon arqué pour la veine azygos, et au-dessus se trouve un large sillon pour la veine cave supérieure et la veine brachiocéphalique droite; derrière cela, et près du haut du poumon se trouve une rainure pour l'artère brachiocéphalique.

Il y a une rainure pour l'œsophage derrière le hile et le ligament pulmonaire, et près de la partie inférieure de la rainure œsophagienne se trouve une rainure plus profonde pour la veine cave inférieure avant qu'elle ne pénètre dans le cœur. Le poids du poumon droit varie selon les individus, avec une plage de référence standard chez les hommes de 155 à 720 g (0,342 à 1,587 lb) et chez les femmes de 100 à 590 g (0,22 à 1,30 lb).


=== Poumon gauche ===

Le poumon gauche est divisé en deux lobes, un lobe supérieur et un lobe inférieur, par la fissure oblique, qui s'étend de la surface costale à la surface médiastinale du poumon à la fois au-dessus et au-dessous du hile.

Le poumon gauche, contrairement au droit, n'a pas de lobe moyen, bien qu'il ait une caractéristique homologue, une projection du lobe supérieur appelée lingula.

Son nom signifie "petite langue".

La lingula sur le poumon gauche sert de parallèle anatomique au lobe moyen sur le poumon droit, les deux zones étant prédisposées à des infections similaires et à des complications anatomiques.

Il existe deux segments broncho-pulmonaires de la lingula : supérieur et inférieur. La surface médiastinale du poumon gauche présente une large empreinte cardiaque à l'endroit où siège le cœur.

C'est plus profond et plus grand que celui du poumon droit, niveau auquel le cœur se projette vers la gauche.Sur la même surface, immédiatement au-dessus du hile, se trouve une rainure incurvée bien marquée pour l'arc aortique, et une rainure en dessous pour l'aorte descendante.

L'artère sous-clavière gauche, une branche de l'arc aortique, se trouve dans une rainure allant de l'arc jusqu'à près de l'apex du poumon.

Une rainure moins profonde devant l'artère et près du bord du poumon, loge la veine brachiocéphalique gauche.

L'œsophage peut se trouver dans une impression peu profonde plus large à la base du poumon. 1,135 livre).


== Microanatomie ==


Les poumons font partie des voies respiratoires inférieures et accueillent les voies respiratoires bronchiques lorsqu'elles se ramifient à partir de la trachée.

Les voies respiratoires bronchiques se terminent par des alvéoles qui constituent le tissu fonctionnel (parenchyme) du poumon, ainsi que des veines, des artères, des nerfs et des vaisseaux lymphatiques.

La trachée et les bronches ont des plexus de capillaires lymphatiques dans leur muqueuse et sous-muqueuse.

Les plus petites bronches ont une seule couche de capillaires lymphatiques et elles sont absentes des alvéoles.

Les poumons sont alimentés par le plus grand système de drainage lymphatique de tous les autres organes du corps.

Chaque poumon est entouré d'une membrane séreuse de plèvre viscérale, qui a une couche sous-jacente de tissu conjonctif lâche attachée à la substance du poumon.


=== Tissu conjonctif ===


Le tissu conjonctif des poumons est constitué de fibres élastiques et de collagène qui s'intercalent entre les capillaires et les parois alvéolaires.

L'élastine est la protéine clé de la matrice extracellulaire et est le composant principal des fibres élastiques.

L'élastine donne l'élasticité et la résilience nécessaires à l'étirement persistant impliqué dans la respiration, connu sous le nom de compliance pulmonaire.

Il est également responsable du recul élastique nécessaire.

L'élastine est plus concentrée dans les zones de stress élevé telles que les ouvertures des alvéoles et les jonctions alvéolaires.

Le tissu conjonctif relie toutes les alvéoles pour former le parenchyme pulmonaire qui a un aspect spongieux.

Les alvéoles ont des passages d'air interconnectés dans leurs parois appelés pores de Kohn.


=== Épithélium respiratoire ===


L'ensemble des voies respiratoires inférieures, y compris la trachée, les bronches et les bronchioles, est tapissé d'épithélium respiratoire.

Il s'agit d'un épithélium cilié parsemé de cellules caliciformes qui produisent de la mucine, composant principal du mucus, des cellules ciliées, des cellules basales et, dans les bronchioles terminales, des cellules en club aux actions similaires aux cellules basales et des macrophages.

Les cellules épithéliales et les glandes sous-muqueuses des voies respiratoires sécrètent du liquide de surface des voies respiratoires (ASL), dont la composition est étroitement régulée et détermine le fonctionnement de la clairance mucociliaire. Les cellules neuroendocrines pulmonaires se trouvent dans tout l'épithélium respiratoire, y compris l'épithélium alvéolaire, bien que ils ne représentent qu'environ 0,5 % de la population épithéliale totale.

Les PNEC sont des cellules épithéliales innervées des voies respiratoires qui se concentrent particulièrement sur les points de jonction des voies respiratoires.

Ces cellules peuvent produire de la sérotonine, de la dopamine et de la noradrénaline, ainsi que des produits polypeptidiques.

Les processus cytoplasmiques des cellules neuroendocrines pulmonaires s'étendent dans la lumière des voies respiratoires où ils peuvent détecter la composition du gaz inspiré.


=== Voies respiratoires bronchiques ===

Dans les bronches, il y a des anneaux de cartilage trachéaux incomplets et de plus petites plaques de cartilage qui les maintiennent ouvertes. : 472 Les bronchioles sont trop étroites pour supporter le cartilage et leurs parois sont en muscle lisse, ce qui est largement absent dans les bronchioles respiratoires plus étroites qui sont principalement juste de l'épithélium. : 472 L'absence de cartilage dans les bronchioles terminales leur donne un autre nom de bronchioles membraneuses.


=== Zone respiratoire ===

La zone conductrice des voies respiratoires se termine aux bronchioles terminales lorsqu'elles se ramifient dans les bronchioles respiratoires.

Cela marque le début de l'unité respiratoire terminale appelée acinus qui comprend les bronchioles respiratoires, les conduits alvéolaires, les sacs alvéolaires et les alvéoles.

Un acinus mesure jusqu'à 10 mm de diamètre.

Un lobule pulmonaire primaire est la partie de l'acinus qui comprend les canaux alvéolaires, les sacs et les alvéoles, mais n'inclut pas les bronchioles respiratoires.

L'unité décrite comme le lobule pulmonaire secondaire est le lobule le plus appelé lobule pulmonaire ou lobule respiratoire. : 489 Ce lobule est une unité discrète qui est le plus petit composant du poumon qui peut être vu sans aide.

Le lobule pulmonaire secondaire est susceptible d'être composé de 30 à 50 lobules primaires.

Le lobule est alimenté par une bronchiole terminale qui se ramifie en bronchioles respiratoires.

Les bronchioles respiratoires alimentent les alvéoles de chaque acinus et s'accompagnent d'une branche de l'artère pulmonaire.

Chaque lobule est entouré d'un septum interlobulaire.

Chaque acinus est incomplètement séparé par un septa interlobulaire. La bronchiole respiratoire donne naissance aux conduits alvéolaires qui mènent aux sacs alvéolaires, qui contiennent deux alvéoles ou plus.

Les parois des alvéoles sont extrêmement fines permettant une vitesse de diffusion rapide.

Les alvéoles ont de petits passages d'air interconnectés dans leurs parois appelés pores de Kohn.


=== Alvéoles ===


Les alvéoles sont constituées de deux types de cellules alvéolaires et d'un macrophage alvéolaire.

Les deux types de cellules sont connus sous le nom de cellules de type I et de type II (également appelées pneumocytes).

Les types I et II constituent les parois et les septa alvéolaires.

Les cellules de type I fournissent 95 % de la surface de chaque alvéole et sont plates (« squameuses »), et les cellules de type II se regroupent généralement dans les coins des alvéoles et ont une forme cubique.

Malgré cela, les cellules se produisent dans un rapport à peu près égal de 1: 1 ou 6: 4. Le type I sont des cellules épithéliales squameuses qui composent la structure de la paroi alvéolaire.

Ils ont des parois extrêmement fines qui permettent un échange de gaz facile.

Ces cellules de type I constituent également les septa alvéolaires qui séparent chaque alvéole.

Les septa sont constitués d'un revêtement épithélial et de membranes basales associées.

Les cellules de type I ne sont pas capables de se diviser et dépendent par conséquent de la différenciation des cellules de type II. Les cellules de type II sont plus grandes et tapissent les alvéoles et produisent et sécrètent du liquide de revêtement épithélial et du surfactant pulmonaire.

Les cellules de type II sont capables de se diviser et de se différencier en cellules de type I. Les macrophages alvéolaires jouent un rôle important dans le système immunitaire.

Ils éliminent les substances qui se déposent dans les alvéoles, y compris les globules rouges en vrac qui ont été expulsés des vaisseaux sanguins.


=== Microbiote ===


Il existe une grande présence de micro-organismes dans les poumons connus sous le nom de microbiote pulmonaire qui interagissent avec les cellules épithéliales des voies respiratoires ; une interaction d'importance probable dans le maintien de l'homéostasie.

Le microbiote est complexe et dynamique chez les personnes en bonne santé, et altéré dans des maladies telles que l'asthme et la MPOC.

Par exemple, des changements significatifs peuvent avoir lieu dans la BPCO suite à une infection par un rhinovirus.

Les genres fongiques que l'on trouve couramment sous forme de mycobiote dans le microbiote comprennent Candida, Malassezia, Saccharomyces et Aspergillus.


=== Voies respiratoires ===


Les voies respiratoires inférieures font partie du système respiratoire et se composent de la trachée et des structures situées en dessous, y compris les poumons.

La trachée reçoit l'air du pharynx et descend jusqu'à un endroit où elle se divise (la carène) en une bronche primaire droite et gauche.

Celles-ci alimentent en air les poumons droit et gauche, se divisant progressivement en bronches secondaires et tertiaires pour les lobes des poumons, et en bronchioles de plus en plus petites jusqu'à devenir les bronchioles respiratoires.

Ceux-ci fournissent à leur tour de l'air à travers des conduits alvéolaires dans les alvéoles, où l'échange de gaz a lieu.

L'oxygène inspiré se diffuse à travers les parois des alvéoles dans les capillaires enveloppants et dans la circulation, et le dioxyde de carbone se diffuse du sang dans les poumons pour être expiré.
Les estimations de la surface totale des poumons varient de 50 à 75 mètres carrés (540 à 810 pieds carrés); bien que cela soit souvent cité dans les manuels et que les médias soient "de la taille d'un court de tennis", il fait en réalité moins de la moitié de la taille d'un court de simple. Les bronches de la zone conductrice sont renforcées par du cartilage hyalin afin de maintenir ouvert le voies respiratoires.

Les bronchioles n'ont pas de cartilage et sont plutôt entourées de muscles lisses.

L'air est réchauffé à 37 °C (99 °F), humidifié et purifié par la zone conductrice.

Les particules de l'air sont éliminées par les cils sur l'épithélium respiratoire tapissant les passages, dans un processus appelé clairance mucociliaire.
Les récepteurs d'étirement pulmonaires dans le muscle lisse des voies respiratoires déclenchent un réflexe connu sous le nom de réflexe de Hering-Breuer qui empêche les poumons de se gonfler excessivement lors d'une inspiration forcée.


=== Approvisionnement en sang ===


Les poumons ont une double circulation sanguine assurée par une circulation bronchique et une circulation pulmonaire.

La circulation bronchique fournit du sang oxygéné aux voies respiratoires des poumons, par les artères bronchiques qui quittent l'aorte.

Il y a généralement trois artères, deux vers le poumon gauche et une vers la droite, et elles se ramifient le long des bronches et des bronchioles.

La circulation pulmonaire transporte le sang désoxygéné du cœur vers les poumons et renvoie le sang oxygéné vers le cœur pour alimenter le reste du corps. Le volume sanguin des poumons est d'environ 450 millilitres en moyenne, soit environ 9 % du volume sanguin total de tout le système circulatoire.

Cette quantité peut facilement fluctuer entre la moitié et le double du volume normal.

De plus, en cas de perte de sang par hémorragie, le sang des poumons peut partiellement compenser en se transférant automatiquement vers la circulation systémique.


=== Innervation ===

Les poumons sont alimentés par les nerfs du système nerveux autonome.

L'entrée du système nerveux parasympathique se fait via le nerf vague.

Lorsqu'il est stimulé par l'acétylcholine, cela provoque une constriction du muscle lisse qui tapisse les bronches et les bronchioles et augmente les sécrétions des glandes.

Les poumons ont également un tonus sympathique de la noradrénaline agissant sur les récepteurs bêta 2 adrénergiques dans les voies respiratoires, ce qui provoque une bronchodilatation. L'action de la respiration a lieu en raison de signaux nerveux envoyés par le centre respiratoire dans le tronc cérébral, le long du nerf phrénique depuis le nerf cervical plexus au diaphragme.


=== Variante ===

Les lobes du poumon sont sujets à des variations anatomiques.

Une fissure interlobaire horizontale était incomplète dans 25 % des poumons droits, voire absente dans 11 % des cas.

Une fissure accessoire a également été trouvée dans 14 % et 22 % des poumons gauche et droit, respectivement.

Une fissure oblique s'est avérée incomplète dans 21% à 47% des poumons gauches.

Dans certains cas, une fissure est absente, ou supplémentaire, résultant en un poumon droit avec seulement deux lobes, ou un poumon gauche avec trois lobes. Une variation dans la structure de ramification des voies respiratoires a été trouvée spécifiquement dans les voies respiratoires centrales.
ramification.

Cette variation est associée au développement de la MPOC à l'âge adulte.


== Développement ==


Le développement des poumons humains provient du sillon laryngotrachéal et se développe jusqu'à maturité sur plusieurs semaines chez le fœtus et pendant plusieurs années après la naissance. Le larynx, la trachée, les bronches et les poumons qui composent les voies respiratoires commencent à se former au cours de la quatrième semaine. de l'embryogenèse du bourgeon pulmonaire qui apparaît ventralement à la partie caudale de l'intestin antérieur.

Les voies respiratoires ont une structure ramifiée et sont également connues sous le nom d'arbre respiratoire.

Dans l'embryon, cette structure se développe dans le processus de morphogenèse ramifiée et est générée par la division répétée de l'extrémité de la branche.

Dans le développement des poumons (comme dans certains autres organes), l'épithélium forme des tubes ramifiés.

Le poumon a une symétrie gauche-droite et chaque bourgeon appelé bourgeon bronchique se développe sous la forme d'un épithélium tubulaire qui devient une bronche.

Chaque bronche se ramifie en bronchioles.

La ramification est le résultat de la pointe de chaque tube bifurquant.

Le processus de ramification forme les bronches, les bronchioles et finalement les alvéoles.

Les quatre gènes principalement associés à la morphogenèse ramifiée dans le poumon sont la protéine de signalisation intercellulaire - sonic hedgehog (SHH), les facteurs de croissance des fibroblastes FGF10 et FGFR2b et la protéine morphogénétique osseuse BMP4.

Le FGF10 est considéré comme ayant le rôle le plus important.

Le FGF10 est une molécule de signalisation paracrine nécessaire à la ramification épithéliale, et SHH inhibe le FGF10.

Le développement des alvéoles est influencé par un mécanisme différent par lequel la bifurcation continue est arrêtée et les pointes distales se dilatent pour former les alvéoles.
A la fin de la quatrième semaine, le bourgeon pulmonaire se divise en deux, les bourgeons bronchiques primaires droit et gauche de chaque côté de la trachée.

Au cours de la cinquième semaine, le bourgeon droit se ramifie en trois bourgeons bronchiques secondaires et les branches gauches en deux bourgeons bronchiques secondaires.

Ceux-ci donnent naissance aux lobes des poumons, trois à droite et deux à gauche.

Au cours de la semaine suivante, les bourgeons secondaires se ramifient en bourgeons tertiaires, une dizaine de chaque côté.

De la sixième à la seizième semaine, les éléments majeurs des poumons apparaissent sauf les alvéoles.

De la semaine 16 à la semaine 26, les bronches grossissent et le tissu pulmonaire devient fortement vascularisé.

Des bronchioles et des canaux alvéolaires se développent également.

À la semaine 26, les bronchioles terminales se sont formées et se ramifient en deux bronchioles respiratoires.

Au cours de la période couvrant la 26e semaine jusqu'à la naissance, l'importante barrière sang-air est établie.

Des cellules alvéolaires de type I spécialisées où vont se produire les échanges gazeux, ainsi que les cellules alvéolaires de type II qui sécrètent du surfactant pulmonaire, apparaissent.

Le tensioactif réduit la tension superficielle à la surface air-alvéolaire, ce qui permet l'expansion des sacs alvéolaires.

Les sacs alvéolaires contiennent les alvéoles primitives qui se forment à l'extrémité des canaux alvéolaires,
et leur apparition vers le septième mois marque le moment où une respiration limitée serait possible, et le bébé prématuré pourrait survivre.


=== Carence en vitamine A ===


Le poumon en développement est particulièrement vulnérable aux variations des niveaux de vitamine A.

La carence en vitamine A a été liée à des modifications de la muqueuse épithéliale du poumon et du parenchyme pulmonaire.

Cela peut perturber la physiologie normale des poumons et prédisposer aux maladies respiratoires.

Une carence nutritionnelle sévère en vitamine A se traduit par une diminution de la formation des parois alvéolaires (septa) et par des modifications notables de l'épithélium respiratoire ; des altérations sont notées dans la matrice extracellulaire et dans le contenu protéique de la membrane basale.

La matrice extracellulaire maintient l'élasticité pulmonaire; la membrane basale est associée à l'épithélium alvéolaire et joue un rôle important dans la barrière sang-air.

La carence est associée à des défauts fonctionnels et à des états pathologiques.

La vitamine A est cruciale dans le développement des alvéoles qui se poursuit pendant plusieurs années après la naissance.


=== Après la naissance ===

À la naissance, les poumons du bébé sont remplis de liquide sécrété par les poumons et ne sont pas gonflés.

Après la naissance, le système nerveux central du nourrisson réagit au changement soudain de température et d'environnement.

Cela déclenche la première respiration, environ 10 secondes après l'accouchement.

Avant la naissance, les poumons sont remplis de liquide pulmonaire fœtal. Après la première respiration, le liquide est rapidement absorbé par le corps ou expiré.

La résistance dans les vaisseaux sanguins des poumons diminue, ce qui augmente la surface d'échange gazeux et les poumons commencent à respirer spontanément.

Cela accompagne d'autres changements qui entraînent une augmentation de la quantité de sang pénétrant dans les tissus pulmonaires. À la naissance, les poumons sont très peu développés avec seulement environ un sixième des alvéoles du poumon adulte.

Les alvéoles continuent à se former jusqu'au début de l'âge adulte, et leur capacité à se former si nécessaire est observée dans la régénération du poumon.

Les septa alvéolaires ont un double réseau capillaire au lieu du réseau unique du poumon développé.

Ce n'est qu'après la maturation du réseau capillaire que le poumon peut entrer dans une phase normale de croissance.

Suite à la croissance précoce du nombre d'alvéoles, il y a une autre étape d'agrandissement des alvéoles.


== Fonction ==



=== Echange gazeux ===

La fonction principale des poumons est l'échange de gaz entre les poumons et le sang.

Les gaz capillaires alvéolaires et pulmonaires s'équilibrent à travers la fine barrière sang-air.

Cette fine membrane (environ 0,5 à 2 μm d'épaisseur) est pliée en environ 300 millions d'alvéoles, offrant une surface extrêmement grande (estimations variant entre 70 et 145 m2) pour que les échanges gazeux se produisent.

Les poumons ne sont pas capables de se dilater pour respirer par eux-mêmes et ne le feront que lorsqu'il y a une augmentation du volume de la cavité thoracique.

Ceci est réalisé par les muscles de la respiration, à travers la contraction du diaphragme, et les muscles intercostaux qui tirent la cage thoracique vers le haut comme indiqué sur le schéma.

Pendant l'expiration, les muscles se détendent, ramenant les poumons à leur position de repos.

À ce stade, les poumons contiennent la capacité résiduelle fonctionnelle (FRC) de l'air, qui, chez l'homme adulte, a un volume d'environ 2,5 à 3,0 litres. Lors d'une respiration intense comme à l'effort, un grand nombre de muscles accessoires dans le cou et abdomen sont recrutés, qui lors de l'expiration tirent la cage thoracique vers le bas, diminuant le volume de la cavité thoracique.

La FRC est maintenant diminuée, mais comme les poumons ne peuvent pas être complètement vidés, il reste encore environ un litre d'air résiduel.

Des tests de la fonction pulmonaire sont effectués pour évaluer les volumes et les capacités pulmonaires.


=== Se protéger ===

Les poumons possèdent plusieurs caractéristiques qui protègent contre l'infection.

Les voies respiratoires sont tapissées d'épithélium respiratoire ou de muqueuse respiratoire, avec des projections ressemblant à des cheveux appelées cils qui battent en rythme et transportent du mucus.

Cette clairance mucociliaire est un important système de défense contre les infections transmises par voie aérienne.

Les particules de poussière et les bactéries présentes dans l'air inhalé sont capturées dans la surface muqueuse des voies respiratoires et sont déplacées vers le pharynx par l'action de battement rythmique vers le haut des cils. protège contre les infections respiratoires; les cellules caliciformes sécrètent du mucus qui contient également plusieurs composés antimicrobiens tels que les défensines, les antiprotéases et les antioxydants.

Un type rare de cellule spécialisée appelée ionocyte pulmonaire qui pourrait réguler la viscosité du mucus a été décrit.

De plus, la muqueuse pulmonaire contient également des macrophages, des cellules immunitaires qui engloutissent et détruisent les débris et les microbes qui pénètrent dans les poumons lors d'un processus appelé phagocytose ; et les cellules dendritiques qui présentent des antigènes pour activer les composants du système immunitaire adaptatif tels que les cellules T et les cellules B. La taille des voies respiratoires et le flux d'air protègent également les poumons des particules plus grosses.

Les particules plus petites se déposent dans la bouche et derrière la bouche dans l'oropharynx, et les particules plus grosses sont piégées dans les poils nasaux après inhalation.


=== Autre ===

En plus de leur fonction dans la respiration, les poumons ont un certain nombre d'autres fonctions.

Ils sont impliqués dans le maintien de l'homéostasie, aidant à la régulation de la pression artérielle dans le cadre du système rénine-angiotensine.

La paroi interne des vaisseaux sanguins sécrète l'enzyme de conversion de l'angiotensine (ECA), une enzyme qui catalyse la conversion de l'angiotensine I en angiotensine II.

Les poumons participent à l'homéostasie acido-basique du sang en expulsant du dioxyde de carbone lors de la respiration. Les poumons jouent également un rôle protecteur.

Plusieurs substances transmissibles par le sang, telles que quelques types de prostaglandines, les leucotriènes, la sérotonine et la bradykinine, sont excrétées par les poumons.

Les médicaments et autres substances peuvent être absorbés, modifiés ou excrétés dans les poumons.

Les poumons filtrent les petits caillots sanguins des veines et les empêchent de pénétrer dans les artères et de provoquer des accidents vasculaires cérébraux. Les poumons jouent également un rôle central dans la parole en fournissant de l'air et un flux d'air pour la création de sons vocaux et d'autres communications paralangagières telles que les soupirs et les halètements.
La recherche suggère un rôle des poumons dans la production de plaquettes sanguines.


== Expression des gènes et des protéines ==


Environ 20 000 gènes codant pour des protéines sont exprimés dans les cellules humaines et près de 75 % de ces gènes sont exprimés dans le poumon normal.

Un peu moins de 200 de ces gènes sont plus spécifiquement exprimés dans le poumon et moins de 20 gènes sont hautement spécifiques du poumon.

L'expression la plus élevée de protéines pulmonaires spécifiques sont différentes protéines tensioactives, telles que SFTPA1, SFTPB et SFTPC, et la napsine, exprimées dans les pneumocytes de type II.

D'autres protéines à expression élevée dans les poumons sont la protéine dynéine DNAH5 dans les cellules ciliées et la protéine SCGB1A1 sécrétée dans les cellules caliciformes sécrétant du mucus de la muqueuse des voies respiratoires.


== Signification clinique ==


Les poumons peuvent être affectés par un certain nombre de maladies et de troubles.

La pneumologie est la spécialité médicale qui traite des maladies respiratoires impliquant les poumons et le système respiratoire.

La chirurgie cardiothoracique traite de la chirurgie des poumons, y compris la chirurgie de réduction du volume pulmonaire, la lobectomie, la pneumectomie et la transplantation pulmonaire.


=== Inflammation et infection ===

Les affections inflammatoires du tissu pulmonaire sont la pneumonie, celles des voies respiratoires sont la bronchite et la bronchiolite, et celles de la plèvre entourant les poumons la pleurésie.

L'inflammation est généralement causée par des infections dues à des bactéries ou à des virus.

Lorsque le tissu pulmonaire est enflammé pour d'autres causes, on parle de pneumonite.

L'une des principales causes de pneumonie bactérienne est la tuberculose.

Les infections chroniques surviennent souvent chez les personnes immunodéprimées et peuvent inclure une infection fongique par Aspergillus fumigatus qui peut entraîner la formation d'un aspergillome dans les poumons. L'alcool affecte les poumons et peut provoquer une maladie pulmonaire alcoolique inflammatoire.

L'exposition aiguë à l'alcool stimule le battement des cils dans l'épithélium respiratoire.

Cependant, une exposition chronique a pour effet de désensibiliser la réponse ciliaire ce qui réduit la clairance mucociliaire (MCC).

Le MCC est un système de défense inné protégeant contre les polluants et les agents pathogènes, et lorsque celui-ci est perturbé, le nombre de macrophages alvéolaires diminue.

Une réponse inflammatoire ultérieure est la libération de cytokines.

Une autre conséquence est la susceptibilité à l'infection.


=== Modifications de l'approvisionnement en sang ===


Une embolie pulmonaire est un caillot sanguin qui se loge dans les artères pulmonaires.

La majorité des embolies surviennent en raison d'une thrombose veineuse profonde dans les jambes.

Les embolies pulmonaires peuvent être étudiées à l'aide d'une analyse de ventilation / perfusion, d'une tomodensitométrie des artères pulmonaires ou de tests sanguins tels que les D-dimères.

L'hypertension pulmonaire décrit une augmentation de la pression au début de l'artère pulmonaire qui a un grand nombre de causes différentes.

D'autres affections plus rares peuvent également affecter l'irrigation sanguine des poumons, telles que la granulomatose avec polyangéite, qui provoque une inflammation des petits vaisseaux sanguins des poumons et des reins. Une contusion pulmonaire est une ecchymose causée par un traumatisme thoracique.

Il en résulte une hémorragie des alvéoles provoquant une accumulation de liquide qui peut gêner la respiration, et cela peut être léger ou grave.
La fonction des poumons peut également être affectée par la compression du liquide dans l'épanchement pleural de la cavité pleurale ou d'autres substances telles que l'air (pneumothorax), le sang (hémothorax) ou des causes plus rares.

Ceux-ci peuvent être étudiés à l'aide d'une radiographie pulmonaire ou d'un scanner et peuvent nécessiter l'insertion d'un drain chirurgical jusqu'à ce que la cause sous-jacente soit identifiée et traitée.


=== Maladies pulmonaires obstructives ===


L'asthme, la bronchite chronique, la bronchectasie et la maladie pulmonaire obstructive chronique (MPOC) sont toutes des maladies pulmonaires obstructives caractérisées par une obstruction des voies respiratoires.

Cela limite la quantité d'air pouvant pénétrer dans les alvéoles en raison de la constriction de l'arbre bronchique, due à l'inflammation.

Les maladies pulmonaires obstructives sont souvent identifiées en raison de symptômes et diagnostiquées à l'aide de tests de la fonction pulmonaire tels que la spirométrie.

De nombreuses maladies pulmonaires obstructives sont gérées en évitant les déclencheurs (tels que les acariens ou le tabagisme), en contrôlant les symptômes tels que les bronchodilatateurs et en supprimant l'inflammation (par exemple par les corticostéroïdes) dans les cas graves.

Une cause fréquente de bronchite chronique et d'emphysème est le tabagisme; et les causes courantes de bronchectasie comprennent les infections graves et la fibrose kystique.

La cause définitive de l'asthme n'est pas encore connue. La dégradation du tissu alvéolaire, souvent due au tabagisme, conduit à l'emphysème, qui peut devenir suffisamment grave pour évoluer en MPOC.

L'élastase décompose l'élastine dans le tissu conjonctif des poumons, ce qui peut également entraîner un emphysème.

L'élastase est inhibée par la protéine de phase aiguë, l'alpha-1 antitrypsine, et lorsqu'il y a une déficience de celle-ci, un emphysème peut se développer.

Avec le stress persistant du tabagisme, les cellules basales des voies respiratoires se désorganisent et perdent leur capacité de régénération nécessaire à la réparation de la barrière épithéliale.

Les cellules basales désorganisées sont considérées comme responsables des modifications majeures des voies respiratoires caractéristiques de la MPOC et, avec un stress continu, peuvent subir une transformation maligne.

Des études ont montré que le développement initial de l'emphysème est centré sur les modifications précoces de l'épithélium des voies respiratoires des petites voies respiratoires.

Les cellules basales deviennent encore plus dérangées lors de la transition d'un fumeur vers une MPOC cliniquement définie.


=== Maladies pulmonaires restrictives ===

Certains types de maladies pulmonaires chroniques sont classées comme maladies pulmonaires restrictives, en raison d'une restriction de la quantité de tissu pulmonaire impliqué dans la respiration.

Ceux-ci comprennent la fibrose pulmonaire qui peut survenir lorsque le poumon est enflammé pendant une longue période.

La fibrose pulmonaire remplace le tissu pulmonaire fonctionnel par du tissu conjonctif fibreux.

Cela peut être dû à une grande variété de maladies pulmonaires professionnelles telles que la pneumoconiose du charbonnier, des maladies auto-immunes ou plus rarement à une réaction aux médicaments.

Les troubles respiratoires graves, où la respiration spontanée n'est pas suffisante pour maintenir la vie, peuvent nécessiter l'utilisation d'une ventilation mécanique pour assurer un apport d'air adéquat.


=== Cancers ===

Le cancer du poumon peut provenir directement du tissu pulmonaire ou résulter de métastases provenant d'une autre partie du corps.

Il existe deux principaux types de tumeurs primaires décrites comme des carcinomes pulmonaires à petites cellules ou non à petites cellules.

Le principal facteur de risque du cancer est le tabagisme.

Une fois qu'un cancer est identifié, il est mis en scène à l'aide d'analyses telles qu'une tomodensitométrie et un échantillon de tissu provenant d'une biopsie est prélevé.

Les cancers peuvent être traités chirurgicalement en retirant la tumeur, en utilisant la radiothérapie, la chimiothérapie ou une association, ou dans le but de contrôler les symptômes.

Le dépistage du cancer du poumon est recommandé aux États-Unis pour les populations à haut risque.


=== Affections congénitales ===

Les troubles congénitaux comprennent la fibrose kystique, l'hypoplasie pulmonaire (un développement incomplet des poumons), la hernie diaphragmatique congénitale et le syndrome de détresse respiratoire du nourrisson causé par une carence en surfactant pulmonaire.

Un lobe azygos est une variation anatomique congénitale qui, bien que généralement sans effet, peut causer des problèmes dans les procédures thoracoscopiques.


=== Autres ===

Un pneumothorax (poumon effondré) est une accumulation anormale d'air dans l'espace pleural qui provoque un découplage du poumon de la paroi thoracique.

Le poumon ne peut pas se dilater contre la pression de l'air à l'intérieur de l'espace pleural.

Un exemple facile à comprendre est un pneumothorax traumatique, où l'air pénètre dans l'espace pleural depuis l'extérieur du corps, comme cela se produit avec une perforation de la paroi thoracique.

De même, les plongeurs qui remontent tout en retenant leur souffle avec leurs poumons complètement gonflés peuvent provoquer l'éclatement des sacs aériens (alvéoles) et une fuite d'air à haute pression dans l'espace pleural.


=== Examen pulmonaire ===


Dans le cadre d'un examen physique en réponse à des symptômes respiratoires d'essoufflement et de toux, un examen pulmonaire peut être effectué.

Cet examen comprend la palpation et l'auscultation.

Les zones des poumons qui peuvent être écoutées à l'aide d'un stéthoscope sont appelées les champs pulmonaires, et ce sont les champs pulmonaires postérieur, latéral et antérieur.

Les champs postérieurs s'écoutent de dos et comprennent : les lobes inférieurs (occupant les trois quarts des champs postérieurs) ; les champs antérieurs occupant l'autre quart ; et les champs latéraux sous les aisselles, l'aisselle gauche pour le lingual, l'aisselle droite pour le lobe moyen droit.

Les champs antérieurs peuvent également être auscultés de face.

Une zone connue sous le nom de triangle d'auscultation est une zone de musculature plus fine sur le dos qui permet une meilleure écoute.

Des bruits respiratoires anormaux entendus lors d'un examen pulmonaire peuvent indiquer la présence d'une affection pulmonaire. la respiration sifflante, par exemple, est couramment associée à l'asthme et à la MPOC.


=== Test de la fonction pulmonaire ===


Les tests de la fonction pulmonaire sont effectués en évaluant la capacité d'une personne à inspirer et à expirer dans différentes circonstances.

Le volume d'air inhalé et expiré par une personne au repos est le volume courant (normalement 500-750 ml) ; le volume de réserve inspiratoire et le volume de réserve expiratoire sont les quantités supplémentaires qu'une personne est capable d'inspirer et d'expirer de force respectivement.

La somme totale de l'inspiration et de l'expiration forcées est la capacité vitale d'une personne.

Tout l'air n'est pas expulsé des poumons même après une expiration forcée; le reste de l'air est appelé le volume résiduel.

Ensemble, ces termes sont appelés volumes pulmonaires. Les pléthysmographes pulmonaires sont utilisés pour mesurer la capacité résiduelle fonctionnelle.

La capacité résiduelle fonctionnelle ne peut pas être mesurée par des tests qui reposent sur l'expiration, car une personne ne peut respirer qu'un maximum de 80 % de sa capacité fonctionnelle totale.

La capacité pulmonaire totale dépend de l'âge, de la taille, du poids et du sexe de la personne et se situe normalement entre 4 et 6 litres.

Les femelles ont tendance à avoir une capacité inférieure de 20 à 25 % à celle des mâles.

Les personnes de grande taille ont tendance à avoir une capacité pulmonaire totale plus importante que les personnes de petite taille.

Les fumeurs ont une capacité inférieure à celle des non-fumeurs.

Les personnes plus minces ont tendance à avoir une plus grande capacité.

La capacité pulmonaire peut être augmentée jusqu'à 40 % par l'entraînement physique, mais l'effet peut être modifié par l'exposition à la pollution de l'air. D'autres tests de la fonction pulmonaire incluent la spirométrie, mesurant la quantité (volume) et le débit d'air qui peut être inhalé et expiré.

Le volume maximal de souffle qui peut être expiré s'appelle la capacité vitale.

En particulier, combien une personne est capable d'expirer en une seconde (appelé volume expiratoire forcé (FEV1)) en proportion de combien elle est capable d'expirer au total (FEV).

Ce rapport, le rapport VEMS/VEMS, est important pour distinguer si une maladie pulmonaire est restrictive ou obstructive.

Un autre test est celui de la capacité de diffusion des poumons - c'est une mesure du transfert de gaz de l'air vers le sang dans les capillaires pulmonaires.


== Autres animaux ==



=== Oiseaux ===


 
Les poumons des oiseaux sont relativement petits, mais sont reliés à 8 ou 9 sacs aériens qui s'étendent sur une grande partie du corps et sont à leur tour reliés à des espaces aériens dans les os.

Lors de l'inhalation, l'air se déplace à travers la trachée d'un oiseau dans les sacs aériens.

L'air se déplace ensuite en continu des sacs aériens à l'arrière, à travers les poumons, qui sont de taille relativement fixe, jusqu'aux sacs aériens à l'avant.

De là, l'air est expiré.

Ces poumons de taille fixe sont appelés « poumons circulatoires », par opposition aux « poumons de type soufflet » que l'on trouve chez la plupart des autres animaux. Les poumons des oiseaux contiennent des millions de minuscules passages parallèles appelés parabronchi.

De petits sacs appelés oreillettes rayonnent des parois des minuscules passages; ceux-ci, comme les alvéoles des autres poumons, sont le siège d'échanges gazeux par simple diffusion.

Le flux sanguin autour des parabronches et de leurs oreillettes forme un processus d'échange gazeux à contre-courant (voir schéma à droite). Les sacs aériens, qui retiennent l'air, ne contribuent pas beaucoup à l'échange gazeux, malgré leur paroi mince, car sont peu vascularisés.

Les sacs aériens se dilatent et se contractent en raison des changements de volume dans le thorax et l'abdomen.

Ce changement de volume est causé par le mouvement du sternum et des côtes et ce mouvement est souvent synchronisé avec le mouvement des muscles du vol. Les parabronches dans lesquelles le flux d'air est unidirectionnel sont appelées parabronches paléopulmoniques et se retrouvent chez tous les oiseaux.

Certains oiseaux ont cependant, en plus, une structure pulmonaire où le flux d'air dans les parabronches est bidirectionnel.

Celles-ci sont appelées parabronches néopulmoniques.


=== Reptiles ===


Les poumons de la plupart des reptiles ont une seule bronche descendant au centre, à partir de laquelle de nombreuses branches atteignent des poches individuelles dans les poumons.

Ces poches sont similaires aux alvéoles des mammifères, mais beaucoup plus grandes et moins nombreuses.

Ceux-ci donnent au poumon une texture semblable à une éponge.

Chez les tuataras, les serpents et certains lézards, les poumons ont une structure plus simple, semblable à celle des amphibiens typiques. Les serpents et les lézards sans membres ne possèdent généralement que le poumon droit comme organe respiratoire majeur; le poumon gauche est fortement réduit, voire absent.

Les amphisbaenians, cependant, ont l'arrangement opposé, avec un poumon gauche majeur et un poumon droit réduit ou absent. Les crocodiliens et les varans ont développé des poumons similaires à ceux des oiseaux, fournissant un flux d'air unidirectionnel et possédant même des sacs aériens.

Les ptérosaures aujourd'hui disparus ont apparemment encore affiné ce type de poumon, étendant les sacs aériens dans les membranes des ailes et, dans le cas des lonchodectidés, des tupuxuara et des azhdarchoïdes, les membres postérieurs. Les poumons reptiliens reçoivent généralement de l'air via l'expansion et la contraction des côtes. par les muscles axiaux et le pompage buccal.

Les crocodiliens s'appuient également sur la méthode du piston hépatique, dans laquelle le foie est tiré vers l'arrière par un muscle ancré à l'os pubien (partie du bassin) appelé diaphragme, qui à son tour crée une pression négative dans la cavité thoracique du crocodile, permettant à l'air d'être déplacé dans les poumons par la loi de Boyle.

Les tortues, qui sont incapables de bouger leurs côtes, utilisent plutôt leurs membres antérieurs et leur ceinture pectorale pour forcer l'air à entrer et à sortir des poumons.


=== Amphibiens ===


Les poumons de la plupart des grenouilles et autres amphibiens sont simples et ressemblent à des ballons, les échanges gazeux étant limités à la surface externe du poumon.

Ce n'est pas très efficace, mais les amphibiens ont de faibles besoins métaboliques et peuvent également éliminer rapidement le dioxyde de carbone par diffusion à travers leur peau dans l'eau, et compléter leur apport en oxygène par la même méthode.

Les amphibiens utilisent un système de pression positive pour amener l'air dans leurs poumons, forçant l'air dans les poumons par pompage buccal.

Ceci est distinct de la plupart des vertébrés supérieurs, qui utilisent un système respiratoire entraîné par une pression négative où les poumons sont gonflés en élargissant la cage thoracique.

Dans le pompage buccal, le plancher de la bouche est abaissé, remplissant la cavité buccale d'air.

Les muscles de la gorge pressent ensuite la gorge contre le dessous du crâne, forçant l'air dans les poumons. En raison de la possibilité de respiration à travers la peau combinée à une petite taille, tous les tétrapodes connus sans poumons sont des amphibiens.

La majorité des espèces de salamandres sont des salamandres sans poumons, qui respirent à travers leur peau et les tissus tapissant leur bouche.

Cela limite nécessairement leur taille : tous sont petits et d'apparence plutôt filiforme, maximisant la surface cutanée par rapport au volume corporel.

D'autres tétrapodes sans poumons connus sont la grenouille à tête plate de Bornéo et Atretochoana eiselti, un cécil. Les poumons des amphibiens ont généralement quelques parois internes étroites (septa) de tissus mous autour des parois extérieures, augmentant la surface respiratoire et donnant au poumon un aspect nid d'abeille.

Chez certaines salamandres, même ceux-ci manquent et le poumon a une paroi lisse.

Chez les céciliens, comme chez les serpents, seul le poumon droit atteint une taille ou un développement quelconque.


=== Poumon ===

Les poumons du poisson-poumon sont similaires à ceux des amphibiens, avec peu ou pas de cloisons internes.

Chez le poisson-poumon australien, il n'y a qu'un seul poumon, bien que divisé en deux lobes.

D'autres dipneustes et Polypterus, cependant, ont deux poumons, qui sont situés dans la partie supérieure du corps, avec le conduit de connexion courbé autour et au-dessus de l'œsophage.

L'approvisionnement en sang se tord également autour de l'œsophage, ce qui suggère que les poumons ont évolué à l'origine dans la partie ventrale du corps, comme chez d'autres vertébrés.


=== Invertébrés ===


Certains invertébrés ont des structures semblables à des poumons qui servent un objectif respiratoire similaire à celui des poumons de vertébrés, mais qui ne sont pas liés à l'évolution.

Certains arachnides, tels que les araignées et les scorpions, ont des structures appelées poumons de livres utilisés pour les échanges gazeux atmosphériques.

Certaines espèces d'araignées ont quatre paires de poumons de livre, mais la plupart en ont deux paires.

Les scorpions ont des spiracles sur leur corps pour l'entrée d'air dans les poumons du livre. Le crabe de noix de coco est terrestre et utilise des structures appelées poumons branchiostégaux pour respirer de l'air.

Ils ne savent pas nager et se noieraient dans l'eau, mais ils possèdent un ensemble rudimentaire de branchies.

Ils peuvent respirer sur terre et retenir leur souffle sous l'eau.

Les poumons branchiostégaux sont considérés comme une étape de développement adaptative de la vie aquatique pour permettre la vie terrestre, ou du poisson à l'amphibien. Les pulmonés sont principalement des escargots terrestres et des limaces qui ont développé un poumon simple à partir de la cavité du manteau.

Une ouverture située à l'extérieur appelée pneumostome permet à l'air d'être aspiré dans le poumon de la cavité du manteau.


== Origines évolutives ==

On pense que les poumons des vertébrés terrestres d'aujourd'hui et les vessies à gaz des poissons d'aujourd'hui ont évolué à partir de simples sacs, en tant que sorties de l'œsophage, qui permettaient aux premiers poissons d'avaler de l'air dans des conditions pauvres en oxygène.

Ces outpocketings sont d'abord apparus chez les poissons osseux.

Chez la plupart des poissons à nageoires rayonnées, les sacs ont évolué en vessies à gaz fermées, tandis qu'un certain nombre de carpes, de truites, de harengs, de poissons-chats et d'anguilles ont conservé l'état de physostome, le sac étant ouvert sur l'œsophage.

Chez les poissons osseux plus basaux, tels que le gar , le bichir , le bowfin et le poisson à nageoires lobes , les vessies ont évolué pour fonctionner principalement comme des poumons.

Les poissons à nageoires lobes ont donné naissance aux tétrapodes terrestres.

Ainsi, les poumons des vertébrés sont homologues aux vessies gazeuses des poissons (mais pas à leurs branchies).


== Lectures complémentaires ==




https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lung
