

MUSCULAR SYSTEM OF LOWER LIMB
/HUMAN LEG


The human leg, in the general word sense, is the entire lower limb of the human body, including the foot, thigh and even the hip or gluteal region. 

However, the definition in human anatomy refers only to the section of the lower limb extending from the knee to the ankle, also known as the crus or, especially in non-technical use, the shank. 

Legs are used for standing, and all forms of locomotion including recreational such as dancing, and constitute a significant portion of a person's mass. 

Female legs generally have greater hip anteversion and tibiofemoral angles, but shorter femur and tibial lengths than those in males.


== Structure ==

In human anatomy, the lower leg is the part of the lower limb that lies between the knee and the ankle. 

The thigh is between the hip and knee and makes up the rest of the lower limb. 

The term lower limb or "lower extremity" is commonly used to describe all of the leg. 

This article generally follows the common usage.
The leg from the knee to the ankle is called the crus or cnemis . 

The calf is the back portion, and the tibia or shinbone together with the smaller fibula make up the front of the lower leg.

Evolution has provided the human body with two distinct features: the specialization of the upper limb for visually guided manipulation and the lower limb's development into a mechanism specifically adapted for efficient bipedal gait. 

While the capacity to walk upright is not unique to humans, other primates can only achieve this for short periods and at a great expenditure of energy. 

The human adaption to bipedalism is not limited to the leg, however, but has also affected the location of the body's center of gravity, the reorganization of internal organs, and the form and biomechanism of the trunk. 

In humans, the double S-shaped vertebral column acts as a great shock-absorber which shifts the weight from the trunk over the load-bearing surface of the feet. 

The human legs are exceptionally long and powerful as a result of their exclusive specialization for support and locomotion—in orangutans the leg length is 111% of the trunk; in chimpanzees 128%, and in humans 171%. 

Many of the leg's muscles are also adapted to bipedalism, most substantially the gluteal muscles, the extensors of the knee joint, and the calf muscles.

=== Muscles ===

==== Hip ====

There are several ways of classifying the muscles of the hip: (1) By location or innervation (ventral and dorsal divisions of the plexus layer); (2) by development on the basis of their points of insertion (a posterior group in two layers and an anterior group); and (3) by function (i.e. extensors, flexors, adductors, and abductors).Some hip muscles also act on either the knee joint or on vertebral joints. 

Additionally, because the area of origin and insertion of many of these muscles are very extensive, these muscles are often involved in several very different movements. 

In the hip joint, lateral and medial rotation occur along the axis of the limb; extension (also called dorsiflexion or retroversion) and flexion (anteflexion or anteversion) occur along a transverse axis; and abduction and adduction occur about a sagittal axis.The anterior dorsal hip muscles are the iliopsoas, a group of two or three muscles with a shared insertion on the lesser trochanter of the femur. 

The psoas major originates from the last vertebra and along the lumbar spine to stretch down into the pelvis. 

The iliacus originates on the iliac fossa on the interior side of the pelvis. 

The two muscles unite to form the iliopsoas muscle which is inserted on the lesser trochanter of the femur. 

The psoas minor, only present in about 50 per cent of subjects, originates above psoas major to stretch obliquely down to its insertion on the interior side of the major muscle.The posterior dorsal hip muscles are inserted on or directly below the greater trochanter of the femur. 

The tensor fasciae latae, stretching from the anterior superior iliac spine down into the iliotibial tract, presses the head of the femur into the acetabulum but also flexes, rotates medially, and abducts to hip joint. 

The piriformis originates on the anterior pelvic surface of the sacrum, passes through the greater sciatic foramen, and inserts on the posterior aspect of the tip of the greater trochanter. 

In a standing posture it is a lateral rotator, but it also assists extending the thigh. 

The gluteus maximus has its origin between (and around) the iliac crest and the coccyx from where one part radiates into the iliotibial tract and the other stretches down to the gluteal tuberosity under the greater trochanter. 

The gluteus maximus is primarily an extensor and lateral rotator of the hip joint, and it comes into action when climbing stairs or rising from a sitting to standing posture. 

Furthermore, the part inserted into the fascia latae abducts and the part inserted into the gluteal tuberosity adducts the hip. 

The two deep glutei muscles, the gluteus medius and minimus, originate on the lateral side of the pelvis. 

The medius muscle is shaped like a cap. 

Its anterior fibers act as a medial rotator and flexor; the posterior fibers as a lateral rotator and extensor; and the entire muscle abducts the hip. 

The minimus has similar functions and both muscles are inserted onto the greater trochanter.

The ventral hip muscles function as lateral rotators and play an important role in the control of the body's balance. 

Because they are stronger than the medial rotators, in the normal position of the leg, the apex of the foot is pointing outward to achieve better support. 

The obturator internus originates on the pelvis on the obturator foramen and its membrane, passes through the lesser sciatic foramen, and is inserted on the trochanteric fossa of the femur. "Bent" over the lesser sciatic notch, which acts as a fulcrum, the muscle forms the strongest lateral rotators of the hip together with the gluteus maximus and quadratus femoris. 

When sitting with the knees flexed it acts as an abductor. 

The obturator externus has a parallel course with its origin located on the posterior border of the obturator foramen. 

It is covered by several muscles and acts as a lateral rotator and a weak adductor. 

The inferior and superior gemelli muscles represent marginal heads of the obturator internus and assist this muscle. 

These three muscles form a three-headed muscle (tricipital) known as the triceps coxae. 

The quadratus femoris originates at the ischial tuberosity and is inserted onto the intertrochanteric crest between the trochanters. 

This flattened muscle act as a strong lateral rotator and adductor of the thigh.

The adductor muscles of the thigh are innervated by the obturator nerve, with the exception of pectineus which receives fibers from the femoral nerve, and the adductor magnus which receives fibers from the tibial nerve. 

The gracilis arises from near the pubic symphysis and is unique among the adductors in that it reaches past the knee to attach on the medial side of the shaft of the tibia, thus acting on two joints. 

It share its distal insertion with the sartorius and semitendinosus, all three muscles forming the pes anserinus. 

It is the most medial muscle of the adductors, and with the thigh abducted its origin can be clearly seen arching under the skin. 

With the knee extended, it adducts the thigh and flexes the hip. 

The pectineus has its origin on the iliopubic eminence laterally to the gracilis and, rectangular in shape, extends obliquely to attach immediately behind the lesser trochanter and down the pectineal line and the proximal part of the linea aspera on the femur. 

It is a flexor of the hip joint, and an adductor and a weak medial rotator of the thigh. 

The adductor brevis originates on the inferior ramus of the pubis below the gracilis and stretches obliquely below the pectineus down to the upper third of the linea aspera. 

Except for being an adductor, it is a lateral rotator and weak flexor of the hip joint.The adductor longus has its origin at superior ramus of the pubis and inserts medially on the middle third of the linea aspera. 

Primarily an adductor, it is also responsible for some flexion. 

The adductor magnus has its origin just behind the longus and lies deep to it. 

Its wide belly divides into two parts: One is inserted into the linea aspera and the tendon of the other reaches down to adductor tubercle on the medial side of the femur's distal end where it forms an intermuscular septum that separates the flexors from the extensors. 

Magnus is a powerful adductor, especially active when crossing legs. 

Its superior part is a lateral rotator but the inferior part acts as a medial rotator on the flexed leg when rotated outward and also extends the hip joint. 

The adductor minimus is an incompletely separated subdivision of the adductor magnus. 

Its origin forms an anterior part of the magnus and distally it is inserted on the linea aspera above the magnus. 

It acts to adduct and lateral rotate the femur.


==== Thigh ====
The muscles of the thigh can be classified into three groups according to their location: anterior and posterior muscles and the adductors (on the medial side). 

All the adductors except gracilis insert on the femur and act on the hip joint, and so functionally qualify as hip muscles. 

The majority of the thigh muscles, the "true" thigh muscles, insert on the leg (either the tibia or the fibula) and act primarily on the knee joint. 

Generally, the extensors lie on anterior of the thigh and flexors lie on the posterior. 

Even though the sartorius flexes the knee, it is ontogenetically considered an extensor since its displacement is secondary.

Of the anterior thigh muscles the largest are the four muscles of the quadriceps femoris: the central rectus femoris, which is surrounded by the three vasti, the vastus intermedius, medialis, and lateralis. 

Rectus femoris is attached to the pelvis with two tendons, while the vasti are inserted to the femur. 

All four muscles unite in a common tendon inserted into the patella from where the patellar ligament extends it down to the tibial tuberosity. 

Fibers from the medial and lateral vasti form two retinacula that stretch past the patella on either sides down to the condyles of the tibia. 

The quadriceps is the knee extensor, but the rectus femoris additionally flexes the hip joint, and articular muscle of the knee protects the articular capsule of the knee joint from being nipped during extension. 

The sartorius runs superficially and obliquely down on the anterior side of the thigh, from the anterior superior iliac spine to the pes anserinus on the medial side of the knee, from where it is further extended into the crural fascia. 

The sartorius acts as a flexor on both the hip and knee, but, due to its oblique course, also contributes to medial rotation of the leg as one of the pes anserinus muscles (with the knee flexed), and to lateral rotation of the hip joint.There are four posterior thigh muscles. 

The biceps femoris has two heads: The long head has its origin on the ischial tuberosity together with the semitendinosus and acts on two joints. 

The short head originates from the middle third of the linea aspera on the shaft of the femur and the lateral intermuscular septum of thigh, and acts on only one joint. 

These two heads unite to form the biceps which inserts on the head of the fibula. 

The biceps flexes the knee joint and rotates the flexed leg laterally—it is the only lateral rotator of the knee and thus has to oppose all medial rotator. 

Additionally, the long head extends the hip joint. 

The semitendinosus and the semimembranosus share their origin with the long head of the biceps, and both attaches on the medial side of the proximal head of the tibia together with the gracilis and sartorius to form the pes anserinus. 

The semitendinosus acts on two joints; extension of the hip, flexion of the knee, and medial rotation of the leg. 

Distally, the semimembranosus' tendon is divided into three parts referred to as the pes anserinus profondus. 

Functionally, the semimembranosus is similar to the semitendinosus, and thus produces extension at the hip joint and flexion and medial rotation at the knee. 

Posteriorly below the knee joint, the popliteus stretches obliquely from the lateral femoral epicondyle down to the posterior surface of the tibia. 

The subpopliteal bursa is located deep to the muscle. 

Popliteus flexes the knee joint and medially rotates the leg.


==== Crus and foot ====
With the popliteus (see above) as the single exception, all muscles in the leg are attached to the foot and, based on location, can be classified into an anterior and a posterior group separated from each other by the tibia, the fibula, and the interosseous membrane. 

In turn, these two groups can be subdivided into subgroups or layers—the anterior group consists of the extensors and the peroneals, and the posterior group of a superficial and a deep layer. 

Functionally, the muscles of the leg are either extensors, responsible for the dorsiflexion of the foot, or flexors, responsible for the plantar flexion. 

These muscles can also classified by innervation, muscles supplied by the anterior subdivision of the plexus and those supplied by the posterior subdivision. 

The leg muscles acting on the foot are called the extrinsic foot muscles whilst the foot muscles located in the foot are called intrinsic.
Dorsiflexion (extension) and plantar flexion occur around the transverse axis running through the ankle joint from the tip of the medial malleolus to the tip of the lateral malleolus. 

Pronation (eversion) and supination (inversion) occur along the oblique axis of the ankle joint.


===== Extrinsic =====

Three of the anterior muscles are extensors. 

From its origin on the lateral surface of the tibia and the interosseus membrane, the three-sided belly of the tibialis anterior extends down below the superior and inferior extensor retinacula to its insertion on the plantar side of the medial cuneiform bone and the first metatarsal bone. 

In the non-weight-bearing leg, the anterior tibialis dorsal flexes the foot and lifts the medial edge of the foot. 

In the weight-bearing leg, it pulls the leg towards the foot. 

The extensor digitorum longus has a wide origin stretching from the lateral condyle of the tibia down along the anterior side of the fibula, and the interosseus membrane. 

At the ankle, the tendon divides into four that stretch across the foot to the dorsal aponeuroses of the last phalanges of the four lateral toes. 

In the non-weight-bearing leg, the muscle extends the digits and dorsiflexes the foot, and in the weight-bearing leg acts similar to the tibialis anterior. 

The extensor hallucis longus has its origin on the fibula and the interosseus membrane between the two other extensors and is, similarly to the extensor digitorum, is inserted on the last phalanx of big toe ("hallux"). 

The muscle dorsiflexes the hallux, and acts similar to the tibialis anterior in the weight-bearing leg. 

Two muscles on the lateral side of the leg form the peroneal group. 

The peroneus longus and brevis both have their origins on the fibula and they both pass behind the lateral malleolus where their tendons pass under the peroneal retinacula. 

Under the foot, the longus stretches from the lateral to the medial side in a groove, thus bracing the transverse arch of the foot. 

The brevis is attached on the lateral side to the tuberosity of the fifth metatarsal. 

Together the two peroneals form the strongest pronators of the foot. 

The peroneus muscles are highly variable and several variants can occasionally be present.

Of the posterior muscles three are in the superficial layer. 

The major plantar flexors, commonly referred to as the triceps surae, are the soleus, which arises on the proximal side of both leg bones, and the gastrocnemius, the two heads of which arises on the distal end of the femur. 

These muscles unite in a large terminal tendon, the Achilles tendon, which is attached to the posterior tubercle of the calcaneus. 

The plantaris closely follows the lateral head of the gastrocnemius. 

Its tendon runs between those of the soleus and gastrocnemius and is embedded in the medial end of the calcaneus tendon.In the deep layer, the tibialis posterior has its origin on the interosseus membrane and the neighbouring bone areas and runs down behind the medial malleolus. 

Under the foot it splits into a thick medial part attached to the navicular bone and a slightly weaker lateral part inserted to the three cuneiform bones. 

The muscle produces simultaneous plantar flexion and supination in the non-weight-bearing leg, and approximates the heel to the calf of the leg. 

The flexor hallucis longus arises distally on the fibula and on the interosseus membrane from where its relatively thick muscle belly extends far distally. 

Its tendon extends beneath the flexor retinaculum to the sole of the foot and finally attaches on the base of the last phalanx of the hallux. 

It plantarflexes the hallux and assists in supination. 

The flexor digitorum longus, finally, has its origin on the upper part of the tibia. 

Its tendon runs to the sole of the foot where it forks into four terminal tendon attached to the last phalanges of the four lateral toes. 

It crosses the tendon of the tibialis posterior distally on the tibia, and the tendon of the flexor hallucis longus in the sole. 

Distally to its division, the quadratus plantae radiates into it and near the middle phalanges its tendons penetrate the tendons of the flexor digitorum brevis. 

In the non-weight-bearing leg, it plantar flexes the toes and foot and supinates. 

In the weight-bearing leg it supports the plantar arch. (For the popliteus, see above.)


===== Intrinsic =====
The intrinsic muscles of the foot, muscles whose bellies are located in the foot proper, are either dorsal (top) or plantar (sole).
On the dorsal side, two long extrinsic extensor muscles are superficial to the intrinsic muscles, and their tendons form the dorsal aponeurosis of the toes. 

The short intrinsic extensors and the plantar and dorsal interossei radiates into these aponeuroses. 

The extensor digitorum brevis and extensor hallucis brevis have a common origin on the anterior side of the calcaneus, from where their tendons extend into the dorsal aponeuroses of digits 1–4. 

They act to dorsiflex these digits.The plantar muscles can be subdivided into three groups associated with three regions: those of the big digit, the little digit, and the region between these two. 

All these muscles are covered by the thick and dense plantar aponeurosis, which, together with two tough septa, form the spaces of the three groups. 

These muscles and their fatty tissue function as cushions that transmit the weight of the body downward. 

As a whole, the foot is a functional entity.

The abductor hallucis stretches along the medial edge of the foot, from the calcaneus to the base of the first phalanx of the first digit and the medial sesamoid bone. 

It is an abductor and a weak flexor, and also helps maintain the arch of the foot. 

Lateral to the abductor hallucis is the flexor hallucis brevis, which originates from the medial cuneiform bone and from the tendon of the tibialis posterior. 

The flexor hallucis has a medial and a lateral head inserted laterally to the abductor hallucis. 

It is an important plantar flexor which comes into prominent use in classical ballet (i.e. for pointe work). 

The adductor hallucis has two heads; a stronger oblique head which arises from the cuboid and lateral cuneiform bones and the bases of the second and third metatarsals; and a transverse head which arises from the distal ends of the third-fifth metatarsals. 

Both heads are inserted on the lateral sesamoid bone of the first digit. 

The muscle acts as a tensor to the arches of the foot, but can also adduct the first digit and plantar flex its first phalanx.The opponens digiti minimi originates from the long plantar ligament and the plantar tendinous sheath of peroneus longus and is inserted on the fifth metatarsal. 

When present, it acts to plantar flex the fifth digit and supports the plantar arch. 

The flexor digiti minimi arises from the region of base of the fifth metatarsal and is inserted onto the base of the first phalanx of the fifth digit where it is usually merged with the abductor of the first digit. 

It acts to plantar flex the last digit. 

The largest and longest muscles of the little toe is the abductor digiti minimi. 

Stretching from the lateral process of the calcaneus, with a second attachment on the base of the fifth metatarsal, to the base of the fifth digit's first phalanx, the muscle forms the lateral edge of the sole. 

Except for supporting the arch, it plantar flexes the little toe and also acts as an abductor.The four lumbricales have their origin on the tendons of the flexor digitorum longus, from where they extend to the medial side of the bases of the first phalanx of digits two-five. 

Except for reinforcing the plantar arch, they contribute to plantar flexion and move the four digits toward the big toe. 

They are, in contrast to the lumbricales of the hand, rather variable, sometimes absent and sometimes more than four are present. 

The quadratus plantae arises with two slips from margins of the plantar surface of the calcaneus and is inserted into the tendon(s) of the flexor digitorum longus, and is known as the "plantar head" of this latter muscle. 

The three plantar interossei arise with their single heads on the medial side of the third-fifth metatarsals and are inserted on the bases of the first phalanges of these digits. 

The two heads of the four dorsal interossei arise on two adjacent metatarsals and merge in the intermediary spaces. 

Their distal attachment is on the bases of the proximal phalanges of the second-fourth digits. 

The interossei are organized with the second digit as a longitudinal axis; the plantars act as adductors and pull digits 3–5 towards the second digit; while the dorsals act as abductors. 

Additionally, the interossei act as plantar flexors at the metatarsophalangeal joints. 

Lastly, the flexor digitorum brevis arises from underneath the calcaneus to insert its tendons on the middle phalanges of digit 2–4. 

Because the tendons of the flexor digitorum longus run between these tendons, the brevis is sometimes called perforatus. 

The tendons of these two muscles are surrounded by a tendinous sheath. 

The brevis acts to plantar flex the middle phalanges.


=== Flexibility ===

Flexibility can be simply defined as the available range of motion (ROM) provided by a specific joint or group of joints. 

For the most part, exercises that increase flexibility are performed with intentions to boost overall muscle length, reduce the risks of injury and to potentially improve muscular performance in physical activity. 

Stretching muscles after engagement in any physical activity can improve muscular strength, increase flexibility, and reduce muscle soreness. 

If limited movement is present within a joint, the "insufficient extensibility" of the muscle, or muscle group, could be restricting the activity of the affected joint.


==== Stretching ====
Stretching prior to strenuous physical activity has been thought to increase muscular performance by extending the soft tissue past its attainable length in order to increase range of motion. 

Many physically active individuals practice these techniques as a “warm-up” in order to achieve a certain level of muscular preparation for specific exercise movements. 

When stretching, muscles should feel somewhat uncomfortable but not physically agonizing.

Plantar flexion: One of the most popular lower leg muscle stretches is the step standing heel raises, which mainly involves the gastrocnemius, soleus, and the Achilles tendon. 

Standing heel raises allow the individual to activate their calf muscles by standing on a step with toes and forefoot, leaving the heel hanging off the step, and plantar flexing the ankle joint by raising the heel. 

This exercise is easily modified by holding on to a nearby rail for balance and is generally repeated 5–10 times.
Dorsiflexion: In order to stretch the anterior muscles of the lower leg, crossover shin stretches work well. 

This motion will stretch the dorsiflexion muscles, mainly the anterior tibialis, extensor hallucis longus and extensor digitorum longus, by slowly causing the muscles to lengthen as body weight is leaned on the ankle joint by using the floor as resistance against the top of the foot. 

Crossover shin stretches can vary in intensity depending on the amount of body weight applied on the ankle joint as the individual bends at the knee. 

This stretch is typically held for 15–30 seconds.
Eversion and inversion: Stretching the eversion and inversion muscles allows for better range of motion to the ankle joint. 

Seated ankle elevations and depressions will stretch the peroneus and tibilalis muscles that are associated with these movements as they lengthen. 

Eversion muscles are stretched when the ankle becomes depressed from the starting position. 

In like manner, the inversion muscles are stretched when the ankle joint becomes elevated. 

Throughout this seated stretch, the ankle joint is to remain supported while depressed and elevated with the ipsilateral (same side) hand in order to sustain the stretch for 10–15 seconds. 

This stretch will increase overall eversion and inversion muscle group length and provide more flexibility to the ankle joint for larger range of motion during activity.


=== Blood supply ===


The arteries of the leg are divided into a series of segments.
In the pelvis area, at the level of the last lumbar vertebra, the abdominal aorta, a continuation the descending aorta, splits into a pair of common iliac arteries. 

These immediately split into the internal and external iliac arteries, the latter of which descends along the medial border of the psoas major to exits the pelvis area through the vascular lacuna under the inguinal ligament.The artery enters the thigh as the femoral artery which descends the medial side of the thigh to the adductor canal. 

The canal passes from the anterior to the posterior side of the limb where the artery leaves through the adductor hiatus and becomes the popliteal artery. 

On the back of the knee the popliteal artery runs through the popliteal fossa to the popliteal muscle where it divides into anterior and posterior tibial arteries.In the lower leg, the anterior tibial enters the extensor compartment near the upper border of the interosseus membrane to descend between the tibialis anterior and the extensor hallucis longus. 

Distal to the superior and extensor retinacula of the foot it becomes the dorsal artery of the foot. 

The posterior tibial forms a direct continuation of the popliteal artery which enters the flexor compartment of the lower leg to descend behind the medial malleolus where it divides into the medial and lateral plantar arteries, of which the posterior branch gives rise to the fibular artery.For practical reasons the lower limb is subdivided into somewhat arbitrary regions: The regions of the hip are all located in the thigh: anteriorly, the subinguinal region is bounded by the inguinal ligament, the sartorius, and the pectineus and forms part of the femoral triangle which extends distally to the adductor longus. 

Posteriorly, the gluteal region corresponds to the gluteus maximus. 

The anterior region of the thigh extends distally from the femoral triangle to the region of the knee and laterally to the tensor fasciae latae. 

The posterior region ends distally before the popliteal fossa. 

The anterior and posterior regions of the knee extend from the proximal regions down to the level of the tuberosity of the tibia. 

In the lower leg the anterior and posterior regions extend down to the malleoli. 

Behind the malleoli are the lateral and medial retromalleolar regions and behind these is the region of the heel. 

Finally, the foot is subdivided into a dorsal region superiorly and a plantar region inferiorly.


=== Veins ===


The veins are subdivided into three systems. 

The deep veins return approximately 85 percent of the blood and the superficial veins approximately 15 percent. 

A series of perforator veins interconnect the superficial and deep systems. 

In the standing posture, the veins of the leg have to handle an exceptional load as they act against gravity when they return the blood to the heart. 

The venous valves assist in maintaining the superficial to deep direction of the blood flow.Superficial veins:

Great saphenous vein
Small saphenousDeep veins:

Femoral vein, whose segments are the common femoral vein and the subsartorial vein.
Popliteal vein
Anterior tibial vein
Posterior tibial vein
Fibular vein


=== Nerve supply ===


The sensory and motor innervation to the lower limb is supplied by the lumbosacral plexus, which is formed by the ventral rami of the lumbar and sacral spinal nerves with additional contributions from the subcostal nerve (T12) and coccygeal nerve (Co1). 

Based on distribution and topography, the lumbosacral plexus is subdivided into the lumbar plexus (T12-L4) and the Sacral plexus (L5-S4); the latter is often further subdivided into the sciatic and pudendal plexuses:The lumbar plexus is formed lateral to the intervertebral foramina by the ventral rami of the first four lumbar spinal nerves (L1-L4), which all pass through psoas major. 

The larger branches of the plexus exit the muscle to pass sharply downward to reach the abdominal wall and the thigh (under the inguinal ligament); with the exception of the obturator nerve which pass through the lesser pelvis to reach the medial part of the thigh through the obturator foramen. 

The nerves of the lumbar plexus pass in front of the hip joint and mainly support the anterior part of the thigh.The iliohypogastric (T12-L1) and ilioinguinal nerves (L1) emerge from the psoas major near the muscle's origin, from where they run laterally downward to pass anteriorly above the iliac crest between the transversus abdominis and abdominal internal oblique, and then run above the inguinal ligament. 

Both nerves give off muscular branches to both these muscles. 

Iliohypogastric supplies sensory branches to the skin of the lateral hip region, and its terminal branch finally pierces the aponeurosis of the abdominal external oblique above the inguinal ring to supply sensory branches to the skin there. 

Ilioinguinalis exits through the inguinal ring and supplies sensory branches to the skin above the pubic symphysis and the lateral portion of the scrotum.The genitofemoral nerve (L1, L2) leaves psoas major below the two former nerves, immediately divides into two branches that descends along the muscle's anterior side. 

The sensory femoral branch supplies the skin below the inguinal ligament, while the mixed genital branch supplies the skin and muscles around the sex organ. 

The lateral femoral cutaneous nerve (L2, L3) leaves psoas major laterally below the previous nerve, runs obliquely and laterally downward above the iliacus, exits the pelvic area near the iliac spine, and supplies the skin of the anterior thigh.The obturator nerve (L2-L4) passes medially behind psoas major to exit the pelvis through the obturator canal, after which it gives off branches to obturator externus and divides into two branches passing behind and in front of adductor brevis to supply motor innervation to all the other adductor muscles. 

The anterior branch also supplies sensory nerves to the skin on a small area on the distal medial aspect of the thigh. 

The femoral nerve (L2-L4) is the largest and longest of the nerves of the lumbar plexus. 

It supplies motor innervation to iliopsoas, pectineus, sartorius, and quadriceps; and sensory branches to the anterior thigh, medial lower leg, and posterior foot.The nerves of the sacral plexus pass behind the hip joint to innervate the posterior part of the thigh, most of the lower leg, and the foot. 

The superior (L4-S1) and inferior gluteal nerves (L5-S2) innervate the gluteus muscles and the tensor fasciae latae. 

The posterior femoral cutaneous nerve (S1-S3) contributes sensory branches to the skin on the posterior thigh. 

The sciatic nerve (L4-S3), the largest and longest nerve in the human body, leaves the pelvis through the greater sciatic foramen. 

In the posterior thigh it first gives off branches to the short head of the biceps femoris and then divides into the tibial (L4-S3) and common fibular nerves (L4-S2). 

The fibular nerve continues down on the medial side of biceps femoris, winds around the fibular neck and enters the front of the lower leg. 

There it divides into a deep and a superficial terminal branch. 

The superficial branch supplies the peroneus muscles and the deep branch enters the extensor compartment; both branches reaches into the dorsal foot. 

In the thigh, the tibial nerve gives off branches to semitendinosus, semimembranosus, adductor magnus, and the long head of the biceps femoris. 

The nerve then runs straight down the back of the leg, through the popliteal fossa to supply the ankle flexors on the back of the lower leg and then continues down to supply all the muscles in the sole of the foot. 

The pudendal (S2-S4) and coccygeal nerves (S5-Co2) supply the muscles of the pelvic floor and the surrounding skin.The lumbosacral trunk is a communicating branch passing between the sacral and lumbar plexuses containing ventral fibers from L4. 

The coccygeal nerve, the last spinal nerve, emerges from the sacral hiatus, unites with the ventral rami of the two last sacral nerves, and forms the coccygeal plexus.


== Lower leg and foot ==

The lower leg and ankle need to keep exercised and moving well as they are the base of the whole body. 

The lower extremities must be strong in order to balance the weight of the rest of the body, and the gastrocnemius muscles take part in much of the blood circulation.


=== Exercises ===



==== Isometric and standard ====
There are a number of exercises that can be done to strengthen the lower leg. 

For example, in order to activate plantar flexors in the deep plantar flexors one can sit on the floor with the hips flexed, the ankle neutral with knees fully extended as they alternate pushing their foot against a wall or platform. 

This kind of exercise is beneficial as it hardly causes any fatigue. 

Another form of isometric exercise for the gastrocnemius would be seated calf raises which can be done with or without equipment. 

One can be seated at a table with their feet flat on the ground, and then plantar flex both ankles so that the heels are raised off the floor and the gastrocnemius flexed. 

An alternate movement could be heel drop exercises with the toes being propped on an elevated surface—as an opposing movement this would improve the range of motion. 

One-legged toe raises for the gastrocnemius muscle can be performed by holding one dumbbell in one hand while using the other for balance, and then standing with one foot on a plate. 

The next step would be to plantar flex and keep the knee joint straight or flexed slightly. 

The triceps surae is contracted during this exercise. 

Stabilization exercises like the BOSU ball squat are also important especially as they assist in the ankles having to adjust to the ball's form in order to balance.


== Clinical significance ==



=== Lower leg injury ===

Lower leg injuries are common while running or playing sports. 

About 10% of all total injuries involve the lower extremities in athletes. 

The majority of athletes sprain their ankles, which are mainly caused by the increased loads onto the feet when they move into the foot down or in an outer ankle position. 

All areas of the foot, which are the forefoot, midfoot, and rearfoot, absorb various forces while running and can lead to injuries as well. 

Running and various activities can cause stress fractures, tendinitis, musculotendinous injuries, or any chronic pain to our lower extremities such as the tibia.


==== Types of activities ====
Injuries to quadriceps or hamstrings are caused by the constant impact loads to the legs during activities, such as kicking a ball. 

While doing this type of motion, 85% of that shock is absorbed to the hamstrings which can cause strain to those muscles.
Jumping – is another risk because if the legs do not land properly after an initial jump, there may be damage to the meniscus in the knees, sprain to the ankle by everting or inverting the foot, or damage to the Achilles tendon and gastrocnemius if there is too much force while plantar flexing.
Weight lifting – such as the improperly performed deep squat, is also dangerous to the lower limbs, because the exercise can lead to an overextension, or an outstretch, of our ligaments in the knee and can cause pain over time.
Running – the most common activity associated with lower leg injury. 

There is constant pressure and stress being put on the feet, knees, and legs while running by gravitational force. 

Muscle tears in our legs or pain in various areas of the feet can be a result of poor biomechanics of running.


===== Running =====
The most common injuries in running involve the knees and the feet. 

Various studies have focused on the initial cause of these running related injuries and found that there are many factors that correlate to these injuries. 

Female distance runners who had a history of stress fracture injuries had higher vertical impact forces than non-injured subjects. 

The large forces onto the lower legs were associated with gravitational forces, and this correlated with patellofemoral pain or potential knee injuries. 

Researchers have also found that these running related injuries affect the feet as well because runners with previous injuries showed more foot eversion and over pronation while running than non-injured runners. 

This causes more loads and forces on the medial side of the foot, causing more stress on the tendons of the foot and ankle (peroneal tendons). 

Most of these running injuries are caused by overuse and that running at longer distances weekly for a long duration is a risk for injuring the lower legs.


==== Prevention tools ====
Voluntary stretches to the legs, such as the wall stretch, condition the hamstrings and the calf muscle to various movements before vigorously working them. 

The environment and surroundings, such as uneven terrain, can cause the feet to position in an unnatural way, so wearing shoes that can absorb forces from the ground's impact and allow for stabilizing the feet can prevent some injuries while running as well. 

Shoes should be structured to allow friction-traction at the shoe surface, space for different foot-strike stresses, or for comfortable, regular arches for the feet.


==== Summary ====
The chances of damaging our lower extremities will be reduced by having knowledge about some activities associated with lower leg injury and developing a correct form of running, such as not over pronating the foot or overusing the legs. 

Preventative measures, such as various stretches, and wearing appropriate footwear, will reduce injuries from occurring as well.


=== Fracture ===


A fracture of the leg can be classified according to the involved bone into:

Femoral fracture (in the upper leg)
Crus fracture (in the lower leg)


== Pain management ==

Lower leg and foot pain management is critical in reducing the progression of further injuries, uncomfortable sensations and limiting alterations while walking and running. 

Most individuals suffer from various pains in their lower leg and foot due to different factors. 

Muscle inflammation, strain, tenderness, swelling and muscle tear from muscle overuse or incorrect movement are several conditions often experienced by athletes and the common public during and after high impact physical activities. 

Therefore, suggested pain management mechanisms are provided to reduce pain and prevent the progression of injury.


=== Plantar fasciitis ===

A plantar fasciitis foot stretch is one of the recommended methods to reduce pain caused by plantar fasciitis (Figure 1). 

To do the plantar fascia stretch, while sitting in a chair place the ankle on the opposite knee and hold the toes of the impaired foot, slowly pulling back. 

The stretch should be held for approximately ten seconds, three times per day.


=== Medial tibial stress syndrome (shin splint) ===

Several methods can be utilized to help control pain caused by shin splints. 

Placing ice on the affected area prior to and after running will aid in reducing pain. 

In addition, wearing orthotic devices including a neoprene sleeve (Figure 2) and wearing appropriate footwear such as a foot arch can help to eliminate the condition. 

Stretching and strengthening of the anterior tibia or medial tibia by performing exercises of plantar and dorsi flexors such as calf stretch can also help in easing the pain.


=== Achilles tendinopathy ===

There are numerous appropriate approaches to handling pain resulting from Achilles tendinitis. 

The primary action is to rest. 

Activities that do not provide additional stress to the affected tendon are also recommended. 

Wearing orthothics or prostheses will provide cushion and will prevent the affected Achilles tendon from experiencing further stress when walking and performing therapeutic stretches. 

A few stretch modalities or eccentric exercises such as toe extension and flexion and calf and heel stretch are beneficial in lowering pain with Achilles tendinopathy patients (Figure 4)


== Society and culture ==

Adolescent and adult women in many Western cultures often remove the hair from their legs. 

Toned, tanned, shaved legs are sometimes perceived as a sign of youthfulness and are often considered attractive in these cultures.
Men generally do not shave their legs in any culture. 

However, leg-shaving is a generally accepted practice in modeling. 

It is also fairly common in sports where the hair removal makes the athlete appreciably faster by reducing drag; the most common case of this is competitive swimming.


== Image gallery ==


		
		
		
		
		



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Human_leg
;;;ES;;;



SISTEMA MUSCULAR DE LA EXTREMIDAD INFERIOR
/PIERNA HUMANA


La pierna humana, en el sentido general de la palabra, es toda la extremidad inferior del cuerpo humano, incluidos el pie, el muslo e incluso la cadera o la región glútea.

Sin embargo, la definición en anatomía humana se refiere solo a la sección de la extremidad inferior que se extiende desde la rodilla hasta el tobillo, también conocida como crus o, especialmente en uso no técnico, la pierna.

Las piernas se utilizan para estar de pie y todas las formas de locomoción, incluidas las recreativas, como el baile, y constituyen una parte importante de la masa de una persona.

Las piernas femeninas generalmente tienen una mayor anteversión de cadera y ángulos tibiofemorales, pero longitudes de fémur y tibia más cortas que las de los hombres.


== Estructura ==

En anatomía humana, la parte inferior de la pierna es la parte del miembro inferior que se encuentra entre la rodilla y el tobillo.

El muslo se encuentra entre la cadera y la rodilla y constituye el resto del miembro inferior.

El término miembro inferior o "extremidad inferior" se usa comúnmente para describir toda la pierna.

Este artículo generalmente sigue el uso común.
La pierna desde la rodilla hasta el tobillo se llama crus o cnemis.

La pantorrilla es la parte trasera, y la tibia o espinilla junto con el peroné más pequeño forman la parte delantera de la parte inferior de la pierna.

La evolución ha proporcionado al cuerpo humano dos características distintas: la especialización de la extremidad superior para la manipulación guiada visualmente y el desarrollo de la extremidad inferior en un mecanismo específicamente adaptado para la marcha bípeda eficiente.

Si bien la capacidad de caminar erguido no es exclusiva de los humanos, otros primates solo pueden lograr esto por períodos cortos y con un gran gasto de energía.

Sin embargo, la adaptación humana al bipedismo no se limita a la pierna, sino que también ha afectado la ubicación del centro de gravedad del cuerpo, la reorganización de los órganos internos y la forma y el biomecanismo del tronco.

En los seres humanos, la columna vertebral en forma de doble S actúa como un gran amortiguador que desplaza el peso del tronco sobre la superficie de carga de los pies.

Las piernas humanas son excepcionalmente largas y poderosas como resultado de su especialización exclusiva para el apoyo y la locomoción: en los orangutanes, la longitud de la pierna es el 111% del tronco; en chimpancés 128% y en humanos 171%.

Muchos de los músculos de la pierna también están adaptados al bipedalismo, sobre todo los músculos de los glúteos, los extensores de la articulación de la rodilla y los músculos de la pantorrilla.

=== Músculos ===

==== Cadera ====

Hay varias formas de clasificar los músculos de la cadera: (1) Por ubicación o inervación (divisiones ventral y dorsal de la capa del plexo); (2) por desarrollo sobre la base de sus puntos de inserción (un grupo posterior en dos capas y un grupo anterior); y (3) por función (es decir, extensores, flexores, aductores y abductores). Algunos músculos de la cadera también actúan sobre la articulación de la rodilla o sobre las articulaciones vertebrales.

Además, debido a que el área de origen e inserción de muchos de estos músculos es muy extensa, estos músculos a menudo participan en varios movimientos muy diferentes.

En la articulación de la cadera, la rotación lateral y medial ocurre a lo largo del eje de la extremidad; la extensión (también llamada dorsiflexión o retroversión) y la flexión (anteflexión o anteversión) ocurren a lo largo de un eje transversal; y la abducción y la aducción ocurren alrededor de un eje sagital. Los músculos dorsales anteriores de la cadera son los iliopsoas, un grupo de dos o tres músculos con una inserción compartida en el trocánter menor del fémur.

El psoas mayor se origina en la última vértebra y se extiende a lo largo de la columna lumbar hasta la pelvis.

El ilíaco se origina en la fosa ilíaca en el lado interior de la pelvis.

Los dos músculos se unen para formar el músculo iliopsoas que se inserta en el trocánter menor del fémur.

El psoas menor, solo presente en aproximadamente el 50 por ciento de los sujetos, se origina por encima del psoas mayor para estirarse oblicuamente hacia abajo hasta su inserción en el lado interior del músculo mayor. Los músculos dorsales posteriores de la cadera se insertan en o directamente debajo del trocánter mayor de la fémur.

El tensor de la fascia lata, que se extiende desde la espina ilíaca anterosuperior hacia el tracto iliotibial, presiona la cabeza del fémur contra el acetábulo, pero también se flexiona, rota medialmente y se abduce hacia la articulación de la cadera.

El piriforme se origina en la superficie pélvica anterior del sacro, pasa a través del agujero ciático mayor y se inserta en la cara posterior de la punta del trocánter mayor.

En una postura de pie es un rotador lateral, pero también ayuda a extender el muslo.

El glúteo mayor tiene su origen entre (y alrededor) de la cresta ilíaca y el cóccix desde donde una parte se irradia hacia el tracto iliotibial y la otra se extiende hasta la tuberosidad glútea debajo del trocánter mayor.

El glúteo mayor es principalmente un extensor y rotador lateral de la articulación de la cadera, y entra en acción al subir escaleras o al pasar de una posición sentada a una de pie.

Además, la parte insertada en la fascia lata abduce y la parte insertada en la tuberosidad glútea aduce la cadera.

Los dos músculos glúteos profundos, el glúteo medio y el menor, se originan en el lado lateral de la pelvis.

El músculo mediano tiene forma de gorra.

Sus fibras anteriores actúan como rotador y flexor medial; las fibras posteriores como rotador lateral y extensor; y todo el músculo abduce la cadera.

El menor tiene funciones similares y ambos músculos se insertan en el trocánter mayor.

Los músculos ventrales de la cadera funcionan como rotadores laterales y juegan un papel importante en el control del equilibrio del cuerpo.

Debido a que son más fuertes que los rotadores mediales, en la posición normal de la pierna, el vértice del pie apunta hacia afuera para lograr un mejor soporte.

El obturador interno se origina en la pelvis en el agujero obturador y su membrana, pasa a través del agujero ciático menor y se inserta en la fosa trocantérica del fémur. "Doblado" sobre la escotadura ciática menor, que actúa como punto de apoyo, el músculo forma los rotadores laterales más fuertes de la cadera junto con el glúteo mayor y el cuadrado femoral.

Al sentarse con las rodillas flexionadas actúa como abductor.

El obturador externo tiene un curso paralelo con su origen ubicado en el borde posterior del agujero obturador.

Está cubierto por varios músculos y actúa como un rotador lateral y un aductor débil.

Los músculos gemelos superior e inferior representan las cabezas marginales del obturador interno y ayudan a este músculo.

Estos tres músculos forman un músculo de tres cabezas (tricipital) conocido como tríceps coxae.

El cuadrado femoral se origina en la tuberosidad isquiática y se inserta en la cresta intertrocantérica entre los trocánteres.

Este músculo aplanado actúa como un fuerte rotador lateral y aductor del muslo.

Los músculos aductores del muslo están inervados por el nervio obturador, a excepción del pectíneo que recibe fibras del nervio femoral y el aductor mayor que recibe fibras del nervio tibial.

El grácil surge cerca de la sínfisis púbica y es único entre los aductores en el sentido de que llega más allá de la rodilla para insertarse en el lado medial de la diáfisis de la tibia, actuando así sobre dos articulaciones.

Comparte su inserción distal con el sartorio y el semitendinoso, los tres músculos forman el pes anserinus.

Es el músculo más medial de los aductores, y con el muslo en abducción se puede ver claramente su origen arqueándose bajo la piel.

Con la rodilla extendida, aduce el muslo y flexiona la cadera.

El pectíneo tiene su origen en la eminencia iliopúbica lateral al gracilis y, de forma rectangular, se extiende oblicuamente para unirse inmediatamente detrás del trocánter menor y hacia abajo por la línea pectínea y la parte proximal de la línea áspera en el fémur.

Es un flexor de la articulación de la cadera y un aductor y un débil rotador medial del muslo.

El aductor corto se origina en la rama inferior del pubis por debajo del recto interno y se extiende oblicuamente por debajo del pectíneo hasta el tercio superior de la línea áspera.

Excepto por ser un aductor, es un rotador lateral y un flexor débil de la articulación de la cadera. El aductor largo tiene su origen en la rama superior del pubis y se inserta medialmente en el tercio medio de la línea áspera.

Principalmente un aductor, también es responsable de cierta flexión.

El aductor mayor tiene su origen justo detrás del largo y se encuentra en la profundidad de este.

Su amplio vientre se divide en dos partes: una se inserta en la línea áspera y el tendón de la otra llega hasta el tubérculo aductor en el lado medial del extremo distal del fémur, donde forma un tabique intermuscular que separa los flexores de los extensores.

Magnus es un potente aductor, especialmente activo al cruzar las piernas.

Su parte superior es un rotador lateral pero la parte inferior actúa como un rotador medial en la pierna flexionada cuando se rota hacia afuera y también extiende la articulación de la cadera.

El aductor menor es una subdivisión incompletamente separada del aductor mayor.

Su origen forma una parte anterior del magnus y distalmente se inserta en la línea áspera por encima del magnus.

Actúa para aducir y rotar lateralmente el fémur.


==== Muslo ====
Los músculos del muslo se pueden clasificar en tres grupos según su ubicación: músculos anteriores y posteriores y los aductores (en el lado medial).

Todos los aductores excepto el gracilis se insertan en el fémur y actúan sobre la articulación de la cadera, por lo que funcionalmente califican como músculos de la cadera.

La mayoría de los músculos del muslo, los "verdaderos" músculos del muslo, se insertan en la pierna (ya sea la tibia o el peroné) y actúan principalmente en la articulación de la rodilla.

Generalmente, los extensores se encuentran en la parte anterior del muslo y los flexores se encuentran en la parte posterior.

Aunque el sartorio flexiona la rodilla, ontogenéticamente se le considera extensor ya que su desplazamiento es secundario.

De los músculos anteriores del muslo, los más grandes son los cuatro músculos del cuádriceps femoral: el recto femoral central, que está rodeado por los tres vastos, el vasto intermedio, medial y lateral.

El recto femoral está unido a la pelvis con dos tendones, mientras que los vastos se insertan en el fémur.

Los cuatro músculos se unen en un tendón común que se inserta en la rótula desde donde el ligamento rotuliano se extiende hasta la tuberosidad tibial.

Las fibras de los vastos medial y lateral forman dos retináculos que se extienden más allá de la rótula a ambos lados hasta los cóndilos de la tibia.

El cuádriceps es el extensor de la rodilla, pero el recto femoral flexiona adicionalmente la articulación de la cadera y el músculo articular de la rodilla protege la cápsula articular de la articulación de la rodilla para que no se apriete durante la extensión.

El sartorio discurre superficial y oblicuamente hacia abajo en la cara anterior del muslo, desde la espina ilíaca anterosuperior hasta la pata de ganso en la cara medial de la rodilla, desde donde se extiende hacia la fascia crural.

El sartorio actúa como flexor tanto de la cadera como de la rodilla, pero, debido a su curso oblicuo, también contribuye a la rotación medial de la pierna como uno de los músculos de la pata de ganso (con la rodilla flexionada) y a la rotación lateral de la cadera. articulación.Hay cuatro músculos posteriores del muslo.

El bíceps femoral tiene dos cabezas: La cabeza larga tiene su origen en la tuberosidad isquiática junto con el semitendinoso y actúa sobre dos articulaciones.

La cabeza corta se origina en el tercio medio de la línea áspera en la diáfisis del fémur y el tabique intermuscular lateral del muslo, y actúa sobre una sola articulación.

Estas dos cabezas se unen para formar el bíceps que se inserta en la cabeza del peroné.

El bíceps flexiona la articulación de la rodilla y rota lateralmente la pierna flexionada; es el único rotador lateral de la rodilla y, por lo tanto, tiene que oponerse a todos los rotadores mediales.

Además, la cabeza larga extiende la articulación de la cadera.

El semitendinoso y el semimembranoso comparten su origen con la cabeza larga del bíceps, y ambos se insertan en el lado medial de la cabeza proximal de la tibia junto con el recto interno y el sartorio para formar el pie anserinus.

El semitendinoso actúa sobre dos articulaciones; extensión de la cadera, flexión de la rodilla y rotación medial de la pierna.

Distalmente, el tendón del semimembranoso se divide en tres partes denominadas pes anserinus profondus.

Funcionalmente, el semimembranoso es similar al semitendinoso y, por lo tanto, produce extensión en la articulación de la cadera y flexión y rotación medial en la rodilla.

Posteriormente, debajo de la articulación de la rodilla, el poplíteo se extiende oblicuamente desde el epicóndilo femoral lateral hasta la superficie posterior de la tibia.

La bursa subpoplítea se encuentra profunda al músculo.

El poplíteo flexiona la articulación de la rodilla y rota medialmente la pierna.


==== Crus y pie ====
Con el poplíteo (ver arriba) como única excepción, todos los músculos de la pierna están unidos al pie y, según su ubicación, se pueden clasificar en un grupo anterior y otro posterior separados entre sí por la tibia, el peroné y el peroné. la membrana interósea.

A su vez, estos dos grupos se pueden subdividir en subgrupos o capas: el grupo anterior está formado por los extensores y los peroneos, y el grupo posterior por una capa superficial y otra profunda.

Funcionalmente, los músculos de la pierna son extensores, responsables de la flexión dorsal del pie, o flexores, responsables de la flexión plantar.

Estos músculos también pueden clasificarse por inervación, músculos inervados por la subdivisión anterior del plexo y los inervados por la subdivisión posterior.

Los músculos de la pierna que actúan sobre el pie se denominan músculos extrínsecos del pie, mientras que los músculos del pie ubicados en el pie se denominan intrínsecos.
La flexión dorsal (extensión) y la flexión plantar ocurren alrededor del eje transversal que atraviesa la articulación del tobillo desde la punta del maléolo medial hasta la punta del maléolo lateral.

La pronación (eversión) y la supinación (inversión) ocurren a lo largo del eje oblicuo de la articulación del tobillo.


===== Extrínseco =====

Tres de los músculos anteriores son extensores.

Desde su origen en la superficie lateral de la tibia y la membrana interósea, el vientre de tres lados del tibial anterior se extiende por debajo de los retináculos extensores superior e inferior hasta su inserción en el lado plantar del hueso cuneiforme medial y el primer hueso metatarsiano. .

En la pierna que no soporta peso, el tibial dorsal anterior flexiona el pie y levanta el borde medial del pie.

En la pierna de carga, tira de la pierna hacia el pie.

El extensor digitorum longus tiene un origen ancho que se extiende desde el cóndilo lateral de la tibia hacia abajo a lo largo del lado anterior del peroné y la membrana interósea.

En el tobillo, el tendón se divide en cuatro que se extienden a lo largo del pie hasta las aponeurosis dorsales de las últimas falanges de los cuatro dedos laterales.

En la pierna que no soporta peso, el músculo extiende los dedos y dorsiflexiona el pie, y en la pierna que soporta peso actúa de manera similar al tibial anterior.

El extensor hallucis longus tiene su origen en el peroné y la membrana interósea entre los otros dos extensores y, de manera similar al extensor digitorum, se inserta en la última falange del dedo gordo del pie ("hallux").

El músculo dorsiflexiona el hallux y actúa de manera similar al tibial anterior en la pierna que soporta el peso.

Dos músculos en el lado lateral de la pierna forman el grupo peroneo.

Tanto el peroneo largo como el corto tienen su origen en el peroné y ambos pasan por detrás del maléolo lateral, donde sus tendones pasan por debajo de los retináculos peroneos.

Debajo del pie, el longus se extiende desde el lado lateral al medial en un surco, apuntalando así el arco transverso del pie.

El brevis se inserta en el lado lateral de la tuberosidad del quinto metatarsiano.

Juntos, los dos peroneos forman los pronadores más fuertes del pie.

Los músculos peroneos son muy variables y ocasionalmente pueden presentarse varias variantes.

De los músculos posteriores, tres están en la capa superficial.

Los principales flexores plantares, comúnmente denominados tríceps sural, son el sóleo, que surge en el lado proximal de ambos huesos de la pierna, y el gastrocnemio, cuyas dos cabezas surgen en el extremo distal del fémur.

Estos músculos se unen en un gran tendón terminal, el tendón de Aquiles, que se une al tubérculo posterior del calcáneo.

El plantaris sigue de cerca la cabeza lateral del gastrocnemio.

Su tendón discurre entre los del sóleo y el gastrocnemio y está incrustado en el extremo medial del tendón del calcáneo. En la capa profunda, el tibial posterior tiene su origen en la membrana interósea y las áreas óseas vecinas y desciende por detrás del maléolo medial.

Debajo del pie se divide en una parte medial gruesa unida al hueso navicular y una parte lateral ligeramente más débil insertada en los tres huesos cuneiformes.

El músculo produce flexión plantar y supinación simultáneas en la pierna que no soporta el peso y aproxima el talón a la pantorrilla de la pierna.

El flexor hallucis longus surge distalmente en el peroné y en la membrana interósea desde donde su vientre muscular relativamente grueso se extiende distalmente.

Su tendón se extiende por debajo del retináculo flexor hasta la planta del pie y finalmente se une a la base de la última falange del hallux.

Flexiona plantarmente el hallux y ayuda en la supinación.

El flexor digitorum longus, finalmente, tiene su origen en la parte superior de la tibia.

Su tendón corre hasta la planta del pie donde se bifurca en cuatro tendones terminales unidos a las últimas falanges de los cuatro dedos laterales.

Cruza el tendón del tibial posterior distalmente en la tibia y el tendón del flexor hallucis longus en la planta del pie.

Distalmente a su división, el quadratus plantae irradia hacia él y cerca de las falanges medias sus tendones penetran en los tendones del flexor digitorum brevis.

En la pierna que no soporta peso, flexiona plantar los dedos y el pie y supina.

En la pierna de carga sostiene el arco plantar. (Para el popliteus, ver arriba).


===== Intrínseco =====
Los músculos intrínsecos del pie, músculos cuyos vientres están ubicados en el pie propiamente dicho, son dorsales (parte superior) o plantares (planta).
En el lado dorsal, dos músculos extensores extrínsecos largos son superficiales a los músculos intrínsecos y sus tendones forman la aponeurosis dorsal de los dedos de los pies.

Los extensores intrínsecos cortos y los interóseos plantar y dorsal se irradian hacia estas aponeurosis.

El extensor digitorum brevis y el extensor hallucis brevis tienen un origen común en el lado anterior del calcáneo, desde donde sus tendones se extienden hacia las aponeurosis dorsales de los dedos 1 a 4.

Actúan para dorsiflexionar estos dedos. Los músculos plantares se pueden subdividir en tres grupos asociados con tres regiones: los del dedo grande, el dedo pequeño y la región entre estos dos.

Todos estos músculos están cubiertos por la gruesa y densa aponeurosis plantar que, junto con dos duros tabiques, forman los espacios de los tres grupos.

Estos músculos y su tejido adiposo funcionan como cojines que transmiten el peso del cuerpo hacia abajo.

En su conjunto, el pie es una entidad funcional.

El abductor hallucis se extiende a lo largo del borde medial del pie, desde el calcáneo hasta la base de la primera falange del primer dedo y el hueso sesamoideo medial.

Es un abductor y un flexor débil, y también ayuda a mantener el arco del pie.

Lateral al abductor hallucis se encuentra el flexor hallucis brevis, que se origina en el hueso cuneiforme medial y en el tendón del tibial posterior.

El flexor hallucis tiene una cabeza medial y una lateral insertadas lateralmente al abductor hallucis.

Es un flexor plantar importante que tiene un uso destacado en el ballet clásico (es decir, para el trabajo de puntas).

El aductor del dedo gordo tiene dos cabezas; una cabeza oblicua más fuerte que surge de los huesos cuboides y cuneiformes laterales y las bases del segundo y tercer metatarsianos; y una cabeza transversal que surge de los extremos distales de los metatarsianos tercero-quinto.

Ambas cabezas se insertan en el hueso sesamoideo lateral del primer dedo.

El músculo actúa como tensor de los arcos del pie, pero también puede aducir el primer dedo y flexionar plantar su primera falange. El oponente digiti minimi se origina en el ligamento plantar largo y la vaina tendinosa plantar del peroneo largo y se inserta en el quinto metatarsiano.

Cuando está presente, actúa para la flexión plantar del quinto dedo y sostiene el arco plantar.

El flexor digiti minimi surge de la región de la base del quinto metatarsiano y se inserta en la base de la primera falange del quinto dedo donde generalmente se fusiona con el abductor del primer dedo.

Actúa flexionando plantarmente el último dedo.

El músculo más grande y más largo del dedo pequeño del pie es el abductor digiti minimi.

Estirándose desde el proceso lateral del calcáneo, con una segunda inserción en la base del quinto metatarsiano, hasta la base de la primera falange del quinto dedo, el músculo forma el borde lateral de la planta del pie.

Excepto para sostener el arco, flexiona plantar el dedo pequeño del pie y también actúa como abductor. Los cuatro lumbricales tienen su origen en los tendones del flexor digitorum longus, desde donde se extienden hacia el lado medial de las bases de la primera falange de dígitos dos-cinco.

Excepto por reforzar el arco plantar, contribuyen a la flexión plantar y mueven los cuatro dedos hacia el dedo gordo del pie.

Son, a diferencia de los lumbricales de la mano, bastante variables, a veces ausentes ya veces presentes más de cuatro.

El quadratus plantae surge con dos deslizamientos de los márgenes de la superficie plantar del calcáneo y se inserta en el (los) tendón (es) del flexor digitorum longus, y se conoce como la "cabeza plantar" de este último músculo.

Los tres interóseos plantares surgen con sus cabezas únicas en el lado medial de los metatarsianos tercero a quinto y se insertan en las bases de las primeras falanges de estos dedos.

Las dos cabezas de los cuatro interóseos dorsales surgen en dos metatarsianos adyacentes y se unen en los espacios intermedios.

Su inserción distal se encuentra en las bases de las falanges proximales del segundo al cuarto dedo.

Los interóseos se organizan con el segundo dedo como eje longitudinal; los plantares actúan como aductores y tiran de los dedos 3 a 5 hacia el segundo dedo; mientras que los dorsales actúan como abductores.

Además, los interóseos actúan como flexores plantares en las articulaciones metatarsofalángicas.

Por último, el flexor digitorum brevis surge por debajo del calcáneo para insertar sus tendones en las falanges medias de los dedos 2-4.

Debido a que los tendones del flexor largo de los dedos corren entre estos tendones, el corto a veces se llama perforatus.

Los tendones de estos dos músculos están rodeados por una vaina tendinosa.

El brevis actúa para flexionar plantar las falanges medias.


=== Flexibilidad ===

La flexibilidad se puede definir simplemente como el rango de movimiento disponible (ROM) proporcionado por una articulación específica o grupo de articulaciones.

En su mayor parte, los ejercicios que aumentan la flexibilidad se realizan con la intención de aumentar la longitud muscular general, reducir los riesgos de lesiones y mejorar potencialmente el rendimiento muscular en la actividad física.

Estirar los músculos después de participar en cualquier actividad física puede mejorar la fuerza muscular, aumentar la flexibilidad y reducir el dolor muscular.

Si hay movimiento limitado dentro de una articulación, la "extensibilidad insuficiente" del músculo o grupo de músculos podría estar restringiendo la actividad de la articulación afectada.


==== Estiramiento ====
Se cree que el estiramiento previo a la actividad física extenuante aumenta el rendimiento muscular al extender el tejido blando más allá de su longitud alcanzable para aumentar el rango de movimiento.

Muchas personas físicamente activas practican estas técnicas como un "calentamiento" para lograr un cierto nivel de preparación muscular para movimientos de ejercicios específicos.

Al estirar, los músculos deben sentirse algo incómodos pero no físicamente agonizantes.

Flexión plantar: uno de los estiramientos más populares de los músculos de la parte inferior de la pierna es la elevación del talón de pie, que involucra principalmente el gastrocnemio, el sóleo y el tendón de Aquiles.

Las elevaciones de talón de pie permiten que el individuo active los músculos de la pantorrilla al pararse en un escalón con los dedos de los pies y el antepié, dejando el talón colgando del escalón y flexionando plantar la articulación del tobillo levantando el talón.

Este ejercicio se modifica fácilmente agarrándose a un riel cercano para mantener el equilibrio y generalmente se repite de 5 a 10 veces.
Dorsiflexión: para estirar los músculos anteriores de la parte inferior de la pierna, los estiramientos cruzados de la espinilla funcionan bien.

Este movimiento estirará los músculos de dorsiflexión, principalmente el tibial anterior, el extensor largo del dedo gordo y el extensor largo de los dedos, al hacer que los músculos se alarguen lentamente a medida que el peso corporal se apoya en la articulación del tobillo usando el piso como resistencia contra la parte superior del pie.

Los estiramientos cruzados de la espinilla pueden variar en intensidad dependiendo de la cantidad de peso corporal aplicado sobre la articulación del tobillo cuando el individuo dobla la rodilla.

Este estiramiento generalmente se mantiene durante 15 a 30 segundos.
Eversión e inversión: estirar los músculos de eversión e inversión permite un mejor rango de movimiento de la articulación del tobillo.

Las elevaciones y depresiones del tobillo sentado estirarán los músculos peroneo y tibial que están asociados con estos movimientos a medida que se alargan.

Los músculos de eversión se estiran cuando el tobillo se deprime desde la posición inicial.

De la misma manera, los músculos de inversión se estiran cuando la articulación del tobillo se eleva.

A lo largo de este estiramiento sentado, la articulación del tobillo debe permanecer apoyada mientras se presiona y se eleva con la mano ipsilateral (del mismo lado) para sostener el estiramiento durante 10 a 15 segundos.

Este estiramiento aumentará la longitud total del grupo muscular de eversión e inversión y proporcionará más flexibilidad a la articulación del tobillo para una mayor amplitud de movimiento durante la actividad.


=== Suministro de sangre ===


Las arterias de la pierna se dividen en una serie de segmentos.
En la zona de la pelvis, a la altura de la última vértebra lumbar, la aorta abdominal, continuación de la aorta descendente, se bifurca en un par de arterias ilíacas comunes.

Estos se dividen inmediatamente en las arterias ilíacas interna y externa, la última de las cuales desciende a lo largo del borde medial del psoas mayor para salir del área de la pelvis a través de la laguna vascular debajo del ligamento inguinal. La arteria ingresa al muslo como la arteria femoral que desciende el cara medial del muslo al canal aductor.

El canal pasa del lado anterior al lado posterior de la extremidad donde la arteria sale a través del hiato aductor y se convierte en la arteria poplítea.

En la parte posterior de la rodilla, la arteria poplítea atraviesa la fosa poplítea hasta el músculo poplíteo, donde se divide en las arterias tibial anterior y posterior. En la parte inferior de la pierna, la tibia anterior ingresa al compartimiento extensor cerca del borde superior de la membrana interósea para descender. entre el tibial anterior y el extensor hallucis longus.

Distal a los retináculos superior y extensor del pie se convierte en la arteria dorsal del pie.

El tibial posterior forma una continuación directa de la arteria poplítea que entra en el compartimento flexor de la parte inferior de la pierna para descender por detrás del maléolo medial donde se divide en las arterias plantares medial y lateral, de las cuales la rama posterior da lugar a la arteria peronea. Por razones prácticas, el miembro inferior se subdivide en regiones un tanto arbitrarias: las regiones de la cadera están todas ubicadas en el muslo: anteriormente, la región subinguinal está delimitada por el ligamento inguinal, el sartorio y el pectíneo y forma parte del triángulo femoral que se extiende distalmente al aductor largo.

Posteriormente, la región glútea corresponde al glúteo mayor.

La región anterior del muslo se extiende distalmente desde el triángulo femoral hasta la región de la rodilla y lateralmente hasta el tensor de la fascia lata.

La región posterior termina distalmente antes de la fosa poplítea.

Las regiones anterior y posterior de la rodilla se extienden desde las regiones proximales hasta el nivel de la tuberosidad de la tibia.

En la parte inferior de la pierna, las regiones anterior y posterior se extienden hasta los maléolos.

Detrás de los maléolos se encuentran las regiones retromaleolar lateral y medial y detrás de éstas se encuentra la región del talón.

Finalmente, el pie se subdivide en una región dorsal superiormente y una región plantar inferiormente.


=== Venas ===


Las venas se subdividen en tres sistemas.

Las venas profundas devuelven aproximadamente el 85 por ciento de la sangre y las venas superficiales aproximadamente el 15 por ciento.

Una serie de venas perforantes interconectan los sistemas superficial y profundo.

En la postura de pie, las venas de la pierna tienen que soportar una carga excepcional ya que actúan contra la gravedad cuando devuelven la sangre al corazón.

Las válvulas venosas ayudan a mantener la dirección superficial a profunda del flujo sanguíneo. Venas superficiales:

Gran vena safena
Venas safenas pequeñas y profundas:

Vena femoral, cuyos segmentos son la vena femoral común y la vena subsartorial.
Vena poplítea
vena tibial anterior
vena tibial posterior
vena fibular


=== Suministro nervioso ===


La inervación sensitiva y motora del miembro inferior la proporciona el plexo lumbosacro, que está formado por las ramas ventrales de los nervios raquídeos lumbar y sacro con contribuciones adicionales del nervio subcostal (T12) y el nervio coccígeo (Co1).

Según la distribución y la topografía, el plexo lumbosacro se subdivide en el plexo lumbar (T12-L4) y el plexo sacro (L5-S4); este último a menudo se subdivide en los plexos ciático y pudendo: el plexo lumbar se forma lateral a los agujeros intervertebrales por las ramas ventrales de los primeros cuatro nervios espinales lumbares (L1-L4), que pasan a través del psoas mayor.

Las ramas más grandes del plexo salen del músculo para pasar bruscamente hacia abajo para alcanzar la pared abdominal y el muslo (debajo del ligamento inguinal); a excepción del nervio obturador que atraviesa la pelvis menor para llegar a la parte medial del muslo a través del agujero obturador.

Los nervios del plexo lumbar pasan por delante de la articulación de la cadera y sostienen principalmente la parte anterior del muslo. Los nervios iliohipogástrico (T12-L1) e ilioinguinal (L1) emergen del psoas mayor cerca del origen del músculo, desde donde discurren. lateralmente hacia abajo para pasar anteriormente por encima de la cresta ilíaca entre el transverso del abdomen y el oblicuo interno abdominal, y luego pasar por encima del ligamento inguinal.

Ambos nervios dan ramas musculares a estos dos músculos.

El iliohipogástrico suministra ramas sensoriales a la piel de la región lateral de la cadera y su rama terminal finalmente perfora la aponeurosis del oblicuo externo abdominal por encima del anillo inguinal para suministrar ramas sensoriales a la piel allí.

Ilioinguinalis sale a través del anillo inguinal y proporciona ramas sensoriales a la piel por encima de la sínfisis púbica y la porción lateral del escroto. El nervio genitofemoral (L1, L2) sale del psoas mayor debajo de los dos nervios anteriores, inmediatamente se divide en dos ramas que descienden a lo largo cara anterior del músculo.

La rama sensorial femoral irriga la piel debajo del ligamento inguinal, mientras que la rama genital mixta irriga la piel y los músculos alrededor del órgano sexual.

El nervio cutáneo femoral lateral (L2, L3) sale del psoas mayor lateralmente por debajo del nervio anterior, discurre oblicua y lateralmente hacia abajo por encima del ilíaco, sale del área pélvica cerca de la espina ilíaca e inerva la piel de la cara anterior del muslo. El nervio obturador ( L2-L4) pasa medialmente por detrás del psoas mayor para salir de la pelvis a través del canal del obturador, después de lo cual da ramas al obturador externo y se divide en dos ramas que pasan por detrás y por delante del aductor corto para suministrar inervación motora a todos los demás músculos aductores .

La rama anterior también suministra nervios sensoriales a la piel en un área pequeña en la cara medial distal del muslo.

El nervio femoral (L2-L4) es el mayor y más largo de los nervios del plexo lumbar.

Suministra inervación motora al iliopsoas, pectíneo, sartorio y cuádriceps; y ramas sensoriales a la parte anterior del muslo, la parte media de la parte inferior de la pierna y la parte posterior del pie. Los nervios del plexo sacro pasan por detrás de la articulación de la cadera para inervar la parte posterior del muslo, la mayor parte de la parte inferior de la pierna y el pie.

Los nervios glúteos superior (L4-S1) e inferior (L5-S2) inervan los músculos glúteos y el tensor de la fascia lata.

El nervio cutáneo femoral posterior (S1-S3) aporta ramas sensoriales a la piel de la parte posterior del muslo.

El nervio ciático (L4-S3), el nervio más grande y largo del cuerpo humano, sale de la pelvis a través del agujero ciático mayor.

En la parte posterior del muslo, primero da ramas a la cabeza corta del bíceps femoral y luego se divide en los nervios tibial (L4-S3) y fibular común (L4-S2).

El nervio peroneo continúa hacia abajo en el lado medial del bíceps femoral, se enrolla alrededor del cuello del peroné y entra en la parte delantera de la parte inferior de la pierna.

Allí se divide en una rama terminal profunda y otra superficial.

La rama superficial inerva los músculos peroneos y la rama profunda ingresa al compartimiento extensor; ambas ramas alcanzan el pie dorsal.

En el muslo, el nervio tibial da ramas al semitendinoso, semimembranoso, aductor mayor y la cabeza larga del bíceps femoral.

Luego, el nervio desciende directamente por la parte posterior de la pierna, a través de la fosa poplítea para inervar los flexores del tobillo en la parte posterior de la parte inferior de la pierna y luego continúa hacia abajo para inervar todos los músculos de la planta del pie.

Los nervios pudendo (S2-S4) y coccígeo (S5-Co2) inervan los músculos del piso pélvico y la piel circundante. El tronco lumbosacro es una rama comunicante que pasa entre los plexos sacro y lumbar que contiene fibras ventrales de L4.

El nervio coccígeo, el último nervio espinal, emerge del hiato sacro, se une con las ramas ventrales de los dos últimos nervios sacros y forma el plexo coccígeo.


== Pierna y pie ==

La parte inferior de la pierna y el tobillo deben mantenerse ejercitados y en movimiento, ya que son la base de todo el cuerpo.

Las extremidades inferiores deben ser fuertes para equilibrar el peso del resto del cuerpo, y los músculos gastrocnemios participan en gran parte de la circulación sanguínea.


=== Ejercicios ===



==== Isométrica y estándar ====
Hay una serie de ejercicios que se pueden hacer para fortalecer la parte inferior de la pierna.

Por ejemplo, para activar los flexores plantares en los flexores plantares profundos uno puede sentarse en el suelo con las caderas flexionadas, el tobillo neutral con las rodillas completamente extendidas mientras se alternan empujando el pie contra una pared o plataforma.

Este tipo de ejercicio es beneficioso ya que apenas provoca fatiga.

Otra forma de ejercicio isométrico para el gastrocnemio serían las elevaciones de pantorrillas sentado, que se pueden realizar con o sin equipo.

Uno puede sentarse en una mesa con los pies apoyados en el suelo y luego flexionar plantar ambos tobillos para que los talones se levanten del suelo y el gastrocnemio se flexione.

Un movimiento alternativo podría ser ejercicios de caída del talón con los dedos de los pies apoyados en una superficie elevada; como movimiento opuesto, esto mejoraría el rango de movimiento.

Las elevaciones de los dedos del pie con una sola pierna para el músculo gastrocnemio se pueden realizar sosteniendo una mancuerna en una mano mientras se usa la otra para mantener el equilibrio y luego parándose con un pie sobre un plato.

El siguiente paso sería la flexión plantar y mantener la articulación de la rodilla recta o ligeramente flexionada.

El tríceps sural se contrae durante este ejercicio.

Los ejercicios de estabilización como la sentadilla con balón BOSU también son importantes, especialmente porque ayudan a que los tobillos tengan que ajustarse a la forma del balón para equilibrarse.


== Importancia clínica ==



=== Lesión en la parte inferior de la pierna ===

Las lesiones en la parte inferior de la pierna son comunes al correr o practicar deportes.

Alrededor del 10% de todas las lesiones totales involucran las extremidades inferiores en los atletas.

La mayoría de los atletas se tuercen los tobillos, lo que se debe principalmente al aumento de la carga en los pies cuando se mueven hacia abajo o en una posición exterior del tobillo.

Todas las áreas del pie, que son el antepié, el mediopié y el retropié, absorben diversas fuerzas al correr y también pueden provocar lesiones.

Correr y diversas actividades pueden provocar fracturas por estrés, tendinitis, lesiones musculotendinosas o cualquier dolor crónico en nuestras extremidades inferiores como la tibia.


==== Tipos de actividades ====
Las lesiones en cuádriceps o isquiotibiales son causadas por las cargas de impacto constante en las piernas durante actividades, como patear una pelota.

Al hacer este tipo de movimiento, el 85% de ese impacto es absorbido por los isquiotibiales, lo que puede causar tensión en esos músculos.
Saltar: es otro riesgo porque si las piernas no aterrizan correctamente después de un salto inicial, puede haber daño en los meniscos de las rodillas, esguince en el tobillo al evertir o invertir el pie, o daño en el tendón de Aquiles y el gastrocnemio si hay es demasiada fuerza durante la flexión plantar.
El levantamiento de pesas, como la sentadilla profunda realizada incorrectamente, también es peligroso para las extremidades inferiores, porque el ejercicio puede provocar una extensión excesiva o un estiramiento de los ligamentos de la rodilla y puede causar dolor con el tiempo.
Correr: la actividad más común asociada con lesiones en la parte inferior de la pierna.

Hay una presión y un estrés constantes sobre los pies, las rodillas y las piernas mientras se corre por la fuerza de la gravedad.

Los desgarros musculares en nuestras piernas o el dolor en varias áreas de los pies pueden ser el resultado de una biomecánica deficiente al correr.


===== Corriendo =====
Las lesiones más comunes al correr involucran las rodillas y los pies.

Varios estudios se han centrado en la causa inicial de estas lesiones relacionadas con la carrera y encontraron que hay muchos factores que se correlacionan con estas lesiones.

Las corredoras de distancia que tenían antecedentes de lesiones por fracturas por estrés tenían fuerzas de impacto vertical más altas que las personas sin lesiones.

Las grandes fuerzas en la parte inferior de las piernas se asociaron con fuerzas gravitatorias, y esto se correlacionó con dolor patelofemoral o posibles lesiones en la rodilla.

Los investigadores también descubrieron que estas lesiones relacionadas con la carrera también afectan los pies porque los corredores con lesiones previas mostraron más eversión del pie y sobrepronación mientras corrían que los corredores no lesionados.

Esto provoca más cargas y fuerzas en el lado medial del pie, provocando más tensión en los tendones del pie y el tobillo (tendones peroneos).

La mayoría de estas lesiones por correr son causadas por el uso excesivo y correr distancias más largas semanalmente durante un período prolongado es un riesgo de lesionar la parte inferior de las piernas.


==== Herramientas de prevención ====
Los estiramientos voluntarios de las piernas, como el estiramiento de la pared, acondicionan los isquiotibiales y los músculos de la pantorrilla para varios movimientos antes de trabajarlos enérgicamente.

El entorno y los alrededores, como un terreno irregular, pueden hacer que los pies se coloquen en una posición poco natural, por lo que usar zapatos que puedan absorber las fuerzas del impacto del suelo y permitir estabilizar los pies también puede prevenir algunas lesiones al correr.

Los zapatos deben estar estructurados para permitir la fricción-tracción en la superficie del zapato, espacio para diferentes tensiones de pisada o para arcos cómodos y regulares para los pies.


==== Resumen ====
Las posibilidades de dañar nuestras extremidades inferiores se reducirán al tener conocimiento sobre algunas actividades asociadas con lesiones en la parte inferior de la pierna y al desarrollar una forma correcta de correr, como no sobrepronar el pie o usar demasiado las piernas.

Las medidas preventivas, como varios estiramientos y el uso de calzado adecuado, también reducirán las lesiones.


=== Fractura ===


Una fractura de pierna se puede clasificar según el hueso afectado en:

Fractura femoral (en la parte superior de la pierna)
Fractura de crus (en la parte inferior de la pierna)


== Manejo del dolor ==

El manejo del dolor en la parte inferior de la pierna y el pie es fundamental para reducir la progresión de más lesiones, sensaciones incómodas y limitar las alteraciones al caminar y correr.

La mayoría de las personas sufren varios dolores en la parte inferior de la pierna y el pie debido a diferentes factores.

La inflamación muscular, la tensión, la sensibilidad, la hinchazón y el desgarro muscular debido al uso excesivo de los músculos o al movimiento incorrecto son varias condiciones que suelen experimentar los atletas y el público en general durante y después de las actividades físicas de alto impacto.

Por lo tanto, se proporcionan mecanismos de manejo del dolor sugeridos para reducir el dolor y prevenir la progresión de la lesión.


=== Fascitis plantar ===

El estiramiento del pie para fascitis plantar es uno de los métodos recomendados para reducir el dolor causado por la fascitis plantar (Figura 1).

Para hacer el estiramiento de la fascia plantar, mientras está sentado en una silla, coloque el tobillo sobre la rodilla opuesta y sostenga los dedos del pie afectado, tirando lentamente hacia atrás.

El estiramiento debe mantenerse durante aproximadamente diez segundos, tres veces al día.


=== Síndrome de tensión tibial medial (férula en la espinilla) ===

Se pueden utilizar varios métodos para ayudar a controlar el dolor causado por los calambres en las piernas.

Colocar hielo en el área afectada antes y después de correr ayudará a reducir el dolor.

Además, el uso de dispositivos ortopédicos que incluyan una manga de neopreno (Figura 2) y el uso de calzado adecuado, como un arco para el pie, pueden ayudar a eliminar la afección.

El estiramiento y el fortalecimiento de la tibia anterior o la tibia medial mediante la realización de ejercicios de flexores plantares y dorsales, como el estiramiento de la pantorrilla, también pueden ayudar a aliviar el dolor.


=== Tendinopatía de Aquiles ===

Existen numerosos enfoques apropiados para manejar el dolor resultante de la tendinitis de Aquiles.

La acción principal es descansar.

También se recomiendan actividades que no supongan una tensión adicional para el tendón afectado.

El uso de aparatos ortopédicos o prótesis proporcionará amortiguación y evitará que el tendón de Aquiles afectado experimente más estrés al caminar y realizar estiramientos terapéuticos.

Algunas modalidades de estiramiento o ejercicios excéntricos, como la extensión y flexión de los dedos de los pies y el estiramiento de la pantorrilla y el talón, son beneficiosos para reducir el dolor en los pacientes con tendinopatía de Aquiles (Figura 4)


== Sociedad y cultura ==

Las mujeres adolescentes y adultas en muchas culturas occidentales a menudo se quitan el vello de las piernas.

Las piernas tonificadas, bronceadas y afeitadas a veces se perciben como un signo de juventud y, a menudo, se consideran atractivas en estas culturas.
Los hombres generalmente no se afeitan las piernas en ninguna cultura.

Sin embargo, afeitarse las piernas es una práctica generalmente aceptada en el modelaje.

También es bastante común en los deportes en los que la depilación hace que el atleta sea mucho más rápido al reducir la resistencia; el caso más común de esto es la natación competitiva.


== Galería de imágenes ==


 
 
 
 
 



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pierna_humana

;;;PT;;;



SISTEMA MUSCULAR DO MEMBRO INFERIOR
/PERNA HUMANA


A perna humana, no sentido geral da palavra, é todo o membro inferior do corpo humano, incluindo o pé, a coxa e até o quadril ou a região glútea.

No entanto, a definição em anatomia humana refere-se apenas à seção do membro inferior que se estende do joelho ao tornozelo, também conhecida como crus ou, especialmente em uso não técnico, a haste.

As pernas são usadas para ficar em pé e todas as formas de locomoção, incluindo recreativas, como dança, e constituem uma parte significativa da massa de uma pessoa.

As pernas femininas geralmente têm maior anteversão do quadril e ângulos tibiofemorais, mas comprimentos de fêmur e tibial mais curtos do que os dos homens.


== Estrutura ==

Na anatomia humana, a perna é a parte do membro inferior que fica entre o joelho e o tornozelo.

A coxa está entre o quadril e o joelho e compõe o resto do membro inferior.

O termo membro inferior ou "extremidade inferior" é comumente usado para descrever toda a perna.

Este artigo geralmente segue o uso comum.
A perna do joelho ao tornozelo é chamada de crus ou cnemis.

A panturrilha é a parte de trás, e a tíbia ou tíbia, juntamente com a fíbula menor, formam a frente da perna.

A evolução forneceu ao corpo humano duas características distintas: a especialização do membro superior para manipulação visualmente guiada e o desenvolvimento do membro inferior em um mecanismo especificamente adaptado para uma marcha bípede eficiente.

Embora a capacidade de andar ereto não seja exclusiva dos humanos, outros primatas só conseguem isso por curtos períodos e com grande gasto de energia.

A adaptação humana ao bipedismo não se limita à perna, mas também afetou a localização do centro de gravidade do corpo, a reorganização dos órgãos internos e a forma e o biomecanismo do tronco.

Nos seres humanos, a coluna vertebral em forma de S duplo atua como um grande amortecedor que desloca o peso do tronco sobre a superfície de suporte de carga dos pés.

As pernas humanas são excepcionalmente longas e poderosas como resultado de sua especialização exclusiva para suporte e locomoção – nos orangotangos o comprimento da perna é 111% do tronco; em chimpanzés 128% e em humanos 171%.

Muitos dos músculos da perna também estão adaptados ao bipedismo, mais substancialmente os músculos glúteos, os extensores da articulação do joelho e os músculos da panturrilha.

=== Músculos ===

==== Quadril ====

Existem várias maneiras de classificar os músculos do quadril: (1) Por localização ou inervação (divisões ventral e dorsal da camada do plexo); (2) por desenvolvimento com base em seus pontos de inserção (um grupo posterior em duas camadas e um grupo anterior); e (3) por função (isto é, extensores, flexores, adutores e abdutores). Alguns músculos do quadril também atuam na articulação do joelho ou nas articulações vertebrais.

Além disso, como a área de origem e inserção de muitos desses músculos é muito extensa, esses músculos geralmente estão envolvidos em vários movimentos muito diferentes.

Na articulação do quadril, as rotações lateral e medial ocorrem ao longo do eixo do membro; extensão (também chamada de dorsiflexão ou retroversão) e flexão (anteflexão ou anteversão) ocorrem ao longo de um eixo transversal; e abdução e adução ocorrem em torno de um eixo sagital. Os músculos dorsais anteriores do quadril são o iliopsoas, um grupo de dois ou três músculos com uma inserção compartilhada no trocanter menor do fêmur.

O psoas maior se origina da última vértebra e ao longo da coluna lombar para se estender até a pelve.

O ilíaco se origina na fossa ilíaca no lado interior da pelve.

Os dois músculos unem-se para formar o músculo iliopsoas que se insere no trocânter menor do fêmur.

O psoas menor, presente apenas em cerca de 50 por cento dos indivíduos, origina-se acima do psoas maior para se esticar obliquamente até sua inserção no lado interior do músculo maior. fêmur.

O tensor da fáscia lata, estendendo-se da espinha ilíaca ântero-superior até o trato iliotibial, pressiona a cabeça do fêmur no acetábulo, mas também flexiona, gira medialmente e abduz até a articulação do quadril.

O piriforme origina-se na superfície pélvica anterior do sacro, passa pelo forame isquiático maior e se insere na face posterior da ponta do trocânter maior.

Na postura em pé é um rotador lateral, mas também auxilia na extensão da coxa.

O glúteo máximo tem sua origem entre (e ao redor) da crista ilíaca e do cóccix, de onde uma parte se irradia para o trato iliotibial e a outra se estende até a tuberosidade glútea sob o trocanter maior.

O glúteo máximo é principalmente um extensor e rotador lateral da articulação do quadril, e entra em ação ao subir escadas ou subir de uma postura sentada para de pé.

Além disso, a parte inserida na fáscia lata abduz e a parte inserida na tuberosidade glútea aduz o quadril.

Os dois músculos glúteos profundos, o glúteo médio e mínimo, originam-se no lado lateral da pelve.

O músculo médio tem a forma de uma tampa.

Suas fibras anteriores atuam como rotador e flexor medial; as fibras posteriores como rotador lateral e extensor; e todo o músculo abduz o quadril.

O mínimo tem funções semelhantes e ambos os músculos são inseridos no trocânter maior.

Os músculos ventrais do quadril funcionam como rotadores laterais e desempenham um papel importante no controle do equilíbrio do corpo.

Por serem mais fortes que os rotadores mediais, na posição normal da perna, o ápice do pé fica voltado para fora para conseguir um melhor suporte.

O obturador interno origina-se na pelve no forame obturador e sua membrana, passa pelo forame isquiático menor e se insere na fossa trocantérica do fêmur. "Inclinado" sobre a incisura isquiática menor, que atua como um fulcro, o músculo forma os rotadores laterais mais fortes do quadril, juntamente com o glúteo máximo e o quadrado femoral.

Quando sentado com os joelhos flexionados, atua como abdutor.

O obturador externo tem um trajeto paralelo com sua origem localizada na borda posterior do forame obturador.

É coberto por vários músculos e atua como um rotador lateral e um adutor fraco.

Os músculos gêmeos inferior e superior representam as cabeças marginais do obturador interno e auxiliam este músculo.

Esses três músculos formam um músculo de três cabeças (tricipital) conhecido como tríceps da coxa.

O quadrado femoral origina-se na tuberosidade isquiática e insere-se na crista intertrocantérica entre os trocânteres.

Este músculo achatado atua como um forte rotador lateral e adutor da coxa.

Os músculos adutores da coxa são inervados pelo nervo obturador, com exceção do pectíneo, que recebe fibras do nervo femoral, e adutor magno, que recebe fibras do nervo tibial.

O grácil surge próximo à sínfise púbica e é único entre os adutores, pois ultrapassa o joelho para se fixar no lado medial da diáfise da tíbia, agindo assim em duas articulações.

Ele compartilha sua inserção distal com o sartório e o semitendinoso, todos os três músculos que formam a pata de ganso.

É o músculo mais medial dos adutores, e com a coxa abduzida sua origem pode ser claramente vista arqueando-se sob a pele.

Com o joelho estendido, aduz a coxa e flexiona o quadril.

O pectíneo tem sua origem na eminência iliopúbica lateralmente ao grácil e, de forma retangular, estende-se obliquamente para se fixar imediatamente atrás do trocanter menor e descendo a linha pectínea e a parte proximal da linha áspera no fêmur.

É um flexor da articulação do quadril e um adutor e um rotador medial fraco da coxa.

O adutor curto origina-se no ramo inferior do púbis abaixo do grácil e se estende obliquamente abaixo do pectíneo até o terço superior da linha áspera.

Exceto por ser adutor, é um rotador lateral e flexor fraco da articulação do quadril. O adutor longo tem sua origem no ramo superior do púbis e se insere medialmente no terço médio da linha áspera.

Principalmente um adutor, também é responsável por alguma flexão.

O adutor magno tem sua origem logo atrás do longo e encontra-se profundamente a ele.

Seu amplo ventre se divide em duas partes: uma se insere na linha áspera e o tendão da outra desce até o tubérculo adutor no lado medial da extremidade distal do fêmur onde forma um septo intermuscular que separa os flexores dos extensores.

Magnus é um poderoso adutor, especialmente ativo ao cruzar as pernas.

Sua parte superior é um rotador lateral, mas a parte inferior atua como um rotador medial na perna flexionada quando girada para fora e também estende a articulação do quadril.

O adutor mínimo é uma subdivisão incompletamente separada do adutor magno.

Sua origem forma uma parte anterior do magno e distalmente insere-se na linha áspera acima do magno.

Atua na adução e rotação lateral do fêmur.


==== Coxa ====
Os músculos da coxa podem ser classificados em três grupos de acordo com sua localização: músculos anteriores e posteriores e os adutores (na face medial).

Todos os adutores, exceto o grácil, inserem-se no fêmur e atuam na articulação do quadril, e assim se qualificam funcionalmente como músculos do quadril.

A maioria dos músculos da coxa, os músculos "verdadeiros" da coxa, inserem-se na perna (tanto na tíbia quanto na fíbula) e atuam principalmente na articulação do joelho.

Geralmente, os extensores ficam na parte anterior da coxa e os flexores na parte posterior.

Embora o sartório flexione o joelho, é ontogeneticamente considerado um extensor, pois seu deslocamento é secundário.

Dos músculos anteriores da coxa, os maiores são os quatro músculos do quadríceps femoral: o reto femoral central, que é circundado pelos três vastos, vasto intermediário, medial e lateral.

O reto femoral é fixado à pelve com dois tendões, enquanto os vastos são inseridos no fêmur.

Todos os quatro músculos se unem em um tendão comum inserido na patela, de onde o ligamento patelar o estende até a tuberosidade da tíbia.

As fibras dos vastos medial e lateral formam dois retináculos que se estendem além da patela em ambos os lados até os côndilos da tíbia.

O quadríceps é o extensor do joelho, mas o reto femoral também flexiona a articulação do quadril, e o músculo articular do joelho protege a cápsula articular da articulação do joelho de ser beliscada durante a extensão.

O sartório corre superficial e obliquamente para baixo no lado anterior da coxa, da espinha ilíaca ântero-superior até a pata de ganso no lado medial do joelho, de onde se estende ainda mais para a fáscia crural.

O sartório atua como flexor tanto no quadril quanto no joelho, mas, devido ao seu curso oblíquo, também contribui para a rotação medial da perna como um dos músculos da pata anserina (com o joelho flexionado) e para a rotação lateral do quadril Joint.There são quatro músculos posteriores da coxa.

O bíceps femoral tem duas cabeças: A cabeça longa tem sua origem na tuberosidade isquiática juntamente com o semitendíneo e atua em duas articulações.

A cabeça curta origina-se do terço médio da linha áspera da diáfise do fêmur e do septo intermuscular lateral da coxa e atua em apenas uma articulação.

Essas duas cabeças se unem para formar o bíceps que se insere na cabeça da fíbula.

O bíceps flexiona a articulação do joelho e gira a perna flexionada lateralmente - é o único rotador lateral do joelho e, portanto, tem que se opor a todos os rotadores mediais.

Além disso, a cabeça longa estende a articulação do quadril.

O semitendíneo e o semimembranoso compartilham sua origem com a cabeça longa do bíceps, e ambos se inserem no lado medial da cabeça proximal da tíbia junto com o grácil e o sartório para formar a pata de ganso.

O semitendíneo atua em duas articulações; extensão do quadril, flexão do joelho e rotação medial da perna.

Distalmente, o tendão do semimembranoso é dividido em três partes denominadas pes anserinus profondus.

Funcionalmente, o semimembranoso é semelhante ao semitendinoso e, portanto, produz extensão na articulação do quadril e flexão e rotação medial no joelho.

Posteriormente abaixo da articulação do joelho, o poplíteo se estende obliquamente do epicôndilo femoral lateral até a superfície posterior da tíbia.

A bolsa subpoplítea está localizada profundamente ao músculo.

O poplíteo flexiona a articulação do joelho e gira medialmente a perna.


==== Crus e pé ====
Com o poplíteo (veja acima) como a única exceção, todos os músculos da perna estão ligados ao pé e, com base na localização, podem ser classificados em um grupo anterior e um posterior separados um do outro pela tíbia, fíbula e a membrana interóssea.

Por sua vez, esses dois grupos podem ser subdivididos em subgrupos ou camadas – o grupo anterior é composto pelos extensores e fibulares, e o grupo posterior por uma camada superficial e uma profunda.

Funcionalmente, os músculos da perna são extensores, responsáveis ​​pela dorsiflexão do pé, ou flexores, responsáveis ​​pela flexão plantar.

Esses músculos também podem ser classificados por inervação, músculos supridos pela subdivisão anterior do plexo e aqueles supridos pela subdivisão posterior.

Os músculos da perna que atuam no pé são chamados de músculos extrínsecos do pé, enquanto os músculos do pé localizados no pé são chamados de intrínsecos.
Dorsiflexão (extensão) e flexão plantar ocorrem em torno do eixo transverso que atravessa a articulação do tornozelo da ponta do maléolo medial até a ponta do maléolo lateral.

A pronação (eversão) e a supinação (inversão) ocorrem ao longo do eixo oblíquo da articulação do tornozelo.


===== Extrínseco =====

Três dos músculos anteriores são extensores.

A partir de sua origem na superfície lateral da tíbia e na membrana interóssea, o ventre trilateral do tibial anterior estende-se abaixo dos retináculos extensores superior e inferior até sua inserção no lado plantar do osso cuneiforme medial e do primeiro metatarso .

Na perna sem sustentação de peso, o dorso do tibial anterior flexiona o pé e levanta a borda medial do pé.

Na perna de sustentação de peso, puxa a perna em direção ao pé.

O extensor longo dos dedos tem uma origem ampla que se estende do côndilo lateral da tíbia para baixo ao longo do lado anterior da fíbula e da membrana interóssea.

No tornozelo, o tendão se divide em quatro que se estendem pelo pé até as aponeuroses dorsais das últimas falanges dos quatro dedos laterais.

Na perna sem peso, o músculo estende os dedos e dorsiflexiona o pé, e na perna com peso age de forma semelhante ao tibial anterior.

O extensor longo do hálux tem sua origem na fíbula e na membrana interóssea entre os dois outros extensores e está, à semelhança do extensor dos dedos, inserido na última falange do dedão do pé ("hálux").

O músculo dorsiflexiona o hálux e age de forma semelhante ao tibial anterior na perna que sustenta peso.

Dois músculos no lado lateral da perna formam o grupo fibular.

O fibular longo e curto ambos têm suas origens na fíbula e ambos passam atrás do maléolo lateral, onde seus tendões passam sob os retináculos fibulares.

Sob o pé, o longo se estende do lado lateral para o medial em um sulco, fortalecendo assim o arco transverso do pé.

O brevis está fixado na face lateral da tuberosidade do quinto metatarso.

Juntos, os dois fibulares formam os pronadores mais fortes do pé.

Os músculos fibulares são altamente variáveis ​​e várias variantes podem ocasionalmente estar presentes.

Dos músculos posteriores, três estão na camada superficial.

Os principais flexores plantares, comumente chamados de tríceps sural, são o sóleo, que se origina no lado proximal de ambos os ossos da perna, e o gastrocnêmio, cujas duas cabeças se originam na extremidade distal do fêmur.

Esses músculos se unem em um grande tendão terminal, o tendão de Aquiles, que está ligado ao tubérculo posterior do calcâneo.

O plantar segue de perto a cabeça lateral do gastrocnêmio.

Seu tendão corre entre os do sóleo e gastrocnêmio e está inserido na extremidade medial do tendão do calcâneo. Na camada profunda, o tibial posterior tem sua origem na membrana interóssea e nas áreas ósseas vizinhas e desce atrás do maléolo medial.

Sob o pé, ele se divide em uma parte medial espessa ligada ao osso navicular e uma parte lateral ligeiramente mais fraca inserida nos três ossos cuneiformes.

O músculo produz flexão plantar e supinação simultâneas na perna sem sustentação de peso e aproxima o calcanhar da panturrilha da perna.

O flexor longo do hálux surge distalmente na fíbula e na membrana interóssea de onde seu ventre muscular relativamente espesso se estende distalmente.

Seu tendão se estende abaixo do retináculo dos flexores até a sola do pé e finalmente se fixa na base da última falange do hálux.

Faz flexão plantar do hálux e auxilia na supinação.

O flexor longo dos dedos, por fim, tem sua origem na parte superior da tíbia.

Seu tendão corre para a sola do pé, onde se bifurca em quatro tendões terminais ligados às últimas falanges dos quatro dedos laterais.

Ele cruza o tendão do tibial posterior distalmente na tíbia e o tendão do flexor longo do hálux na sola.

Distalmente à sua divisão, o quadrado plantar se irradia para ele e próximo às falanges médias seus tendões penetram nos tendões do flexor curto dos dedos.

Na perna sem sustentação de peso, ele flexiona plantarmente os dedos e o pé e supina.

Na perna de sustentação de peso suporta o arco plantar. (Para o poplíteo, veja acima.)


===== Intrínseco =====
Os músculos intrínsecos do pé, músculos cujas barrigas estão localizadas no próprio pé, são dorsais (topo) ou plantares (sola).
No lado dorsal, dois músculos extensores extrínsecos longos são superficiais aos músculos intrínsecos, e seus tendões formam a aponeurose dorsal dos dedos.

Os extensores intrínsecos curtos e os interósseos plantar e dorsal se irradiam para essas aponeuroses.

O extensor curto dos dedos e o extensor curto do hálux têm uma origem comum na face anterior do calcâneo, de onde seus tendões se estendem para as aponeuroses dorsais dos dedos 1-4.

Atuam na dorsiflexão desses dedos. Os músculos plantares podem ser subdivididos em três grupos associados a três regiões: a do dedo grande, a do dedo mínimo e a região entre essas duas.

Todos esses músculos são recobertos pela espessa e densa aponeurose plantar, que, juntamente com dois septos resistentes, formam os espaços dos três grupos.

Esses músculos e seu tecido adiposo funcionam como almofadas que transmitem o peso do corpo para baixo.

Como um todo, o pé é uma entidade funcional.

O abdutor do hálux se estende ao longo da borda medial do pé, do calcâneo até a base da primeira falange do primeiro dedo e o osso sesamoide medial.

É um abdutor e um flexor fraco, e também ajuda a manter o arco do pé.

Lateralmente ao abdutor do hálux está o flexor curto do hálux, que se origina do osso cuneiforme medial e do tendão do tibial posterior.

O flexor do hálux tem uma cabeça medial e uma lateral inseridas lateralmente ao abdutor do hálux.

É um importante flexor plantar que entra em uso proeminente no balé clássico (ou seja, para o trabalho de ponta).

O adutor do hálux tem duas cabeças; uma cabeça oblíqua mais forte que se origina dos ossos cubóide e cuneiforme lateral e das bases do segundo e terceiro metatarsos; e uma cabeça transversal que se origina das extremidades distais do terceiro-quinto metatarsos.

Ambas as cabeças são inseridas no osso sesamoide lateral do primeiro dedo.

O músculo atua como tensor dos arcos do pé, mas também pode aduzir o primeiro dedo e flexionar plantar sua primeira falange. quinto metatarso.

Quando presente, atua na flexão plantar do quinto dedo e suporta o arco plantar.

O flexor do dedo mínimo origina-se da região da base do quinto metatarso e insere-se na base da primeira falange do quinto dedo onde geralmente se funde com o abdutor do primeiro dedo.

Atua na flexão plantar do último dedo.

O maior e mais longo músculo do dedo mínimo do pé é o abdutor do dedo mínimo.

Estendendo-se do processo lateral do calcâneo, com uma segunda fixação na base do quinto metatarso, até a base da primeira falange do quinto dedo, o músculo forma a borda lateral da sola.

Exceto para sustentar o arco, ele flexiona plantarmente o dedo mínimo e também atua como abdutor. Os quatro lumbricales têm sua origem nos tendões do flexor longo dos dedos, de onde se estendem para o lado medial das bases da primeira falange dígitos dois a cinco.

Exceto para reforçar o arco plantar, eles contribuem para a flexão plantar e movem os quatro dedos em direção ao dedão do pé.

Eles são, em contraste com os lumbricales da mão, bastante variáveis, às vezes ausentes e às vezes mais de quatro presentes.

O quadrado plantar surge com dois deslizamentos das margens da superfície plantar do calcâneo e é inserido no(s) tendão(ões) do flexor longo dos dedos, e é conhecido como a "cabeça plantar" deste último músculo.

Os três interósseos plantares surgem com suas cabeças únicas na face medial do terceiro-quinto metatarsos e são inseridos nas bases das primeiras falanges desses dedos.

As duas cabeças dos quatro interósseos dorsais surgem em dois metatarsos adjacentes e se fundem nos espaços intermediários.

Sua fixação distal está nas bases das falanges proximais do segundo quarto dedo.

Os interósseos são organizados com o segundo dígito como eixo longitudinal; os plantares atuam como adutores e puxam os dedos de 3 a 5 em direção ao segundo dedo; enquanto os dorsais atuam como abdutores.

Além disso, os interósseos atuam como flexores plantares nas articulações metatarsofalângicas.

Por fim, o flexor curto dos dedos surge por baixo do calcâneo para inserir seus tendões nas falanges médias do dígito 2-4.

Como os tendões do flexor longo dos dedos correm entre esses tendões, o curto às vezes é chamado de perfurante.

Os tendões desses dois músculos são circundados por uma bainha tendínea.

O curto atua na flexão plantar das falanges médias.


=== Flexibilidade ===

A flexibilidade pode ser definida simplesmente como a amplitude de movimento (ADM) disponível fornecida por uma articulação específica ou grupo de articulações.

Na maioria das vezes, os exercícios que aumentam a flexibilidade são realizados com a intenção de aumentar o comprimento muscular geral, reduzir os riscos de lesões e potencialmente melhorar o desempenho muscular na atividade física.

Alongar os músculos após o envolvimento em qualquer atividade física pode melhorar a força muscular, aumentar a flexibilidade e reduzir a dor muscular.

Se houver movimento limitado dentro de uma articulação, a "extensibilidade insuficiente" do músculo ou grupo muscular pode estar restringindo a atividade da articulação afetada.


==== Alongamento ====
Acredita-se que o alongamento antes da atividade física extenuante aumenta o desempenho muscular, estendendo o tecido mole além de seu comprimento atingível, a fim de aumentar a amplitude de movimento.

Muitos indivíduos fisicamente ativos praticam essas técnicas como um “aquecimento” para atingir um certo nível de preparação muscular para movimentos específicos de exercícios.

Ao alongar, os músculos devem se sentir um pouco desconfortáveis, mas não fisicamente agonizantes.

Flexão plantar: Um dos alongamentos musculares da perna mais populares é a elevação do calcanhar em pé, que envolve principalmente o gastrocnêmio, o sóleo e o tendão de Aquiles.

A elevação do calcanhar em pé permite que o indivíduo ative os músculos da panturrilha ao ficar em um degrau com os dedos dos pés e o antepé, deixando o calcanhar pendurado no degrau, e flexionando a articulação do tornozelo levantando o calcanhar.

Este exercício é facilmente modificado segurando-se em um trilho próximo para se equilibrar e geralmente é repetido de 5 a 10 vezes.
Dorsiflexão: Para alongar os músculos anteriores da perna, os alongamentos cruzados da canela funcionam bem.

Este movimento alongará os músculos de dorsiflexão, principalmente o tibial anterior, extensor longo do hálux e extensor longo dos dedos, fazendo com que os músculos se alonguem lentamente à medida que o peso do corpo é apoiado na articulação do tornozelo, usando o chão como resistência contra a parte superior do pé.

Os alongamentos cruzados da canela podem variar em intensidade dependendo da quantidade de peso corporal aplicada na articulação do tornozelo à medida que o indivíduo se dobra no joelho.

Este alongamento é normalmente mantido por 15 a 30 segundos.
Eversão e inversão: alongar os músculos de eversão e inversão permite uma melhor amplitude de movimento para a articulação do tornozelo.

As elevações e depressões do tornozelo sentado alongam os músculos fibular e tibial que estão associados a esses movimentos.

Os músculos de eversão são alongados quando o tornozelo fica deprimido a partir da posição inicial.

Da mesma forma, os músculos de inversão são alongados quando a articulação do tornozelo fica elevada.

Ao longo deste alongamento sentado, a articulação do tornozelo deve permanecer apoiada enquanto deprimida e elevada com a mão ipsilateral (mesmo lado) para sustentar o alongamento por 10 a 15 segundos.

Esse alongamento aumentará o comprimento geral do grupo muscular de eversão e inversão e fornecerá mais flexibilidade à articulação do tornozelo para maior amplitude de movimento durante a atividade.


=== Suprimento sanguíneo ===


As artérias da perna são divididas em uma série de segmentos.
Na área da pelve, ao nível da última vértebra lombar, a aorta abdominal, continuação da aorta descendente, divide-se em um par de artérias ilíacas comuns.

Estas imediatamente se dividem nas artérias ilíacas interna e externa, a última das quais desce ao longo da borda medial do psoas maior para sair da área da pelve através da lacuna vascular sob o ligamento inguinal. lado medial da coxa até o canal adutor.

O canal passa do lado anterior para o lado posterior do membro, onde a artéria sai através do hiato adutor e se torna a artéria poplítea.

Na parte de trás do joelho, a artéria poplítea atravessa a fossa poplítea até o músculo poplíteo, onde se divide em artérias tibiais anterior e posterior. entre o tibial anterior e o extensor longo do hálux.

Distal aos retináculos superior e extensor do pé, torna-se a artéria dorsal do pé.

A tibial posterior forma uma continuação direta da artéria poplítea que entra no compartimento flexor da perna para descer atrás do maléolo medial onde se divide nas artérias plantares medial e lateral, das quais o ramo posterior dá origem à artéria fibular. razões práticas o membro inferior é subdividido em regiões um tanto arbitrárias: As regiões do quadril estão todas localizadas na coxa: anteriormente, a região subinguinal é limitada pelo ligamento inguinal, pelo sartório e pelo pectíneo e faz parte do triângulo femoral que estende-se distalmente ao adutor longo.

Posteriormente, a região glútea corresponde ao glúteo máximo.

A região anterior da coxa estende-se distalmente do triângulo femoral até a região do joelho e lateralmente ao tensor da fáscia lata.

A região posterior termina distalmente antes da fossa poplítea.

As regiões anterior e posterior do joelho estendem-se das regiões proximais até o nível da tuberosidade da tíbia.

Na perna, as regiões anterior e posterior se estendem até os maléolos.

Atrás dos maléolos estão as regiões retromaleolares lateral e medial e atrás destas está a região do calcanhar.

Finalmente, o pé é subdividido em uma região dorsal superiormente e uma região plantar inferiormente.


=== Veias ===


As veias são subdivididas em três sistemas.

As veias profundas retornam aproximadamente 85% do sangue e as veias superficiais aproximadamente 15%.

Uma série de veias perfurantes interligam os sistemas superficial e profundo.

Na postura em pé, as veias da perna têm que suportar uma carga excepcional, pois agem contra a gravidade quando devolvem o sangue ao coração.

As válvulas venosas auxiliam na manutenção da direção superficial para profunda do fluxo sanguíneo.Vias superficiais:

Grande veia safena
Pequenas veias safenas profundas:

Veia femoral, cujos segmentos são a veia femoral comum e a veia subartorial.
Veia poplítea
Veia tibial anterior
Veia tibial posterior
Veia fibular


=== Suprimento nervoso ===


A inervação sensitiva e motora do membro inferior é fornecida pelo plexo lombossacral, que é formado pelos ramos ventrais dos nervos espinhais lombares e sacrais com contribuições adicionais do nervo subcostal (T12) e do nervo coccígeo (Co1).

Com base na distribuição e topografia, o plexo lombossacral é subdividido em plexo lombar (T12-L4) e plexo sacral (L5-S4); o último é muitas vezes subdividido em plexos ciático e pudendo: O plexo lombar é formado lateralmente aos forames intervertebrais pelos ramos ventrais dos quatro primeiros nervos espinhais lombares (L1-L4), que passam todos pelo psoas maior.

Os ramos maiores do plexo saem do músculo para descer abruptamente para alcançar a parede abdominal e a coxa (sob o ligamento inguinal); com exceção do nervo obturador que passa pela pelve menor para alcançar a parte medial da coxa através do forame obturador.

Os nervos do plexo lombar passam na frente da articulação do quadril e sustentam principalmente a parte anterior da coxa. lateralmente para baixo para passar anteriormente acima da crista ilíaca entre o transverso do abdome e o oblíquo interno abdominal, e então passar acima do ligamento inguinal.

Ambos os nervos emitem ramos musculares para ambos os músculos.

O ílio-hipogástrico fornece ramos sensoriais para a pele da região lateral do quadril, e seu ramo terminal finalmente perfura a aponeurose do oblíquo externo abdominal acima do anel inguinal para fornecer ramos sensoriais para a pele ali.

O nervo ilioinguinal sai pelo anel inguinal e fornece ramos sensoriais para a pele acima da sínfise púbica e a porção lateral do escroto. o lado anterior do músculo.

O ramo femoral sensorial supre a pele abaixo do ligamento inguinal, enquanto o ramo genital misto supre a pele e os músculos ao redor do órgão sexual.

O nervo cutâneo femoral lateral (L2, L3) deixa o psoas maior lateralmente abaixo do nervo anterior, segue obliquamente e lateralmente para baixo acima do ilíaco, sai da área pélvica perto da espinha ilíaca e supre a pele da coxa anterior. L2-L4) passa medialmente atrás do psoas maior para sair da pelve através do canal obturador, após o qual emite ramos para o obturador externo e se divide em dois ramos passando atrás e na frente do adutor curto para fornecer inervação motora a todos os outros músculos adutores .

O ramo anterior também fornece nervos sensoriais para a pele em uma pequena área na face distal medial da coxa.

O nervo femoral (L2-L4) é o maior e mais longo dos nervos do plexo lombar.

Fornece inervação motora ao iliopsoas, pectíneo, sartório e quadríceps; e ramos sensitivos para a parte anterior da coxa, parte medial da perna e parte posterior do pé. Os nervos do plexo sacral passam atrás da articulação do quadril para inervar a parte posterior da coxa, a maior parte da parte inferior da perna e o pé.

Os nervos glúteo superior (L4-S1) e inferior (L5-S2) inervam os músculos glúteos e o tensor da fáscia lata.

O nervo cutâneo femoral posterior (S1-S3) contribui com ramos sensoriais para a pele na parte posterior da coxa.

O nervo ciático (L4-S3), o maior e mais longo nervo do corpo humano, deixa a pelve através do forame isquiático maior.

Na parte posterior da coxa, primeiro emite ramos para a cabeça curta do bíceps femoral e depois se divide nos nervos tibial (L4-S3) e fibular comum (L4-S2).

O nervo fibular continua para baixo no lado medial do bíceps femoral, serpenteia ao redor do colo fibular e entra na frente da perna.

Lá ele se divide em um ramo terminal profundo e um superficial.

O ramo superficial supre os músculos fibulares e o ramo profundo entra no compartimento extensor; ambos os ramos atingem o dorso do pé.

Na coxa, o nervo tibial emite ramos para o semitendinoso, semimembranoso, adutor magno e a cabeça longa do bíceps femoral.

O nervo então desce direto pela parte de trás da perna, através da fossa poplítea para suprir os flexores do tornozelo na parte de trás da perna e, em seguida, continua descendo para suprir todos os músculos da sola do pé.

Os nervos pudendo (S2-S4) e coccígeo (S5-Co2) suprem os músculos do assoalho pélvico e a pele circundante. O tronco lombossacral é um ramo comunicante que passa entre os plexos sacro e lombar contendo fibras ventrais de L4.

O nervo coccígeo, o último nervo espinhal, emerge do hiato sacral, une-se aos ramos ventrais dos dois últimos nervos sacrais e forma o plexo coccígeo.


== Parte inferior da perna e pé ==

A parte inferior da perna e o tornozelo precisam se manter exercitados e se movendo bem, pois são a base de todo o corpo.

As extremidades inferiores devem ser fortes para equilibrar o peso do resto do corpo, e os músculos gastrocnêmios participam de grande parte da circulação sanguínea.


=== Exercícios ===



==== Isométrico e padrão ====
Há uma série de exercícios que podem ser feitos para fortalecer a parte inferior da perna.

Por exemplo, para ativar os flexores plantares nos flexores plantares profundos, pode-se sentar no chão com os quadris flexionados, o tornozelo neutro com os joelhos totalmente estendidos enquanto alternam empurrando o pé contra uma parede ou plataforma.

Este tipo de exercício é benéfico, pois dificilmente causa fadiga.

Outra forma de exercício isométrico para o gastrocnêmio seriam as elevações de panturrilha sentadas, que podem ser feitas com ou sem equipamento.

Pode-se sentar em uma mesa com os pés apoiados no chão e, em seguida, flexionar os dois tornozelos plantares para que os calcanhares sejam levantados do chão e o gastrocnêmio flexionado.

Um movimento alternativo pode ser exercícios de queda do calcanhar com os dedos dos pés apoiados em uma superfície elevada - como um movimento oposto, isso melhoraria a amplitude de movimento.

A elevação do dedo do pé com uma perna para o músculo gastrocnêmio pode ser realizada segurando um haltere em uma mão enquanto usa a outra para se equilibrar e, em seguida, em pé com um pé em uma placa.

O próximo passo seria a flexão plantar e manter a articulação do joelho reta ou levemente flexionada.

O tríceps sural é contraído durante este exercício.

Exercícios de estabilização, como o agachamento com bola BOSU, também são importantes, especialmente porque ajudam os tornozelos a se ajustarem à forma da bola para se equilibrar.


== Significado clínico ==



=== Lesão na perna ===

Lesões na parte inferior da perna são comuns durante a corrida ou a prática de esportes.

Cerca de 10% de todas as lesões totais envolvem as extremidades inferiores em atletas.

A maioria dos atletas torce os tornozelos, o que é causado principalmente pelo aumento das cargas nos pés quando eles se movem para baixo ou em uma posição externa do tornozelo.

Todas as áreas do pé, que são o antepé, o mediopé e o retropé, absorvem várias forças durante a corrida e também podem levar a lesões.

Correr e várias atividades podem causar fraturas por estresse, tendinites, lesões musculotendíneas ou qualquer dor crônica nas extremidades inferiores, como a tíbia.


==== Tipos de atividades ====
Lesões no quadríceps ou isquiotibiais são causadas pelas cargas de impacto constantes nas pernas durante atividades, como chutar uma bola.

Ao fazer esse tipo de movimento, 85% desse choque é absorvido pelos isquiotibiais, o que pode causar tensão nesses músculos.
Saltar – é outro risco porque se as pernas não pousarem corretamente após um salto inicial, pode haver danos ao menisco nos joelhos, entorse no tornozelo por eversão ou inversão do pé ou danos ao tendão de Aquiles e gastrocnêmio se houver é muita força durante a flexão plantar.
Levantamento de peso – como o agachamento profundo mal realizado, também é perigoso para os membros inferiores, pois o exercício pode levar a uma superextensão, ou estiramento, dos nossos ligamentos no joelho e pode causar dor ao longo do tempo.
Correr – a atividade mais comum associada à lesão na perna.

Há pressão e estresse constantes nos pés, joelhos e pernas durante a corrida pela força gravitacional.

Rupturas musculares em nossas pernas ou dores em várias áreas dos pés podem ser resultado de uma biomecânica ruim da corrida.


===== Correndo =====
As lesões mais comuns na corrida envolvem os joelhos e os pés.

Vários estudos se concentraram na causa inicial dessas lesões relacionadas à corrida e descobriram que existem muitos fatores que se correlacionam com essas lesões.

Os corredores de longa distância do sexo feminino que tinham histórico de lesões por fratura de estresse apresentaram forças de impacto vertical mais altas do que indivíduos não lesionados.

As grandes forças na parte inferior das pernas foram associadas a forças gravitacionais, e isso se correlacionou com dor patelofemoral ou possíveis lesões no joelho.

Os pesquisadores também descobriram que essas lesões relacionadas à corrida também afetam os pés porque os corredores com lesões anteriores mostraram mais eversão do pé e pronação excessiva durante a corrida do que os corredores não lesionados.

Isso causa mais cargas e forças no lado medial do pé, causando mais estresse nos tendões do pé e do tornozelo (tendões fibulares).

A maioria dessas lesões na corrida é causada por uso excessivo e correr longas distâncias semanalmente por um longo período é um risco de ferir a parte inferior das pernas.


==== Ferramentas de prevenção ====
Alongamentos voluntários para as pernas, como o alongamento da parede, condicionam os isquiotibiais e os músculos da panturrilha a vários movimentos antes de trabalhá-los vigorosamente.

O ambiente e os arredores, como terrenos irregulares, podem fazer com que os pés se posicionem de maneira não natural, portanto, usar sapatos que possam absorver as forças do impacto do solo e permitir a estabilização dos pés também pode evitar algumas lesões durante a corrida.

Os sapatos devem ser estruturados para permitir tração de fricção na superfície do sapato, espaço para diferentes tensões de pisada ou para arcos confortáveis ​​e regulares para os pés.


==== Resumo ====
As chances de danificar nossas extremidades inferiores serão reduzidas ao ter conhecimento sobre algumas atividades associadas à lesão na perna e desenvolver uma forma correta de corrida, como não pronar demais o pé ou usar demais as pernas.

Medidas preventivas, como vários alongamentos e o uso de calçados adequados, também reduzirão a ocorrência de lesões.


=== Fratura ===


Uma fratura da perna pode ser classificada de acordo com o osso envolvido em:

Fratura do fêmur (na parte superior da perna)
Fratura Crus (na parte inferior da perna)


== Tratamento da dor ==

O controle da dor na perna e no pé é fundamental para reduzir a progressão de novas lesões, sensações desconfortáveis ​​e limitar as alterações durante a caminhada e a corrida.

A maioria das pessoas sofre de várias dores na perna e no pé devido a diferentes fatores.

Inflamação muscular, tensão, sensibilidade, inchaço e ruptura muscular por uso excessivo ou movimento incorreto são várias condições frequentemente experimentadas por atletas e pelo público comum durante e após atividades físicas de alto impacto.

Portanto, mecanismos sugeridos de gerenciamento da dor são fornecidos para reduzir a dor e prevenir a progressão da lesão.


=== Fasceíte plantar ===

O alongamento do pé da fascite plantar é um dos métodos recomendados para reduzir a dor causada pela fascite plantar (Figura 1).

Para fazer o alongamento da fáscia plantar, sentado em uma cadeira, coloque o tornozelo no joelho oposto e segure os dedos do pé prejudicado, puxando lentamente para trás.

O alongamento deve ser realizado por aproximadamente dez segundos, três vezes ao dia.


=== Síndrome de estresse tibial medial (tala da canela) ===

Vários métodos podem ser utilizados para ajudar a controlar a dor causada por dores nas canelas.

Colocar gelo na área afetada antes e depois da corrida ajudará a reduzir a dor.

Além disso, o uso de órteses, incluindo uma manga de neoprene (Figura 2) e o uso de calçados adequados, como um arco de pé, podem ajudar a eliminar a condição.

Alongamento e fortalecimento da tíbia anterior ou tíbia medial, realizando exercícios de flexores plantares e dorsais, como o alongamento da panturrilha, também podem ajudar a aliviar a dor.


=== Tendinopatia de Aquiles ===

Existem inúmeras abordagens apropriadas para lidar com a dor resultante da tendinite de Aquiles.

A ação principal é descansar.

Atividades que não forneçam estresse adicional ao tendão afetado também são recomendadas.

O uso de órteses ou próteses fornecerá amortecimento e impedirá que o tendão de Aquiles afetado sofra mais estresse ao caminhar e realizar alongamentos terapêuticos.

Algumas modalidades de alongamento ou exercícios excêntricos, como extensão e flexão dos dedos do pé e alongamento da panturrilha e do calcanhar, são benéficos na redução da dor em pacientes com tendinopatia de Aquiles (Figura 4)


== Sociedade e cultura ==

Mulheres adolescentes e adultas em muitas culturas ocidentais costumam remover os pelos das pernas.

Pernas tonificadas, bronzeadas e raspadas às vezes são percebidas como um sinal de juventude e muitas vezes são consideradas atraentes nessas culturas.
Os homens geralmente não depilam as pernas em nenhuma cultura.

No entanto, raspar as pernas é uma prática geralmente aceita na modelagem.

Também é bastante comum em esportes onde a depilação torna o atleta sensivelmente mais rápido ao reduzir o arrasto; o caso mais comum disso é a natação competitiva.


== Galeria de imagens ==


 
 
 
 
 



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Human_leg

;;;FR;;;



SYSTÈME MUSCULAIRE DU MEMBRE INFÉRIEUR
/JAMBE HUMAINE


La jambe humaine, au sens général du terme, est l'ensemble du membre inférieur du corps humain, y compris le pied, la cuisse et même la hanche ou la région fessière.

Cependant, la définition en anatomie humaine se réfère uniquement à la section du membre inférieur s'étendant du genou à la cheville, également appelée crus ou, en particulier dans un usage non technique, la tige.

Les jambes sont utilisées pour se tenir debout et pour toutes les formes de locomotion, y compris les loisirs tels que la danse, et constituent une partie importante de la masse d'une personne.

Les jambes des femmes ont généralement une plus grande antéversion de la hanche et des angles tibio-fémoraux, mais des longueurs de fémur et de tibial plus courtes que celles des hommes.


== Structure ==

En anatomie humaine, la partie inférieure de la jambe est la partie du membre inférieur située entre le genou et la cheville.

La cuisse se situe entre la hanche et le genou et constitue le reste du membre inférieur.

Le terme membre inférieur ou « extrémité inférieure » est couramment utilisé pour décrire l'ensemble de la jambe.

Cet article suit généralement l'usage courant.
La jambe du genou à la cheville s'appelle la crus ou cnemis.

Le mollet est la partie arrière, et le tibia ou le tibia avec le péroné plus petit constituent l'avant de la jambe inférieure.

L'évolution a doté le corps humain de deux caractéristiques distinctes : la spécialisation du membre supérieur pour la manipulation visuellement guidée et le développement du membre inférieur en un mécanisme spécifiquement adapté à une démarche bipède efficace.

Alors que la capacité de marcher debout n'est pas unique aux humains, d'autres primates ne peuvent y parvenir que pendant de courtes périodes et en dépensant beaucoup d'énergie.

L'adaptation humaine à la bipédie ne se limite cependant pas à la jambe, mais a également affecté la localisation du centre de gravité du corps, la réorganisation des organes internes, la forme et le biomécanisme du tronc.

Chez l'homme, la colonne vertébrale en forme de double S agit comme un grand amortisseur qui déplace le poids du tronc sur la surface portante des pieds.

Les jambes humaines sont exceptionnellement longues et puissantes en raison de leur spécialisation exclusive pour le soutien et la locomotion - chez les orangs-outans, la longueur des jambes correspond à 111% du tronc; chez les chimpanzés 128% et chez les humains 171%.

De nombreux muscles de la jambe sont également adaptés à la bipédie, principalement les muscles fessiers, les extenseurs de l'articulation du genou et les muscles du mollet.

=== Muscles ===

==== Hanche ====

Il existe plusieurs façons de classer les muscles de la hanche : (1) Par localisation ou innervation (divisions ventrale et dorsale de la couche du plexus) ; (2) par développement à partir de leurs points d'insertion (un groupe postérieur en deux couches et un groupe antérieur) ; et (3) par fonction (extenseurs, fléchisseurs, adducteurs et abducteurs). Certains muscles de la hanche agissent également sur l'articulation du genou ou sur les articulations vertébrales.

De plus, comme la zone d'origine et d'insertion de bon nombre de ces muscles est très étendue, ces muscles sont souvent impliqués dans plusieurs mouvements très différents.

Dans l'articulation de la hanche, la rotation latérale et médiale se produit le long de l'axe du membre ; l'extension (également appelée dorsiflexion ou rétroversion) et la flexion (antéflexion ou antéversion) se produisent le long d'un axe transversal ; et l'abduction et l'adduction se produisent autour d'un axe sagittal. Les muscles dorsaux antérieurs de la hanche sont les iliopsoas, un groupe de deux ou trois muscles avec une insertion partagée sur le petit trochanter du fémur.

Le grand psoas prend naissance à partir de la dernière vertèbre et le long de la colonne lombaire pour s'étendre dans le bassin.

L'iliaque prend sa source dans la fosse iliaque du côté intérieur du bassin.

Les deux muscles s'unissent pour former le muscle iliopsoas qui est inséré sur le petit trochanter du fémur.

Le psoas minor, présent seulement chez environ 50 % des sujets, prend naissance au-dessus du psoas major pour s'étirer obliquement jusqu'à son insertion sur la face interne du muscle majeur. Les muscles postérieurs dorsaux de la hanche sont insérés sur ou directement en dessous du grand trochanter du fémur.

Le tenseur du fascia latae, qui s'étend de l'épine iliaque antéro-supérieure jusqu'au tractus iliotibial, appuie la tête du fémur dans l'acétabulum, mais fléchit également, tourne médialement et s'enlève à l'articulation de la hanche.

Le piriforme prend naissance sur la surface pelvienne antérieure du sacrum, traverse le grand foramen sciatique et s'insère sur la face postérieure de la pointe du grand trochanter.

En position debout, c'est un rotateur latéral, mais il aide également à étendre la cuisse.

Le grand fessier a son origine entre (et autour) la crête iliaque et le coccyx d'où une partie rayonne dans le tractus iliotibial et l'autre s'étend jusqu'à la tubérosité fessière sous le grand trochanter.

Le grand fessier est principalement un extenseur et un rotateur latéral de l'articulation de la hanche, et il entre en action lorsque vous montez des escaliers ou que vous passez d'une position assise à debout.

De plus, la partie insérée dans le fascia latae enlève et la partie insérée dans la tubérosité fessière en adduit la hanche.

Les deux muscles fessiers profonds, le moyen et le petit fessiers, prennent naissance sur le côté latéral du bassin.

Le muscle moyen a la forme d'un bonnet.

Ses fibres antérieures agissent comme un rotateur médial et un fléchisseur; les fibres postérieures comme rotateur latéral et extenseur ; et le muscle entier enlève la hanche.

Le minimus a des fonctions similaires et les deux muscles sont insérés sur le grand trochanter.

Les muscles ventraux de la hanche fonctionnent comme des rotateurs latéraux et jouent un rôle important dans le contrôle de l'équilibre du corps.

Parce qu'ils sont plus forts que les rotateurs médiaux, dans la position normale de la jambe, l'apex du pied est orienté vers l'extérieur pour obtenir un meilleur soutien.

L'obturateur interne prend naissance sur le bassin sur le foramen obturateur et sa membrane, traverse le petit foramen sciatique et s'insère sur la fosse trochantérienne du fémur. "Courbé" sur la petite échancrure sciatique, qui agit comme un point d'appui, le muscle forme les rotateurs latéraux les plus puissants de la hanche avec le grand fessier et le carré fémoral.

Lorsqu'il est assis avec les genoux fléchis, il agit comme un abducteur.

L'obturateur externe a un trajet parallèle avec son origine située sur le bord postérieur du foramen obturateur.

Il est recouvert de plusieurs muscles et agit comme un rotateur latéral et un adducteur faible.

Les muscles gemelli inférieur et supérieur représentent les têtes marginales de l'obturateur interne et assistent ce muscle.

Ces trois muscles forment un muscle à trois têtes (tricipital) connu sous le nom de triceps coxae.

Le carré fémoral prend naissance au niveau de la tubérosité ischiatique et s'insère sur la crête intertrochantérienne entre les trochanters.

Ce muscle aplati agit comme un puissant rotateur latéral et adducteur de la cuisse.

Les muscles adducteurs de la cuisse sont innervés par le nerf obturateur, à l'exception du pectiné qui reçoit les fibres du nerf fémoral et du grand adducteur qui reçoit les fibres du nerf tibial.

Le gracilis provient de près de la symphyse pubienne et est unique parmi les adducteurs en ce qu'il dépasse le genou pour se fixer sur le côté médial de la tige du tibia, agissant ainsi sur deux articulations.

Il partage son insertion distale avec le couturier et le demi-tendineux, les trois muscles formant le pied anserinus.

C'est le muscle le plus médial des adducteurs, et avec la cuisse enlevée, son origine peut être clairement vue en se cambrant sous la peau.

Le genou tendu, il fait une adduction de la cuisse et fléchit la hanche.

Le pectiné a son origine sur l'éminence ilio-pubienne latéralement au gracilis et, de forme rectangulaire, s'étend obliquement pour se fixer immédiatement derrière le petit trochanter et le long de la ligne pectiné et de la partie proximale de la linea aspera sur le fémur.

C'est un fléchisseur de l'articulation de la hanche, un adducteur et un faible rotateur médial de la cuisse.

Le court adducteur prend naissance sur la branche inférieure du pubis sous le gracile et s'étend obliquement sous le pectiné jusqu'au tiers supérieur de la ligne âpre.

En plus d'être un adducteur, c'est un rotateur latéral et un fléchisseur faible de l'articulation de la hanche.

Principalement un adducteur, il est également responsable d'une certaine flexion.

Le grand adducteur a son origine juste derrière le muscle long et se trouve en profondeur.

Son large ventre se divise en deux parties : l'une est insérée dans la ligne âpre et le tendon de l'autre descend jusqu'au tubercule de l'adducteur sur le côté médial de l'extrémité distale du fémur où il forme un septum intermusculaire qui sépare les fléchisseurs des extenseurs.

Magnus est un adducteur puissant, particulièrement actif lors du croisement des jambes.

Sa partie supérieure est un rotateur latéral mais la partie inférieure agit comme un rotateur médial sur la jambe fléchie lorsqu'elle est tournée vers l'extérieur et prolonge également l'articulation de la hanche.

Le petit adducteur est une subdivision incomplètement séparée du grand adducteur.

Son origine forme une partie antérieure du magnus et distalement il est inséré sur la linea aspera au-dessus du magnus.

Il agit sur l'adduction et la rotation latérale du fémur.


==== Cuisse ====
Les muscles de la cuisse peuvent être classés en trois groupes selon leur localisation : les muscles antérieurs et postérieurs et les adducteurs (du côté médial).

Tous les adducteurs, à l'exception du gracilis, s'insèrent sur le fémur et agissent sur l'articulation de la hanche, et sont donc fonctionnellement qualifiés de muscles de la hanche.

La majorité des muscles de la cuisse, les "vrais" muscles de la cuisse, s'insèrent sur la jambe (soit le tibia, soit le péroné) et agissent principalement sur l'articulation du genou.

Généralement, les extenseurs se trouvent sur la partie antérieure de la cuisse et les fléchisseurs sur la partie postérieure.

Même si le sartorius fléchit le genou, il est considéré ontogénétiquement comme un extenseur puisque son déplacement est secondaire.

Parmi les muscles antérieurs de la cuisse, les plus gros sont les quatre muscles du quadriceps fémoral : le droit central fémoral, qui est entouré par les trois vastes, le vaste intermédiaire, le médial et le latéral.

Le rectus femoris est attaché au bassin avec deux tendons, tandis que les vastes sont insérés au fémur.

Les quatre muscles s'unissent dans un tendon commun inséré dans la rotule d'où le ligament rotulien le prolonge jusqu'à la tubérosité tibiale.

Les fibres des vastes médial et latéral forment deux rétinacules qui s'étendent au-delà de la rotule de chaque côté jusqu'aux condyles du tibia.

Le quadriceps est l'extenseur du genou, mais le rectus femoris fléchit également l'articulation de la hanche et le muscle articulaire du genou protège la capsule articulaire de l'articulation du genou contre le pincement pendant l'extension.

Le sartorius s'étend superficiellement et obliquement vers le bas sur la face antérieure de la cuisse, de l'épine iliaque antéro-supérieure au pied anserinus sur la face médiale du genou, d'où il se prolonge dans le fascia crural.

Le sartorius agit comme un fléchisseur à la fois sur la hanche et le genou, mais, en raison de son parcours oblique, contribue également à la rotation médiale de la jambe en tant que l'un des muscles pes anserinus (avec le genou fléchi) et à la rotation latérale de la hanche joint.Il y a quatre muscles postérieurs de la cuisse.

Le biceps femoris a deux têtes : La longue tête a son origine sur la tubérosité ischiatique avec le demi-tendineux et agit sur deux articulations.

La tête courte provient du tiers médian de la linea aspera sur la tige du fémur et du septum intermusculaire latéral de la cuisse, et agit sur une seule articulation.

Ces deux têtes s'unissent pour former le biceps qui s'insère sur la tête du péroné.

Le biceps fléchit l'articulation du genou et fait tourner la jambe fléchie latéralement - c'est le seul rotateur latéral du genou et doit donc s'opposer à tous les rotateurs médiaux.

De plus, la longue tête prolonge l'articulation de la hanche.

Le demi-tendineux et le semi-membraneux partagent leur origine avec la longue tête du biceps, et tous deux se fixent sur le côté médial de la tête proximale du tibia avec le gracilis et le couturier pour former le pied anserinus.

Le demi-tendineux agit sur deux articulations ; extension de la hanche, flexion du genou et rotation médiale de la jambe.

Distalement, le tendon du semi-membraneux est divisé en trois parties appelées pes anserinus profondus.

Fonctionnellement, le semi-membraneux est similaire au semi-tendineux et produit ainsi une extension au niveau de l'articulation de la hanche et une flexion et une rotation médiale au niveau du genou.

En arrière sous l'articulation du genou, le poplité s'étend obliquement de l'épicondyle fémoral latéral jusqu'à la face postérieure du tibia.

La bourse sous-poplitée est située en profondeur du muscle.

Popliteus fléchit l'articulation du genou et fait pivoter médialement la jambe.


==== Crus et pied ====
Avec le poplité (voir ci-dessus) comme seule exception, tous les muscles de la jambe sont attachés au pied et, en fonction de leur emplacement, peuvent être classés en un groupe antérieur et un groupe postérieur séparés l'un de l'autre par le tibia, le péroné et la membrane interosseuse.

À leur tour, ces deux groupes peuvent être subdivisés en sous-groupes ou couches - le groupe antérieur comprend les extenseurs et les péroniers, et le groupe postérieur d'une couche superficielle et d'une couche profonde.

Fonctionnellement, les muscles de la jambe sont soit des extenseurs, responsables de la dorsiflexion du pied, soit des fléchisseurs, responsables de la flexion plantaire.

Ces muscles peuvent également être classés par innervation, les muscles innervés par la subdivision antérieure du plexus et ceux irrigués par la subdivision postérieure.

Les muscles de la jambe agissant sur le pied sont appelés muscles extrinsèques du pied tandis que les muscles du pied situés dans le pied sont appelés intrinsèques.
La dorsiflexion (extension) et la flexion plantaire se produisent autour de l'axe transversal traversant l'articulation de la cheville de la pointe de la malléole médiale à la pointe de la malléole latérale.

La pronation (éversion) et la supination (inversion) se produisent le long de l'axe oblique de l'articulation de la cheville.


===== Extrinsèque =====

Trois des muscles antérieurs sont des extenseurs.

De son origine sur la surface latérale du tibia et de la membrane interosseuse, le ventre à trois côtés du tibial antérieur s'étend sous les rétinacules des extenseurs supérieurs et inférieurs jusqu'à son insertion sur la face plantaire de l'os cunéiforme médial et du premier os métatarsien .

Dans la jambe non portante, le tibial dorsal antérieur fléchit le pied et soulève le bord médial du pied.

Dans la jambe d'appui, il tire la jambe vers le pied.

L'extensor digitorum longus a une large origine qui s'étend du condyle latéral du tibia le long de la face antérieure du péroné et de la membrane interosseuse.

A la cheville, le tendon se divise en quatre qui s'étendent à travers le pied jusqu'aux aponévroses dorsales des dernières phalanges des quatre orteils latéraux.

Dans la jambe non porteuse, le muscle étend les doigts et fait une flexion dorsale du pied, et dans la jambe porteuse agit de la même manière que le tibial antérieur.

L'extenseur de l'hallux long a son origine sur le péroné et la membrane interosseuse entre les deux autres extenseurs et est, comme l'extenseur des orteils, inséré sur la dernière phalange du gros orteil ("hallux").

Le muscle fléchit le dos de l'hallux et agit de la même manière que le tibial antérieur de la jambe portante.

Deux muscles du côté latéral de la jambe forment le groupe péronier.

Le long et le court péronier ont tous deux leurs origines sur le péroné et ils passent tous deux derrière la malléole latérale où leurs tendons passent sous le rétinacula péronier.

Sous le pied, le longus s'étend du côté latéral au côté médial dans une rainure, soutenant ainsi l'arche transversale du pied.

Le court s'attache latéralement à la tubérosité du cinquième métatarsien.

Ensemble, les deux péroniers forment les pronateurs les plus puissants du pied.

Les muscles péroniers sont très variables et plusieurs variantes peuvent parfois être présentes.

Parmi les muscles postérieurs, trois se trouvent dans la couche superficielle.

Les principaux fléchisseurs plantaires, communément appelés triceps sural, sont le soléaire, qui se pose sur le côté proximal des deux os de la jambe, et le gastrocnémien, dont les deux têtes se posent à l'extrémité distale du fémur.

Ces muscles se réunissent en un gros tendon terminal, le tendon d'Achille, qui est attaché au tubercule postérieur du calcanéum.

Le plantaris suit de près le chef latéral du gastrocnémien.

Son tendon s'étend entre ceux du soléaire et du gastrocnémien et s'encastre dans l'extrémité médiale du tendon calcanéen. Dans la couche profonde, le tibial postérieur a son origine sur la membrane interosseuse et les zones osseuses voisines et descend derrière la malléole médiale.

Sous le pied, il se divise en une partie médiale épaisse attachée à l'os naviculaire et une partie latérale légèrement plus faible insérée aux trois os cunéiformes.

Le muscle produit une flexion plantaire et une supination simultanées dans la jambe non porteuse et rapproche le talon du mollet de la jambe.

Le long fléchisseur de l'hallux naît distalement sur le péroné et sur la membrane interosseuse d'où son ventre musculaire relativement épais s'étend loin distalement.

Son tendon s'étend sous le rétinaculum des fléchisseurs jusqu'à la plante du pied et se fixe enfin à la base de la dernière phalange de l'hallux.

Il fléchit plantairement l'hallux et aide à la supination.

Le long fléchisseur des doigts, enfin, a son origine sur la partie supérieure du tibia.

Son tendon court jusqu'à la plante du pied où il se divise en quatre tendons terminaux attachés aux dernières phalanges des quatre orteils latéraux.

Il croise le tendon du tibial postérieur distalement sur le tibia, et le tendon du long fléchisseur de l'hallux dans la semelle.

Distalement à sa division, le quadratus plantae y rayonne et près des phalanges moyennes, ses tendons pénètrent dans les tendons du court fléchisseur des doigts.

Dans la jambe non porteuse, il fléchit plantairement les orteils et le pied et se met en supination.

Dans la jambe d'appui, il soutient la voûte plantaire. (Pour le poplité, voir ci-dessus.)


===== Intrinsèque =====
Les muscles intrinsèques du pied, muscles dont le ventre est situé dans le pied proprement dit, sont soit dorsaux (haut) soit plantaires (plante).
Du côté dorsal, deux longs muscles extenseurs extrinsèques sont superficiels aux muscles intrinsèques et leurs tendons forment l'aponévrose dorsale des orteils.

Les extenseurs intrinsèques courts et les interosseux plantaires et dorsaux irradient dans ces aponévroses.

Le court extenseur des orteils et le court extenseur de l'hallux ont une origine commune sur la face antérieure du calcanéum, d'où leurs tendons s'étendent dans les aponévroses dorsales des doigts 1 à 4.

Ils agissent sur la flexion dorsale de ces doigts. Les muscles plantaires peuvent être subdivisés en trois groupes associés à trois régions : celles du gros doigt, du petit doigt et la région entre ces deux.

Tous ces muscles sont recouverts par l'aponévrose plantaire épaisse et dense qui, avec deux cloisons résistantes, forme les espaces des trois groupes.

Ces muscles et leur tissu adipeux fonctionnent comme des coussins qui transmettent le poids du corps vers le bas.

Dans son ensemble, le pied est une entité fonctionnelle.

L'abducteur de l'hallux s'étend le long du bord médial du pied, du calcanéus à la base de la première phalange du premier doigt et de l'os sésamoïde médial.

C'est un abducteur et un fléchisseur faible, et contribue également au maintien de la voûte plantaire.

Latéralement à l'abducteur de l'hallux se trouve le court fléchisseur de l'hallux, qui provient de l'os cunéiforme médial et du tendon du tibial postérieur.

Le fléchisseur de l'hallux a une tête médiale et une tête latérale insérées latéralement à l'abducteur de l'hallux.

C'est un fléchisseur plantaire important qui est très utilisé dans le ballet classique (c'est-à-dire pour le travail sur pointe).

L'adducteur de l'hallux a deux têtes ; une tête oblique plus forte qui provient des os cuboïdes et cunéiformes latéraux et des bases des deuxième et troisième métatarsiens ; et une tête transversale qui découle des extrémités distales des troisième-cinquième métatarsiens.

Les deux têtes sont insérées sur l'os sésamoïde latéral du premier doigt.

Le muscle agit comme un tenseur de la voûte plantaire, mais peut également adduire le premier doigt et fléchir plantaire sa première phalange. L'opponens digiti minimi provient du long ligament plantaire et de la gaine tendineuse plantaire du peroneus longus et est inséré sur le cinquième métatarsien.

Lorsqu'il est présent, il agit sur la flexion plantaire du cinquième doigt et soutient la voûte plantaire.

Le fléchisseur digiti minimi provient de la région de la base du cinquième métatarsien et est inséré sur la base de la première phalange du cinquième chiffre où il est généralement fusionné avec le ravisseur du premier chiffre.

Il agit sur la flexion plantaire du dernier chiffre.

Le muscle le plus gros et le plus long du petit orteil est le abducteur digiti minimi.

S'étendant du processus latéral du calcanéum, avec une deuxième attache à la base du cinquième métatarsien, à la base de la première phalange du cinquième doigt, le muscle forme le bord latéral de la plante des pieds.

Sauf pour soutenir l'arche, il fléchit plantairement le petit orteil et agit également comme un abducteur. chiffres deux-cinq.

Hormis le renforcement de la voûte plantaire, ils contribuent à la flexion plantaire et déplacent les quatre doigts vers le gros orteil.

Ils sont, contrairement aux lombricaux de la main, assez variables, parfois absents et parfois plus de quatre sont présents.

Le quadratus plantae se pose avec deux feuillets des marges de la surface plantaire du calcanéum et est inséré dans le ou les tendons du long fléchisseur des doigts, et est connu sous le nom de «tête plantaire» de ce dernier muscle.

Les trois interosseux plantaires apparaissent avec leurs têtes uniques sur le côté médial des troisième-cinquième métatarsiens et sont insérés sur les bases des premières phalanges de ces doigts.

Les deux têtes des quatre interosseux dorsaux naissent sur deux métatarsiens adjacents et se confondent dans les espaces intermédiaires.

Leur attache distale est sur les bases des phalanges proximales des deuxième-quatrième doigts.

Les interosseux sont organisés avec le deuxième doigt comme axe longitudinal ; les plantaires agissent comme des adducteurs et tirent les chiffres 3 à 5 vers le deuxième chiffre ; tandis que les dorsales agissent comme ravisseurs.

De plus, les interosseux agissent comme des fléchisseurs plantaires au niveau des articulations métatarsophalangiennes.

Enfin, le court fléchisseur des doigts prend naissance sous le calcanéus pour insérer ses tendons sur les phalanges médianes des chiffres 2 à 4.

Parce que les tendons du long fléchisseur des doigts passent entre ces tendons, le court est parfois appelé perforatus.

Les tendons de ces deux muscles sont entourés d'une gaine tendineuse.

Le brevis agit sur la flexion plantaire des phalanges moyennes.


=== Flexibilité ===

La flexibilité peut être simplement définie comme l'amplitude de mouvement disponible (ROM) fournie par une articulation spécifique ou un groupe d'articulations.

Pour la plupart, les exercices qui augmentent la flexibilité sont effectués dans le but d'augmenter la longueur globale des muscles, de réduire les risques de blessures et d'améliorer potentiellement les performances musculaires lors d'une activité physique.

L'étirement des muscles après l'engagement dans une activité physique peut améliorer la force musculaire, augmenter la flexibilité et réduire les douleurs musculaires.

Si un mouvement limité est présent dans une articulation, "l'extensibilité insuffisante" du muscle, ou du groupe de muscles, pourrait restreindre l'activité de l'articulation affectée.


==== Étirement ====
On pense que les étirements avant une activité physique intense augmentent les performances musculaires en étendant les tissus mous au-delà de leur longueur atteignable afin d'augmenter l'amplitude des mouvements.

De nombreuses personnes physiquement actives pratiquent ces techniques comme «échauffement» afin d'atteindre un certain niveau de préparation musculaire pour des mouvements d'exercices spécifiques.

Lors des étirements, les muscles doivent être quelque peu inconfortables mais pas physiquement angoissants.

Flexion plantaire : L'un des étirements musculaires les plus populaires de la partie inférieure de la jambe est le soulèvement du talon debout, qui implique principalement le gastrocnémien, le soléaire et le tendon d'Achille.

Les élévations de talon debout permettent à l'individu d'activer les muscles de son mollet en se tenant debout sur une marche avec les orteils et l'avant-pied, en laissant le talon suspendu à la marche et en fléchissant plantairement l'articulation de la cheville en levant le talon.

Cet exercice est facilement modifiable en se tenant à un rail à proximité pour l'équilibre et est généralement répété 5 à 10 fois.
Dorsiflexion : Afin d'étirer les muscles antérieurs du bas de la jambe, les étirements croisés du tibia fonctionnent bien.

Ce mouvement étirera les muscles de la dorsiflexion, principalement le tibial antérieur, le long extenseur de l'hallux et le long extenseur des orteils, en provoquant lentement l'allongement des muscles lorsque le poids du corps s'appuie sur l'articulation de la cheville en utilisant le sol comme résistance contre le dessus du pied.

Les étirements croisés du tibia peuvent varier en intensité en fonction de la quantité de poids corporel appliquée sur l'articulation de la cheville lorsque l'individu se plie au niveau du genou.

Cet étirement est généralement maintenu pendant 15 à 30 secondes.
Éversion et inversion : l'étirement des muscles d'éversion et d'inversion permet une meilleure amplitude de mouvement de l'articulation de la cheville.

Les élévations et dépressions de la cheville en position assise étirent les muscles péronier et tibilalis associés à ces mouvements à mesure qu'ils s'allongent.

Les muscles d'éversion sont étirés lorsque la cheville devient déprimée à partir de la position de départ.

De la même manière, les muscles d'inversion sont étirés lorsque l'articulation de la cheville s'élève.

Tout au long de cet étirement assis, l'articulation de la cheville doit rester soutenue tout en étant déprimée et élevée avec la main ipsilatérale (du même côté) afin de maintenir l'étirement pendant 10 à 15 secondes.

Cet étirement augmentera la longueur globale du groupe musculaire d'éversion et d'inversion et fournira plus de flexibilité à l'articulation de la cheville pour une plus grande amplitude de mouvement pendant l'activité.


=== Approvisionnement en sang ===


Les artères de la jambe sont divisées en une série de segments.
Dans la région pelvienne, au niveau de la dernière vertèbre lombaire, l'aorte abdominale, prolongement de l'aorte descendante, se scinde en une paire d'artères iliaques communes.

Celles-ci se divisent immédiatement en artères iliaques internes et externes, cette dernière descendant le long du bord médial du grand psoas pour sortir de la région pelvienne par la lacune vasculaire sous le ligament inguinal. L'artère pénètre dans la cuisse comme l'artère fémorale qui descend le côté médial de la cuisse au canal de l'adducteur.

Le canal passe de la face antérieure à la face postérieure du membre où l'artère sort par le hiatus de l'adducteur et devient l'artère poplitée.

À l'arrière du genou, l'artère poplitée traverse la fosse poplitée jusqu'au muscle poplité où elle se divise en artères tibiales antérieure et postérieure. Dans la partie inférieure de la jambe, l'artère tibiale antérieure pénètre dans le compartiment extenseur près du bord supérieur de la membrane interosseuse pour descendre entre le tibial antérieur et le long extenseur de l'hallux.

Distale par rapport aux rétinacules supérieur et extenseur du pied, elle devient l'artère dorsale du pied.

La tibiale postérieure forme un prolongement direct de l'artère poplitée qui pénètre dans le compartiment fléchisseur du bas de la jambe pour descendre derrière la malléole médiale où elle se divise en artères plantaires médiales et latérales, dont la branche postérieure donne naissance à l'artère fibulaire. raisons pratiques le membre inférieur est subdivisé en régions un peu arbitraires : Les régions de la hanche sont toutes situées dans la cuisse : en avant, la région sous-inguinale est délimitée par le ligament inguinal, le couturier et le pectiné et fait partie du triangle fémoral qui s'étend distalement au long adducteur.

En arrière, la région fessière correspond au grand fessier.

La région antérieure de la cuisse s'étend distalement du triangle fémoral à la région du genou et latéralement au tenseur du fascia latae.

La région postérieure se termine distalement avant la fosse poplitée.

Les régions antérieure et postérieure du genou s'étendent des régions proximales jusqu'au niveau de la tubérosité du tibia.

Dans la partie inférieure de la jambe, les régions antérieure et postérieure s'étendent jusqu'aux malléoles.

Derrière les malléoles se trouvent les régions rétromalléolaires latérale et médiale et derrière celles-ci se trouve la région du talon.

Enfin, le pied est subdivisé en une région dorsale en haut et une région plantaire en bas.


=== Veines ===


Les veines sont subdivisées en trois systèmes.

Les veines profondes renvoient environ 85 % du sang et les veines superficielles environ 15 %.

Une série de veines perforantes relient les systèmes superficiel et profond.

En position debout, les veines de la jambe doivent supporter une charge exceptionnelle car elles agissent contre la gravité lorsqu'elles renvoient le sang vers le cœur.

Les valvules veineuses aident à maintenir la direction superficielle à profonde du flux sanguin. Veines superficielles :

Grande veine saphène
Petites veines saphènes profondes :

Veine fémorale, dont les segments sont la veine fémorale commune et la veine sous-sartorielle.
Veine poplitée
Veine tibiale antérieure
Veine tibiale postérieure
Veine fibulaire


=== Innervation ===


L'innervation sensorielle et motrice du membre inférieur est fournie par le plexus lombo-sacré, qui est formé par les branches ventrales des nerfs rachidiens lombaire et sacré avec des contributions supplémentaires du nerf sous-costal (T12) et du nerf coccygien (Co1).

Sur la base de la distribution et de la topographie, le plexus lombo-sacré est subdivisé en plexus lombaire (T12-L4) et en plexus sacré (L5-S4) ; ce dernier est souvent subdivisé en plexus sciatique et pudendal : le plexus lombaire est formé latéralement au foramen intervertébral par les branches ventrales des quatre premiers nerfs rachidiens lombaires (L1-L4), qui traversent tous le psoas majeur.

Les grosses branches du plexus sortent du muscle pour passer brusquement vers le bas pour atteindre la paroi abdominale et la cuisse (sous le ligament inguinal) ; à l'exception du nerf obturateur qui traverse le petit bassin pour atteindre la partie médiale de la cuisse par le foramen obturateur.

Les nerfs du plexus lombaire passent devant l'articulation de la hanche et soutiennent principalement la partie antérieure de la cuisse. latéralement vers le bas pour passer en avant au-dessus de la crête iliaque entre le transverse de l'abdomen et l'oblique interne abdominal, puis passer au-dessus du ligament inguinal.

Les deux nerfs donnent des branches musculaires à ces deux muscles.

Iliohypogastrique fournit des branches sensorielles à la peau de la région latérale de la hanche, et sa branche terminale perce enfin l'aponévrose de l'oblique externe abdominal au-dessus de l'anneau inguinal pour y fournir des branches sensorielles à la peau.

Ilioinguinalis sort par l'anneau inguinal et fournit des branches sensorielles à la peau au-dessus de la symphyse pubienne et de la partie latérale du scrotum. Le nerf génito-fémoral (L1, L2) laisse le psoas major sous les deux nerfs antérieurs, se divise immédiatement en deux branches la face antérieure du muscle.

La branche fémorale sensorielle alimente la peau sous le ligament inguinal, tandis que la branche génitale mixte alimente la peau et les muscles autour de l'organe sexuel.

Le nerf cutané fémoral latéral (L2, L3) laisse le psoas majeur latéralement sous le nerf précédent, s'étend obliquement et latéralement vers le bas au-dessus de l'iliaque, sort de la région pelvienne près de l'épine iliaque et alimente la peau de la cuisse antérieure. Le nerf obturateur ( L2-L4) passe médialement derrière le grand psoas pour sortir du bassin par le canal obturateur, après quoi il dégage des branches vers l'obturateur externe et se divise en deux branches passant derrière et devant le court adducteur pour fournir l'innervation motrice à tous les autres muscles adducteurs .

La branche antérieure fournit également des nerfs sensitifs à la peau sur une petite zone de la face médiale distale de la cuisse.

Le nerf fémoral (L2-L4) est le plus grand et le plus long des nerfs du plexus lombaire.

Il fournit l'innervation motrice à l'iliopsoas, au pectiné, au couturier et au quadriceps; et des branches sensorielles vers la cuisse antérieure, la partie inférieure médiale de la jambe et la partie postérieure du pied. Les nerfs du plexus sacré passent derrière l'articulation de la hanche pour innerver la partie postérieure de la cuisse, la majeure partie de la partie inférieure de la jambe et le pied.

Les nerfs fessiers supérieur (L4-S1) et inférieur (L5-S2) innervent les muscles fessiers et le tenseur du fascia lata.

Le nerf cutané fémoral postérieur (S1-S3) apporte des branches sensorielles à la peau de la cuisse postérieure.

Le nerf sciatique (L4-S3), le nerf le plus grand et le plus long du corps humain, quitte le bassin par le grand foramen sciatique.

Dans la partie postérieure de la cuisse, il donne d'abord des branches au chef court du biceps fémoral, puis se divise en nerfs tibial (L4-S3) et fibulaire commun (L4-S2).

Le nerf fibulaire continue vers le bas sur le côté médial du biceps fémoral, s'enroule autour du col fibulaire et pénètre à l'avant de la partie inférieure de la jambe.

Là, il se divise en une branche terminale profonde et une branche superficielle.

La branche superficielle innerve les muscles péroniers et la branche profonde pénètre dans le compartiment extenseur ; les deux branches atteignent le pied dorsal.

Dans la cuisse, le nerf tibial donne des branches au semi-tendineux, au semi-membraneux, au grand adducteur et au long chef du biceps fémoral.

Le nerf descend ensuite directement à l'arrière de la jambe, à travers la fosse poplitée pour alimenter les fléchisseurs de la cheville à l'arrière de la jambe inférieure, puis continue vers le bas pour alimenter tous les muscles de la plante du pied.

Les nerfs pudendal (S2-S4) et coccygien (S5-Co2) alimentent les muscles du plancher pelvien et de la peau environnante. Le tronc lombo-sacré est une branche communicante passant entre les plexus sacré et lombaire contenant des fibres ventrales issues de L4.

Le nerf coccygien, le dernier nerf spinal, émerge du hiatus sacré, s'unit aux branches ventrales des deux derniers nerfs sacrés et forme le plexus coccygien.


== Bas de jambe et pied ==

Le bas de la jambe et la cheville doivent rester exercés et bien bouger car ils sont la base de tout le corps.

Les membres inférieurs doivent être forts afin d'équilibrer le poids du reste du corps, et les muscles gastrocnémiens participent à une grande partie de la circulation sanguine.


=== Exercices ===



==== Isométrique et standard ====
Il existe un certain nombre d'exercices qui peuvent être faits pour renforcer le bas de la jambe.

Par exemple, afin d'activer les fléchisseurs plantaires dans les fléchisseurs plantaires profonds, on peut s'asseoir sur le sol avec les hanches fléchies, la cheville neutre avec les genoux complètement étendus alors qu'ils alternent en poussant leur pied contre un mur ou une plate-forme.

Ce type d'exercice est bénéfique car il ne cause pratiquement aucune fatigue.

Une autre forme d'exercice isométrique pour les gastrocnémiens serait les soulèvements de mollets assis qui peuvent être effectués avec ou sans équipement.

On peut être assis à une table avec les pieds à plat sur le sol, puis fléchir plantairement les deux chevilles de sorte que les talons soient soulevés du sol et le gastrocnémien fléchi.

Un mouvement alternatif pourrait être des exercices de chute du talon avec les orteils appuyés sur une surface surélevée - en tant que mouvement opposé, cela améliorerait l'amplitude des mouvements.

Les soulèvements d'orteils à une jambe pour le muscle gastrocnémien peuvent être effectués en tenant un haltère dans une main tout en utilisant l'autre pour l'équilibre, puis en se tenant debout avec un pied sur une plaque.

La prochaine étape serait de fléchir plantaire et de garder l'articulation du genou droite ou légèrement fléchie.

Le triceps sural est contracté lors de cet exercice.

Les exercices de stabilisation comme le squat de ballon BOSU sont également importants, d'autant plus qu'ils aident les chevilles à s'adapter à la forme du ballon pour s'équilibrer.


== Signification clinique ==



=== Blessure à la jambe ===

Les blessures au bas de la jambe sont courantes lors de la course ou de la pratique d'un sport.

Environ 10% de toutes les blessures totales impliquent les membres inférieurs chez les athlètes.

La majorité des athlètes se foulent la cheville, ce qui est principalement causé par les charges accrues sur les pieds lorsqu'ils se déplacent vers le bas ou dans une position extérieure de la cheville.

Toutes les zones du pied, qui sont l'avant-pied, le milieu du pied et l'arrière-pied, absorbent diverses forces pendant la course et peuvent également entraîner des blessures.

La course à pied et diverses activités peuvent provoquer des fractures de stress, des tendinites, des blessures musculo-tendineuses ou toute douleur chronique aux membres inférieurs comme le tibia.


==== Types d'activités ====
Les blessures aux quadriceps ou aux ischio-jambiers sont causées par les charges d'impact constantes sur les jambes pendant les activités, comme taper dans un ballon.

En faisant ce type de mouvement, 85% de ce choc est absorbé par les ischio-jambiers, ce qui peut provoquer une tension sur ces muscles.
Sauter - est un autre risque car si les jambes ne se posent pas correctement après un premier saut, il peut y avoir des dommages au ménisque des genoux, une entorse à la cheville en renversant ou en inversant le pied, ou des dommages au tendon d'Achille et au gastrocnémien s'il y a est trop de force lors de la flexion plantaire.
L'haltérophilie - comme le squat profond mal exécuté, est également dangereuse pour les membres inférieurs, car l'exercice peut entraîner une surextension ou un étirement de nos ligaments dans le genou et peut causer des douleurs au fil du temps.
Course à pied - l'activité la plus courante associée aux blessures à la jambe inférieure.

Il y a une pression et un stress constants sur les pieds, les genoux et les jambes lors de la course par force gravitationnelle.

Des déchirures musculaires dans nos jambes ou des douleurs dans diverses zones des pieds peuvent être le résultat d'une mauvaise biomécanique de la course.


===== Courir =====
Les blessures les plus courantes en course à pied concernent les genoux et les pieds.

Diverses études se sont concentrées sur la cause initiale de ces blessures liées à la course à pied et ont constaté qu'il existe de nombreux facteurs en corrélation avec ces blessures.

Les coureuses de fond féminines qui avaient des antécédents de fractures de stress avaient des forces d'impact verticales plus élevées que les sujets non blessés.

Les forces importantes exercées sur le bas des jambes étaient associées à des forces gravitationnelles, ce qui était corrélé à des douleurs fémoro-patellaires ou à des blessures potentielles au genou.

Les chercheurs ont également découvert que ces blessures liées à la course affectent également les pieds, car les coureurs ayant déjà subi des blessures ont montré plus d'éversion du pied et de surpronation pendant la course que les coureurs non blessés.

Cela provoque plus de charges et de forces sur le côté médial du pied, provoquant plus de stress sur les tendons du pied et de la cheville (tendons péroniers).

La plupart de ces blessures de course sont causées par une utilisation excessive et courir sur de plus longues distances chaque semaine pendant une longue durée présente un risque de blessure au bas des jambes.


==== Outils de prévention ====
Les étirements volontaires des jambes, comme l'étirement du mur, conditionnent les ischio-jambiers et le muscle du mollet à divers mouvements avant de les travailler vigoureusement.

L'environnement et les environs, tels qu'un terrain accidenté, peuvent entraîner une position non naturelle des pieds. Par conséquent, le port de chaussures capables d'absorber les forces de l'impact du sol et de stabiliser les pieds peut également prévenir certaines blessures pendant la course.

Les chaussures doivent être structurées pour permettre une friction-traction à la surface de la chaussure, un espace pour différentes contraintes de frappe du pied ou pour des voûtes plantaires confortables et régulières.


==== Résumé ====
Les risques d'endommager nos membres inférieurs seront réduits en connaissant certaines activités associées aux blessures à la jambe inférieure et en développant une forme correcte de course, comme ne pas trop pronationr le pied ou trop utiliser les jambes.

Des mesures préventives, telles que divers étirements et le port de chaussures appropriées, réduiront également les blessures.


=== Rupture ===


Une fracture de la jambe peut être classée selon l'os impliqué en :

Fracture fémorale (dans la partie supérieure de la jambe)
Crus fracture (dans la jambe inférieure)


== Gestion de la douleur ==

La gestion de la douleur au bas de la jambe et au pied est essentielle pour réduire la progression de nouvelles blessures, les sensations inconfortables et limiter les altérations lors de la marche et de la course.

La plupart des individus souffrent de diverses douleurs dans la partie inférieure de la jambe et du pied en raison de différents facteurs.

L'inflammation musculaire, la tension, la sensibilité, l'enflure et la déchirure musculaire causées par une surutilisation musculaire ou un mouvement incorrect sont plusieurs conditions souvent rencontrées par les athlètes et le grand public pendant et après des activités physiques à fort impact.

Par conséquent, des mécanismes de gestion de la douleur suggérés sont fournis pour réduire la douleur et prévenir la progression de la blessure.


=== Fasciite plantaire ===

Un étirement du pied fasciite plantaire est l'une des méthodes recommandées pour réduire la douleur causée par la fasciite plantaire (Figure 1).

Pour faire l'étirement du fascia plantaire, assis sur une chaise, placez la cheville sur le genou opposé et maintenez les orteils du pied handicapé, en tirant lentement vers l'arrière.

L'étirement doit être maintenu pendant environ dix secondes, trois fois par jour.


=== Syndrome de stress tibial médial (attelle de tibia) ===

Plusieurs méthodes peuvent être utilisées pour aider à contrôler la douleur causée par les attelles de tibia.

Placer de la glace sur la zone touchée avant et après la course aidera à réduire la douleur.

De plus, le port d'orthèses comprenant un manchon en néoprène (Figure 2) et le port de chaussures appropriées telles qu'une voûte plantaire peuvent aider à éliminer la condition.

L'étirement et le renforcement du tibia antérieur ou du tibia médial en effectuant des exercices de fléchisseurs plantaires et dorsaux tels que l'étirement du mollet peuvent également aider à soulager la douleur.


=== Tendinopathie d'Achille ===

Il existe de nombreuses approches appropriées pour gérer la douleur résultant d'une tendinite d'Achille.

L'action principale est de se reposer.

Les activités qui ne fournissent pas de stress supplémentaire au tendon affecté sont également recommandées.

Le port d'orthèses ou de prothèses fournira un coussin et empêchera le tendon d'Achille affecté de subir un stress supplémentaire lors de la marche et de l'exécution d'étirements thérapeutiques.

Quelques modalités d'étirement ou exercices excentriques tels que l'extension et la flexion des orteils et l'étirement du mollet et du talon sont bénéfiques pour réduire la douleur chez les patients atteints de tendinopathie d'Achille (Figure 4)


== Société et culture ==

Dans de nombreuses cultures occidentales, les adolescentes et les adultes s'épilent souvent les jambes.

Des jambes toniques, bronzées, rasées sont parfois perçues comme un signe de jeunesse et sont souvent considérées comme attirantes dans ces cultures.
Les hommes ne se rasent généralement les jambes dans aucune culture.

Cependant, le rasage des jambes est une pratique généralement acceptée dans le mannequinat.

C'est aussi assez fréquent dans les sports où l'épilation rend l'athlète sensiblement plus rapide en réduisant la traînée ; le cas le plus courant est la natation de compétition.


== Galerie d'images ==


 
 
 
 
 



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Human_leg
