

PANCREATIC CANCER


Pancreatic cancer arises when cells in the pancreas, a glandular organ behind the stomach, begin to multiply out of control and form a mass. 

These cancerous cells have the ability to invade other parts of the body. 

A number of types of pancreatic cancer are known.The most common, pancreatic adenocarcinoma, accounts for about 90% of cases, and the term "pancreatic cancer" is sometimes used to refer only to that type. 

These adenocarcinomas start within the part of the pancreas that makes digestive enzymes. 

Several other types of cancer, which collectively represent the majority of the non-adenocarcinomas, can also arise from these cells. 

About 1–2% of cases of pancreatic cancer are neuroendocrine tumors, which arise from the hormone-producing cells of the pancreas. 

These are generally less aggressive than pancreatic adenocarcinoma.Signs and symptoms of the most-common form of pancreatic cancer may include yellow skin, abdominal or back pain, unexplained weight loss, light-colored stools, dark urine, and loss of appetite. 

Usually, no symptoms are seen in the disease's early stages, and symptoms that are specific enough to suggest pancreatic cancer typically do not develop until the disease has reached an advanced stage. 

By the time of diagnosis, pancreatic cancer has often spread to other parts of the body.Pancreatic cancer rarely occurs before the age of 40, and more than half of cases of pancreatic adenocarcinoma occur in those over 70. 

Risk factors for pancreatic cancer include tobacco smoking, obesity, diabetes, and certain rare genetic conditions. 

About 25% of cases are linked to smoking, and 5–10% are linked to inherited genes. 

Pancreatic cancer is usually diagnosed by a combination of medical imaging techniques such as ultrasound or computed tomography, blood tests, and examination of tissue samples (biopsy). 

The disease is divided into stages, from early (stage I) to late (stage IV). 

Screening the general population has not been found to be effective.The risk of developing pancreatic cancer is lower among nonsmokers, and people who maintain a healthy weight and limit their consumption of red or processed meat. 

Smokers' chances of developing the disease decrease if they stop smoking and almost return to that of the rest of the population after 20 years. 

Pancreatic cancer can be treated with surgery, radiotherapy, chemotherapy, palliative care, or a combination of these. 

Treatment options are partly based on the cancer stage. 

Surgery is the only treatment that can cure pancreatic adenocarcinoma, and may also be done to improve quality of life without the potential for cure. 

Pain management and medications to improve digestion are sometimes needed. 

Early palliative care is recommended even for those receiving treatment that aims for a cure.In 2015, pancreatic cancers of all types resulted in 411,600 deaths globally. 

Pancreatic cancer is the fifth-most-common cause of death from cancer in the United Kingdom, and the third most-common in the United States. 

The disease occurs most often in the developed world, where about 70% of the new cases in 2012 originated. 

Pancreatic adenocarcinoma typically has a very poor prognosis; after diagnosis, 25% of people survive one year and 5% live for five years. 

For cancers diagnosed early, the five-year survival rate rises to about 20%. 

Neuroendocrine cancers have better outcomes; at five years from diagnosis, 65% of those diagnosed are living, though survival considerably varies depending on the type of tumor.


== Types ==


The many types of pancreatic cancer can be divided into two general groups. 

The vast majority of cases (about 95%) occur in the part of the pancreas that produces digestive enzymes, known as the exocrine component. 

Several subtypes of exocrine pancreatic cancers are described, but their diagnosis and treatment have much in common. 

The small minority of cancers that arise in the hormone-producing (endocrine) tissue of the pancreas have different clinical characteristics and are called pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors, sometimes abbreviated as "PanNETs". 

Both groups occur mainly (but not exclusively) in people over 40, and are slightly more common in men, but some rare subtypes mainly occur in women or children.


=== Exocrine cancers ===

The exocrine group is dominated by pancreatic adenocarcinoma (variations of this name may add "invasive" and "ductal"), which is by far the most common type, representing about 85% of all pancreatic cancers. 

Nearly all these start in the ducts of the pancreas, as pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC). 

This is despite the fact that the tissue from which it arises — the pancreatic ductal epithelium — represents less than 10% of the pancreas by cell volume, because it constitutes only the ducts (an extensive but capillary-like duct-system fanning out) within the pancreas. 

This cancer originates in the ducts that carry secretions (such as enzymes and bicarbonate) away from the pancreas. 

About 60–70% of adenocarcinomas occur in the head of the pancreas.The next-most common type, acinar cell carcinoma of the pancreas, arises in the clusters of cells that produce these enzymes, and represents 5% of exocrine pancreas cancers. 

Like the 'functioning' endocrine cancers described below, acinar cell carcinomas may cause over-production of certain molecules, in this case digestive enzymes, which may cause symptoms such as skin rashes and joint pain.
Cystadenocarcinomas account for 1% of pancreatic cancers, and they have a better prognosis than the other exocrine types.Pancreatoblastoma is a rare form, mostly occurring in childhood, and with a relatively good prognosis. 

Other exocrine cancers include adenosquamous carcinomas, signet ring cell carcinomas, hepatoid carcinomas, colloid carcinomas, undifferentiated carcinomas, and undifferentiated carcinomas with osteoclast-like giant cells. 

Solid pseudopapillary tumor is a rare low-grade neoplasm that mainly affects younger women, and generally has a very good prognosis.Pancreatic mucinous cystic neoplasms are a broad group of pancreas tumors that have varying malignant potential. 

They are being detected at a greatly increased rate as CT scans become more powerful and common, and discussion continues as how best to assess and treat them, given that many are benign.


=== Neuroendocrine ===


The small minority of tumors that arise elsewhere in the pancreas are mainly pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (PanNETs). 

Neuroendocrine tumors (NETs) are a diverse group of benign or malignant tumors that arise from the body's neuroendocrine cells, which are responsible for integrating the nervous and endocrine systems. 

NETs can start in most organs of the body, including the pancreas, where the various malignant types are all considered to be rare. 

PanNETs are grouped into 'functioning' and 'nonfunctioning' types, depending on the degree to which they produce hormones. 

The functioning types secrete hormones such as insulin, gastrin, and glucagon into the bloodstream, often in large quantities, giving rise to serious symptoms such as low blood sugar, but also favoring relatively early detection. 

The most common functioning PanNETs are insulinomas and gastrinomas, named after the hormones they secrete. 

The nonfunctioning types do not secrete hormones in a sufficient quantity to give rise to overt clinical symptoms, so nonfunctioning PanNETs are often diagnosed only after the cancer has spread to other parts of the body.As with other neuroendocrine tumors, the history of the terminology and classification of PanNETs is complex. 

PanNETs are sometimes called "islet cell cancers", though they are now known to not actually arise from islet cells as previously thought.


== Signs and symptoms ==


Since pancreatic cancer usually does not cause recognizable symptoms in its early stages, the disease is typically not diagnosed until it has spread beyond the pancreas itself. 

This is one of the main reasons for the generally poor survival rates. 

Exceptions to this are the functioning PanNETs, where over-production of various active hormones can give rise to symptoms (which depend on the type of hormone).Bearing in mind that the disease is rarely diagnosed before the age of 40, common symptoms of pancreatic adenocarcinoma occurring before diagnosis include:

Pain in the upper abdomen or back, often spreading from around the stomach to the back. 

The location of the pain can indicate the part of the pancreas where a tumor is located. 

The pain may be worse at night and may increase over time to become severe and unremitting. 

It may be slightly relieved by bending forward. 

In the UK, about half of new cases of pancreatic cancer are diagnosed following a visit to a hospital emergency department for pain or jaundice. 

In up to two-thirds of people, abdominal pain is the main symptom, for 46% of the total accompanied by jaundice, with 13% having jaundice without pain.
Jaundice, a yellow tint to the whites of the eyes or skin, with or without pain, and possibly in combination with darkened urine, results when a cancer in the head of the pancreas obstructs the common bile duct as it runs through the pancreas.
Unexplained weight loss, either from loss of appetite, or loss of exocrine function resulting in poor digestion.
The tumor may compress neighboring organs, disrupting digestive processes and making it difficult for the stomach to empty, which may cause nausea and a feeling of fullness. 

The undigested fat leads to foul-smelling, fatty feces that are difficult to flush away. 

Constipation is also common.
At least 50% of people with pancreatic adenocarcinoma have diabetes at the time of diagnosis. 

While long-standing diabetes is a known risk factor for pancreatic cancer (see Risk factors), the cancer can itself cause diabetes, in which case recent onset of diabetes could be considered an early sign of the disease. 

People over 50 who develop diabetes have eight times the usual risk of developing pancreatic adenocarcinoma within three years, after which the relative risk declines.


=== Other findings ===

Trousseau's syndrome – in which blood clots form spontaneously in the portal blood vessels (portal vein thrombosis), the deep veins of the extremities (deep vein thrombosis), or the superficial veins (superficial vein thrombosis) anywhere on the body – may be associated with pancreatic cancer, and is found in about 10% of cases.
Clinical depression has been reported in association with pancreatic cancer in some 10–20% of cases, and can be a hindrance to optimal management. 

The depression sometimes appears before the diagnosis of cancer, suggesting that it may be brought on by the biology of the disease.Other common manifestations of the disease include weakness and tiring easily, dry mouth, sleep problems, and a palpable abdominal mass.


=== Symptoms of spread ===


The spread of pancreatic cancer to other organs (metastasis) may also cause symptoms. 

Typically, pancreatic adenocarcinoma first spreads to nearby lymph nodes, and later to the liver or to the peritoneal cavity, large intestine, or lungs. 

Uncommonly, it spreads to the bones or brain.Cancers in the pancreas may also be secondary cancers that have spread from other parts of the body. 

This is uncommon, found in only about 2% of cases of pancreatic cancer. 

Kidney cancer is by far the most common cancer to spread to the pancreas, followed by colorectal cancer, and then cancers of the skin, breast, and lung. 

Surgery may be performed on the pancreas in such cases, whether in hope of a cure or to alleviate symptoms.


== Risk factors ==

Risk factors for pancreatic adenocarcinoma include:
Age, sex, and ethnicity – the risk of developing pancreatic cancer increases with age. 

Most cases occur after age 65, while cases before age 40 are uncommon. 

The disease is slightly more common in men than in women. 

In the United States, it is over 1.5 times more common in African Americans, though incidence in Africa is low.
Cigarette smoking is the best-established avoidable risk factor for pancreatic cancer, approximately doubling risk among long-term smokers, the risk increasing with the number of cigarettes smoked and the years of smoking. 

The risk declines slowly after smoking cessation, taking some 20 years to return to almost that of nonsmokers.
Obesity – a body mass index greater than 35 increases relative risk by about half.
Family history – 5–10% of pancreatic cancer cases have an inherited component, where people have a family history of pancreatic cancer. 

The risk escalates greatly if more than one first-degree relative had the disease, and more modestly if they developed it before the age of 50. 

Most of the genes involved have not been identified. 

Hereditary pancreatitis gives a greatly increased lifetime risk of pancreatic cancer of 30–40% to the age of 70. 

Screening for early pancreatic cancer may be offered to individuals with hereditary pancreatitis on a research basis. 

Some people may choose to have their pancreas surgically removed to prevent cancer from developing in the future.Pancreatic cancer has been associated with these other rare hereditary syndromes: Peutz–Jeghers syndrome due to mutations in the STK11 tumor suppressor gene (very rare, but a very strong risk factor); dysplastic nevus syndrome (or familial atypical multiple mole and melanoma syndrome, FAMMM-PC) due to mutations in the CDKN2A tumor suppressor gene; autosomal recessive ataxia-telangiectasia and autosomal dominantly inherited mutations in the BRCA2 and PALB2 genes; hereditary non-polyposis colon cancer (Lynch syndrome); and familial adenomatous polyposis. 

PanNETs have been associated with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN1) and von Hippel Lindau syndromes.Chronic pancreatitis appears to almost triple risk, and as with diabetes, new-onset pancreatitis may be a symptom of a tumor. 

The risk of pancreatic cancer in individuals with familial pancreatitis is particularly high.
Diabetes mellitus is a risk factor for pancreatic cancer and (as noted in the Signs and symptoms section) new-onset diabetes may also be an early sign of the disease. 

People who have been diagnosed with type 2 diabetes for longer than 10 years may have a 50% increased risk, as compared with individuals without diabetes. 

In 2021, Venturi reported that pancreas is able to absorb in great quantity radioactive cesium (Cs-134 and Cs-137) causing chronic pancreatitis and probably pancreatic cancer with damage of pancreatic islands, causing Type 3c (pancreatogenic) diabetes . 

Chronic pancreatitis, pancreatic cancer and diabetes mellitus increased in contaminated population, particularly children and adolescents, after Fukushima and Chernobyl nuclear incidents. 

At the same time, worldwide pancreatic diseases, diabetes and environmental radiocesium are increasing.
Specific types of food (as distinct from obesity) have not been clearly shown to increase the risk of pancreatic cancer. 

Dietary factors for which some evidence shows slightly increased risk include processed meat, red meat, and meat cooked at very high temperatures (e.g. by frying, broiling, or grilling).


=== Alcohol ===

Drinking alcohol excessively is a major cause of chronic pancreatitis, which in turn predisposes to pancreatic cancer, but considerable research has failed to firmly establish alcohol consumption as a direct risk factor for pancreatic cancer. 

Overall, the association is consistently weak and the majority of studies have found no association, with smoking a strong confounding factor. 

The evidence is stronger for a link with heavy drinking, of at least six drinks per day.


== Pathophysiology ==



=== Precancer ===


Exocrine cancers are thought to arise from several types of precancerous lesions within the pancreas, but these lesions do not always progress to cancer, and the increased numbers detected as a byproduct of the increasing use of CT scans for other reasons are not all treated. 

Apart from pancreatic serous cystadenomas, which are almost always benign, four types of precancerous lesion are recognized.
The first is pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia. 

These lesions are microscopic abnormalities in the pancreas and are often found in autopsies of people with no diagnosed cancer. 

These lesions may progress from low to high grade and then to a tumor. 

More than 90% of cases at all grades carry a faulty KRAS gene, while in grades 2 and 3, damage to three further genes – CDKN2A (p16), p53, and SMAD4 – are increasingly often found.A second type is the intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm (IPMN). 

These are macroscopic lesions, which are found in about 2% of all adults. 

This rate rises to about 10% by age 70. 

These lesions have about a 25% risk of developing into invasive cancer. 

They may have KRAS gene mutations (40–65% of cases) and in the GNAS Gs alpha subunit and RNF43, affecting the Wnt signaling pathway. 

Even if removed surgically, a considerably increased risk remains of pancreatic cancer developing subsequently.The third type, pancreatic mucinous cystic neoplasm (MCN), mainly occurs in women, and may remain benign or progress to cancer. 

If these lesions become large, cause symptoms, or have suspicious features, they can usually be successfully removed by surgery.A fourth type of cancer that arises in the pancreas is the intraductal tubulopapillary neoplasm. 

This type was recognised by the WHO in 2010 and constitutes about 1–3% of all pancreatic neoplasms. 

Mean age at diagnosis is 61 years (range 35–78 years). 

About 50% of these lesions become invasive. 

Diagnosis depends on histology, as these lesions are very difficult to differentiate from other lesions on either clinical or radiological grounds.


=== Invasive cancer ===

The genetic events found in ductal adenocarcinoma have been well characterized, and complete exome sequencing has been done for the common types of tumor. 

Four genes have each been found to be mutated in the majority of adenocarcinomas: KRAS (in 95% of cases), CDKN2A (also in 95%), TP53 (75%), and SMAD4 (55%). 

The last of these is especially associated with a poor prognosis. 

SWI/SNF mutations/deletions occur in about 10–15% of the adenocarcinomas. 

The genetic alterations in several other types of pancreatic cancer and precancerous lesions have also been researched. 

Transcriptomics analyses and mRNA sequencing for the common forms of pancreatic cancer have found that 75% of human genes are expressed in the tumors, with some 200 genes more specifically expressed in pancreatic cancer as compared to other tumor types.


=== PanNETs ===

The genes often found mutated in PanNETs are different from those in exocrine pancreatic cancer. 

For example, KRAS mutation is normally absent. 

Instead, hereditary MEN1 gene mutations give rise to MEN1 syndrome, in which primary tumors occur in two or more endocrine glands. 

About 40–70% of people born with a MEN1 mutation eventually develop a PanNet. 

Other genes that are frequently mutated include DAXX, mTOR, and ATRX.


== Diagnosis ==


The symptoms of pancreatic adenocarcinoma do not usually appear in the disease's early stages, and they are not individually distinctive to the disease. 

The symptoms at diagnosis vary according to the location of the cancer in the pancreas, which anatomists divide (from left to right on most diagrams) into the thick head, the neck, and the tapering body, ending in the tail.
Regardless of a tumor's location, the most common symptom is unexplained weight loss, which may be considerable. 

A large minority (between 35% and 47%) of people diagnosed with the disease will have had nausea, vomiting, or a feeling of weakness. 

Tumors in the head of the pancreas typically also cause jaundice, pain, loss of appetite, dark urine, and light-colored stools. 

Tumors in the body and tail typically also cause pain.People sometimes have recent onset of atypical type 2 diabetes that is difficult to control, a history of recent but unexplained blood vessel inflammation caused by blood clots (thrombophlebitis) known as Trousseau sign, or a previous attack of pancreatitis. 

A doctor may suspect pancreatic cancer when the onset of diabetes in someone over 50 years old is accompanied by typical symptoms such as unexplained weight loss, persistent abdominal or back pain, indigestion, vomiting, or fatty feces. 

Jaundice accompanied by a painlessly swollen gallbladder (known as Courvoisier's sign) may also raise suspicion, and can help differentiate pancreatic cancer from gallstones.Medical imaging techniques, such as computed tomography (CT scan) and endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) are used both to confirm the diagnosis and to help decide whether the tumor can be surgically removed (its "resectability"). 

On contrast CT scan, pancreatic cancer typically shows a gradually increasing radiocontrast uptake, rather than a fast washout as seen in a normal pancreas or a delayed washout as seen in chronic pancreatitis. 

Magnetic resonance imaging and positron emission tomography may also be used, and magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography may be useful in some cases. 

Abdominal ultrasound is less sensitive and will miss small tumors, but can identify cancers that have spread to the liver and build-up of fluid in the peritoneal cavity (ascites). 

It may be used for a quick and cheap first examination before other techniques.

A biopsy by fine needle aspiration, often guided by endoscopic ultrasound, may be used where there is uncertainty over the diagnosis, but a histologic diagnosis is not usually required for removal of the tumor by surgery to go ahead.Liver function tests can show a combination of results indicative of bile duct obstruction (raised conjugated bilirubin, γ-glutamyl transpeptidase and alkaline phosphatase levels). 

CA19-9 (carbohydrate antigen 19.9) is a tumor marker that is frequently elevated in pancreatic cancer. 

However, it lacks sensitivity and specificity, not least because 5% of people lack the Lewis (a) antigen and cannot produce CA19-9. 

It has a sensitivity of 80% and specificity of 73% in detecting pancreatic adenocarcinoma, and is used for following known cases rather than diagnosis.


=== Histopathology ===

The most common form of pancreatic cancer (adenocarcinoma) is typically characterized by moderately to poorly differentiated glandular structures on microscopic examination. 

There is typically considerable desmoplasia or formation of a dense fibrous stroma or structural tissue consisting of a range of cell types (including myofibroblasts, macrophages, lymphocytes and mast cells) and deposited material (such as type I collagen and hyaluronic acid). 

This creates a tumor microenvironment that is short of blood vessels (hypovascular) and so of oxygen (tumor hypoxia). 

It is thought that this prevents many chemotherapy drugs from reaching the tumor, as one factor making the cancer especially hard to treat.


=== Staging ===



==== Exocrine cancers ====
Pancreatic cancer is usually staged following a CT scan. 

The most widely used cancer staging system for pancreatic cancer is the one formulated by the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) together with the Union for International Cancer Control (UICC). 

The AJCC-UICC staging system designates four main overall stages, ranging from early to advanced disease, based on TNM classification of Tumor size, spread to lymph Nodes, and Metastasis.To help decide treatment, the tumors are also divided into three broader categories based on whether surgical removal seems possible: in this way, tumors are judged to be "resectable", "borderline resectable", or "unresectable". 

When the disease is still in an early stage (AJCC-UICC stages I and II), without spread to large blood vessels or distant organs such as the liver or lungs, surgical resection of the tumor can normally be performed, if the patient is willing to undergo this major operation and is thought to be sufficiently fit.The AJCC-UICC staging system allows distinction between stage III tumors that are judged to be "borderline resectable" (where surgery is technically feasible because the celiac axis and superior mesenteric artery are still free) and those that are "unresectable" (due to more locally advanced disease); in terms of the more detailed TNM classification, these two groups correspond to T3 and T4 respectively.
Pancreatic cancer staging (TNM classification)
		
		
		
		
		

Locally advanced adenocarcinomas have spread into neighboring organs, which may be any of the following (in roughly decreasing order of frequency): the duodenum, stomach, transverse colon, spleen, adrenal gland, or kidney. 

Very often they also spread to the important blood or lymphatic vessels and nerves that run close to the pancreas, making surgery far more difficult. 

Typical sites for metastatic spread (stage IV disease) are the liver, peritoneal cavity and lungs, all of which occur in 50% or more of fully advanced cases.


==== PanNETs ====
The 2010 WHO classification of tumors of the digestive system grades all the pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (PanNETs) into three categories, based on their degree of cellular differentiation (from "NET G1" through to the poorly differentiated "NET G3"). 

The U.S. 

National Comprehensive Cancer Network recommends use of the same AJCC-UICC staging system as pancreatic adenocarcinoma.: 52  Using this scheme, the stage-by-stage outcomes for PanNETs are dissimilar to those of the exocrine cancers. 

A different TNM system for PanNETs has been proposed by the European Neuroendocrine Tumor Society.


== Prevention and screening ==

Apart from not smoking, the American Cancer Society recommends keeping a healthy weight, and increasing consumption of fruits, vegetables, and whole grains, while decreasing consumption of red and processed meat, although there is no consistent evidence this will prevent or reduce pancreatic cancer specifically. 

A 2014 review of research concluded that there was evidence that consumption of citrus fruits and curcumin reduced risk of pancreatic cancer, while there was possibly a beneficial effect from whole grains, folate, selenium, and non-fried fish.In the general population, screening of large groups is not considered effective and may be harmful as of 2019, although newer techniques, and the screening of tightly targeted groups, are being evaluated. 

Nevertheless, regular screening with endoscopic ultrasound and MRI/CT imaging is recommended for those at high risk from inherited genetics.


== Management ==



=== Exocrine cancer ===

A key assessment that is made after diagnosis is whether surgical removal of the tumor is possible (see Staging), as this is the only cure for this cancer. 

Whether or not surgical resection can be offered depends on how much the cancer has spread. 

The exact location of the tumor is also a significant factor, and CT can show how it relates to the major blood vessels passing close to the pancreas. 

The general health of the person must also be assessed, though age in itself is not an obstacle to surgery.Chemotherapy and, to a lesser extent, radiotherapy are likely to be offered to most people, whether or not surgery is possible. 

Specialists advise that the management of pancreatic cancer should be in the hands of a multidisciplinary team including specialists in several aspects of oncology, and is, therefore, best conducted in larger centers.


==== Surgery ====

Surgery with the intention of a cure is only possible in around one-fifth (20%) of new cases. 

Although CT scans help, in practice it can be difficult to determine whether the tumor can be fully removed (its "resectability"), and it may only become apparent during surgery that it is not possible to successfully remove the tumor without damaging other vital tissues. 

Whether or not surgical resection can be offered depends on various factors, including the precise extent of local anatomical adjacency to, or involvement of, the venous or arterial blood vessels, as well as surgical expertise and a careful consideration of projected post-operative recovery. 

The age of the person is not in itself a reason not to operate, but their general performance status needs to be adequate for a major operation.One particular feature that is evaluated is the encouraging presence, or discouraging absence, of a clear layer or plane of fat creating a barrier between the tumor and the vessels. 

Traditionally, an assessment is made of the tumor's proximity to major venous or arterial vessels, in terms of "abutment" (defined as the tumor touching no more than half a blood vessel's circumference without any fat to separate it), "encasement" (when the tumor encloses most of the vessel's circumference), or full vessel involvement.: 22  A resection that includes encased sections of blood vessels may be possible in some cases, particularly if preliminary neoadjuvant therapy is feasible, using chemotherapy: 36  and/or radiotherapy.: 29–30 Even when the operation appears to have been successful, cancerous cells are often found around the edges ("margins") of the removed tissue, when a pathologist examines them microscopically (this will always be done), indicating the cancer has not been entirely removed. 

Furthermore, cancer stem cells are usually not evident microscopically, and if they are present they may continue to develop and spread. 

An exploratory laparoscopy (a small, camera-guided surgical procedure) may therefore be performed to gain a clearer idea of the outcome of a full operation.

For cancers involving the head of the pancreas, the Whipple procedure is the most commonly attempted curative surgical treatment. 

This is a major operation which involves removing the pancreatic head and the curve of the duodenum together ("pancreato-duodenectomy"), making a bypass for food from the stomach to the jejunum ("gastro-jejunostomy") and attaching a loop of jejunum to the cystic duct to drain bile ("cholecysto-jejunostomy"). 

It can be performed only if the person is likely to survive major surgery and if the cancer is localized without invading local structures or metastasizing. 

It can, therefore, be performed only in a minority of cases. 

Cancers of the tail of the pancreas can be resected using a procedure known as a distal pancreatectomy, which often also entails removal of the spleen. 

Nowadays, this can often be done using minimally invasive surgery.Although curative surgery no longer entails the very high death rates that occurred until the 1980s, a high proportion of people (about 30–45%) still have to be treated for a post-operative sickness that is not caused by the cancer itself. 

The most common complication of surgery is difficulty in emptying the stomach. 

Certain more limited surgical procedures may also be used to ease symptoms (see Palliative care): for instance, if the cancer is invading or compressing the duodenum or colon. 

In such cases, bypass surgery might overcome the obstruction and improve quality of life but is not intended as a cure.


==== Chemotherapy ====
After surgery, adjuvant chemotherapy with gemcitabine or 5-FU can be offered if the person is sufficiently fit, after a recovery period of one to two months. 

In people not suitable for curative surgery, chemotherapy may be used to extend life or improve its quality. 

Before surgery, neoadjuvant chemotherapy or chemoradiotherapy may be used in cases that are considered to be "borderline resectable" (see Staging) in order to reduce the cancer to a level where surgery could be beneficial. 

In other cases neoadjuvant therapy remains controversial, because it delays surgery.Gemcitabine was approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in 1997, after a clinical trial reported improvements in quality of life and a 5-week improvement in median survival duration in people with advanced pancreatic cancer. 

This was the first chemotherapy drug approved by the FDA primarily for a nonsurvival clinical trial endpoint. 

Chemotherapy using gemcitabine alone was the standard for about a decade, as a number of trials testing it in combination with other drugs failed to demonstrate significantly better outcomes. 

However, the combination of gemcitabine with erlotinib was found to increase survival modestly, and erlotinib was licensed by the FDA for use in pancreatic cancer in 2005.The FOLFIRINOX chemotherapy regimen using four drugs was found more effective than gemcitabine, but with substantial side effects, and is thus only suitable for people with good performance status. 

This is also true of protein-bound paclitaxel (nab-paclitaxel), which was licensed by the FDA in 2013 for use with gemcitabine in pancreas cancer. 

By the end of 2013, both FOLFIRINOX and nab-paclitaxel with gemcitabine were regarded as good choices for those able to tolerate the side-effects, and gemcitabine remained an effective option for those who were not. 

A head-to-head trial between the two new options is awaited, and trials investigating other variations continue. 

However, the changes of the last few years have only increased survival times by a few months. 

Clinical trials are often conducted for novel adjuvant therapies.


==== Radiotherapy ====
The role of radiotherapy as an auxiliary (adjuvant) treatment after potentially curative surgery has been controversial since the 1980s. 

In the early 2000s the European Study Group for Pancreatic Cancer Research (ESPAC) showed prognostic superiority of adjuvant chemotherapy over chemoradiotherapy. 

The European Society for Medical Oncology recommends that adjuvant radiotherapy should only be used for people enrolled in clinical trials. 

However, there is a continuing tendency for clinicians in the US to be more ready to use adjuvant radiotherapy than those in Europe. 

Many clinical trials have tested a variety of treatment combinations since the 1980s, but have failed to settle the matter conclusively.Radiotherapy may form part of treatment to attempt to shrink a tumor to a resectable state, but its use on unresectable tumors remains controversial as there are conflicting results from clinical trials. 

The preliminary results of one trial, presented in 2013, "markedly reduced enthusiasm" for its use on locally advanced tumors.


=== PanNETs ===


Treatment of PanNETs, including the less common malignant types, may include a number of approaches. 

Some small tumors of less than 1 cm. that are identified incidentally, for example on a CT scan performed for other purposes, may be followed by watchful waiting. 

This depends on the assessed risk of surgery which is influenced by the site of the tumor and the presence of other medical problems. 

Tumors within the pancreas only (localized tumors), or with limited metastases, for example to the liver, may be removed by surgery. 

The type of surgery depends on the tumor location, and the degree of spread to lymph nodes.For localized tumors, the surgical procedure may be much less extensive than the types of surgery used to treat pancreatic adenocarcinoma described above, but otherwise surgical procedures are similar to those for exocrine tumors. 

The range of possible outcomes varies greatly; some types have a very high survival rate after surgery while others have a poor outlook. 

As all this group are rare, guidelines emphasize that treatment should be undertaken in a specialized center. 

Use of liver transplantation may be considered in certain cases of liver metastasis.For functioning tumors, the somatostatin analog class of medications, such as octreotide, can reduce the excessive production of hormones. 

Lanreotide can slow tumor growth. 

If the tumor is not amenable to surgical removal and is causing symptoms, targeted therapy with everolimus or sunitinib can reduce symptoms and slow progression of the disease. 

Standard cytotoxic chemotherapy is generally not very effective for PanNETs, but may be used when other drug treatments fail to prevent the disease from progressing, or in poorly differentiated PanNET cancers.Radiation therapy is occasionally used if there is pain due to anatomic extension, such as metastasis to bone. 

Some PanNETs absorb specific peptides or hormones, and these PanNETs may respond to nuclear medicine therapy with radiolabeled peptides or hormones such as iobenguane (iodine-131-MIBG). 

Radiofrequency ablation (RFA), cryoablation, and hepatic artery embolization may also be used.


=== Palliative care ===

Palliative care is medical care which focuses on treatment of symptoms from serious illness, such as cancer, and improving quality of life. 

Because pancreatic adenocarcinoma is usually diagnosed after it has progressed to an advanced stage, palliative care as a treatment of symptoms is often the only treatment possible.Palliative care focuses not on treating the underlying cancer, but on treating symptoms such as pain or nausea, and can assist in decision-making, including when or if hospice care will be beneficial. 

Pain can be managed with medications such as opioids or through procedural intervention, by a nerve block on the celiac plexus (CPB). 

This alters or, depending on the technique used, destroys the nerves that transmit pain from the abdomen. 

CPB is a safe and effective way to reduce the pain, which generally reduces the need to use opioid painkillers, which have significant negative side effects.Other symptoms or complications that can be treated with palliative surgery are obstruction by the tumor of the intestines or bile ducts. 

For the latter, which occurs in well over half of cases, a small metal tube called a stent may be inserted by endoscope to keep the ducts draining. 

Palliative care can also help treat depression that often comes with the diagnosis of pancreatic cancer.Both surgery and advanced inoperable tumors often lead to digestive system disorders from a lack of the exocrine products of the pancreas (exocrine insufficiency). 

These can be treated by taking pancreatin which contains manufactured pancreatic enzymes, and is best taken with food. 

Difficulty in emptying the stomach (delayed gastric emptying) is common and can be a serious problem, involving hospitalization. 

Treatment may involve a variety of approaches, including draining the stomach by nasogastric aspiration and drugs called proton-pump inhibitors or H2 antagonists, which both reduce production of gastric acid. 

Medications like metoclopramide can also be used to clear stomach contents.


== Outcomes ==

Pancreatic adenocarcinoma and the other less common exocrine cancers have a very poor prognosis, as they are normally diagnosed at a late stage when the cancer is already locally advanced or has spread to other parts of the body. 

Outcomes are much better for PanNETs: Many are benign and completely without clinical symptoms, and even those cases not treatable with surgery have an average five-year survival rate of 16%, although the outlook varies considerably according to the type.For locally advanced and metastatic pancreatic adenocarcinomas, which together represent over 80% of cases, numerous trials comparing chemotherapy regimes have shown increased survival times, but not to more than one year. 

Overall five-year survival for pancreatic cancer in the US has improved from 2% in cases diagnosed in 1975–1977, and 4% in 1987–1989 diagnoses, to 6% in 2003–2009. 

In the less than 20% of cases of pancreatic adenocarcinoma with a diagnosis of a localized and small cancerous growth (less than 2 cm in Stage T1), about 20% of Americans survive to five years.About 1500 genes are linked to outcomes in pancreatic adenocarcinoma. 

These include both unfavorable genes, where high expression is related to poor outcome, for example C-Met and MUC-1, and favorable genes where high expression is associated with better survival, for example the transcription factor PELP1.


== Distribution ==


In 2015, pancreatic cancers of all types resulted in 411,600 deaths globally. 

In 2014, an estimated 46,000 people in the US are expected to be diagnosed with pancreatic cancer and 40,000 to die of it. 

Although it accounts for only 2.5% of new cases, pancreatic cancer is responsible for 6% of cancer deaths each year. 

It is the seventh highest cause of death from cancer worldwide. 

Pancreatic cancer is the fifth most common cause of death from cancer in the United Kingdom, and the third most common in the United States.Globally pancreatic cancer is the 11th most common cancer in women and the 12th most common in men. 

The majority of recorded cases occur in developed countries. 

People from the United States have an average lifetime risk of about 1 in 67 (or 1.5%) of developing the disease, slightly higher than the figure for the UK. 

The disease is more common in men than women, though the difference in rates has narrowed over recent decades, probably reflecting earlier increases in female smoking. 

In the United States the risk for African Americans is over 50% greater than for whites, but the rates in Africa and East Asia are much lower than those in North America or Europe. 

The United States, Central, and eastern Europe, and Argentina and Uruguay all have high rates.


=== PanNETs ===

The annual incidence of clinically recognized PanNETs is low (about 5 per one million person-years) and is dominated by the non-functioning types. 

Somewhere between 45% and 90% of PanNETs are thought to be of the non-functioning types. 

Studies of autopsies have uncovered small PanNETs rather frequently, suggesting that the prevalence of tumors that remain inert and asymptomatic may be relatively high. 

Overall PanNETs are thought to account for about 1 to 2% of all pancreatic tumors. 

The definition and classification of PanNETs has changed over time, affecting what is known about their epidemiology and clinical relevance.


== History ==



=== Recognition and diagnosis ===

The earliest recognition of pancreatic cancer has been attributed to the 18th-century Italian scientist Giovanni Battista Morgagni, the historical father of modern-day anatomic pathology, who claimed to have traced several cases of cancer in the pancreas. 

Many 18th and 19th-century physicians were skeptical about the existence of the disease, given the similar appearance of pancreatitis. 

Some case reports were published in the 1820s and 1830s, and a genuine histopathologic diagnosis was eventually recorded by the American clinician Jacob Mendes Da Costa, who also doubted the reliability of Morgagni's interpretations. 

By the start of the 20th century, cancer of the head of the pancreas had become a well-established diagnosis.Regarding the recognition of PanNETs, the possibility of cancer of the islet cells was initially suggested in 1888. 

The first case of hyperinsulinism due to a tumor of this type was reported in 1927. 

Recognition of a non-insulin-secreting type of PanNET is generally ascribed to the American surgeons, R. 

M. 

Zollinger and E. 

H. 

Ellison, who gave their names to Zollinger–Ellison syndrome, after postulating the existence of a gastrin-secreting pancreatic tumor in a report of two cases of unusually severe peptic ulcers published in 1955. 

In 2010, the WHO recommended that PanNETs be referred to as "neuroendocrine" rather than "endocrine" tumors.Small precancerous neoplasms for many pancreatic cancers are being detected at greatly increased rates by modern medical imaging. 

One type, the intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm (IPMN) was first described by Japanese researchers in 1982. 

It was noted in 2010 that: "For the next decade, little attention was paid to this report; however, over the subsequent 15 years, there has been a virtual explosion in the recognition of this tumor."


=== Surgery ===

The first reported partial pancreaticoduodenectomy was performed by the Italian surgeon Alessandro Codivilla in 1898, but the patient only survived 18 days before succumbing to complications. 

Early operations were compromised partly because of mistaken beliefs that people would die if their duodenum were removed, and also, at first, if the flow of pancreatic juices stopped. 

Later it was thought, also mistakenly, that the pancreatic duct could simply be tied up without serious adverse effects; in fact, it will very often leak later on. 

In 1907–1908, after some more unsuccessful operations by other surgeons, experimental procedures were tried on corpses by French surgeons.In 1912 the German surgeon Walther Kausch was the first to remove large parts of the duodenum and pancreas together (en bloc). 

This was in Breslau, now Wrocław in Poland. 

In 1918 it was demonstrated, in operations on dogs, that it is possible to survive even after complete removal of the duodenum, but no such result was reported in human surgery until 1935, when the American surgeon Allen Oldfather Whipple published the results of a series of three operations at Columbia Presbyterian Hospital in New York. 

Only one of the patients had the duodenum entirely removed, but he survived for two years before dying of metastasis to the liver.
The first operation was unplanned, as cancer was only discovered in the operating theater. 

Whipple's success showed the way for the future, but the operation remained a difficult and dangerous one until recent decades. 

He published several refinements to his procedure, including the first total removal of the duodenum in 1940, but he only performed a total of 37 operations.The discovery in the late 1930s that vitamin K prevented bleeding with jaundice, and the development of blood transfusion as an everyday process, both improved post-operative survival, but about 25% of people never left hospital alive as late as the 1970s. 

In the 1970s a group of American surgeons wrote urging that the procedure was too dangerous and should be abandoned. 

Since then outcomes in larger centers have improved considerably, and mortality from the operation is often less than 4%.In 2006 a report was published of a series of 1,000 consecutive pancreatico-duodenectomies performed by a single surgeon from Johns Hopkins Hospital between 1969 and 2003. 

The rate of these operations had increased steadily over this period, with only three of them before 1980, and the median operating time reduced from 8.8 hours in the 1970s to 5.5 hours in the 2000s, and mortality within 30 days or in hospital was only 1%. 

Another series of 2,050 operations at the Massachusetts General Hospital between 1941 and 2011 showed a similar picture of improvement.


== Research directions ==

Early-stage research on pancreatic cancer includes studies of genetics and early detection, treatment at different cancer stages, surgical strategies, and targeted therapies, such as inhibition of growth factors, immune therapies, and vaccines. 

Bile acids may have a role in the carcinogenesis of pancreatic cancer.A key question is the timing of events as the disease develops and progresses – particularly the role of diabetes, and how and when the disease spreads. 

The knowledge that new onset of diabetes can be an early sign of the disease could facilitate timely diagnosis and prevention if a workable screening strategy can be developed. 

The European Registry of Hereditary Pancreatitis and Familial Pancreatic Cancer (EUROPAC) trial is aiming to determine whether regular screening is appropriate for people with a family history of the disease.Keyhole surgery (laparoscopy) rather than Whipple's procedure, particularly in terms of recovery time, is being evaluated. 

Irreversible electroporation is a relatively novel ablation technique with potential for downstaging and prolonging survival in persons with locally advanced disease, especially for tumors in proximity to peri-pancreatic vessels without risk of vascular trauma.Efforts are underway to develop new drugs, including those targeting molecular mechanisms for cancer onset, stem cells, and cell proliferation. 

A further approach involves the use of immunotherapy, such as oncolytic viruses. 

Galectin-specific mechanisms of the tumor microenvironment are under study.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pancreatic_cancer
;;;ES;;;



CANCER DE PANCREAS


El cáncer de páncreas surge cuando las células del páncreas, un órgano glandular detrás del estómago, comienzan a multiplicarse sin control y forman una masa.

Estas células cancerosas tienen la capacidad de invadir otras partes del cuerpo.

Se conocen varios tipos de cáncer de páncreas. El más común, el adenocarcinoma de páncreas, representa aproximadamente el 90 % de los casos, y el término "cáncer de páncreas" a veces se usa para referirse solo a ese tipo.

Estos adenocarcinomas comienzan dentro de la parte del páncreas que produce enzimas digestivas.

Varios otros tipos de cáncer, que colectivamente representan la mayoría de los no adenocarcinomas, también pueden surgir de estas células.

Alrededor del 1% al 2% de los casos de cáncer de páncreas son tumores neuroendocrinos, que surgen de las células productoras de hormonas del páncreas.

Por lo general, son menos agresivos que el adenocarcinoma de páncreas. Los signos y síntomas de la forma más común de cáncer de páncreas pueden incluir piel amarilla, dolor abdominal o de espalda, pérdida de peso inexplicable, heces de color claro, orina oscura y pérdida de apetito.

Por lo general, no se observan síntomas en las primeras etapas de la enfermedad, y los síntomas que son lo suficientemente específicos como para sugerir cáncer de páncreas generalmente no se desarrollan hasta que la enfermedad ha alcanzado una etapa avanzada.

En el momento del diagnóstico, el cáncer de páncreas a menudo se ha diseminado a otras partes del cuerpo. El cáncer de páncreas rara vez ocurre antes de los 40 años, y más de la mitad de los casos de adenocarcinoma de páncreas ocurren en personas mayores de 70 años.

Los factores de riesgo para el cáncer de páncreas incluyen el tabaquismo, la obesidad, la diabetes y ciertas afecciones genéticas raras.

Alrededor del 25% de los casos están relacionados con el tabaquismo y entre el 5% y el 10% están relacionados con genes heredados.

El cáncer de páncreas generalmente se diagnostica mediante una combinación de técnicas de imágenes médicas, como ultrasonido o tomografía computarizada, análisis de sangre y examen de muestras de tejido (biopsia).

La enfermedad se divide en etapas, desde temprana (etapa I) hasta tardía (etapa IV).

No se ha encontrado que la detección en la población general sea efectiva. El riesgo de desarrollar cáncer de páncreas es menor entre los no fumadores y las personas que mantienen un peso saludable y limitan su consumo de carne roja o procesada.

Las posibilidades de los fumadores de desarrollar la enfermedad disminuyen si dejan de fumar y casi vuelven a las del resto de la población después de 20 años.

El cáncer de páncreas se puede tratar con cirugía, radioterapia, quimioterapia, cuidados paliativos o una combinación de estos.

Las opciones de tratamiento se basan en parte en el estadio del cáncer.

La cirugía es el único tratamiento que puede curar el adenocarcinoma de páncreas y también se puede realizar para mejorar la calidad de vida sin posibilidad de curación.

A veces se necesitan medicamentos para controlar el dolor y mejorar la digestión.

Los cuidados paliativos tempranos se recomiendan incluso para aquellos que reciben un tratamiento que apunta a una cura. En 2015, los cánceres de páncreas de todos los tipos provocaron 411 600 muertes en todo el mundo.

El cáncer de páncreas es la quinta causa más común de muerte por cáncer en el Reino Unido y la tercera más común en los Estados Unidos.

La enfermedad ocurre con mayor frecuencia en el mundo desarrollado, donde se originó alrededor del 70% de los casos nuevos en 2012.

El adenocarcinoma de páncreas suele tener un pronóstico muy precario; después del diagnóstico, el 25% de las personas sobrevive un año y el 5% vive cinco años.

Para los cánceres diagnosticados temprano, la tasa de supervivencia a cinco años se eleva a alrededor del 20%.

Los cánceres neuroendocrinos tienen mejores resultados; a los cinco años del diagnóstico, el 65% de los diagnosticados están vivos, aunque la supervivencia varía considerablemente según el tipo de tumor.


== Tipos ==


Los muchos tipos de cáncer de páncreas se pueden dividir en dos grupos generales.

La gran mayoría de los casos (alrededor del 95%) ocurren en la parte del páncreas que produce enzimas digestivas, conocida como componente exocrino.

Se describen varios subtipos de cánceres de páncreas exocrinos, pero su diagnóstico y tratamiento tienen mucho en común.

La pequeña minoría de cánceres que surgen en el tejido productor de hormonas (endocrino) del páncreas tienen diferentes características clínicas y se denominan tumores neuroendocrinos pancreáticos, a veces abreviados como "PanNET".

Ambos grupos ocurren principalmente (pero no exclusivamente) en personas mayores de 40 años, y son un poco más comunes en hombres, pero algunos subtipos raros ocurren principalmente en mujeres o niños.


=== Cánceres exocrinos ===

El grupo exocrino está dominado por el adenocarcinoma pancreático (las variaciones de este nombre pueden agregar "invasivo" y "ductal"), que es, con mucho, el tipo más común y representa aproximadamente el 85% de todos los cánceres de páncreas.

Casi todos estos comienzan en los conductos del páncreas, como adenocarcinoma ductal pancreático (PDAC).

Esto es a pesar del hecho de que el tejido del que surge, el epitelio ductal pancreático, representa menos del 10% del páncreas por volumen celular, porque constituye solo los conductos (un sistema de conductos extenso pero similar a un capilar que se abre en abanico) dentro el páncreas

Este cáncer se origina en los conductos que transportan secreciones (como enzimas y bicarbonato) fuera del páncreas.

Alrededor del 60% al 70% de los adenocarcinomas ocurren en la cabeza del páncreas. El siguiente tipo más común, el carcinoma de células acinares del páncreas, surge en los grupos de células que producen estas enzimas y representa el 5% de los cánceres de páncreas exocrinos.

Al igual que los cánceres endocrinos 'funcionales' que se describen a continuación, los carcinomas de células acinares pueden causar una producción excesiva de ciertas moléculas, en este caso enzimas digestivas, que pueden causar síntomas como erupciones cutáneas y dolor en las articulaciones.
Los cistoadenocarcinomas representan el 1 % de los cánceres de páncreas y tienen un mejor pronóstico que los otros tipos exocrinos. El pancreatoblastoma es una forma rara, que se presenta principalmente en la infancia y tiene un pronóstico relativamente bueno.

Otros cánceres exocrinos incluyen carcinomas adenoescamosos, carcinomas de células en anillo de sello, carcinomas hepatoides, carcinomas coloides, carcinomas indiferenciados y carcinomas indiferenciados con células gigantes similares a osteoclastos.

El tumor sólido pseudopapilar es una neoplasia rara de bajo grado que afecta principalmente a mujeres jóvenes y, en general, tiene un pronóstico muy bueno. Las neoplasias quísticas mucinosas pancreáticas son un grupo amplio de tumores de páncreas que tienen un potencial maligno variable.

Se están detectando a un ritmo mucho mayor a medida que las tomografías computarizadas se vuelven más poderosas y comunes, y continúa la discusión sobre la mejor manera de evaluarlas y tratarlas, dado que muchas son benignas.


=== Neuroendocrino ===


La pequeña minoría de tumores que surgen en otras partes del páncreas son principalmente tumores neuroendocrinos pancreáticos (PanNET).

Los tumores neuroendocrinos (NET) son un grupo diverso de tumores benignos o malignos que surgen de las células neuroendocrinas del cuerpo, que son responsables de integrar los sistemas nervioso y endocrino.

Los NET pueden comenzar en la mayoría de los órganos del cuerpo, incluido el páncreas, donde los diversos tipos malignos se consideran raros.

Los PanNET se agrupan en tipos "funcionales" y "no funcionales", según el grado en que producen hormonas.

Los tipos funcionales secretan hormonas como la insulina, la gastrina y el glucagón en el torrente sanguíneo, a menudo en grandes cantidades, lo que da lugar a síntomas graves, como un nivel bajo de azúcar en la sangre, pero también favorece una detección relativamente temprana.

Los PanNET funcionales más comunes son los insulinomas y los gastrinomas, llamados así por las hormonas que secretan.

Los tipos no funcionantes no secretan hormonas en una cantidad suficiente para dar lugar a síntomas clínicos evidentes, por lo que los PanNET no funcionantes a menudo se diagnostican solo después de que el cáncer se ha diseminado a otras partes del cuerpo. Al igual que con otros tumores neuroendocrinos, la historia de la terminología y La clasificación de las PanNET es compleja.

Los PanNET a veces se denominan "cánceres de células de los islotes", aunque ahora se sabe que en realidad no surgen de las células de los islotes como se pensaba anteriormente.


== Signos y síntomas ==


Dado que el cáncer de páncreas generalmente no causa síntomas reconocibles en sus primeras etapas, la enfermedad generalmente no se diagnostica hasta que se ha propagado más allá del páncreas.

Esta es una de las principales razones de las tasas de supervivencia generalmente bajas.

Las excepciones a esto son los PanNET funcionales, en los que la producción excesiva de varias hormonas activas puede dar lugar a síntomas (que dependen del tipo de hormona). Teniendo en cuenta que la enfermedad rara vez se diagnostica antes de los 40 años, los síntomas comunes de la enfermedad pancreática El adenocarcinoma que se presenta antes del diagnóstico incluye:

Dolor en la parte superior del abdomen o en la espalda, que a menudo se extiende desde alrededor del estómago hasta la espalda.

La ubicación del dolor puede indicar la parte del páncreas donde se encuentra un tumor.

El dolor puede empeorar por la noche y puede aumentar con el tiempo hasta volverse intenso e incesante.

Puede aliviarse un poco al inclinarse hacia adelante.

En el Reino Unido, aproximadamente la mitad de los casos nuevos de cáncer de páncreas se diagnostican después de una visita al departamento de emergencias de un hospital por dolor o ictericia.

En hasta dos tercios de las personas, el dolor abdominal es el síntoma principal, para el 46% del total acompañado de ictericia, con un 13% con ictericia sin dolor.
La ictericia, un tinte amarillo en el blanco de los ojos o la piel, con o sin dolor, y posiblemente en combinación con orina oscura, se produce cuando un cáncer en la cabeza del páncreas obstruye el conducto biliar común a su paso por el páncreas.
Pérdida de peso inexplicable, ya sea por pérdida de apetito o pérdida de la función exocrina que resulta en mala digestión.
El tumor puede comprimir órganos vecinos, interrumpiendo los procesos digestivos y dificultando el vaciado del estómago, lo que puede causar náuseas y sensación de saciedad.

La grasa no digerida conduce a heces grasosas y malolientes que son difíciles de eliminar.

El estreñimiento también es común.
Al menos el 50 % de las personas con adenocarcinoma de páncreas tienen diabetes en el momento del diagnóstico.

Si bien la diabetes de larga data es un factor de riesgo conocido para el cáncer de páncreas (consulte Factores de riesgo), el cáncer en sí mismo puede causar diabetes, en cuyo caso la aparición reciente de diabetes podría considerarse un signo temprano de la enfermedad.

Las personas mayores de 50 años que desarrollan diabetes tienen ocho veces el riesgo habitual de desarrollar adenocarcinoma de páncreas en un plazo de tres años, después de lo cual el riesgo relativo disminuye.


=== Otros hallazgos ===

El síndrome de Trousseau, en el que se forman espontáneamente coágulos de sangre en los vasos sanguíneos porta (trombosis de la vena porta), las venas profundas de las extremidades (trombosis venosa profunda) o las venas superficiales (trombosis venosa superficial) en cualquier parte del cuerpo, puede estar asociado con cáncer de páncreas, y se encuentra en alrededor del 10% de los casos.
La depresión clínica se ha informado en asociación con el cáncer de páncreas en alrededor del 10 al 20% de los casos y puede ser un obstáculo para el manejo óptimo.

La depresión a veces aparece antes del diagnóstico de cáncer, lo que sugiere que puede ser provocada por la biología de la enfermedad. Otras manifestaciones comunes de la enfermedad incluyen debilidad y cansancio fácil, boca seca, problemas para dormir y una masa abdominal palpable.


=== Síntomas de propagación ===


La propagación del cáncer de páncreas a otros órganos (metástasis) también puede causar síntomas.

Por lo general, el adenocarcinoma de páncreas primero se disemina a los ganglios linfáticos cercanos y luego al hígado oa la cavidad peritoneal, el intestino grueso o los pulmones.

Con poca frecuencia, se propaga a los huesos o al cerebro. Los cánceres de páncreas también pueden ser cánceres secundarios que se han propagado desde otras partes del cuerpo.

Esto es poco común, se encuentra en solo alrededor del 2% de los casos de cáncer de páncreas.

El cáncer de riñón es, con mucho, el cáncer más común que se disemina al páncreas, seguido del cáncer colorrectal y luego los cánceres de piel, mama y pulmón.

La cirugía se puede realizar en el páncreas en tales casos, ya sea con la esperanza de una cura o para aliviar los síntomas.


== Factores de riesgo ==

Los factores de riesgo para el adenocarcinoma de páncreas incluyen:
Edad, sexo y origen étnico: el riesgo de desarrollar cáncer de páncreas aumenta con la edad.

La mayoría de los casos ocurren después de los 65 años, mientras que los casos antes de los 40 años son poco comunes.

La enfermedad es ligeramente más común en hombres que en mujeres.

En los Estados Unidos, es 1,5 veces más común en los afroamericanos, aunque la incidencia en África es baja.
Fumar cigarrillos es el factor de riesgo evitable mejor establecido para el cáncer de páncreas, aproximadamente duplicando el riesgo entre los fumadores a largo plazo, el riesgo aumenta con la cantidad de cigarrillos fumados y los años de tabaquismo.

El riesgo disminuye lentamente después de dejar de fumar, tardando unos 20 años en volver casi al de los no fumadores.
Obesidad: un índice de masa corporal superior a 35 aumenta el riesgo relativo a la mitad.
Antecedentes familiares: entre el 5 y el 10 % de los casos de cáncer de páncreas tienen un componente hereditario, en el que las personas tienen antecedentes familiares de cáncer de páncreas.

El riesgo aumenta mucho si más de un familiar de primer grado ha tenido la enfermedad, y más modestamente si la desarrollaron antes de los 50 años.

La mayoría de los genes implicados no han sido identificados.

La pancreatitis hereditaria aumenta mucho el riesgo de por vida de cáncer de páncreas de 30 a 40 % hasta los 70 años.

Se puede ofrecer la detección del cáncer de páncreas temprano a las personas con pancreatitis hereditaria con base en la investigación.

Algunas personas pueden optar por la extirpación quirúrgica del páncreas para evitar que se desarrolle cáncer en el futuro. El cáncer de páncreas se ha asociado con estos otros síndromes hereditarios raros: Síndrome de Peutz-Jeghers debido a mutaciones en el gen supresor de tumores STK11 (muy raro, pero un factor de riesgo muy fuerte); síndrome de nevus displásico (o síndrome de melanoma y lunares múltiples atípicos familiares, FAMMM-PC) debido a mutaciones en el gen supresor de tumores CDKN2A; ataxia-telangiectasia autosómica recesiva y mutaciones autosómicas dominantes heredadas en los genes BRCA2 y PALB2; cáncer de colon hereditario sin poliposis (síndrome de Lynch); y poliposis adenomatosa familiar.

Los PanNET se han asociado con la neoplasia endocrina múltiple tipo 1 (MEN1) y los síndromes de von Hippel Lindau. La pancreatitis crónica parece casi triplicar el riesgo y, al igual que con la diabetes, la pancreatitis de inicio reciente puede ser un síntoma de un tumor.

El riesgo de cáncer de páncreas en personas con pancreatitis familiar es particularmente alto.
La diabetes mellitus es un factor de riesgo para el cáncer de páncreas y (como se indica en la sección Signos y síntomas), la diabetes de inicio reciente también puede ser un signo temprano de la enfermedad.

Las personas a las que se les ha diagnosticado diabetes tipo 2 durante más de 10 años pueden tener un riesgo un 50 % mayor, en comparación con las personas sin diabetes.

En 2021, Venturi informó que el páncreas es capaz de absorber en gran cantidad cesio radiactivo (Cs-134 y Cs-137) causando pancreatitis crónica y probablemente cáncer de páncreas con daño de las islas pancreáticas, causando diabetes tipo 3c (pancreatogénica).

La pancreatitis crónica, el cáncer de páncreas y la diabetes mellitus aumentaron en la población contaminada, particularmente en niños y adolescentes, después de los incidentes nucleares de Fukushima y Chernóbil.

Al mismo tiempo, las enfermedades pancreáticas, la diabetes y el cesio radiactivo ambiental en todo el mundo están aumentando.
No se ha demostrado claramente que tipos específicos de alimentos (a diferencia de la obesidad) aumenten el riesgo de cáncer de páncreas.

Los factores dietéticos para los cuales alguna evidencia muestra un riesgo ligeramente mayor incluyen la carne procesada, la carne roja y la carne cocinada a temperaturas muy altas (p. ej., frita, asada oa la parrilla).


=== Alcohol ===

Beber alcohol en exceso es una de las principales causas de pancreatitis crónica, que a su vez predispone al cáncer de páncreas, pero una cantidad considerable de investigaciones no ha logrado establecer firmemente que el consumo de alcohol sea un factor de riesgo directo para el cáncer de páncreas.

En general, la asociación es consistentemente débil y la mayoría de los estudios no han encontrado asociación, siendo el tabaquismo un fuerte factor de confusión.

La evidencia es más fuerte para un vínculo con el consumo excesivo de alcohol, de al menos seis tragos por día.


== Fisiopatología ==



=== Precáncer ===


Se cree que los cánceres exocrinos surgen de varios tipos de lesiones precancerosas dentro del páncreas, pero estas lesiones no siempre progresan hasta convertirse en cáncer, y no todos los números detectados como subproducto del uso creciente de tomografías computarizadas por otras razones son tratados.

Aparte de los cistoadenomas serosos pancreáticos, que casi siempre son benignos, se reconocen cuatro tipos de lesiones precancerosas.
El primero es la neoplasia intraepitelial pancreática.

Estas lesiones son anomalías microscópicas en el páncreas y, a menudo, se encuentran en autopsias de personas sin cáncer diagnosticado.

Estas lesiones pueden progresar de bajo a alto grado y luego a un tumor.

Más del 90 % de los casos en todos los grados portan un gen KRAS defectuoso, mientras que en los grados 2 y 3 se encuentran cada vez con mayor frecuencia daños en otros tres genes: CDKN2A (p16), p53 y SMAD4. Un segundo tipo es el gen papilar intraductal. neoplasia mucinosa (IPMN).

Estas son lesiones macroscópicas, que se encuentran en aproximadamente el 2% de todos los adultos.

Esta tasa aumenta a alrededor del 10% a los 70 años.

Estas lesiones tienen alrededor de un 25% de riesgo de convertirse en cáncer invasivo.

Pueden tener mutaciones en el gen KRAS (40-65% de los casos) y en la subunidad alfa Gs GNAS y RNF43, afectando la vía de señalización Wnt.

Incluso si se extirpa quirúrgicamente, sigue habiendo un riesgo considerablemente mayor de que se desarrolle cáncer de páncreas posteriormente. El tercer tipo, la neoplasia quística mucinosa pancreática (MCN), ocurre principalmente en mujeres y puede permanecer benigna o progresar a cáncer.

Si estas lesiones se agrandan, causan síntomas o tienen características sospechosas, por lo general se pueden extirpar con éxito mediante cirugía. Un cuarto tipo de cáncer que surge en el páncreas es la neoplasia tubulopapilar intraductal.

Este tipo fue reconocido por la OMS en 2010 y constituye alrededor del 1-3% de todas las neoplasias pancreáticas.

La edad media en el momento del diagnóstico es de 61 años (rango 35-78 años).

Alrededor del 50% de estas lesiones se vuelven invasivas.

El diagnóstico depende de la histología, ya que estas lesiones son muy difíciles de diferenciar de otras lesiones tanto clínicas como radiológicas.


=== Cáncer invasivo ===

Los eventos genéticos encontrados en el adenocarcinoma ductal se han caracterizado bien y se ha realizado la secuenciación completa del exoma para los tipos comunes de tumor.

Se ha encontrado que cuatro genes están mutados en la mayoría de los adenocarcinomas: KRAS (en el 95 % de los casos), CDKN2A (también en el 95 %), TP53 (75 %) y SMAD4 (55 %).

El último de ellos se asocia especialmente a un mal pronóstico.

Las mutaciones/deleciones de SWI/SNF ocurren en cerca de 10 a 15% de los adenocarcinomas.

También se han investigado las alteraciones genéticas en varios otros tipos de cáncer de páncreas y lesiones precancerosas.

Los análisis transcriptómicos y la secuenciación del ARNm para las formas comunes de cáncer de páncreas han encontrado que el 75 % de los genes humanos se expresan en los tumores, con unos 200 genes expresados ​​más específicamente en el cáncer de páncreas en comparación con otros tipos de tumores.


=== PanNET ===

Los genes que a menudo se encuentran mutados en PanNET son diferentes de los del cáncer de páncreas exocrino.

Por ejemplo, la mutación KRAS normalmente está ausente.

En cambio, las mutaciones genéticas hereditarias de MEN1 dan lugar al síndrome de MEN1, en el que se producen tumores primarios en dos o más glándulas endocrinas.

Alrededor del 40% al 70% de las personas que nacen con una mutación MEN1 eventualmente desarrollan PanNet.

Otros genes que mutan con frecuencia incluyen DAXX, mTOR y ATRX.


== Diagnóstico ==


Los síntomas del adenocarcinoma de páncreas no suelen aparecer en las primeras etapas de la enfermedad y no son distintivos individuales de la enfermedad.

Los síntomas en el momento del diagnóstico varían según la ubicación del cáncer en el páncreas, que los anatomistas dividen (de izquierda a derecha en la mayoría de los diagramas) en la cabeza gruesa, el cuello y el cuerpo ahusado, que termina en la cola.
Independientemente de la ubicación del tumor, el síntoma más común es la pérdida de peso inexplicable, que puede ser considerable.

Una gran minoría (entre el 35% y el 47%) de las personas diagnosticadas con la enfermedad habrá tenido náuseas, vómitos o sensación de debilidad.

Los tumores en la cabeza del páncreas generalmente también causan ictericia, dolor, pérdida de apetito, orina oscura y heces de color claro.

Los tumores en el cuerpo y la cola generalmente también causan dolor. Las personas a veces tienen un inicio reciente de diabetes tipo 2 atípica que es difícil de controlar, antecedentes de inflamación reciente pero inexplicable de los vasos sanguíneos causada por coágulos sanguíneos (tromboflebitis) conocida como signo de Trousseau, o un Ataque previo de pancreatitis.

Un médico puede sospechar cáncer de páncreas cuando la aparición de diabetes en una persona mayor de 50 años se acompaña de síntomas típicos como pérdida de peso inexplicable, dolor abdominal o de espalda persistente, indigestión, vómitos o heces grasas.

La ictericia acompañada de una vesícula biliar inflamada sin dolor (conocida como signo de Courvoisier) también puede generar sospechas y puede ayudar a diferenciar el cáncer de páncreas de los cálculos biliares. el diagnóstico y para ayudar a decidir si el tumor se puede extirpar quirúrgicamente (su "resectabilidad").

En la tomografía computarizada con contraste, el cáncer de páncreas generalmente muestra una captación de contraste radiológico que aumenta gradualmente, en lugar de un lavado rápido como se observa en un páncreas normal o un lavado tardío como se observa en la pancreatitis crónica.

También se pueden utilizar imágenes por resonancia magnética y tomografía por emisión de positrones, y la colangiopancreatografía por resonancia magnética puede ser útil en algunos casos.

La ecografía abdominal es menos sensible y no detectará tumores pequeños, pero puede identificar cánceres que se han propagado al hígado y acumulación de líquido en la cavidad peritoneal (ascitis).

Puede utilizarse para un primer examen rápido y económico antes de otras técnicas.

Se puede usar una biopsia por aspiración con aguja fina, a menudo guiada por ecografía endoscópica, cuando existe incertidumbre sobre el diagnóstico, pero generalmente no se requiere un diagnóstico histológico para continuar con la extirpación del tumor mediante cirugía. Las pruebas de función hepática pueden mostrar una combinación de resultados indicativos de obstrucción del conducto biliar (niveles elevados de bilirrubina conjugada, γ-glutamil transpeptidasa y fosfatasa alcalina).

CA19-9 (antígeno carbohidrato 19.9) es un marcador tumoral que frecuentemente está elevado en el cáncer de páncreas.

Sin embargo, carece de sensibilidad y especificidad, sobre todo porque el 5% de las personas carecen del antígeno Lewis (a) y no pueden producir CA19-9.

Tiene una sensibilidad del 80% y una especificidad del 73% para detectar adenocarcinoma de páncreas, y se utiliza para el seguimiento de casos conocidos más que para el diagnóstico.


=== Histopatología ===

La forma más común de cáncer de páncreas (adenocarcinoma) se caracteriza típicamente por estructuras glandulares moderadamente diferenciadas en el examen microscópico.

Por lo general, hay una desmoplasia considerable o formación de un estroma fibroso denso o tejido estructural que consta de una variedad de tipos de células (incluidos miofibroblastos, macrófagos, linfocitos y mastocitos) y material depositado (como colágeno tipo I y ácido hialurónico).

Esto crea un microambiente tumoral que carece de vasos sanguíneos (hipovascular) y, por lo tanto, de oxígeno (hipoxia tumoral).

Se cree que esto evita que muchos medicamentos de quimioterapia lleguen al tumor, como un factor que hace que el cáncer sea especialmente difícil de tratar.


=== Puesta en escena ===



==== Cánceres exocrinos ====
El cáncer de páncreas generalmente se clasifica en etapas después de una tomografía computarizada.

El sistema de estadificación del cáncer más utilizado para el cáncer de páncreas es el formulado por el Comité Conjunto Estadounidense sobre el Cáncer (AJCC) junto con la Unión para el Control Internacional del Cáncer (UICC).

El sistema de estadificación AJCC-UICC designa cuatro etapas generales principales, que van desde la enfermedad temprana hasta la avanzada, según la clasificación TNM del tamaño del tumor, la diseminación a los ganglios linfáticos y la metástasis. Para ayudar a decidir el tratamiento, los tumores también se dividen en tres categorías más amplias según sobre si la extirpación quirúrgica parece posible: de esta manera, los tumores se juzgan como "resecable", "límite resecable" o "no resecable".

Cuando la enfermedad aún se encuentra en una etapa temprana (estadios I y II de AJCC-UICC), sin diseminación a vasos sanguíneos grandes u órganos distantes como el hígado o los pulmones, normalmente se puede realizar una resección quirúrgica del tumor, si el paciente lo desea. someterse a esta operación principal y se cree que está lo suficientemente apto. El sistema de estadificación AJCC-UICC permite distinguir entre los tumores en estadio III que se consideran "límite resecables" (donde la cirugía es técnicamente factible porque el eje celíaco y la arteria mesentérica superior aún están libres) y los que son "irresecables" (debido a una enfermedad localmente más avanzada); en términos de la clasificación TNM más detallada, estos dos grupos corresponden a T3 y T4 respectivamente.
Estadificación del cáncer de páncreas (clasificación TNM)
 
 
 
 
 

Los adenocarcinomas localmente avanzados se diseminaron a los órganos vecinos, que pueden ser cualquiera de los siguientes (en orden decreciente de frecuencia): el duodeno, el estómago, el colon transverso, el bazo, la glándula suprarrenal o el riñón.

Con mucha frecuencia, también se diseminan a los vasos sanguíneos o linfáticos importantes y a los nervios que corren cerca del páncreas, lo que dificulta mucho la cirugía.

Los sitios típicos para la diseminación metastásica (enfermedad en etapa IV) son el hígado, la cavidad peritoneal y los pulmones, todos los cuales ocurren en el 50% o más de los casos completamente avanzados.


==== PanNET ====
La clasificación de tumores del sistema digestivo de la OMS de 2010 clasifica todos los tumores neuroendocrinos pancreáticos (PanNET) en tres categorías, según su grado de diferenciación celular (desde "NET G1" hasta el pobremente diferenciado "NET G3").

Los Estados Unidos

National Comprehensive Cancer Network recomienda el uso del mismo sistema de estadificación AJCC-UICC que el adenocarcinoma de páncreas.: 52 Con este esquema, los resultados etapa por etapa de los PanNET son diferentes a los de los cánceres exocrinos.

La Sociedad Europea de Tumores Neuroendocrinos ha propuesto un sistema TNM diferente para PanNET.


== Prevención y detección ==

Además de no fumar, la Sociedad Estadounidense del Cáncer recomienda mantener un peso saludable y aumentar el consumo de frutas, verduras y granos integrales, mientras se disminuye el consumo de carnes rojas y procesadas, aunque no hay evidencia consistente de que esto prevenga o reduzca específicamente el cáncer de páncreas. .

Una revisión de investigaciones de 2014 concluyó que había pruebas de que el consumo de frutas cítricas y curcumina reducía el riesgo de cáncer de páncreas, mientras que los cereales integrales, el folato, el selenio y el pescado no frito posiblemente tenían un efecto beneficioso. de grupos grandes no se considera eficaz y puede ser perjudicial a partir de 2019, aunque se están evaluando técnicas más nuevas y la detección de grupos específicos.

Sin embargo, se recomiendan exámenes de detección regulares con ecografía endoscópica y resonancia magnética/tomografía computarizada para las personas con alto riesgo de herencia genética.


== Gestión ==



=== Cáncer exocrino ===

Una evaluación clave que se realiza después del diagnóstico es si es posible la extirpación quirúrgica del tumor (ver Estadificación), ya que esta es la única cura para este cáncer.

El hecho de que se pueda ofrecer o no la resección quirúrgica depende de cuánto se haya propagado el cáncer.

La ubicación exacta del tumor también es un factor importante, y la TC puede mostrar cómo se relaciona con los principales vasos sanguíneos que pasan cerca del páncreas.

También se debe evaluar el estado de salud general de la persona, aunque la edad en sí misma no es un obstáculo para la cirugía. Es probable que se ofrezca quimioterapia y, en menor medida, radioterapia a la mayoría de las personas, sea posible o no la cirugía.

Los especialistas aconsejan que el manejo del cáncer de páncreas debe estar en manos de un equipo multidisciplinario que incluya especialistas en varios aspectos de la oncología y, por lo tanto, es mejor realizarlo en centros más grandes.


==== Cirugía ====

La cirugía con la intención de curar solo es posible en alrededor de una quinta parte (20%) de los casos nuevos.

Aunque las tomografías computarizadas ayudan, en la práctica puede ser difícil determinar si el tumor se puede extirpar por completo (su "resectabilidad"), y solo durante la cirugía puede ser evidente que no es posible extirpar el tumor con éxito sin dañar otros tejidos vitales. .

El hecho de que se pueda ofrecer o no la resección quirúrgica depende de varios factores, incluido el grado preciso de adyacencia anatómica local a los vasos sanguíneos venosos o arteriales, o la afectación de los mismos, así como la experiencia quirúrgica y una consideración cuidadosa de la recuperación postoperatoria proyectada.

La edad de la persona no es en sí misma una razón para no operar, pero su estado funcional general debe ser adecuado para una operación mayor. Una característica particular que se evalúa es la presencia alentadora, o la ausencia desalentadora, de una capa o plano claro. de grasa creando una barrera entre el tumor y los vasos.

Tradicionalmente, se hace una evaluación de la proximidad del tumor a los principales vasos venosos o arteriales, en términos de "colindancia" (definido como el tumor que toca no más de la mitad de la circunferencia de un vaso sanguíneo sin grasa que lo separe), "recubrimiento" (cuando el tumor encierra la mayor parte de la circunferencia del vaso), o compromiso total del vaso.: 22 Una resección que incluye secciones recubiertas de vasos sanguíneos puede ser posible en algunos casos, particularmente si la terapia neoadyuvante preliminar es factible, usando quimioterapia: 36 y/o radioterapia. : 29–30 Incluso cuando la operación parece haber tenido éxito, a menudo se encuentran células cancerosas alrededor de los bordes ("márgenes") del tejido extirpado, cuando un patólogo las examina microscópicamente (esto siempre se hará), lo que indica que el cáncer ha desaparecido. no ha sido eliminado por completo.

Además, las células madre cancerosas generalmente no son evidentes microscópicamente y, si están presentes, pueden continuar desarrollándose y propagándose.

Por lo tanto, se puede realizar una laparoscopia exploratoria (un pequeño procedimiento quirúrgico guiado por cámara) para tener una idea más clara del resultado de una operación completa.

Para los cánceres que afectan la cabeza del páncreas, el procedimiento de Whipple es el tratamiento quirúrgico curativo que se intenta con más frecuencia.

Esta es una operación importante que consiste en extirpar la cabeza pancreática y la curva del duodeno ("pancreato-duodenectomía"), hacer una derivación para la comida desde el estómago hasta el yeyuno ("gastro-yeyunostomía") y adjuntar un asa de yeyuno. al conducto cístico para drenar la bilis ("colecisto-yeyunostomía").

Se puede realizar solo si es probable que la persona sobreviva a una cirugía mayor y si el cáncer se localiza sin invadir las estructuras locales ni hacer metástasis.

Por lo tanto, sólo puede realizarse en una minoría de casos.

Los cánceres de la cola del páncreas se pueden resecar mediante un procedimiento conocido como pancreatectomía distal, que a menudo también implica la extirpación del bazo.

Hoy en día, esto a menudo se puede hacer mediante cirugía mínimamente invasiva. Aunque la cirugía curativa ya no implica las tasas de mortalidad muy altas que ocurrieron hasta la década de 1980, una alta proporción de personas (alrededor de 30 a 45%) todavía tienen que ser tratadas por un período posterior a la cirugía. enfermedad operativa que no es causada por el cáncer mismo.

La complicación más común de la cirugía es la dificultad para vaciar el estómago.

Ciertos procedimientos quirúrgicos más limitados también se pueden utilizar para aliviar los síntomas (consulte Cuidados paliativos): por ejemplo, si el cáncer invade o comprime el duodeno o el colon.

En tales casos, la cirugía de derivación podría superar la obstrucción y mejorar la calidad de vida, pero no pretende ser una cura.


==== Quimioterapia ====
Después de la cirugía, se puede ofrecer quimioterapia adyuvante con gemcitabina o 5-FU si la persona está lo suficientemente en forma, después de un período de recuperación de uno a dos meses.

En las personas que no son aptas para la cirugía curativa, se puede utilizar la quimioterapia para prolongar la vida o mejorar su calidad.

Antes de la cirugía, se puede usar quimioterapia neoadyuvante o quimiorradioterapia en casos que se consideran "límite de resecabilidad" (ver Estadificación) para reducir el cáncer a un nivel en el que la cirugía podría ser beneficiosa.

En otros casos, la terapia neoadyuvante sigue siendo controvertida porque retrasa la cirugía. La gemcitabina fue aprobada por la Administración de Drogas y Alimentos de los Estados Unidos (FDA) en 1997, después de que un ensayo clínico informara mejoras en la calidad de vida y una mejora de 5 semanas en la mediana de duración de la supervivencia. en personas con cáncer de páncreas avanzado.

Este fue el primer fármaco de quimioterapia aprobado por la FDA principalmente para el punto final de un ensayo clínico de no supervivencia.

La quimioterapia con gemcitabina sola fue el estándar durante aproximadamente una década, ya que varios ensayos que la probaron en combinación con otros medicamentos no lograron demostrar resultados significativamente mejores.

Sin embargo, se descubrió que la combinación de gemcitabina con erlotinib aumentaba modestamente la supervivencia, y la FDA autorizó el uso de erlotinib en el cáncer de páncreas en 2005. Se encontró que el régimen de quimioterapia FOLFIRINOX que usa cuatro medicamentos es más efectivo que la gemcitabina, pero con efectos secundarios considerables. y, por lo tanto, solo es adecuado para personas con un buen estado funcional.

Lo mismo ocurre con el paclitaxel unido a proteínas (nab-paclitaxel), que fue autorizado por la FDA en 2013 para su uso con gemcitabina en el cáncer de páncreas.

A fines de 2013, tanto FOLFIRINOX como nab-paclitaxel con gemcitabina se consideraban buenas opciones para quienes podían tolerar los efectos secundarios, y la gemcitabina seguía siendo una opción eficaz para quienes no los toleraban.

Se espera un ensayo directo entre las dos nuevas opciones y continúan los ensayos que investigan otras variaciones.

Sin embargo, los cambios de los últimos años solo han aumentado los tiempos de supervivencia en unos pocos meses.

A menudo se realizan ensayos clínicos para nuevas terapias adyuvantes.


==== Radioterapia ====
El papel de la radioterapia como tratamiento auxiliar (adyuvante) después de una cirugía potencialmente curativa ha sido controvertido desde la década de 1980.

A principios de la década de 2000, el Grupo de estudio europeo para la investigación del cáncer de páncreas (ESPAC) demostró la superioridad pronóstica de la quimioterapia adyuvante sobre la quimiorradioterapia.

La Sociedad Europea de Oncología Médica recomienda que la radioterapia adyuvante solo se use en personas inscritas en ensayos clínicos.

Sin embargo, existe una tendencia continua de que los médicos de los EE. UU. estén más dispuestos a utilizar la radioterapia adyuvante que los de Europa.

Muchos ensayos clínicos han probado una variedad de combinaciones de tratamiento desde la década de 1980, pero no han logrado resolver el asunto de manera concluyente. La radioterapia puede formar parte del tratamiento para intentar reducir un tumor a un estado resecable, pero su uso en tumores irresecables sigue siendo controvertido ya que son resultados contradictorios de los ensayos clínicos.

Los resultados preliminares de un ensayo, presentado en 2013, "redujeron notablemente el entusiasmo" por su uso en tumores localmente avanzados.


=== PanNET ===


El tratamiento de los PanNET, incluidos los tipos malignos menos comunes, puede incluir varios enfoques.

Algunos pequeños tumores de menos de 1 cm. que se identifican de manera incidental, por ejemplo, en una tomografía computarizada realizada para otros fines, puede ser seguido por una conducta expectante.

Esto depende del riesgo evaluado de la cirugía, que está influenciado por el sitio del tumor y la presencia de otros problemas médicos.

Los tumores dentro del páncreas únicamente (tumores localizados) o con metástasis limitadas, por ejemplo, en el hígado, pueden extirparse mediante cirugía.

El tipo de cirugía depende de la ubicación del tumor y del grado de diseminación a los ganglios linfáticos. Para los tumores localizados, el procedimiento quirúrgico puede ser mucho menos extenso que los tipos de cirugía utilizados para tratar el adenocarcinoma de páncreas descritos anteriormente, pero por lo demás, los procedimientos quirúrgicos son similares. a los de tumores exocrinos.

La gama de posibles resultados varía mucho; algunos tipos tienen una tasa de supervivencia muy alta después de la cirugía, mientras que otros tienen un mal pronóstico.

Como todo este grupo es raro, las guías enfatizan que el tratamiento debe realizarse en un centro especializado.

Se puede considerar el uso de un trasplante de hígado en ciertos casos de metástasis en el hígado. Para los tumores funcionales, la clase de medicamentos análogos de la somatostatina, como la octreotida, pueden reducir la producción excesiva de hormonas.

La lanreotida puede retrasar el crecimiento del tumor.

Si el tumor no es susceptible de extirpación quirúrgica y está causando síntomas, la terapia dirigida con everolimus o sunitinib puede reducir los síntomas y retrasar la progresión de la enfermedad.

La quimioterapia citotóxica estándar generalmente no es muy eficaz para los PanNET, pero se puede usar cuando otros tratamientos farmacológicos no logran prevenir el progreso de la enfermedad, o en cánceres PanNET mal diferenciados. La radioterapia se usa ocasionalmente si hay dolor debido a la extensión anatómica, como metástasis al hueso.

Algunos PanNET absorben péptidos u hormonas específicos, y estos PanNET pueden responder a la terapia de medicina nuclear con péptidos u hormonas radiomarcados como el iobenguano (yodo-131-MIBG).

También se pueden utilizar la ablación por radiofrecuencia (RFA), la crioablación y la embolización de la arteria hepática.


=== Cuidados paliativos ===

Los cuidados paliativos son cuidados médicos que se centran en el tratamiento de los síntomas de enfermedades graves, como el cáncer, y en mejorar la calidad de vida.

Debido a que el adenocarcinoma de páncreas generalmente se diagnostica después de que ha progresado a una etapa avanzada, los cuidados paliativos como tratamiento de los síntomas suelen ser el único tratamiento posible. Los cuidados paliativos no se enfocan en tratar el cáncer subyacente, sino en tratar síntomas como dolor o náuseas, y puede ayudar en la toma de decisiones, incluso cuándo o si el cuidado de hospicio será beneficioso.

El dolor se puede controlar con medicamentos como los opioides o mediante una intervención de procedimiento, mediante un bloqueo nervioso en el plexo celíaco (CPB).

Esto altera o, según la técnica utilizada, destruye los nervios que transmiten el dolor desde el abdomen.

La CEC es una forma segura y eficaz de reducir el dolor, lo que generalmente reduce la necesidad de usar analgésicos opioides, que tienen importantes efectos secundarios negativos. Otros síntomas o complicaciones que pueden tratarse con cirugía paliativa son la obstrucción por el tumor de los intestinos o la bilis. conductos

Para este último, que ocurre en más de la mitad de los casos, se puede insertar un pequeño tubo de metal llamado stent por endoscopio para mantener el drenaje de los conductos.

Los cuidados paliativos también pueden ayudar a tratar la depresión que a menudo viene con el diagnóstico de cáncer de páncreas. Tanto la cirugía como los tumores inoperables avanzados a menudo conducen a trastornos del sistema digestivo debido a la falta de productos exocrinos del páncreas (insuficiencia exocrina).

Estos pueden tratarse tomando pancreatina, que contiene enzimas pancreáticas fabricadas, y es mejor tomarla con alimentos.

La dificultad para vaciar el estómago (vaciamiento gástrico retardado) es común y puede ser un problema grave que implica hospitalización.

El tratamiento puede involucrar una variedad de enfoques, incluido el drenaje del estómago mediante aspiración nasogástrica y medicamentos llamados inhibidores de la bomba de protones o antagonistas H2, que reducen la producción de ácido gástrico.

Los medicamentos como la metoclopramida también se pueden usar para limpiar el contenido del estómago.


== Resultados ==

El adenocarcinoma de páncreas y los otros cánceres exocrinos menos comunes tienen un pronóstico muy malo, ya que normalmente se diagnostican en una etapa tardía cuando el cáncer ya está localmente avanzado o se ha extendido a otras partes del cuerpo.

Los resultados son mucho mejores para los PanNET: muchos son benignos y completamente asintomáticos, e incluso aquellos casos que no se pueden tratar con cirugía tienen una tasa de supervivencia promedio de cinco años del 16 %, aunque el pronóstico varía considerablemente según el tipo. Para los adenocarcinomas de páncreas metastásicos, que en conjunto representan más del 80 % de los casos, numerosos ensayos que comparan los regímenes de quimioterapia han mostrado un aumento de los tiempos de supervivencia, pero no a más de un año.

La supervivencia general a cinco años para el cáncer de páncreas en los EE. UU. ha mejorado del 2 % en los casos diagnosticados en 1975–1977 y del 4 % en los diagnósticos de 1987–1989 al 6 % en 2003–2009.

En menos del 20 % de los casos de adenocarcinoma de páncreas con un diagnóstico de crecimiento canceroso pequeño y localizado (menos de 2 cm en el estadio T1), alrededor del 20 % de los estadounidenses sobrevive hasta los cinco años. adenocarcinoma.

Estos incluyen genes desfavorables, donde la alta expresión se relaciona con un mal resultado, por ejemplo, C-Met y MUC-1, y genes favorables donde la alta expresión se asocia con una mejor supervivencia, por ejemplo, el factor de transcripción PELP1.


== Distribución ==


En 2015, los cánceres de páncreas de todos los tipos provocaron 411 600 muertes en todo el mundo.

En 2014, se espera que aproximadamente 46 000 personas en los EE. UU. sean diagnosticadas con cáncer de páncreas y 40 000 mueran a causa de él.

Aunque representa solo el 2,5 % de los casos nuevos, el cáncer de páncreas es responsable del 6 % de las muertes por cáncer cada año.

Es la séptima causa de muerte por cáncer en todo el mundo.

El cáncer de páncreas es la quinta causa más común de muerte por cáncer en el Reino Unido y la tercera más común en los Estados Unidos. A nivel mundial, el cáncer de páncreas es el undécimo cáncer más común en mujeres y el duodécimo más común en hombres.

La mayoría de los casos registrados ocurren en países desarrollados.

Las personas de los Estados Unidos tienen un riesgo promedio de por vida de aproximadamente 1 en 67 (o 1,5 %) de desarrollar la enfermedad, un poco más alto que la cifra del Reino Unido.

La enfermedad es más común en hombres que en mujeres, aunque la diferencia en las tasas se ha reducido en las últimas décadas, probablemente reflejando aumentos anteriores en el tabaquismo femenino.

En los Estados Unidos, el riesgo para los afroamericanos es un 50 % mayor que para los blancos, pero las tasas en África y el este de Asia son mucho más bajas que las de América del Norte o Europa.

Los Estados Unidos, Europa central y oriental, y Argentina y Uruguay tienen tasas altas.


=== PanNET ===

La incidencia anual de PanNET clínicamente reconocidos es baja (alrededor de 5 por millón de años-persona) y está dominada por los tipos no funcionales.

Se cree que entre el 45 % y el 90 % de las PanNET son del tipo que no funcionan.

Los estudios de autopsias han descubierto pequeños PanNET con bastante frecuencia, lo que sugiere que la prevalencia de tumores que permanecen inertes y asintomáticos puede ser relativamente alta.

En general, se cree que los PanNET representan alrededor del 1 al 2 % de todos los tumores pancreáticos.

La definición y clasificación de PanNET ha cambiado con el tiempo, afectando lo que se sabe sobre su epidemiología y relevancia clínica.


== Historia ==



=== Reconocimiento y diagnóstico ===

El primer reconocimiento del cáncer de páncreas se ha atribuido al científico italiano del siglo XVIII Giovanni Battista Morgagni, el padre histórico de la patología anatómica moderna, quien afirmó haber rastreado varios casos de cáncer en el páncreas.

Muchos médicos de los siglos XVIII y XIX se mostraron escépticos sobre la existencia de la enfermedad, dada la apariencia similar de la pancreatitis.

Se publicaron algunos informes de casos en las décadas de 1820 y 1830, y finalmente el clínico estadounidense Jacob Mendes Da Costa registró un diagnóstico histopatológico genuino, quien también dudó de la confiabilidad de las interpretaciones de Morgagni.

A principios del siglo XX, el cáncer de la cabeza del páncreas se había convertido en un diagnóstico bien establecido. Con respecto al reconocimiento de PanNET, la posibilidad de cáncer de las células de los islotes se sugirió inicialmente en 1888.

El primer caso de hiperinsulinismo por un tumor de este tipo se informó en 1927.

El reconocimiento de un tipo de PanNET no secretor de insulina se atribuye generalmente a los cirujanos estadounidenses, R.

METRO.

Zollinger y E.

h

Ellison, que dieron nombre al síndrome de Zollinger-Ellison, tras postular la existencia de un tumor pancreático secretor de gastrina en un informe de dos casos de úlceras pépticas inusualmente graves publicado en 1955.

En 2010, la OMS recomendó que los PanNET se denominaran tumores "neuroendocrinos" en lugar de "endocrinos".

Un tipo, la neoplasia mucinosa papilar intraductal (IPMN, por sus siglas en inglés), fue descrita por primera vez por investigadores japoneses en 1982.

En 2010 se señaló que: "Durante la próxima década, se prestó poca atención a este informe; sin embargo, durante los 15 años posteriores, ha habido una explosión virtual en el reconocimiento de este tumor".


=== Cirugía ===

La primera pancreaticoduodenectomía parcial informada fue realizada por el cirujano italiano Alessandro Codivilla en 1898, pero el paciente solo sobrevivió 18 días antes de sucumbir a las complicaciones.

Las primeras operaciones se vieron comprometidas en parte debido a las creencias erróneas de que las personas morirían si se extirpaba el duodeno y también, al principio, si se detenía el flujo de jugos pancreáticos.

Más tarde se pensó, también erróneamente, que el conducto pancreático podía simplemente ligarse sin efectos adversos graves; de hecho, muy a menudo se filtrará más adelante.

En 1907-1908, después de algunas operaciones fallidas por parte de otros cirujanos, cirujanos franceses probaron procedimientos experimentales en cadáveres. En 1912, el cirujano alemán Walther Kausch fue el primero en extirpar grandes partes del duodeno y el páncreas juntos (en bloque).

Esto fue en Breslau, ahora Wrocław en Polonia.

En 1918 se demostró, en operaciones en perros, que es posible sobrevivir incluso después de la extirpación completa del duodeno, pero tal resultado no se informó en cirugía humana hasta 1935, cuando el cirujano estadounidense Allen Oldfather Whipple publicó los resultados de una serie de tres operaciones en el Hospital Presbiteriano de Columbia en Nueva York.

Solo a uno de los pacientes se le extirpó el duodeno por completo, pero sobrevivió durante dos años antes de morir por metástasis en el hígado.
La primera operación no fue planeada, ya que el cáncer solo se descubrió en el quirófano.

El éxito de Whipple mostró el camino para el futuro, pero la operación siguió siendo difícil y peligrosa hasta décadas recientes.

Publicó varios refinamientos de su procedimiento, incluida la primera extirpación total del duodeno en 1940, pero solo realizó un total de 37 operaciones. un proceso cotidiano, ambos mejoraron la supervivencia postoperatoria, pero alrededor del 25% de las personas nunca salieron vivas del hospital hasta la década de 1970.

En la década de 1970, un grupo de cirujanos estadounidenses escribió instando a que el procedimiento era demasiado peligroso y debería abandonarse.

Desde entonces, los resultados en los centros más grandes han mejorado considerablemente y la mortalidad de la operación suele ser inferior al 4 %. En 2006, se publicó un informe de una serie de 1000 duodenectomías pancreáticas consecutivas realizadas por un solo cirujano del Hospital Johns Hopkins entre 1969 y 2003. .

La tasa de estas operaciones aumentó constantemente durante este período, con solo tres de ellas antes de 1980, y el tiempo de operación promedio se redujo de 8,8 horas en la década de 1970 a 5,5 horas en la década de 2000, y la mortalidad dentro de los 30 días o en el hospital fue de solo 1 %

Otra serie de 2050 operaciones en el Hospital General de Massachusetts entre 1941 y 2011 mostró una imagen similar de mejora.


== Direcciones de investigación ==

La investigación en etapa temprana sobre el cáncer de páncreas incluye estudios de genética y detección temprana, tratamiento en diferentes etapas del cáncer, estrategias quirúrgicas y terapias dirigidas, como la inhibición de factores de crecimiento, terapias inmunitarias y vacunas.

Los ácidos biliares pueden tener un papel en la carcinogénesis del cáncer de páncreas. Una pregunta clave es el momento de los eventos a medida que la enfermedad se desarrolla y progresa, en particular el papel de la diabetes y cómo y cuándo se propaga la enfermedad.

El conocimiento de que la nueva aparición de diabetes puede ser un signo temprano de la enfermedad podría facilitar el diagnóstico y la prevención oportunos si se puede desarrollar una estrategia de detección viable.

El ensayo del Registro europeo de pancreatitis hereditaria y cáncer de páncreas familiar (EUROPAC) tiene como objetivo determinar si las pruebas de detección regulares son apropiadas para las personas con antecedentes familiares de la enfermedad. La cirugía mínimamente invasiva (laparoscopia) en lugar del procedimiento de Whipple, particularmente en términos de tiempo de recuperación, está siendo evaluado.

La electroporación irreversible es una técnica de ablación relativamente novedosa con potencial para reducir el estadio y prolongar la supervivencia en personas con enfermedad localmente avanzada, especialmente para tumores en la proximidad de los vasos peripancreáticos sin riesgo de traumatismo vascular. mecanismos para la aparición del cáncer, células madre y proliferación celular.

Otro enfoque implica el uso de inmunoterapia, como virus oncolíticos.

Se están estudiando los mecanismos específicos de galectina del microambiente tumoral.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pancreatic_cancer

;;;PT;;;



CÂNCER DE PÂNCREAS


O câncer de pâncreas surge quando as células do pâncreas, um órgão glandular atrás do estômago, começam a se multiplicar fora de controle e formar uma massa.

Essas células cancerosas têm a capacidade de invadir outras partes do corpo.

São conhecidos vários tipos de câncer pancreático. O mais comum, o adenocarcinoma pancreático, representa cerca de 90% dos casos, e o termo "câncer pancreático" às vezes é usado para se referir apenas a esse tipo.

Esses adenocarcinomas começam na parte do pâncreas que produz enzimas digestivas.

Vários outros tipos de câncer, que coletivamente representam a maioria dos não adenocarcinomas, também podem surgir dessas células.

Cerca de 1 a 2% dos casos de câncer de pâncreas são tumores neuroendócrinos, que surgem das células produtoras de hormônios do pâncreas.

Geralmente são menos agressivos que o adenocarcinoma pancreático. Os sinais e sintomas da forma mais comum de câncer pancreático podem incluir pele amarelada, dor abdominal ou nas costas, perda de peso inexplicável, fezes claras, urina escura e perda de apetite.

Geralmente, nenhum sintoma é observado nos estágios iniciais da doença, e os sintomas que são específicos o suficiente para sugerir câncer de pâncreas geralmente não se desenvolvem até que a doença atinja um estágio avançado.

No momento do diagnóstico, o câncer de pâncreas geralmente se espalhou para outras partes do corpo. O câncer de pâncreas raramente ocorre antes dos 40 anos, e mais da metade dos casos de adenocarcinoma pancreático ocorre em pessoas com mais de 70 anos.

Os fatores de risco para câncer de pâncreas incluem tabagismo, obesidade, diabetes e certas condições genéticas raras.

Cerca de 25% dos casos estão ligados ao tabagismo e 5 a 10% estão ligados a genes herdados.

O câncer de pâncreas geralmente é diagnosticado por uma combinação de técnicas de imagem médica, como ultrassonografia ou tomografia computadorizada, exames de sangue e exame de amostras de tecido (biópsia).

A doença é dividida em fases, desde precoce (estágio I) até tardia (estágio IV).

A triagem da população em geral não se mostrou eficaz. O risco de desenvolver câncer de pâncreas é menor entre não fumantes e pessoas que mantêm um peso saudável e limitam o consumo de carne vermelha ou processada.

As chances de os fumantes desenvolverem a doença diminuem se pararem de fumar e quase voltam à do restante da população após 20 anos.

O câncer de pâncreas pode ser tratado com cirurgia, radioterapia, quimioterapia, cuidados paliativos ou uma combinação destes.

As opções de tratamento são parcialmente baseadas no estágio do câncer.

A cirurgia é o único tratamento que pode curar o adenocarcinoma pancreático e também pode ser feito para melhorar a qualidade de vida sem potencial de cura.

O controle da dor e medicamentos para melhorar a digestão às vezes são necessários.

Os cuidados paliativos precoces são recomendados mesmo para aqueles que recebem tratamento que visa a cura.

O câncer de pâncreas é a quinta causa mais comum de morte por câncer no Reino Unido e a terceira mais comum nos Estados Unidos.

A doença ocorre com mais frequência no mundo desenvolvido, onde se originaram cerca de 70% dos novos casos em 2012.

O adenocarcinoma pancreático normalmente tem um prognóstico muito ruim; após o diagnóstico, 25% das pessoas sobrevivem um ano e 5% vivem por cinco anos.

Para cânceres diagnosticados precocemente, a taxa de sobrevida em cinco anos aumenta para cerca de 20%.

Os cânceres neuroendócrinos têm melhores resultados; cinco anos após o diagnóstico, 65% dos diagnosticados estão vivos, embora a sobrevida varie consideravelmente dependendo do tipo de tumor.


== Tipos ==


Os muitos tipos de câncer de pâncreas podem ser divididos em dois grupos gerais.

A grande maioria dos casos (cerca de 95%) ocorre na parte do pâncreas que produz enzimas digestivas, conhecidas como componente exócrino.

Vários subtipos de câncer de pâncreas exócrino são descritos, mas seu diagnóstico e tratamento têm muito em comum.

A pequena minoria de cânceres que surgem no tecido produtor de hormônios (endócrino) do pâncreas tem características clínicas diferentes e são chamados de tumores neuroendócrinos pancreáticos, às vezes abreviados como "PanNETs".

Ambos os grupos ocorrem principalmente (mas não exclusivamente) em pessoas com mais de 40 anos e são ligeiramente mais comuns em homens, mas alguns subtipos raros ocorrem principalmente em mulheres ou crianças.


=== Cânceres exócrinos ===

O grupo exócrino é dominado pelo adenocarcinoma pancreático (variações deste nome podem acrescentar "invasivo" e "ductal"), que é de longe o tipo mais comum, representando cerca de 85% de todos os cânceres pancreáticos.

Quase todos estes começam nos ductos do pâncreas, como adenocarcinoma ductal pancreático (PDAC).

Isso apesar do fato de que o tecido do qual se origina - o epitélio ductal pancreático - representa menos de 10% do pâncreas em volume celular, porque constitui apenas os ductos (um sistema de ductos extenso, mas semelhante a capilar) dentro o pâncreas.

Esse câncer se origina nos ductos que transportam secreções (como enzimas e bicarbonato) para longe do pâncreas.

Cerca de 60 a 70% dos adenocarcinomas ocorrem na cabeça do pâncreas. O segundo tipo mais comum, o carcinoma de células acinares do pâncreas, surge nos aglomerados de células que produzem essas enzimas e representa 5% dos cânceres de pâncreas exócrino.

Como os cânceres endócrinos 'funcionantes' descritos abaixo, os carcinomas de células acinares podem causar superprodução de certas moléculas, neste caso enzimas digestivas, que podem causar sintomas como erupções cutâneas e dores nas articulações.
Os cistadenocarcinomas representam 1% dos cânceres pancreáticos e apresentam melhor prognóstico que os demais tipos exócrinos. O pancreatoblastoma é uma forma rara, ocorrendo principalmente na infância e com prognóstico relativamente bom.

Outros cânceres exócrinos incluem carcinomas adenoescamosos, carcinomas de células em anel de sinete, carcinomas hepatóides, carcinomas coloides, carcinomas indiferenciados e carcinomas indiferenciados com células gigantes semelhantes a osteoclastos.

O tumor sólido pseudopapilar é uma neoplasia rara de baixo grau que afeta principalmente mulheres mais jovens e geralmente tem um prognóstico muito bom. As neoplasias císticas mucinosas pancreáticas são um amplo grupo de tumores pancreáticos com potencial maligno variável.

Eles estão sendo detectados em uma taxa muito maior à medida que as tomografias se tornam mais poderosas e comuns, e a discussão continua sobre a melhor forma de avaliá-los e tratá-los, já que muitos são benignos.


=== Neuroendócrino ===


A pequena minoria de tumores que surgem em outras partes do pâncreas são principalmente tumores neuroendócrinos pancreáticos (PanNETs).

Os tumores neuroendócrinos (TNEs) são um grupo diversificado de tumores benignos ou malignos que surgem das células neuroendócrinas do corpo, responsáveis ​​pela integração dos sistemas nervoso e endócrino.

Os TNEs podem começar na maioria dos órgãos do corpo, incluindo o pâncreas, onde os vários tipos malignos são considerados raros.

Os PanNETs são agrupados em tipos 'funcionantes' e 'não funcionais', dependendo do grau em que produzem hormônios.

Os tipos funcionais secretam hormônios como insulina, gastrina e glucagon na corrente sanguínea, muitas vezes em grandes quantidades, dando origem a sintomas graves, como baixo nível de açúcar no sangue, mas também favorecendo a detecção relativamente precoce.

Os PanNETs funcionais mais comuns são os insulinomas e os gastrinomas, assim chamados devido aos hormônios que secretam.

Os tipos não funcionais não secretam hormônios em quantidade suficiente para dar origem a sintomas clínicos evidentes, de modo que os PanNETs não funcionais são frequentemente diagnosticados somente após o câncer se espalhar para outras partes do corpo. classificação de PanNETs é complexa.

PanNETs às vezes são chamados de "câncer de células de ilhotas", embora agora sejam conhecidos por não surgirem de células de ilhotas como se pensava anteriormente.


== Sinais e sintomas ==


Como o câncer de pâncreas geralmente não causa sintomas reconhecíveis em seus estágios iniciais, a doença geralmente não é diagnosticada até que se espalhe além do próprio pâncreas.

Esta é uma das principais razões para as taxas de sobrevivência geralmente baixas.

Exceções a isso são os PanNETs funcionais, onde a superprodução de vários hormônios ativos pode dar origem a sintomas (que dependem do tipo de hormônio). adenocarcinoma que ocorre antes do diagnóstico incluem:

Dor na parte superior do abdômen ou nas costas, geralmente se espalhando do estômago para as costas.

A localização da dor pode indicar a parte do pâncreas onde o tumor está localizado.

A dor pode ser pior à noite e pode aumentar ao longo do tempo para se tornar grave e incessante.

Pode ser ligeiramente aliviado dobrando-se para a frente.

No Reino Unido, cerca de metade dos novos casos de câncer de pâncreas são diagnosticados após uma visita ao pronto-socorro de um hospital por dor ou icterícia.

Em até dois terços das pessoas, a dor abdominal é o principal sintoma, para 46% do total acompanhada de icterícia, sendo que 13% apresentam icterícia sem dor.
A icterícia, uma coloração amarelada no branco dos olhos ou da pele, com ou sem dor, e possivelmente em combinação com a urina escurecida, ocorre quando um câncer na cabeça do pâncreas obstrui o ducto biliar comum à medida que atravessa o pâncreas.
Perda de peso inexplicável, seja por perda de apetite ou perda de função exócrina, resultando em má digestão.
O tumor pode comprimir órgãos vizinhos, interrompendo os processos digestivos e dificultando o esvaziamento do estômago, o que pode causar náuseas e sensação de saciedade.

A gordura não digerida leva a fezes fétidas e gordurosas que são difíceis de eliminar.

A constipação também é comum.
Pelo menos 50% das pessoas com adenocarcinoma pancreático têm diabetes no momento do diagnóstico.

Embora o diabetes de longa data seja um fator de risco conhecido para câncer de pâncreas (consulte Fatores de risco), o próprio câncer pode causar diabetes, caso em que o início recente do diabetes pode ser considerado um sinal precoce da doença.

Pessoas com mais de 50 anos que desenvolvem diabetes têm oito vezes o risco normal de desenvolver adenocarcinoma pancreático dentro de três anos, após o qual o risco relativo diminui.


=== Outras descobertas ===

A síndrome de Trousseau – na qual coágulos sanguíneos se formam espontaneamente nos vasos sanguíneos portais (trombose da veia porta), nas veias profundas das extremidades (trombose venosa profunda) ou nas veias superficiais (trombose venosa superficial) em qualquer parte do corpo – pode estar associada a câncer de pâncreas, e é encontrado em cerca de 10% dos casos.
Depressão clínica foi relatada em associação com câncer de pâncreas em cerca de 10 a 20% dos casos e pode ser um obstáculo para o tratamento ideal.

A depressão às vezes aparece antes do diagnóstico de câncer, sugerindo que pode ser provocada pela biologia da doença. Outras manifestações comuns da doença incluem fraqueza e cansaço fácil, boca seca, problemas de sono e massa abdominal palpável.


=== Sintomas de propagação ===


A disseminação do câncer de pâncreas para outros órgãos (metástase) também pode causar sintomas.

Normalmente, o adenocarcinoma pancreático se espalha primeiro para os linfonodos próximos e depois para o fígado ou para a cavidade peritoneal, intestino grosso ou pulmões.

Raramente, ele se espalha para os ossos ou cérebro. Os cânceres no pâncreas também podem ser cânceres secundários que se espalharam de outras partes do corpo.

Isso é incomum, encontrado em apenas cerca de 2% dos casos de câncer de pâncreas.

O câncer de rim é de longe o câncer mais comum a se espalhar para o pâncreas, seguido pelo câncer colorretal e depois pelos cânceres de pele, mama e pulmão.

A cirurgia pode ser realizada no pâncreas nesses casos, seja na esperança de cura ou para aliviar os sintomas.


== Fatores de risco ==

Fatores de risco para adenocarcinoma pancreático incluem:
Idade, sexo e etnia – o risco de desenvolver câncer de pâncreas aumenta com a idade.

A maioria dos casos ocorre após os 65 anos, enquanto os casos antes dos 40 anos são incomuns.

A doença é ligeiramente mais comum em homens do que em mulheres.

Nos Estados Unidos, é mais de 1,5 vezes mais comum em afro-americanos, embora a incidência na África seja baixa.
O tabagismo é o fator de risco evitável mais bem estabelecido para câncer de pâncreas, aproximadamente dobrando o risco entre os fumantes de longa data, o risco aumentando com o número de cigarros fumados e os anos de tabagismo.

O risco diminui lentamente após a cessação do tabagismo, levando cerca de 20 anos para retornar quase ao dos não fumantes.
Obesidade – um índice de massa corporal superior a 35 aumenta o risco relativo em cerca de metade.
História familiar – 5 a 10% dos casos de câncer de pâncreas têm um componente hereditário, onde as pessoas têm histórico familiar de câncer de pâncreas.

O risco aumenta muito se mais de um parente de primeiro grau tiver a doença e, mais modestamente, se a desenvolver antes dos 50 anos.

A maioria dos genes envolvidos não foram identificados.

A pancreatite hereditária aumenta o risco de câncer pancreático ao longo da vida de 30 a 40% até os 70 anos.

A triagem para câncer de pâncreas precoce pode ser oferecida a indivíduos com pancreatite hereditária com base em pesquisa.

Algumas pessoas podem optar por remover cirurgicamente o pâncreas para evitar o desenvolvimento de câncer no futuro. fator de risco muito forte); síndrome do nevo displásico (ou síndrome do melanoma e mola múltipla atípica familiar, FAMMM-PC) devido a mutações no gene supressor de tumor CDKN2A; ataxia-telangiectasia autossômica recessiva e mutações de herança autossômica dominante nos genes BRCA2 e PALB2; câncer de cólon hereditário sem polipose (síndrome de Lynch); e polipose adenomatosa familiar.

PanNETs foram associados com neoplasia endócrina múltipla tipo 1 (MEN1) e síndromes de von Hippel Lindau. A pancreatite crônica parece quase triplicar o risco e, como no diabetes, a pancreatite de início recente pode ser um sintoma de um tumor.

O risco de câncer de pâncreas em indivíduos com pancreatite familiar é particularmente alto.
Diabetes mellitus é um fator de risco para câncer de pâncreas e (como observado na seção Sinais e sintomas) o diabetes de início recente também pode ser um sinal precoce da doença.

Pessoas que foram diagnosticadas com diabetes tipo 2 por mais de 10 anos podem ter um risco 50% maior, em comparação com indivíduos sem diabetes.

Em 2021, Venturi relatou que o pâncreas é capaz de absorver em grande quantidade o césio radioativo (Cs-134 e Cs-137) causando pancreatite crônica e provavelmente câncer de pâncreas com dano das ilhas pancreáticas, causando diabetes tipo 3c (pancreatogênico).

Pancreatite crônica, câncer de pâncreas e diabetes mellitus aumentaram na população contaminada, principalmente crianças e adolescentes, após os incidentes nucleares de Fukushima e Chernobyl.

Ao mesmo tempo, doenças pancreáticas em todo o mundo, diabetes e radiocésio ambiental estão aumentando.
Tipos específicos de alimentos (diferentes da obesidade) não demonstraram claramente aumentar o risco de câncer de pâncreas.

Fatores dietéticos para os quais algumas evidências mostram um risco ligeiramente aumentado incluem carne processada, carne vermelha e carne cozida em temperaturas muito altas (por exemplo, fritar, grelhar ou grelhar).


=== Álcool ===

O consumo excessivo de álcool é uma das principais causas de pancreatite crônica, que por sua vez predispõe ao câncer de pâncreas, mas pesquisas consideráveis ​​falharam em estabelecer firmemente o consumo de álcool como um fator de risco direto para o câncer de pâncreas.

No geral, a associação é consistentemente fraca e a maioria dos estudos não encontrou associação, sendo o tabagismo um forte fator de confusão.

A evidência é mais forte para uma ligação com o consumo excessivo de álcool, de pelo menos seis doses por dia.


== Fisiopatologia ==



=== Pré-câncer ===


Acredita-se que os cânceres exócrinos surjam de vários tipos de lesões pré-cancerosas no pâncreas, mas essas lesões nem sempre progridem para câncer, e o aumento do número detectado como subproduto do uso crescente de tomografias computadorizadas por outros motivos não é tratado.

Além dos cistoadenomas serosos pancreáticos, quase sempre benignos, são reconhecidos quatro tipos de lesão pré-cancerosa.
A primeira é a neoplasia intraepitelial pancreática.

Essas lesões são anormalidades microscópicas no pâncreas e são frequentemente encontradas em autópsias de pessoas sem câncer diagnosticado.

Essas lesões podem progredir de baixo para alto grau e depois para um tumor.

Mais de 90% dos casos em todos os graus carregam um gene KRAS defeituoso, enquanto nos graus 2 e 3, danos a três outros genes – CDKN2A (p16), p53 e SMAD4 – são cada vez mais encontrados. neoplasia mucinosa (IPMN).

São lesões macroscópicas, encontradas em cerca de 2% de todos os adultos.

Essa taxa sobe para cerca de 10% aos 70 anos.

Essas lesões têm cerca de 25% de risco de evoluir para câncer invasivo.

Eles podem ter mutações no gene KRAS (40-65% dos casos) e na subunidade alfa GNAS Gs e RNF43, afetando a via de sinalização Wnt.

Mesmo se removido cirurgicamente, permanece um risco consideravelmente aumentado de desenvolvimento subsequente de câncer pancreático. O terceiro tipo, neoplasia cística mucinosa pancreática (NMC), ocorre principalmente em mulheres e pode permanecer benigno ou progredir para câncer.

Se essas lesões se tornarem grandes, causarem sintomas ou apresentarem características suspeitas, elas geralmente podem ser removidas com sucesso por cirurgia. Um quarto tipo de câncer que surge no pâncreas é a neoplasia tubulopapilar intraductal.

Este tipo foi reconhecido pela OMS em 2010 e constitui cerca de 1 a 3% de todas as neoplasias pancreáticas.

A idade média ao diagnóstico é de 61 anos (variação de 35 a 78 anos).

Cerca de 50% dessas lesões tornam-se invasivas.

O diagnóstico depende da histologia, pois essas lesões são muito difíceis de diferenciar de outras lesões por motivos clínicos ou radiológicos.


=== Câncer invasivo ===

Os eventos genéticos encontrados no adenocarcinoma ductal foram bem caracterizados e o sequenciamento completo do exoma foi feito para os tipos comuns de tumor.

Quatro genes foram encontrados mutados na maioria dos adenocarcinomas: KRAS (em 95% dos casos), CDKN2A (também em 95%), TP53 (75%) e SMAD4 (55%).

O último destes está especialmente associado a um mau prognóstico.

Mutações/deleções SWI/SNF ocorrem em cerca de 10-15% dos adenocarcinomas.

As alterações genéticas em vários outros tipos de câncer de pâncreas e lesões pré-cancerosas também têm sido pesquisadas.

Análises transcriptômicas e sequenciamento de mRNA para as formas comuns de câncer de pâncreas descobriram que 75% dos genes humanos são expressos nos tumores, com cerca de 200 genes expressos mais especificamente no câncer de pâncreas em comparação com outros tipos de tumor.


=== PanNETs ===

Os genes frequentemente encontrados mutados em PanNETs são diferentes daqueles no câncer de pâncreas exócrino.

Por exemplo, a mutação KRAS está normalmente ausente.

Em vez disso, as mutações hereditárias do gene MEN1 dão origem à síndrome MEN1, na qual os tumores primários ocorrem em duas ou mais glândulas endócrinas.

Cerca de 40-70% das pessoas nascidas com uma mutação MEN1 eventualmente desenvolvem um PanNet.

Outros genes que são frequentemente mutados incluem DAXX, mTOR e ATRX.


== Diagnóstico ==


Os sintomas do adenocarcinoma pancreático geralmente não aparecem nos estágios iniciais da doença e não são individualmente distintos da doença.

Os sintomas no diagnóstico variam de acordo com a localização do câncer no pâncreas, que os anatomistas dividem (da esquerda para a direita na maioria dos diagramas) em cabeça grossa, pescoço e corpo afilado, terminando na cauda.
Independentemente da localização do tumor, o sintoma mais comum é a perda de peso inexplicável, que pode ser considerável.

Uma grande minoria (entre 35% e 47%) das pessoas diagnosticadas com a doença terá náusea, vômito ou sensação de fraqueza.

Tumores na cabeça do pâncreas geralmente também causam icterícia, dor, perda de apetite, urina escura e fezes claras.

Os tumores no corpo e na cauda geralmente também causam dor. Às vezes, as pessoas têm início recente de diabetes tipo 2 atípica difícil de controlar, história de inflamação recente, mas inexplicável dos vasos sanguíneos causada por coágulos sanguíneos (tromboflebite) conhecida como sinal de Trousseau ou um ataque anterior de pancreatite.

Um médico pode suspeitar de câncer de pâncreas quando o início do diabetes em alguém com mais de 50 anos é acompanhado por sintomas típicos, como perda de peso inexplicável, dor abdominal ou nas costas persistente, indigestão, vômitos ou fezes gordurosas.

A icterícia acompanhada por uma vesícula biliar edemaciada e indolor (conhecida como sinal de Courvoisier) também pode levantar suspeita e pode ajudar a diferenciar câncer de pâncreas de cálculos biliares. o diagnóstico e para ajudar a decidir se o tumor pode ser removido cirurgicamente (sua "ressecabilidade").

Na tomografia computadorizada com contraste, o câncer pancreático geralmente mostra uma captação de radiocontraste gradualmente crescente, em vez de uma eliminação rápida, como observada em um pâncreas normal, ou uma eliminação tardia, como observada na pancreatite crônica.

A ressonância magnética e a tomografia por emissão de pósitrons também podem ser utilizadas, e a colangiopancreatografia por ressonância magnética pode ser útil em alguns casos.

A ultrassonografia abdominal é menos sensível e não detecta pequenos tumores, mas pode identificar cânceres que se espalharam para o fígado e acúmulo de líquido na cavidade peritoneal (ascite).

Pode ser usado para um primeiro exame rápido e barato antes de outras técnicas.

Uma biópsia por aspiração por agulha fina, muitas vezes guiada por ultrassom endoscópico, pode ser usada quando há incerteza sobre o diagnóstico, mas um diagnóstico histológico geralmente não é necessário para a remoção do tumor por cirurgia. de resultados indicativos de obstrução do ducto biliar (níveis elevados de bilirrubina conjugada, γ-glutamil transpeptidase e fosfatase alcalina).

CA19-9 (antígeno de carboidrato 19.9) é um marcador tumoral frequentemente elevado no câncer de pâncreas.

No entanto, carece de sensibilidade e especificidade, até porque 5% das pessoas não possuem o antígeno de Lewis (a) e não podem produzir CA19-9.

Tem uma sensibilidade de 80% e especificidade de 73% na detecção de adenocarcinoma pancreático e é usado para acompanhar casos conhecidos em vez de diagnóstico.


=== Histopatologia ===

A forma mais comum de câncer de pâncreas (adenocarcinoma) é tipicamente caracterizada por estruturas glandulares moderadamente a pouco diferenciadas no exame microscópico.

Há tipicamente uma considerável desmoplasia ou formação de um estroma fibroso denso ou tecido estrutural que consiste em uma variedade de tipos de células (incluindo miofibroblastos, macrófagos, linfócitos e mastócitos) e material depositado (como colágeno tipo I e ácido hialurônico).

Isso cria um microambiente tumoral com falta de vasos sanguíneos (hipovascular) e, portanto, de oxigênio (hipóxia tumoral).

Pensa-se que isso impede que muitos medicamentos quimioterápicos atinjam o tumor, como um fator que torna o câncer especialmente difícil de tratar.


=== Encenação ===



==== Cânceres exócrinos ====
O câncer de pâncreas geralmente é estadiado após uma tomografia computadorizada.

O sistema de estadiamento do câncer de pâncreas mais amplamente utilizado é o formulado pelo American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) em conjunto com a Union for International Cancer Control (UICC).

O sistema de estadiamento AJCC-UICC designa quatro estágios gerais principais, variando de doença precoce a avançada, com base na classificação TNM de tamanho do tumor, disseminação para linfonodos e metástase. sobre se a remoção cirúrgica parece possível: desta forma, os tumores são considerados "ressecáveis", "limite ressecáveis" ou "irressecáveis".

Quando a doença ainda está em estágio inicial (estágios AJCC-UICC I e II), sem disseminação para grandes vasos sanguíneos ou órgãos distantes, como fígado ou pulmões, a ressecção cirúrgica do tumor normalmente pode ser realizada, se o paciente estiver disposto O sistema de estadiamento AJCC-UICC permite a distinção entre tumores em estágio III que são considerados "limítrofes ressecáveis" (onde a cirurgia é tecnicamente viável porque o eixo celíaco e a artéria mesentérica superior ainda são livres) e os que são "irressecáveis" (devido à doença mais localmente avançada); em termos da classificação TNM mais detalhada, esses dois grupos correspondem a T3 e T4, respectivamente.
Estadiamento do câncer de pâncreas (classificação TNM)
 
 
 
 
 

Adenocarcinomas localmente avançados se espalharam para órgãos vizinhos, que podem ser qualquer um dos seguintes (em ordem decrescente de frequência aproximadamente): duodeno, estômago, cólon transverso, baço, glândula adrenal ou rim.

Muitas vezes, eles também se espalham para os vasos e nervos sanguíneos ou linfáticos importantes que correm perto do pâncreas, tornando a cirurgia muito mais difícil.

Os locais típicos de disseminação metastática (doença em estágio IV) são o fígado, a cavidade peritoneal e os pulmões, os quais ocorrem em 50% ou mais dos casos totalmente avançados.


==== PanNETs ====
A classificação de 2010 da OMS de tumores do sistema digestivo classifica todos os tumores neuroendócrinos pancreáticos (PanNETs) em três categorias, com base em seu grau de diferenciação celular (de "NET G1" até o "NET G3" pouco diferenciado).

Os EUA

A National Comprehensive Cancer Network recomenda o uso do mesmo sistema de estadiamento AJCC-UICC que o adenocarcinoma pancreático.: 52 Usando esse esquema, os resultados estágio a estágio para PanNETs são diferentes daqueles dos cânceres exócrinos.

Um sistema TNM diferente para PanNETs foi proposto pela European Neuroendócrine Tumor Society.


== Prevenção e triagem ==

Além de não fumar, a American Cancer Society recomenda manter um peso saudável e aumentar o consumo de frutas, vegetais e grãos integrais, enquanto diminui o consumo de carne vermelha e processada, embora não haja evidências consistentes de que isso previna ou reduza especificamente o câncer de pâncreas. .

Uma revisão de pesquisa de 2014 concluiu que havia evidências de que o consumo de frutas cítricas e curcumina reduzia o risco de câncer de pâncreas, enquanto possivelmente havia um efeito benéfico de grãos integrais, folato, selênio e peixe não frito. de grandes grupos não é considerado eficaz e pode ser prejudicial a partir de 2019, embora técnicas mais recentes e a triagem de grupos fortemente direcionados estejam sendo avaliadas.

No entanto, a triagem regular com ultrassonografia endoscópica e ressonância magnética/TC é recomendada para aqueles com alto risco de genética hereditária.


== Gestão ==



=== Câncer exócrino ===

Uma avaliação importante que é feita após o diagnóstico é se a remoção cirúrgica do tumor é possível (consulte Estadiamento), pois esta é a única cura para esse câncer.

Se a ressecção cirúrgica pode ou não ser oferecida depende de quanto o câncer se espalhou.

A localização exata do tumor também é um fator significativo, e a TC pode mostrar como ele se relaciona com os principais vasos sanguíneos que passam perto do pâncreas.

A saúde geral da pessoa também deve ser avaliada, embora a idade em si não seja um obstáculo para a cirurgia. A quimioterapia e, em menor grau, a radioterapia provavelmente serão oferecidas à maioria das pessoas, seja a cirurgia possível ou não.

Especialistas aconselham que o manejo do câncer de pâncreas deve estar nas mãos de uma equipe multidisciplinar, incluindo especialistas em vários aspectos da oncologia, sendo, portanto, mais bem conduzido em centros maiores.


==== Cirurgia ====

A cirurgia com intenção de cura só é possível em cerca de um quinto (20%) dos novos casos.

Embora a tomografia computadorizada ajude, na prática pode ser difícil determinar se o tumor pode ser totalmente removido (sua "ressecabilidade"), e pode ficar aparente apenas durante a cirurgia que não é possível remover o tumor com sucesso sem danificar outros tecidos vitais .

Se a ressecção cirúrgica pode ou não ser oferecida depende de vários fatores, incluindo a extensão precisa da adjacência anatômica local ou o envolvimento dos vasos sanguíneos venosos ou arteriais, bem como a experiência cirúrgica e uma consideração cuidadosa da recuperação pós-operatória projetada.

A idade da pessoa não é em si uma razão para não operar, mas seu estado geral de desempenho precisa ser adequado para uma grande operação. de gordura criando uma barreira entre o tumor e os vasos.

Tradicionalmente, avalia-se a proximidade do tumor com os principais vasos venosos ou arteriais, em termos de "abutment" (definido como o tumor que não atinge mais de metade da circunferência de um vaso sanguíneo sem nenhuma gordura para separá-lo), "envelopment" (quando o tumor envolve a maior parte da circunferência do vaso) ou envolvimento total do vaso.: 22 Em alguns casos, uma ressecção que inclua seções encapsuladas de vasos sanguíneos pode ser possível, principalmente se a terapia neoadjuvante preliminar for viável, usando quimioterapia: 36 e/ou radioterapia. : 29–30 Mesmo quando a operação parece ter sido bem sucedida, as células cancerosas são frequentemente encontradas em torno das bordas ("margens") do tecido removido, quando um patologista as examina microscopicamente (isso sempre será feito), indicando que o câncer não foi totalmente removido.

Além disso, as células-tronco cancerígenas geralmente não são evidentes microscopicamente e, se estiverem presentes, podem continuar a se desenvolver e se espalhar.

Uma laparoscopia exploratória (um pequeno procedimento cirúrgico guiado por câmera) pode, portanto, ser realizada para obter uma ideia mais clara do resultado de uma operação completa.

Para cânceres envolvendo a cabeça do pâncreas, o procedimento de Whipple é o tratamento cirúrgico curativo mais comumente tentado.

Esta é uma grande operação que envolve a remoção da cabeça pancreática e da curva do duodeno juntos ("pancreato-duodenectomia"), fazendo um desvio para o alimento do estômago para o jejuno ("gastro-jejunostomia") e anexando uma alça do jejuno para o ducto cístico para drenar a bile ("colecisto-jejunostomia").

Só pode ser realizado se a pessoa tiver probabilidade de sobreviver a uma cirurgia de grande porte e se o câncer for localizado sem invadir estruturas locais ou metastatizar.

Pode, portanto, ser realizado apenas em uma minoria de casos.

Os cânceres da cauda do pâncreas podem ser ressecados usando um procedimento conhecido como pancreatectomia distal, que muitas vezes também envolve a remoção do baço.

Hoje em dia, isso muitas vezes pode ser feito usando cirurgia minimamente invasiva. doença operatória que não é causada pelo próprio câncer.

A complicação mais comum da cirurgia é a dificuldade em esvaziar o estômago.

Certos procedimentos cirúrgicos mais limitados também podem ser usados ​​para aliviar os sintomas (consulte Cuidados paliativos): por exemplo, se o câncer estiver invadindo ou comprimindo o duodeno ou o cólon.

Nesses casos, a cirurgia de bypass pode superar a obstrução e melhorar a qualidade de vida, mas não pretende ser uma cura.


==== Quimioterapia ====
Após a cirurgia, a quimioterapia adjuvante com gencitabina ou 5-FU pode ser oferecida se a pessoa estiver suficientemente apta, após um período de recuperação de um a dois meses.

Em pessoas não adequadas para cirurgia curativa, a quimioterapia pode ser usada para prolongar a vida ou melhorar sua qualidade.

Antes da cirurgia, quimioterapia neoadjuvante ou quimiorradioterapia pode ser usada em casos considerados "limite ressecáveis" (consulte Estadiamento) para reduzir o câncer a um nível em que a cirurgia possa ser benéfica.

Em outros casos, a terapia neoadjuvante permanece controversa, pois atrasa a cirurgia. A gencitabina foi aprovada pela Food and Drug Administration (FDA) dos Estados Unidos em 1997, após um ensaio clínico relatar melhorias na qualidade de vida e uma melhora de 5 semanas na duração média da sobrevida em pessoas com câncer de pâncreas avançado.

Este foi o primeiro medicamento quimioterápico aprovado pela FDA principalmente para um desfecho de ensaio clínico de não sobrevivência.

A quimioterapia usando apenas gencitabina foi o padrão por cerca de uma década, já que vários ensaios que a testaram em combinação com outras drogas não conseguiram demonstrar resultados significativamente melhores.

No entanto, a combinação de gencitabina com erlotinib aumentou modestamente a sobrevida, e o erlotinib foi licenciado pela FDA para uso em câncer de pâncreas em 2005. e, portanto, é adequado apenas para pessoas com bom desempenho.

Isso também vale para o paclitaxel ligado a proteínas (nab-paclitaxel), que foi licenciado pelo FDA em 2013 para uso com gencitabina no câncer de pâncreas.

No final de 2013, tanto o FOLFIRINOX quanto o nab-paclitaxel com gencitabina foram considerados boas opções para aqueles capazes de tolerar os efeitos colaterais, e a gencitabina permaneceu uma opção eficaz para aqueles que não o eram.

Aguarda-se um teste direto entre as duas novas opções, e os testes que investigam outras variações continuam.

No entanto, as mudanças dos últimos anos só aumentaram os tempos de sobrevivência em alguns meses.

Ensaios clínicos são frequentemente conduzidos para novas terapias adjuvantes.


==== Radioterapia ====
O papel da radioterapia como tratamento auxiliar (adjuvante) após cirurgia potencialmente curativa é controverso desde a década de 1980.

No início dos anos 2000, o European Study Group for Pancreatic Cancer Research (ESPAC) mostrou superioridade prognóstica da quimioterapia adjuvante sobre a quimiorradioterapia.

A Sociedade Europeia de Oncologia Médica recomenda que a radioterapia adjuvante seja usada apenas para pessoas inscritas em ensaios clínicos.

No entanto, há uma tendência contínua de os médicos nos EUA estarem mais prontos para usar radioterapia adjuvante do que os da Europa.

Muitos ensaios clínicos testaram uma variedade de combinações de tratamento desde a década de 1980, mas não conseguiram resolver o assunto de forma conclusiva. são resultados conflitantes de ensaios clínicos.

Os resultados preliminares de um estudo, apresentado em 2013, "reduziram marcadamente o entusiasmo" pelo seu uso em tumores localmente avançados.


=== PanNETs ===


O tratamento de PanNETs, ​​incluindo os tipos malignos menos comuns, pode incluir várias abordagens.

Alguns pequenos tumores de menos de 1 cm. que são identificados incidentalmente, por exemplo, em uma tomografia computadorizada realizada para outros fins, podem ser seguidas de espera vigilante.

Isso depende do risco avaliado da cirurgia, que é influenciado pelo local do tumor e pela presença de outros problemas médicos.

Tumores apenas no pâncreas (tumores localizados), ou com metástases limitadas, por exemplo para o fígado, podem ser removidos por cirurgia.

O tipo de cirurgia depende da localização do tumor e do grau de disseminação para os linfonodos. Para tumores localizados, o procedimento cirúrgico pode ser muito menos extenso do que os tipos de cirurgia usados ​​para tratar o adenocarcinoma pancreático descritos acima, mas os procedimentos cirúrgicos são semelhantes aos de tumores exócrinos.

A gama de resultados possíveis varia muito; alguns tipos têm uma taxa de sobrevivência muito alta após a cirurgia, enquanto outros têm uma perspectiva ruim.

Como todo esse grupo é raro, as diretrizes enfatizam que o tratamento deve ser realizado em centro especializado.

O uso de transplante de fígado pode ser considerado em certos casos de metástase hepática. Para tumores funcionantes, a classe de medicamentos análogos da somatostatina, como octreotide, pode reduzir a produção excessiva de hormônios.

Lanreotida pode retardar o crescimento do tumor.

Se o tumor não for passível de remoção cirúrgica e estiver causando sintomas, a terapia direcionada com everolimus ou sunitinibe pode reduzir os sintomas e retardar a progressão da doença.

A quimioterapia citotóxica padrão geralmente não é muito eficaz para PanNETs, ​​mas pode ser usada quando outros tratamentos medicamentosos não conseguem impedir a progressão da doença ou em cânceres PanNET pouco diferenciados. A radioterapia é ocasionalmente usada se houver dor devido à extensão anatômica, como metástase para o osso.

Alguns PanNETs absorvem peptídeos ou hormônios específicos, e esses PanNETs podem responder à terapia de medicina nuclear com peptídeos ou hormônios radiomarcados, como o iobenguano (iodo-131-MIBG).

Ablação por radiofrequência (RFA), crioablação e embolização da artéria hepática também podem ser usadas.


=== Cuidados Paliativos ===

Os cuidados paliativos são cuidados médicos que se concentram no tratamento de sintomas de doenças graves, como o câncer, e na melhoria da qualidade de vida.

Como o adenocarcinoma pancreático geralmente é diagnosticado após progredir para um estágio avançado, os cuidados paliativos como tratamento dos sintomas geralmente são o único tratamento possível. Os cuidados paliativos se concentram não no tratamento do câncer subjacente, mas no tratamento de sintomas como dor ou náusea e pode ajudar na tomada de decisões, incluindo quando ou se os cuidados paliativos serão benéficos.

A dor pode ser controlada com medicamentos como opióides ou através de intervenção processual, por um bloqueio do nervo no plexo celíaco (CEC).

Isso altera ou, dependendo da técnica utilizada, destrói os nervos que transmitem a dor do abdome.

A CEC é uma forma segura e eficaz de reduzir a dor, o que geralmente reduz a necessidade do uso de analgésicos opióides, que têm efeitos colaterais negativos significativos. Outros sintomas ou complicações que podem ser tratados com cirurgia paliativa são obstrução por tumor de intestino ou bile dutos.

Para este último, que ocorre em bem mais da metade dos casos, um pequeno tubo metálico chamado stent pode ser inserido pelo endoscópio para manter os ductos drenando.

Os cuidados paliativos também podem ajudar a tratar a depressão que geralmente vem com o diagnóstico de câncer de pâncreas. Tanto a cirurgia quanto os tumores inoperáveis ​​avançados geralmente levam a distúrbios do sistema digestivo devido à falta de produtos exócrinos do pâncreas (insuficiência exócrina).

Estes podem ser tratados tomando pancreatina, que contém enzimas pancreáticas fabricadas, e é melhor tomar com alimentos.

A dificuldade de esvaziar o estômago (esvaziamento gástrico retardado) é comum e pode ser um problema grave, envolvendo hospitalização.

O tratamento pode envolver uma variedade de abordagens, incluindo a drenagem do estômago por aspiração nasogástrica e medicamentos chamados inibidores da bomba de prótons ou antagonistas H2, que reduzem a produção de ácido gástrico.

Medicamentos como a metoclopramida também podem ser usados ​​para limpar o conteúdo do estômago.


== Resultados ==

O adenocarcinoma pancreático e os outros cânceres exócrinos menos comuns têm um prognóstico muito ruim, pois normalmente são diagnosticados em estágio tardio, quando o câncer já está localmente avançado ou se espalhou para outras partes do corpo.

Os resultados são muito melhores para PanNETs: muitos são benignos e completamente sem sintomas clínicos, e mesmo os casos não tratáveis ​​com cirurgia têm uma taxa média de sobrevida em cinco anos de 16%, embora a perspectiva varie consideravelmente de acordo com o tipo. adenocarcinomas pancreáticos metastáticos, que juntos representam mais de 80% dos casos, numerosos ensaios comparando regimes de quimioterapia mostraram aumento do tempo de sobrevida, mas não mais de um ano.

A sobrevida global de cinco anos para câncer de pâncreas nos EUA melhorou de 2% nos casos diagnosticados em 1975-1977 e 4% nos diagnósticos de 1987-1989, para 6% em 2003-2009.

Em menos de 20% dos casos de adenocarcinoma pancreático com diagnóstico de um tumor canceroso localizado e pequeno (menos de 2 cm no estágio T1), cerca de 20% dos americanos sobrevivem até cinco anos. adenocarcinoma.

Estes incluem tanto genes desfavoráveis, onde a alta expressão está relacionada a resultados ruins, por exemplo, C-Met e MUC-1, quanto genes favoráveis, onde a alta expressão está associada a melhor sobrevida, por exemplo, o fator de transcrição PELP1.


== Distribuição ==


Em 2015, todos os tipos de câncer de pâncreas resultaram em 411.600 mortes em todo o mundo.

Em 2014, estima-se que 46.000 pessoas nos EUA serão diagnosticadas com câncer de pâncreas e 40.000 morrerão.

Embora represente apenas 2,5% dos novos casos, o câncer de pâncreas é responsável por 6% das mortes por câncer a cada ano.

É a sétima maior causa de morte por câncer no mundo.

O câncer de pâncreas é a quinta causa mais comum de morte por câncer no Reino Unido e a terceira mais comum nos Estados Unidos. Globalmente, o câncer de pâncreas é o 11º câncer mais comum em mulheres e o 12º mais comum em homens.

A maioria dos casos registrados ocorre em países desenvolvidos.

As pessoas dos Estados Unidos têm um risco médio ao longo da vida de cerca de 1 em 67 (ou 1,5%) de desenvolver a doença, um pouco maior do que o número do Reino Unido.

A doença é mais comum em homens do que em mulheres, embora a diferença nas taxas tenha diminuído nas últimas décadas, provavelmente refletindo aumentos anteriores no tabagismo feminino.

Nos Estados Unidos, o risco para afro-americanos é mais de 50% maior do que para brancos, mas as taxas na África e no leste da Ásia são muito menores do que na América do Norte ou na Europa.

Os Estados Unidos, a Europa Central e Oriental, a Argentina e o Uruguai têm taxas altas.


=== PanNETs ===

A incidência anual de PanNETs clinicamente reconhecidos é baixa (cerca de 5 por um milhão de pessoas-ano) e é dominada pelos tipos não funcionais.

Em algum lugar entre 45% e 90% dos PanNETs são considerados do tipo que não funciona.

Estudos de autópsias descobriram pequenos PanNETs com bastante frequência, sugerindo que a prevalência de tumores que permanecem inertes e assintomáticos pode ser relativamente alta.

Acredita-se que os PanNETs representem cerca de 1 a 2% de todos os tumores pancreáticos.

A definição e classificação dos PanNETs mudou ao longo do tempo, afetando o que se sabe sobre sua epidemiologia e relevância clínica.


== História ==



=== Reconhecimento e diagnóstico ===

O primeiro reconhecimento do câncer de pâncreas foi atribuído ao cientista italiano do século 18 Giovanni Battista Morgagni, o pai histórico da patologia anatômica moderna, que alegou ter traçado vários casos de câncer no pâncreas.

Muitos médicos dos séculos 18 e 19 eram céticos sobre a existência da doença, dada a aparência semelhante da pancreatite.

Alguns relatos de casos foram publicados nas décadas de 1820 e 1830, e um diagnóstico histopatológico genuíno acabou sendo registrado pelo clínico americano Jacob Mendes Da Costa, que também duvidou da confiabilidade das interpretações de Morgagni.

No início do século 20, o câncer da cabeça do pâncreas tornou-se um diagnóstico bem estabelecido. Em relação ao reconhecimento dos PanNETs, ​​a possibilidade de câncer das células das ilhotas foi inicialmente sugerida em 1888.

O primeiro caso de hiperinsulinismo devido a um tumor desse tipo foi relatado em 1927.

O reconhecimento de um tipo de PanNET não secretor de insulina é geralmente atribuído aos cirurgiões americanos, R.

M.

Zollinger e E.

H.

Ellison, que deram seus nomes à síndrome de Zollinger-Ellison, após postular a existência de um tumor pancreático secretor de gastrina em um relato de dois casos de úlceras pépticas incomumente graves publicado em 1955.

Em 2010, a OMS recomendou que os PanNETs fossem referidos como tumores "neuroendócrinos" em vez de tumores "endócrinos". Pequenas neoplasias pré-cancerosas para muitos cânceres pancreáticos estão sendo detectadas em taxas muito maiores por imagens médicas modernas.

Um tipo, a neoplasia mucinosa papilar intraductal (IPMN) foi descrita pela primeira vez por pesquisadores japoneses em 1982.

Observou-se em 2010 que: "Na próxima década, pouca atenção foi dada a este relatório; no entanto, nos 15 anos seguintes, houve uma explosão virtual no reconhecimento desse tumor".


=== Cirurgia ===

A primeira pancreatoduodenectomia parcial relatada foi realizada pelo cirurgião italiano Alessandro Codivilla em 1898, mas o paciente sobreviveu apenas 18 dias antes de sucumbir às complicações.

As primeiras operações foram comprometidas em parte por causa de crenças equivocadas de que as pessoas morreriam se seu duodeno fosse removido e também, a princípio, se o fluxo de sucos pancreáticos parasse.

Mais tarde, pensou-se, também erroneamente, que o ducto pancreático poderia simplesmente ser amarrado sem efeitos adversos graves; na verdade, muitas vezes vazará mais tarde.

Em 1907-1908, após algumas operações mais mal sucedidas por outros cirurgiões, procedimentos experimentais foram tentados em cadáveres por cirurgiões franceses. Em 1912, o cirurgião alemão Walther Kausch foi o primeiro a remover grandes partes do duodeno e pâncreas juntos (em bloco).

Isso foi em Breslau, agora Wrocław na Polônia.

Em 1918 foi demonstrado, em operações em cães, que é possível sobreviver mesmo após a remoção completa do duodeno, mas tal resultado não foi relatado em cirurgia humana até 1935, quando o cirurgião americano Allen Oldfather Whipple publicou os resultados de uma série de três operações no Columbia Presbyterian Hospital, em Nova York.

Apenas um dos pacientes teve o duodeno totalmente removido, mas sobreviveu por dois anos antes de morrer de metástase no fígado.
A primeira operação não foi planejada, pois o câncer só foi descoberto no centro cirúrgico.

O sucesso de Whipple mostrou o caminho para o futuro, mas a operação permaneceu difícil e perigosa até décadas recentes.

Ele publicou vários refinamentos em seu procedimento, incluindo a primeira remoção total do duodeno em 1940, mas ele só realizou um total de 37 operações. um processo diário, ambos melhoraram a sobrevida pós-operatória, mas cerca de 25% das pessoas nunca deixaram o hospital vivas até a década de 1970.

Na década de 1970, um grupo de cirurgiões americanos escreveu pedindo que o procedimento fosse muito perigoso e deveria ser abandonado.

Desde então, os resultados em centros maiores melhoraram consideravelmente, e a mortalidade da operação é muitas vezes inferior a 4%. .

A taxa dessas operações aumentou de forma constante durante esse período, com apenas três delas antes de 1980, e o tempo médio de operação foi reduzido de 8,8 horas na década de 1970 para 5,5 horas na década de 2000, e a mortalidade em 30 dias ou no hospital foi de apenas 1 %.

Outra série de 2.050 operações no Hospital Geral de Massachusetts entre 1941 e 2011 mostrou um quadro semelhante de melhora.


== Orientações de pesquisa ==

A pesquisa em estágio inicial do câncer de pâncreas inclui estudos de genética e detecção precoce, tratamento em diferentes estágios do câncer, estratégias cirúrgicas e terapias direcionadas, como inibição de fatores de crescimento, terapias imunológicas e vacinas.

Os ácidos biliares podem ter um papel na carcinogênese do câncer de pâncreas. Uma questão-chave é o momento dos eventos à medida que a doença se desenvolve e progride – particularmente o papel do diabetes e como e quando a doença se espalha.

O conhecimento de que um novo aparecimento de diabetes pode ser um sinal precoce da doença pode facilitar o diagnóstico e a prevenção oportunos se uma estratégia de triagem viável puder ser desenvolvida.

O ensaio do Registro Europeu de Pancreatite Hereditária e Câncer de Pâncreas Familiares (EUROPAC) tem como objetivo determinar se a triagem regular é apropriada para pessoas com histórico familiar da doença. está sendo avaliado.

A eletroporação irreversível é uma técnica de ablação relativamente nova com potencial para reduzir e prolongar a sobrevida em pessoas com doença localmente avançada, especialmente para tumores próximos a vasos peripancreáticos sem risco de trauma vascular. mecanismos para o aparecimento do câncer, células-tronco e proliferação celular.

Uma outra abordagem envolve o uso de imunoterapia, como vírus oncolíticos.

Mecanismos específicos de galectina do microambiente tumoral estão em estudo.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pancreatic_cancer

;;;FR;;;



CANCER DU PANCRÉAS


Le cancer du pancréas survient lorsque les cellules du pancréas, un organe glandulaire situé derrière l'estomac, commencent à se multiplier de manière incontrôlable et à former une masse.

Ces cellules cancéreuses ont la capacité d'envahir d'autres parties du corps.

Un certain nombre de types de cancer du pancréas sont connus. Le plus courant, l'adénocarcinome pancréatique, représente environ 90 % des cas, et le terme « cancer du pancréas » est parfois utilisé pour désigner uniquement ce type.

Ces adénocarcinomes commencent dans la partie du pancréas qui fabrique les enzymes digestives.

Plusieurs autres types de cancer, qui représentent collectivement la majorité des non-adénocarcinomes, peuvent également provenir de ces cellules.

Environ 1 à 2 % des cas de cancer du pancréas sont des tumeurs neuroendocrines, qui proviennent des cellules productrices d'hormones du pancréas.

Ceux-ci sont généralement moins agressifs que l'adénocarcinome pancréatique. Les signes et symptômes de la forme la plus courante de cancer du pancréas peuvent inclure une peau jaune, des douleurs abdominales ou dorsales, une perte de poids inexpliquée, des selles claires, une urine foncée et une perte d'appétit.

Habituellement, aucun symptôme n'est observé aux premiers stades de la maladie, et les symptômes suffisamment spécifiques pour suggérer un cancer du pancréas ne se développent généralement pas tant que la maladie n'a pas atteint un stade avancé.

Au moment du diagnostic, le cancer du pancréas s'est souvent propagé à d'autres parties du corps. Le cancer du pancréas survient rarement avant l'âge de 40 ans et plus de la moitié des cas d'adénocarcinome pancréatique surviennent chez les personnes de plus de 70 ans.

Les facteurs de risque du cancer du pancréas comprennent le tabagisme, l'obésité, le diabète et certaines maladies génétiques rares.

Environ 25 % des cas sont liés au tabagisme et 5 à 10 % sont liés à des gènes héréditaires.

Le cancer du pancréas est généralement diagnostiqué par une combinaison de techniques d'imagerie médicale telles que l'échographie ou la tomodensitométrie, des tests sanguins et l'examen d'échantillons de tissus (biopsie).

La maladie est divisée en stades, du début (stade I) au stade tardif (stade IV).

Le dépistage dans la population générale ne s'est pas avéré efficace. Le risque de développer un cancer du pancréas est plus faible chez les non-fumeurs et les personnes qui maintiennent un poids santé et limitent leur consommation de viande rouge ou transformée.

Les chances des fumeurs de développer la maladie diminuent s'ils arrêtent de fumer et reviennent presque à celles du reste de la population après 20 ans.

Le cancer du pancréas peut être traité par chirurgie, radiothérapie, chimiothérapie, soins palliatifs ou une combinaison de ceux-ci.

Les options de traitement sont en partie basées sur le stade du cancer.

La chirurgie est le seul traitement qui peut guérir l'adénocarcinome pancréatique et peut également être pratiquée pour améliorer la qualité de vie sans possibilité de guérison.

La gestion de la douleur et les médicaments pour améliorer la digestion sont parfois nécessaires.

Des soins palliatifs précoces sont recommandés même pour ceux qui reçoivent un traitement visant à guérir. En 2015, les cancers du pancréas de tous types ont entraîné 411 600 décès dans le monde.

Le cancer du pancréas est la cinquième cause de décès par cancer au Royaume-Uni et la troisième aux États-Unis.

La maladie survient le plus souvent dans le monde développé, d'où provenaient environ 70 % des nouveaux cas en 2012.

L'adénocarcinome pancréatique a généralement un très mauvais pronostic; après le diagnostic, 25 % des personnes survivent un an et 5 % vivent cinq ans.

Pour les cancers diagnostiqués précocement, le taux de survie à cinq ans s'élève à environ 20 %.

Les cancers neuroendocriniens ont de meilleurs résultats ; à cinq ans du diagnostic, 65% des personnes diagnostiquées sont vivantes, bien que la survie varie considérablement selon le type de tumeur.


== Genre ==


Les nombreux types de cancer du pancréas peuvent être divisés en deux groupes généraux.

La grande majorité des cas (environ 95%) surviennent dans la partie du pancréas qui produit des enzymes digestives, appelées composants exocrines.

Plusieurs sous-types de cancers pancréatiques exocrines sont décrits, mais leur diagnostic et leur traitement ont beaucoup en commun.

La petite minorité de cancers qui surviennent dans les tissus producteurs d'hormones (endocrines) du pancréas ont des caractéristiques cliniques différentes et sont appelées tumeurs neuroendocrines pancréatiques, parfois abrégées en « PanNET ».

Les deux groupes surviennent principalement (mais pas exclusivement) chez les personnes de plus de 40 ans et sont légèrement plus fréquents chez les hommes, mais certains sous-types rares surviennent principalement chez les femmes ou les enfants.


=== Cancers exocrines ===

Le groupe exocrine est dominé par l'adénocarcinome pancréatique (des variantes de ce nom peuvent ajouter "invasif" et "canalaire"), qui est de loin le type le plus courant, représentant environ 85 % de tous les cancers du pancréas.

Presque tous ceux-ci commencent dans les canaux du pancréas, sous forme d'adénocarcinome canalaire pancréatique (PDAC).

Ceci en dépit du fait que le tissu dont il provient - l'épithélium canalaire pancréatique - représente moins de 10% du pancréas en volume cellulaire, car il ne constitue que les conduits (un système de conduits étendu mais de type capillaire qui se déploie) à l'intérieur le pancréas.

Ce cancer prend naissance dans les conduits qui transportent les sécrétions (telles que les enzymes et le bicarbonate) loin du pancréas.

Environ 60 à 70 % des adénocarcinomes surviennent dans la tête du pancréas. Le deuxième type le plus courant, le carcinome à cellules acineuses du pancréas, apparaît dans les amas de cellules qui produisent ces enzymes et représente 5 % des cancers exocrines du pancréas.

Comme les cancers endocriniens « fonctionnels » décrits ci-dessous, les carcinomes à cellules acineuses peuvent entraîner une surproduction de certaines molécules, en l'occurrence des enzymes digestives, qui peuvent provoquer des symptômes tels que des éruptions cutanées et des douleurs articulaires.
Les cystadénocarcinomes représentent 1 % des cancers du pancréas, et ils ont un meilleur pronostic que les autres types exocrines. Le pancréatoblastome est une forme rare, survenant majoritairement dans l'enfance, et de relativement bon pronostic.

D'autres cancers exocrines comprennent les carcinomes adénosquameux, les carcinomes à chevalière, les carcinomes hépatoïdes, les carcinomes colloïdes, les carcinomes indifférenciés et les carcinomes indifférenciés à cellules géantes de type ostéoclaste.

La tumeur solide pseudopapillaire est une tumeur rare de bas grade qui affecte principalement les femmes jeunes et qui a généralement un très bon pronostic. Les tumeurs kystiques mucineuses pancréatiques sont un large groupe de tumeurs du pancréas qui ont un potentiel malin variable.

Ils sont détectés à un rythme considérablement accru à mesure que les tomodensitogrammes deviennent plus puissants et plus courants, et la discussion se poursuit sur la meilleure façon de les évaluer et de les traiter, étant donné que beaucoup sont bénins.


=== Neuroendocrine ===


La petite minorité de tumeurs qui surviennent ailleurs dans le pancréas sont principalement des tumeurs neuroendocrines pancréatiques (PanNETs).

Les tumeurs neuroendocrines (TNE) sont un groupe diversifié de tumeurs bénignes ou malignes qui proviennent des cellules neuroendocrines du corps, qui sont responsables de l'intégration des systèmes nerveux et endocrinien.

Les TNE peuvent apparaître dans la plupart des organes du corps, y compris le pancréas, où les différents types malins sont tous considérés comme rares.

Les PanNET sont regroupés en types « fonctionnels » et « non fonctionnels », selon le degré auquel ils produisent des hormones.

Les types fonctionnels sécrètent des hormones telles que l'insuline, la gastrine et le glucagon dans la circulation sanguine, souvent en grande quantité, entraînant des symptômes graves tels qu'un faible taux de sucre dans le sang, mais favorisant également une détection relativement précoce.

Les PanNET fonctionnels les plus courants sont les insulinomes et les gastrinomes, nommés d'après les hormones qu'ils sécrètent.

Les types non fonctionnels ne sécrètent pas d'hormones en quantité suffisante pour provoquer des symptômes cliniques manifestes, de sorte que les PanNET non fonctionnels ne sont souvent diagnostiqués qu'après que le cancer s'est propagé à d'autres parties du corps. Comme pour d'autres tumeurs neuroendocrines, l'histoire de la terminologie et la classification des PanNET est complexe.

Les PanNET sont parfois appelés "cancers des cellules des îlots", bien qu'on sache maintenant qu'ils ne proviennent pas réellement des cellules des îlots comme on le pensait auparavant.


== Signes et symptômes ==


Étant donné que le cancer du pancréas ne provoque généralement pas de symptômes reconnaissables à ses débuts, la maladie n'est généralement pas diagnostiquée tant qu'elle ne s'est pas propagée au-delà du pancréas lui-même.

C'est l'une des principales raisons des taux de survie généralement faibles.

Les exceptions à cela sont les PanNET fonctionnels, où la surproduction de diverses hormones actives peut donner lieu à des symptômes (qui dépendent du type d'hormone). Sachant que la maladie est rarement diagnostiquée avant l'âge de 40 ans, les symptômes courants de adénocarcinome survenant avant le diagnostic comprennent :

Douleur dans la partie supérieure de l'abdomen ou du dos, s'étendant souvent de l'abdomen vers le dos.

L'emplacement de la douleur peut indiquer la partie du pancréas où se trouve une tumeur.

La douleur peut être pire la nuit et peut augmenter avec le temps pour devenir sévère et incessante.

Il peut être légèrement soulagé en se penchant en avant.

Au Royaume-Uni, environ la moitié des nouveaux cas de cancer du pancréas sont diagnostiqués à la suite d'une visite aux urgences d'un hôpital pour douleur ou jaunisse.

Chez jusqu'à deux tiers des personnes, la douleur abdominale est le principal symptôme, pour 46% du total accompagné d'un ictère, 13% ayant un ictère sans douleur.
La jaunisse, une teinte jaune du blanc des yeux ou de la peau, avec ou sans douleur, et éventuellement associée à une urine foncée, survient lorsqu'un cancer de la tête du pancréas obstrue le canal cholédoque lorsqu'il traverse le pancréas.
Perte de poids inexpliquée, soit par perte d'appétit, soit par perte de la fonction exocrine entraînant une mauvaise digestion.
La tumeur peut comprimer les organes voisins, perturber les processus digestifs et rendre difficile la vidange de l'estomac, ce qui peut provoquer des nausées et une sensation de satiété.

La graisse non digérée conduit à des matières fécales grasses et nauséabondes difficiles à éliminer.

La constipation est également fréquente.
Au moins 50 % des personnes atteintes d'un adénocarcinome pancréatique sont diabétiques au moment du diagnostic.

Bien que le diabète de longue date soit un facteur de risque connu du cancer du pancréas (voir Facteurs de risque), le cancer peut lui-même provoquer le diabète, auquel cas l'apparition récente d'un diabète pourrait être considérée comme un signe précoce de la maladie.

Les personnes de plus de 50 ans qui développent un diabète ont huit fois le risque habituel de développer un adénocarcinome pancréatique dans les trois ans, après quoi le risque relatif diminue.


=== Autres découvertes ===

Le syndrome de Trousseau - dans lequel des caillots sanguins se forment spontanément dans les vaisseaux sanguins portes (thrombose de la veine porte), les veines profondes des extrémités (thrombose veineuse profonde) ou les veines superficielles (thrombose veineuse superficielle) n'importe où sur le corps - peut être associé à cancer du pancréas, et se retrouve dans environ 10% des cas.
La dépression clinique a été rapportée en association avec le cancer du pancréas dans environ 10 à 20 % des cas et peut constituer un obstacle à une prise en charge optimale.

La dépression apparaît parfois avant le diagnostic de cancer, suggérant qu'elle peut être provoquée par la biologie de la maladie. D'autres manifestations courantes de la maladie comprennent une faiblesse et une fatigue facile, une bouche sèche, des problèmes de sommeil et une masse abdominale palpable.


=== Symptômes de propagation ===


La propagation du cancer du pancréas à d'autres organes (métastases) peut également provoquer des symptômes.

En règle générale, l'adénocarcinome pancréatique se propage d'abord aux ganglions lymphatiques voisins, puis au foie ou à la cavité péritonéale, au gros intestin ou aux poumons.

Rarement, il se propage aux os ou au cerveau. Les cancers du pancréas peuvent également être des cancers secondaires qui se sont propagés à partir d'autres parties du corps.

Ceci est rare, trouvé dans seulement environ 2% des cas de cancer du pancréas.

Le cancer du rein est de loin le cancer le plus courant à se propager au pancréas, suivi du cancer colorectal, puis des cancers de la peau, du sein et du poumon.

Une intervention chirurgicale peut être pratiquée sur le pancréas dans de tels cas, que ce soit dans l'espoir d'une guérison ou pour atténuer les symptômes.


== Facteurs de risque ==

Les facteurs de risque d'adénocarcinome pancréatique comprennent :
Âge, sexe et origine ethnique - le risque de développer un cancer du pancréas augmente avec l'âge.

La plupart des cas surviennent après 65 ans, tandis que les cas avant 40 ans sont rares.

La maladie est légèrement plus fréquente chez les hommes que chez les femmes.

Aux États-Unis, il est plus de 1,5 fois plus fréquent chez les Afro-Américains, bien que l'incidence en Afrique soit faible.
Le tabagisme est le facteur de risque évitable le mieux établi pour le cancer du pancréas, doublant approximativement le risque chez les fumeurs à long terme, le risque augmentant avec le nombre de cigarettes fumées et les années de tabagisme.

Le risque diminue lentement après l'arrêt du tabac, mettant environ 20 ans pour revenir presque à celui des non-fumeurs.
Obésité - un indice de masse corporelle supérieur à 35 augmente le risque relatif d'environ la moitié.
Antécédents familiaux - 5 à 10% des cas de cancer du pancréas ont une composante héréditaire, où les personnes ont des antécédents familiaux de cancer du pancréas.

Le risque augmente fortement si plus d'un parent au premier degré a eu la maladie, et plus modestement s'il l'a développée avant l'âge de 50 ans.

La plupart des gènes impliqués n'ont pas été identifiés.

La pancréatite héréditaire augmente considérablement le risque à vie de cancer du pancréas de 30 à 40 % jusqu'à l'âge de 70 ans.

Le dépistage du cancer du pancréas précoce peut être proposé aux personnes atteintes de pancréatite héréditaire sur une base de recherche.

Certaines personnes peuvent choisir de se faire enlever chirurgicalement le pancréas pour prévenir le développement d'un cancer à l'avenir. facteur de risque très fort); le syndrome du naevus dysplasique (ou syndrome familial atypique des grains de beauté multiples et du mélanome, FAMMM-PC) dû à des mutations du gène suppresseur de tumeur CDKN2A ; ataxie-télangiectasie autosomique récessive et mutations autosomiques dominantes des gènes BRCA2 et PALB2 ; cancer du côlon héréditaire sans polypose (syndrome de Lynch); et la polypose adénomateuse familiale.

Les PanNET ont été associées à la néoplasie endocrinienne multiple de type 1 (NEM1) et aux syndromes de von Hippel Lindau. La pancréatite chronique semble presque tripler le risque et, comme pour le diabète, la pancréatite d'apparition récente peut être le symptôme d'une tumeur.

Le risque de cancer du pancréas chez les personnes atteintes de pancréatite familiale est particulièrement élevé.
Le diabète sucré est un facteur de risque du cancer du pancréas et (comme indiqué dans la section Signes et symptômes) le diabète d'apparition récente peut également être un signe précoce de la maladie.

Les personnes qui ont reçu un diagnostic de diabète de type 2 depuis plus de 10 ans peuvent présenter un risque accru de 50 % par rapport aux personnes non diabétiques.

En 2021, Venturi a rapporté que le pancréas est capable d'absorber en grande quantité du césium radioactif (Cs-134 et Cs-137) provoquant une pancréatite chronique et probablement un cancer du pancréas avec atteinte des îlots pancréatiques, provoquant un diabète de type 3c (pancréatogène).

La pancréatite chronique, le cancer du pancréas et le diabète sucré ont augmenté dans la population contaminée, en particulier les enfants et les adolescents, après les accidents nucléaires de Fukushima et de Tchernobyl.

Dans le même temps, les maladies pancréatiques mondiales, le diabète et le radiocésium environnemental sont en augmentation.
Il n'a pas été clairement démontré que certains types d'aliments (par opposition à l'obésité) augmentent le risque de cancer du pancréas.

Les facteurs alimentaires pour lesquels certaines preuves montrent un risque légèrement accru comprennent la viande transformée, la viande rouge et la viande cuite à très haute température (par exemple par friture, grillage ou grillade).


=== Alcool ===

La consommation excessive d'alcool est une cause majeure de pancréatite chronique, qui à son tour prédispose au cancer du pancréas, mais de nombreuses recherches n'ont pas réussi à établir fermement la consommation d'alcool comme facteur de risque direct du cancer du pancréas.

Dans l'ensemble, l'association est systématiquement faible et la majorité des études n'ont trouvé aucune association, le tabagisme étant un facteur de confusion important.

La preuve est plus forte pour un lien avec une forte consommation d'alcool, d'au moins six verres par jour.


== Physiopathologie ==



=== Précancer ===


On pense que les cancers exocrines proviennent de plusieurs types de lésions précancéreuses dans le pancréas, mais ces lésions ne progressent pas toujours vers le cancer, et l'augmentation du nombre détectée comme sous-produit de l'utilisation croissante des tomodensitogrammes pour d'autres raisons ne sont pas toutes traitées.

Outre les cystadénomes séreux pancréatiques, presque toujours bénins, quatre types de lésions précancéreuses sont reconnus.
Le premier est la néoplasie pancréatique intraépithéliale.

Ces lésions sont des anomalies microscopiques du pancréas et se retrouvent souvent dans les autopsies de personnes sans cancer diagnostiqué.

Ces lésions peuvent évoluer de bas en haut grade puis en tumeur.

Plus de 90% des cas à tous les grades portent un gène KRAS défectueux, tandis qu'aux grades 2 et 3, des dommages à trois autres gènes - CDKN2A (p16), p53 et SMAD4 - sont de plus en plus souvent trouvés. Un deuxième type est le papillaire intracanalaire néoplasme mucineux (IPMN).

Ce sont des lésions macroscopiques, qui se trouvent dans environ 2% de tous les adultes.

Ce taux passe à environ 10 % à 70 ans.

Ces lésions ont un risque d'environ 25 % d'évoluer en cancer invasif.

Ils peuvent avoir des mutations du gène KRAS (40 à 65 % des cas) et dans la sous-unité GNAS Gs alpha et RNF43, affectant la voie de signalisation Wnt.

Même en cas d'ablation chirurgicale, il reste un risque considérablement accru de développement ultérieur d'un cancer du pancréas. Le troisième type, le néoplasme kystique pancréatique mucineux (MCN), survient principalement chez les femmes et peut rester bénin ou évoluer vers un cancer.

Si ces lésions deviennent importantes, provoquent des symptômes ou présentent des caractéristiques suspectes, elles peuvent généralement être enlevées avec succès par chirurgie. Un quatrième type de cancer qui survient dans le pancréas est le néoplasme tubulo-papillaire intracanalaire.

Ce type a été reconnu par l'OMS en 2010 et représente environ 1 à 3 % de tous les néoplasmes pancréatiques.

L'âge moyen au moment du diagnostic est de 61 ans (extrêmes 35–78 ans).

Environ 50 % de ces lésions deviennent invasives.

Le diagnostic dépend de l'histologie, car ces lésions sont très difficiles à différencier des autres lésions sur des bases cliniques ou radiologiques.


=== Cancer invasif ===

Les événements génétiques trouvés dans l'adénocarcinome canalaire ont été bien caractérisés et un séquençage complet de l'exome a été effectué pour les types courants de tumeurs.

Quatre gènes ont chacun été retrouvés mutés dans la majorité des adénocarcinomes : KRAS (dans 95 % des cas), CDKN2A (également dans 95 %), TP53 (75 %) et SMAD4 (55 %).

Le dernier d'entre eux est particulièrement associé à un mauvais pronostic.

Des mutations/délétions SWI/SNF surviennent dans environ 10 à 15 % des adénocarcinomes.

Les altérations génétiques de plusieurs autres types de cancer du pancréas et de lésions précancéreuses ont également fait l'objet de recherches.

Les analyses transcriptomiques et le séquençage de l'ARNm pour les formes courantes de cancer du pancréas ont révélé que 75 % des gènes humains sont exprimés dans les tumeurs, avec quelque 200 gènes plus spécifiquement exprimés dans le cancer du pancréas par rapport aux autres types de tumeurs.


=== PanNET ===

Les gènes souvent trouvés mutés dans les PanNET sont différents de ceux du cancer du pancréas exocrine.

Par exemple, la mutation KRAS est normalement absente.

Au lieu de cela, les mutations héréditaires du gène MEN1 donnent lieu au syndrome MEN1, dans lequel des tumeurs primaires se produisent dans deux glandes endocrines ou plus.

Environ 40 à 70 % des personnes nées avec une mutation MEN1 finissent par développer un PanNet.

D'autres gènes fréquemment mutés comprennent DAXX, mTOR et ATRX.


== Diagnostic ==


Les symptômes de l'adénocarcinome pancréatique n'apparaissent généralement pas dans les premiers stades de la maladie et ne sont pas individuellement distinctifs de la maladie.

Les symptômes au moment du diagnostic varient selon la localisation du cancer dans le pancréas, que les anatomistes divisent (de gauche à droite sur la plupart des schémas) en tête épaisse, cou et corps effilé se terminant par la queue.
Quelle que soit la localisation de la tumeur, le symptôme le plus courant est une perte de poids inexpliquée, qui peut être considérable.

Une grande minorité (entre 35% et 47%) des personnes diagnostiquées avec la maladie auront eu des nausées, des vomissements ou une sensation de faiblesse.

Les tumeurs de la tête du pancréas provoquent également généralement une jaunisse, des douleurs, une perte d'appétit, une urine foncée et des selles de couleur claire.

Les tumeurs du corps et de la queue provoquent également généralement des douleurs. Les personnes ont parfois un diabète de type 2 atypique récent difficile à contrôler, des antécédents d'inflammation récente mais inexpliquée des vaisseaux sanguins causée par des caillots sanguins (thrombophlébite) connue sous le nom de signe de Trousseau, ou un crise antérieure de pancréatite.

Un médecin peut suspecter un cancer du pancréas lorsque l'apparition du diabète chez une personne de plus de 50 ans s'accompagne de symptômes typiques tels qu'une perte de poids inexpliquée, des douleurs abdominales ou dorsales persistantes, une indigestion, des vomissements ou des matières fécales grasses.

La jaunisse accompagnée d'une vésicule biliaire enflée sans douleur (connue sous le nom de signe de Courvoisier) peut également éveiller les soupçons et peut aider à différencier le cancer du pancréas des calculs biliaires. Des techniques d'imagerie médicale, telles que la tomodensitométrie (TDM) et l'échographie endoscopique (EUS) sont utilisées le diagnostic et pour aider à décider si la tumeur peut être enlevée chirurgicalement (sa « résécabilité »).

Sur la tomodensitométrie de contraste, le cancer du pancréas montre généralement une augmentation progressive de l'absorption du radiocontraste, plutôt qu'un lavage rapide comme on le voit dans un pancréas normal ou un lavage retardé comme on le voit dans la pancréatite chronique.

L'imagerie par résonance magnétique et la tomographie par émission de positrons peuvent également être utilisées, et la cholangiopancréatographie par résonance magnétique peut être utile dans certains cas.

L'échographie abdominale est moins sensible et passera à côté de petites tumeurs, mais peut identifier les cancers qui se sont propagés au foie et l'accumulation de liquide dans la cavité péritonéale (ascite).

Elle peut être utilisée pour un premier examen rapide et peu coûteux avant d'autres techniques.

Une biopsie par aspiration à l'aiguille fine, souvent guidée par échographie endoscopique, peut être utilisée en cas d'incertitude sur le diagnostic, mais un diagnostic histologique n'est généralement pas requis pour l'ablation chirurgicale de la tumeur. Les tests de la fonction hépatique peuvent montrer une combinaison des résultats indiquant une obstruction des voies biliaires (augmentation des taux de bilirubine conjuguée, de γ-glutamyl transpeptidase et de phosphatase alcaline).

CA19-9 (carbohydrate antigen 19.9) est un marqueur tumoral fréquemment élevé dans le cancer du pancréas.

Cependant, il manque de sensibilité et de spécificité, notamment parce que 5% des personnes n'ont pas l'antigène Lewis (a) et ne peuvent pas produire CA19-9.

Il a une sensibilité de 80% et une spécificité de 73% dans la détection de l'adénocarcinome pancréatique, et est utilisé pour suivre les cas connus plutôt que pour le diagnostic.


=== Histopathologie ===

La forme la plus courante de cancer du pancréas (adénocarcinome) est généralement caractérisée par des structures glandulaires modérément à peu différenciées à l'examen microscopique.

Il existe généralement une desmoplasie considérable ou la formation d'un stroma fibreux dense ou d'un tissu structurel composé d'une gamme de types de cellules (y compris les myofibroblastes, les macrophages, les lymphocytes et les mastocytes) et de matériel déposé (tel que le collagène de type I et l'acide hyaluronique).

Cela crée un microenvironnement tumoral qui manque de vaisseaux sanguins (hypovasculaire) et donc d'oxygène (hypoxie tumorale).

On pense que cela empêche de nombreux agents chimiothérapeutiques d'atteindre la tumeur, ce qui rend le cancer particulièrement difficile à traiter.


=== Mise en scène ===



==== Cancers exocrines ====
Le cancer du pancréas est généralement stadifié après un scanner.

Le système de stadification du cancer du pancréas le plus largement utilisé est celui formulé par l'American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) en collaboration avec l'Union for International Cancer Control (UICC).

Le système de stadification AJCC-UICC désigne quatre stades globaux principaux, allant de la maladie précoce à la maladie avancée, en fonction de la classification TNM de la taille de la tumeur, de la propagation aux ganglions lymphatiques et des métastases. Pour aider à décider du traitement, les tumeurs sont également divisées en trois catégories plus larges basées sur si l'ablation chirurgicale semble possible : ainsi, les tumeurs sont jugées « résécables », « borderline résécables », ou « non résécables ».

Lorsque la maladie est encore à un stade précoce (AJCC-UICC stades I et II), sans propagation à de gros vaisseaux sanguins ou à des organes distants tels que le foie ou les poumons, une résection chirurgicale de la tumeur peut normalement être effectuée, si le patient le souhaite pour subir cette opération majeure et que l'on pense qu'il est suffisamment en forme. libres) et ceux qui sont "non résécables" (en raison d'une maladie plus localement avancée) ; selon la classification TNM plus détaillée, ces deux groupes correspondent respectivement à T3 et T4.
Stadification du cancer du pancréas (classification TNM)
 
 
 
 
 

Les adénocarcinomes localement avancés se sont propagés dans les organes voisins, qui peuvent être l'un des suivants (par ordre de fréquence grossièrement décroissant) : le duodénum, ​​l'estomac, le côlon transverse, la rate, la glande surrénale ou le rein.

Très souvent, ils se propagent également aux importants vaisseaux sanguins ou lymphatiques et aux nerfs qui se trouvent à proximité du pancréas, ce qui rend la chirurgie beaucoup plus difficile.

Les sites typiques de propagation métastatique (maladie de stade IV) sont le foie, la cavité péritonéale et les poumons, qui surviennent tous dans 50 % ou plus des cas complètement avancés.


==== PanNET ====
La classification OMS 2010 des tumeurs de l'appareil digestif classe toutes les tumeurs neuroendocrines pancréatiques (PanNET) en trois catégories, en fonction de leur degré de différenciation cellulaire (de « NET G1 » à « NET G3 » peu différencié).

Les Etats Unis

Le National Comprehensive Cancer Network recommande l'utilisation du même système de stadification AJCC-UICC que l'adénocarcinome pancréatique. : 52 En utilisant ce schéma, les résultats étape par étape pour les PanNET sont différents de ceux des cancers exocrines.

Un système TNM différent pour les PanNET a été proposé par la Société européenne des tumeurs neuroendocrines.


== Prévention et dépistage ==

En plus de ne pas fumer, l'American Cancer Society recommande de maintenir un poids santé et d'augmenter la consommation de fruits, de légumes et de grains entiers, tout en diminuant la consommation de viande rouge et transformée, bien qu'il n'y ait aucune preuve cohérente que cela préviendra ou réduira spécifiquement le cancer du pancréas. .

Un examen de la recherche de 2014 a conclu qu'il y avait des preuves que la consommation d'agrumes et de curcumine réduisait le risque de cancer du pancréas, alors qu'il y avait peut-être un effet bénéfique des grains entiers, du folate, du sélénium et du poisson non frit. Dans la population générale, le dépistage de grands groupes n'est pas considérée comme efficace et peut être nocive à partir de 2019, bien que de nouvelles techniques et le dépistage de groupes étroitement ciblés soient en cours d'évaluation.

Néanmoins, un dépistage régulier par échographie endoscopique et imagerie IRM/TDM est recommandé pour les personnes à haut risque génétique héréditaire.


== Gestion ==



=== Cancer exocrine ===

Une évaluation clé qui est faite après le diagnostic est de savoir si l'ablation chirurgicale de la tumeur est possible (voir Stadification), car c'est le seul remède pour ce cancer.

La possibilité ou non de proposer une résection chirurgicale dépend de l'étendue de la propagation du cancer.

L'emplacement exact de la tumeur est également un facteur important, et la TDM peut montrer comment elle se rapporte aux principaux vaisseaux sanguins passant à proximité du pancréas.

L'état de santé général de la personne doit également être évalué, même si l'âge en soi n'est pas un obstacle à la chirurgie. La chimiothérapie et, dans une moindre mesure, la radiothérapie sont susceptibles d'être proposées à la plupart des gens, que la chirurgie soit possible ou non.

Les spécialistes recommandent que la prise en charge du cancer du pancréas soit entre les mains d'une équipe multidisciplinaire comprenant des spécialistes de plusieurs aspects de l'oncologie, et qu'elle soit donc mieux conduite dans les grands centres.


==== Chirurgie ====

La chirurgie en vue d'une guérison n'est possible que dans environ un cinquième (20 %) des nouveaux cas.

Bien que les tomodensitogrammes soient utiles, en pratique, il peut être difficile de déterminer si la tumeur peut être complètement retirée (sa « résécabilité »), et il peut n'apparaître qu'au cours de la chirurgie qu'il n'est pas possible de réussir à retirer la tumeur sans endommager d'autres tissus vitaux. .

La possibilité ou non de proposer une résection chirurgicale dépend de divers facteurs, notamment de l'étendue précise de la contiguïté anatomique locale ou de l'implication des vaisseaux sanguins veineux ou artériels, ainsi que de l'expertise chirurgicale et d'un examen attentif de la récupération postopératoire projetée.

L'âge de la personne n'est pas en soi une raison de ne pas opérer, mais son état général de performance doit être suffisant pour une opération majeure. Une caractéristique particulière qui est évaluée est la présence encourageante ou l'absence décourageante d'une couche ou d'un plan clair. de graisse créant une barrière entre la tumeur et les vaisseaux.

Traditionnellement, une évaluation est faite de la proximité de la tumeur avec les principaux vaisseaux veineux ou artériels, en termes de « butée » (définie comme la tumeur ne touchant pas plus de la moitié de la circonférence d'un vaisseau sanguin sans aucune graisse pour la séparer), « emboîtement » (lorsque la tumeur enferme la majeure partie de la circonférence du vaisseau), ou une atteinte complète du vaisseau : 22 Une résection qui comprend des sections emboîtées de vaisseaux sanguins peut être possible dans certains cas, en particulier si un traitement néoadjuvant préliminaire est possible, en utilisant la chimiothérapie : 36 et/ou la radiothérapie. : 29–30 Même lorsque l'opération semble avoir réussi, des cellules cancéreuses sont souvent trouvées sur les bords ("marges") du tissu retiré, lorsqu'un pathologiste les examine au microscope (cela sera toujours fait), indiquant que le cancer a pas été entièrement supprimée.

De plus, les cellules souches cancéreuses ne sont généralement pas visibles au microscope et, si elles sont présentes, elles peuvent continuer à se développer et à se propager.

Une laparoscopie exploratoire (une petite intervention chirurgicale guidée par caméra) peut donc être effectuée pour avoir une idée plus claire du résultat d'une opération complète.

Pour les cancers impliquant la tête du pancréas, la procédure de Whipple est le traitement chirurgical curatif le plus couramment tenté.

Il s'agit d'une opération majeure qui consiste à retirer ensemble la tête pancréatique et la courbure du duodénum ("pancréato-duodénectomie"), à réaliser un pontage alimentaire de l'estomac vers le jéjunum ("gastro-jéjunostomie") et à fixer une anse de jéjunum au canal cystique pour drainer la bile ("cholécysto-jéjunostomie").

Elle ne peut être pratiquée que si la personne est susceptible de survivre à une intervention chirurgicale majeure et si le cancer est localisé sans envahir les structures locales ni métastaser.

Elle ne peut donc être pratiquée que dans une minorité de cas.

Les cancers de la queue du pancréas peuvent être réséqués à l'aide d'une procédure connue sous le nom de pancréatectomie distale, qui implique souvent également l'ablation de la rate.

De nos jours, cela peut souvent être fait en utilisant la chirurgie mini-invasive. Bien que la chirurgie curative n'entraîne plus les taux de mortalité très élevés qui se produisaient jusqu'aux années 1980, une forte proportion de personnes (environ 30 à 45 %) doivent encore être traitées pour une post-opératoire. maladie opératoire qui n'est pas causée par le cancer lui-même.

La complication la plus courante de la chirurgie est la difficulté à vider l'estomac.

Certaines interventions chirurgicales plus limitées peuvent également être utilisées pour soulager les symptômes (voir Soins palliatifs) : par exemple, si le cancer envahit ou comprime le duodénum ou le côlon.

Dans de tels cas, la chirurgie de pontage peut surmonter l'obstruction et améliorer la qualité de vie, mais n'est pas destinée à guérir.


==== Chimiothérapie ====
Après la chirurgie, une chimiothérapie adjuvante par gemcitabine ou 5-FU peut être proposée si la personne est suffisamment en forme, après une période de récupération d'un à deux mois.

Chez les personnes non éligibles à la chirurgie curative, la chimiothérapie peut être utilisée pour prolonger la vie ou améliorer sa qualité.

Avant la chirurgie, une chimiothérapie néoadjuvante ou une chimioradiothérapie peut être utilisée dans les cas considérés comme « borderline résécables » (voir Stadification) afin de réduire le cancer à un niveau où la chirurgie pourrait être bénéfique.

Dans d'autres cas, la thérapie néoadjuvante reste controversée, car elle retarde la chirurgie. La gemcitabine a été approuvée par la Food and Drug Administration (FDA) des États-Unis en 1997, après qu'un essai clinique a rapporté des améliorations de la qualité de vie et une amélioration de 5 semaines de la durée médiane de survie. chez les personnes atteintes d'un cancer du pancréas avancé.

Il s'agissait du premier médicament de chimiothérapie approuvé par la FDA principalement pour un critère d'essai clinique sans survie.

La chimiothérapie utilisant la gemcitabine seule a été la norme pendant environ une décennie, car un certain nombre d'essais la testant en association avec d'autres médicaments n'ont pas réussi à démontrer des résultats significativement meilleurs.

Cependant, l'association de la gemcitabine avec l'erlotinib s'est avérée augmenter légèrement la survie, et l'erlotinib a été autorisé par la FDA pour une utilisation dans le cancer du pancréas en 2005. Le schéma de chimiothérapie FOLFIRINOX utilisant quatre médicaments s'est avéré plus efficace que la gemcitabine, mais avec des effets secondaires importants, et ne convient donc qu'aux personnes ayant un bon statut de performance.

Cela est également vrai du paclitaxel lié aux protéines (nab-paclitaxel), qui a été autorisé par la FDA en 2013 pour une utilisation avec la gemcitabine dans le cancer du pancréas.

Fin 2013, le FOLFIRINOX et le nab-paclitaxel avec gemcitabine étaient considérés comme de bons choix pour les personnes capables de tolérer les effets secondaires, et la gemcitabine restait une option efficace pour ceux qui ne l'étaient pas.

Un essai en tête-à-tête entre les deux nouvelles options est attendu, et les essais portant sur d'autres variantes se poursuivent.

Cependant, les changements de ces dernières années n'ont augmenté les temps de survie que de quelques mois.

Des essais cliniques sont souvent menés pour de nouvelles thérapies adjuvantes.


==== Radiothérapie ====
La place de la radiothérapie comme traitement auxiliaire (adjuvant) après une chirurgie potentiellement curative est controversée depuis les années 1980.

Au début des années 2000, le Groupe d'étude européen pour la recherche sur le cancer du pancréas (ESPAC) a montré la supériorité pronostique de la chimiothérapie adjuvante sur la chimioradiothérapie.

La Société européenne d'oncologie médicale recommande que la radiothérapie adjuvante ne soit utilisée que pour les personnes inscrites à des essais cliniques.

Cependant, les cliniciens aux États-Unis ont tendance à être plus disposés à utiliser la radiothérapie adjuvante que ceux en Europe.

De nombreux essais cliniques ont testé une variété de combinaisons de traitement depuis les années 1980, mais n'ont pas réussi à régler la question de manière concluante. La radiothérapie peut faire partie du traitement pour tenter de réduire une tumeur à un état résécable, mais son utilisation sur des tumeurs non résécables reste controversée car il sont des résultats contradictoires des essais cliniques.

Les résultats préliminaires d'un essai, présentés en 2013, "ont nettement réduit l'enthousiasme" pour son utilisation sur des tumeurs localement avancées.


=== PanNET ===


Le traitement des PanNET, y compris les types malins les moins courants, peut inclure un certain nombre d'approches.

Quelques petites tumeurs de moins de 1 cm. qui sont identifiées fortuitement, par exemple sur un scanner réalisé à d'autres fins, peuvent être suivies d'une attente vigilante.

Cela dépend du risque évalué de chirurgie qui est influencé par le site de la tumeur et la présence d'autres problèmes médicaux.

Les tumeurs du pancréas uniquement (tumeurs localisées) ou avec des métastases limitées, par exemple au foie, peuvent être enlevées par chirurgie.

Le type de chirurgie dépend de l'emplacement de la tumeur et du degré de propagation aux ganglions lymphatiques. Pour les tumeurs localisées, la procédure chirurgicale peut être beaucoup moins étendue que les types de chirurgie utilisés pour traiter l'adénocarcinome pancréatique décrit ci-dessus, mais sinon les procédures chirurgicales sont similaires à ceux des tumeurs exocrines.

L'éventail des résultats possibles varie considérablement; certains types ont un taux de survie très élevé après la chirurgie tandis que d'autres ont de mauvaises perspectives.

Comme tout ce groupe est rare, les directives soulignent que le traitement doit être entrepris dans un centre spécialisé.

Le recours à la transplantation hépatique peut être envisagé dans certains cas de métastases hépatiques. Pour les tumeurs fonctionnelles, la classe de médicaments analogues de la somatostatine, comme l'octréotide, peut réduire la production excessive d'hormones.

Le lanréotide peut ralentir la croissance tumorale.

Si la tumeur ne se prête pas à l'ablation chirurgicale et provoque des symptômes, un traitement ciblé par l'évérolimus ou le sunitinib peut réduire les symptômes et ralentir la progression de la maladie.

La chimiothérapie cytotoxique standard est généralement peu efficace pour les PanNET, mais peut être utilisée lorsque d'autres traitements médicamenteux ne parviennent pas à empêcher la progression de la maladie ou dans les cancers PanNET peu différenciés. La radiothérapie est parfois utilisée en cas de douleur due à une extension anatomique, telle que métastase à l'os.

Certains PanNETs absorbent des peptides ou des hormones spécifiques, et ces PanNETs peuvent répondre à une thérapie de médecine nucléaire avec des peptides radiomarqués ou des hormones telles que l'iobenguane (iode-131-MIBG).

L'ablation par radiofréquence (RFA), la cryoablation et l'embolisation de l'artère hépatique peuvent également être utilisées.


=== Soins palliatifs ===

Les soins palliatifs sont des soins médicaux axés sur le traitement des symptômes d'une maladie grave, comme le cancer, et sur l'amélioration de la qualité de vie.

Étant donné que l'adénocarcinome pancréatique est généralement diagnostiqué après avoir atteint un stade avancé, les soins palliatifs en tant que traitement des symptômes sont souvent le seul traitement possible. Les soins palliatifs ne se concentrent pas sur le traitement du cancer sous-jacent, mais sur le traitement des symptômes tels que la douleur ou la nausée, et peut aider à la prise de décision, y compris quand ou si les soins palliatifs seront bénéfiques.

La douleur peut être gérée avec des médicaments tels que les opioïdes ou par une intervention procédurale, par un bloc nerveux sur le plexus coeliaque (CPB).

Cela altère ou, selon la technique utilisée, détruit les nerfs qui transmettent la douleur de l'abdomen.

La CPB est un moyen sûr et efficace de réduire la douleur, ce qui réduit généralement le besoin d'utiliser des analgésiques opioïdes, qui ont des effets secondaires négatifs importants. D'autres symptômes ou complications qui peuvent être traités par la chirurgie palliative sont l'obstruction par la tumeur des intestins ou de la bile. conduits.

Pour ce dernier, qui survient dans bien plus de la moitié des cas, un petit tube métallique appelé stent peut être inséré par endoscope pour maintenir le drainage des conduits.

Les soins palliatifs peuvent également aider à traiter la dépression qui accompagne souvent le diagnostic de cancer du pancréas. La chirurgie et les tumeurs avancées inopérables entraînent souvent des troubles du système digestif dus à un manque de produits exocrines du pancréas (insuffisance exocrine).

Ceux-ci peuvent être traités en prenant de la pancréatine qui contient des enzymes pancréatiques fabriquées, et il est préférable de la prendre avec de la nourriture.

La difficulté à vider l'estomac (vidange gastrique retardée) est courante et peut être un problème grave, impliquant une hospitalisation.

Le traitement peut impliquer diverses approches, notamment le drainage de l'estomac par aspiration nasogastrique et des médicaments appelés inhibiteurs de la pompe à protons ou antagonistes H2, qui réduisent tous deux la production d'acide gastrique.

Des médicaments comme le métoclopramide peuvent également être utilisés pour éliminer le contenu de l'estomac.


== Résultats ==

L'adénocarcinome pancréatique et les autres cancers exocrines moins courants ont un très mauvais pronostic, car ils sont normalement diagnostiqués à un stade tardif lorsque le cancer est déjà localement avancé ou s'est propagé à d'autres parties du corps.

Les résultats sont bien meilleurs pour les PanNET : beaucoup sont bénins et ne présentent aucun symptôme clinique, et même les cas non traitables par chirurgie ont un taux de survie moyen à cinq ans de 16 %, bien que les perspectives varient considérablement selon le type. Pour les cas localement avancés et adénocarcinomes pancréatiques métastatiques, qui représentent ensemble plus de 80 % des cas, de nombreux essais comparant les régimes de chimiothérapie ont montré des durées de survie accrues, mais pas à plus d'un an.

La survie globale à cinq ans pour le cancer du pancréas aux États-Unis est passée de 2 % dans les cas diagnostiqués en 1975-1977 et de 4 % dans les diagnostics de 1987-1989 à 6 % en 2003-2009.

Dans moins de 20 % des cas d'adénocarcinome pancréatique avec un diagnostic de croissance cancéreuse localisée et petite (moins de 2 cm au stade T1), environ 20 % des Américains survivent jusqu'à cinq ans. Environ 1 500 gènes sont liés à des résultats dans le pancréas adénocarcinome.

Ceux-ci comprennent à la fois des gènes défavorables, où une expression élevée est liée à un mauvais résultat, par exemple C-Met et MUC-1, et des gènes favorables où une expression élevée est associée à une meilleure survie, par exemple le facteur de transcription PELP1.


== Répartition ==


En 2015, les cancers du pancréas de tous types ont entraîné 411 600 décès dans le monde.

En 2014, environ 46 000 personnes aux États-Unis devraient recevoir un diagnostic de cancer du pancréas et 40 000 en mourir.

Bien qu'il ne représente que 2,5 % des nouveaux cas, le cancer du pancréas est responsable de 6 % des décès par cancer chaque année.

C'est la septième cause de décès par cancer dans le monde.

Le cancer du pancréas est la cinquième cause de décès par cancer au Royaume-Uni et la troisième aux États-Unis. À l'échelle mondiale, le cancer du pancréas est le 11e cancer le plus fréquent chez les femmes et le 12e chez les hommes.

La majorité des cas enregistrés surviennent dans les pays développés.

Les personnes en provenance des États-Unis ont un risque moyen à vie d'environ 1 sur 67 (ou 1,5%) de développer la maladie, légèrement plus élevé que le chiffre pour le Royaume-Uni.

La maladie est plus fréquente chez les hommes que chez les femmes, bien que la différence de taux se soit réduite au cours des dernières décennies, reflétant probablement des augmentations antérieures du tabagisme chez les femmes.

Aux États-Unis, le risque pour les Afro-Américains est supérieur de plus de 50 % à celui des Blancs, mais les taux en Afrique et en Asie de l'Est sont bien inférieurs à ceux de l'Amérique du Nord ou de l'Europe.

Les États-Unis, l'Europe centrale et orientale, l'Argentine et l'Uruguay ont tous des taux élevés.


=== PanNET ===

L'incidence annuelle des PanNET cliniquement reconnus est faible (environ 5 pour un million de personnes-années) et est dominée par les types non fonctionnels.

Quelque part entre 45 % et 90 % des PanNET sont considérés comme des types non fonctionnels.

Les études d'autopsies ont découvert assez fréquemment de petites PanNET, ce qui suggère que la prévalence des tumeurs qui restent inertes et asymptomatiques peut être relativement élevée.

Globalement, on pense que les PanNET représentent environ 1 à 2 % de toutes les tumeurs pancréatiques.

La définition et la classification des PanNET ont changé au fil du temps, affectant ce que l'on sait de leur épidémiologie et de leur pertinence clinique.


== Historique ==



=== Reconnaissance et diagnostic ===

La première reconnaissance du cancer du pancréas a été attribuée au scientifique italien du XVIIIe siècle Giovanni Battista Morgagni, le père historique de la pathologie anatomique moderne, qui a affirmé avoir retracé plusieurs cas de cancer du pancréas.

De nombreux médecins des XVIIIe et XIXe siècles étaient sceptiques quant à l'existence de la maladie, étant donné l'apparence similaire de la pancréatite.

Certains rapports de cas ont été publiés dans les années 1820 et 1830, et un véritable diagnostic histopathologique a finalement été enregistré par le clinicien américain Jacob Mendes Da Costa, qui doutait également de la fiabilité des interprétations de Morgagni.

Au début du 20e siècle, le cancer de la tête du pancréas était devenu un diagnostic bien établi. En ce qui concerne la reconnaissance des PanNET, la possibilité d'un cancer des cellules des îlots a été initialement suggérée en 1888.

Le premier cas d'hyperinsulinisme dû à une tumeur de ce type a été rapporté en 1927.

La reconnaissance d'un type de PanNET non insulino-sécrétant est généralement attribuée aux chirurgiens américains, R.

M

Zollinger et E.

H

Ellison, qui ont donné leur nom au syndrome de Zollinger-Ellison, après avoir postulé l'existence d'une tumeur pancréatique sécrétant de la gastrine dans un rapport de deux cas d'ulcères peptiques inhabituellement graves publié en 1955.

En 2010, l'OMS a recommandé que les PanNET soient appelées tumeurs « neuroendocrines » plutôt que « endocrines ». De petits néoplasmes précancéreux pour de nombreux cancers du pancréas sont détectés à des taux considérablement accrus par l'imagerie médicale moderne.

Un type, le néoplasme mucineux papillaire intracanalaire (IPMN) a été décrit pour la première fois par des chercheurs japonais en 1982.

Il a été noté en 2010 que: "Pendant la prochaine décennie, peu d'attention a été accordée à ce rapport; cependant, au cours des 15 années suivantes, il y a eu une explosion virtuelle dans la reconnaissance de cette tumeur."


=== Chirurgie ===

La première pancréaticoduodénectomie partielle signalée a été réalisée par le chirurgien italien Alessandro Codivilla en 1898, mais le patient n'a survécu que 18 jours avant de succomber à des complications.

Les premières opérations ont été compromises en partie à cause de croyances erronées selon lesquelles les gens mourraient si leur duodénum était retiré, et aussi, au début, si le flux de sucs pancréatiques s'arrêtait.

Plus tard, on a pensé, également à tort, que le canal pancréatique pouvait simplement être ligaturé sans effets indésirables graves; en fait, il fuira très souvent plus tard.

En 1907-1908, après quelques opérations plus infructueuses par d'autres chirurgiens, des procédures expérimentales ont été essayées sur des cadavres par des chirurgiens français. En 1912, le chirurgien allemand Walther Kausch a été le premier à retirer de grandes parties du duodénum et du pancréas ensemble (en bloc).

C'était à Breslau, aujourd'hui Wrocław en Pologne.

En 1918, il a été démontré, lors d'opérations sur des chiens, qu'il est possible de survivre même après l'ablation complète du duodénum, ​​mais aucun résultat de ce type n'a été rapporté en chirurgie humaine jusqu'en 1935, lorsque le chirurgien américain Allen Oldfather Whipple a publié les résultats d'une série de trois opérations au Columbia Presbyterian Hospital de New York.

Un seul des patients a eu le duodénum entièrement enlevé, mais il a survécu pendant deux ans avant de mourir d'une métastase au foie.
La première opération n'était pas planifiée, car le cancer n'a été découvert qu'au bloc opératoire.

Le succès de Whipple a ouvert la voie à l'avenir, mais l'opération est restée difficile et dangereuse jusqu'à ces dernières décennies.

Il a publié plusieurs améliorations à sa procédure, y compris la première ablation totale du duodénum en 1940, mais il n'a effectué qu'un total de 37 opérations. La découverte à la fin des années 1930 que la vitamine K empêchait les saignements avec jaunisse et le développement de la transfusion sanguine un processus quotidien, les deux ont amélioré la survie post-opératoire, mais environ 25% des personnes n'ont jamais quitté l'hôpital en vie jusque dans les années 1970.

Dans les années 1970, un groupe de chirurgiens américains a écrit que la procédure était trop dangereuse et devait être abandonnée.

Depuis lors, les résultats dans les grands centres se sont considérablement améliorés et la mortalité due à l'opération est souvent inférieure à 4 %. .

Le rythme de ces opérations avait augmenté régulièrement sur cette période, avec seulement trois d'entre elles avant 1980, et le temps opératoire médian est passé de 8,8 heures dans les années 1970 à 5,5 heures dans les années 2000, et la mortalité dans les 30 jours ou à l'hôpital n'était que de 1 %.

Une autre série de 2 050 opérations au Massachusetts General Hospital entre 1941 et 2011 a montré une image similaire d'amélioration.


== Axes de recherche ==

La recherche à un stade précoce sur le cancer du pancréas comprend des études sur la génétique et la détection précoce, le traitement à différents stades du cancer, les stratégies chirurgicales et les thérapies ciblées, telles que l'inhibition des facteurs de croissance, les thérapies immunitaires et les vaccins.

Les acides biliaires peuvent jouer un rôle dans la carcinogenèse du cancer du pancréas. Une question clé est le moment des événements au fur et à mesure que la maladie se développe et progresse - en particulier le rôle du diabète, et comment et quand la maladie se propage.

Le fait de savoir qu'une nouvelle apparition du diabète peut être un signe précoce de la maladie pourrait faciliter le diagnostic et la prévention en temps opportun si une stratégie de dépistage viable pouvait être élaborée.

L'essai EUROPAC (European Registry of Hereditary Pancreatitis and Familial Pancreatic Cancer) vise à déterminer si un dépistage régulier est approprié pour les personnes ayant des antécédents familiaux de la maladie. La chirurgie en trou de serrure (laparoscopie) plutôt que la procédure de Whipple, notamment en termes de temps de est en cours d'évaluation.

L'électroporation irréversible est une technique d'ablation relativement nouvelle avec un potentiel de réduction et de prolongation de la survie chez les personnes atteintes d'une maladie localement avancée, en particulier pour les tumeurs à proximité des vaisseaux péripancréatiques sans risque de traumatisme vasculaire. Des efforts sont en cours pour développer de nouveaux médicaments, y compris ceux ciblant les molécules moléculaires mécanismes d'apparition du cancer, des cellules souches et de la prolifération cellulaire.

Une autre approche implique l'utilisation d'une immunothérapie, telle que des virus oncolytiques.

Les mécanismes spécifiques à la galectine du microenvironnement tumoral sont à l'étude.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cancer_pancréatique
