

SHOULDER


The human shoulder is made up of three bones: the clavicle (collarbone), the scapula (shoulder blade), and the humerus (upper arm bone) as well as associated muscles, ligaments and tendons. 

The articulations between the bones of the shoulder make up the shoulder joints. 

The shoulder joint, also known as the glenohumeral joint, is the major joint of the shoulder, but can more broadly include the acromioclavicular joint. 

In human anatomy, the shoulder joint comprises the part of the body where the humerus attaches to the scapula, and the head sits in the glenoid cavity. 

The shoulder is the group of structures in the region of the joint.The shoulder joint is the main joint of the shoulder. 

It is a ball and socket joint that allows the arm to rotate in a circular fashion or to hinge out and up away from the body. 

The joint capsule is a soft tissue envelope that encircles the glenohumeral joint and attaches to the scapula, humerus, and head of the biceps. 

It is lined by a thin, smooth synovial membrane. 

The rotator cuff is a group of four muscles that surround the shoulder joint and contribute to the shoulder's stability. 

The muscles of the rotator cuff are supraspinatus, subscapularis, infraspinatus, and teres minor. 

The cuff adheres to the glenohumeral capsule and attaches to the humeral head.
The shoulder must be mobile enough for the wide range actions of the arms and hands, but stable enough to allow for actions such as lifting, pushing, and pulling.


== Structure ==

The shoulder consists of a ball-and-socket joint formed by the humerus and scapula and their surrounding structures - ligaments, muscles, tendons - which support the bones and maintain the relationship of one to another. 

These supporting structures attach to the clavicle, humerus, and scapula, the latter providing the glenoid cavity, acromion and coracoid processes. 

The main joint of the shoulder is the shoulder joint (or glenohumeral joint), between the humerus and the glenoid process of the scapular. 

The acromioclavicular joint and sternoclavicular joint also play a role in shoulder movements. 

White hyaline cartilage on the ends of the bones (called articular cartilage) allows the bones to glide and move on each other, and the joint space is surrounded by a synovial membrane. 

Around the joint space are muscles - the rotator cuff, which directly surrounds and attaches to the shoulder joint - and other muscles that help provide stability and facilitate movement.
Two filmy sac-like structures called bursae permit smooth gliding between bone, muscle, and tendon. 

They cushion and protect the rotator cuff from the bony arch of the acromion.The glenoid labrum is the second kind of cartilage in the shoulder which is distinctly different from the articular cartilage. 

This cartilage is more fibrous or rigid than the cartilage on the ends of the ball and socket. 

Also, this cartilage is also found only around the socket where it is attached.


=== Joint ===


The shoulder joint (also known as the glenohumeral joint) is the main joint of the shoulder. 

It is a ball and socket joint that allows the arm to rotate in a circular fashion or to hinge out and up away from the body. 

It is formed by the articulation between the head of the humerus and the lateral scapula (specifically-the glenoid cavity of the scapula). 

The "ball" of the joint is the rounded, medial anterior surface of the humerus and the "socket" is formed by the glenoid cavity, the dish-shaped portion of the lateral scapula. 

The shallowness of the cavity and relatively loose connections between the shoulder and the rest of the body allows the arm to have tremendous mobility, at the expense of being much easier to dislocate than most other joints in the body. 

There is an approximately 4-to-1 disproportion in size between the large head of the humerus and the shallow glenoid cavity.The glenoid cavity is made deeper by the addition of the fibrocartilaginous ring of the glenoid labrum.
The capsule is a soft tissue envelope that encircles the glenohumeral joint and attaches to the scapula, humerus, and head of the biceps. 

It is lined by a thin, smooth synovial membrane. 

This capsule is strengthened by the coracohumeral ligament which attaches the coracoid process of the scapula to the greater tubercle of the humerus. 

There are also three other ligaments attaching the lesser tubercle of the humerus to lateral scapula and are collectively called the glenohumeral ligaments.The transverse humeral ligament, which passes from the lesser tubercle to the greater tubercle of humerus, covers the intertubercular groove, in which the long head of biceps brachii travels.


=== Rotator cuff ===


The rotator cuff is an anatomical term given to the group of four muscles and their tendons that act to stabilize the shoulder. 

These muscles are the supraspinatus, infraspinatus, teres minor and subscapularis and that hold the head of the humerus in the glenoid cavity during movement. 

The cuff adheres to the glenohumeral capsule and attaches to the head of the humerus. 

Together, these keep the humeral head in the glenoid cavity, preventing upward migration of the humeral head caused by the pull of the deltoid muscle at the beginning of arm elevation. 

The infraspinatus and the teres minor, along with the anterior fibers of the deltoid muscle, are responsible for external rotation of the arm.The four tendons of these muscles converge to form the rotator cuff tendon. 

This tendon, along with the articular capsule, the coracohumeral ligament, and the glenohumeral ligament complex, blend into a confluent sheet before insertion into the humeral tuberosities. 

The infraspinatus and teres minor fuse near their musculotendinous junctions, while the supraspinatus and subscapularis tendons join as a sheath that surrounds the biceps tendon at the entrance of the bicipital groove.


=== Other muscles ===

Muscles from the shoulder region
In addition to the four muscles of the rotator cuff, the deltoid muscle and teres major muscles arise and exist in the shoulder region itself. 

The deltoid muscle covers the shoulder joint on three sides, arising from the front upper third of the clavicle, the acromion, and the spine of the scapula, and travelling to insert on the deltoid tubercle of the humerus. 

Contraction of each part of the deltoid assists in different movements of the shoulder - flexion (clavicular part), abduction (middle part) and extension (scapular part). 

The teres major attaches to the outer part of the back of the scapula, beneath the teres minor, and attaches to the upper part of the humerus. 

It helps with medial rotation of the humerus.Muscles from the front
Muscles from the chest wall that contribute to the shoulder are:
Muscles from the back


=== Armpit ===

The armpit (Latin: axilla) is formed by the space between the muscles of the shoulder. 

The nerves and blood vessels of the arm travel through the armpit, and it possesses several sets of lymph nodes that are able to be examined. 

The armpit is formed by the pectoralis major and minor muscles at the front, the latissimus dorsi and teres major muscles at the back, the serratus anterior muscle on its inner surface, and the intertubercular groove of the humerus on the outer side.


=== Nerve supply and passage ===


The skin around the shoulder is supplied by C2-C4 (upper), and C7 and T2 (lower area). 

The brachial plexus emerges as nerve roots from the cervical vertebrae C5-T1. 

Branches of the plexus, in particular from C5-C6, supply the majority of the muscles of the shoulder.


=== Blood vessels ===

The subclavian artery arises from the brachiocephalic trunk on the right and directly from the aorta from the left. 

This becomes the axillary artery as it passes beyond the first rib. 

The axillary artery also supplies blood to the arm, and is one of the major sources of blood to the shoulder region. 

The other major sources are the transverse cervical artery and the suprascapular artery, both branches of the thyrocervical trunk which itself is a branch of the subclavian artery. 

The blood vessels form a network (anastamosis) behind the shoulder that helps to supply blood to the arm even when the axillary artery is compromised.


== Function ==

The muscles and joints of the shoulder allow it to move through a remarkable range of motion, making it one of the most mobile joints in the human body. 

The shoulder can abduct, adduct, rotate, be raised in front of and behind the torso and move through a full 360° in the sagittal plane. 

This tremendous range of motion also makes the shoulder extremely unstable, far more prone to dislocation and injury than other jointsThe following describes the terms used for different movements of the shoulder:


== Development ==



=== Puberty ===

Under the influence of testosterone and growth hormone, the shoulders broaden in males during puberty.


== Clinical significance ==


The shoulder is the most movable joint in the body. 

However, it is an unstable joint because of the range of motion allowed. 

This instability increases the likelihood of joint injury, which often leads to a degenerative process in which tissues break down and no longer function well.


=== Fracture ===

Fractures of shoulder bones can include clavicular fractures, scapular fractures, and fractures of the upper humerus.


=== Pain ===

Shoulder problems, including pain, are common and can relate to any of the structures within the shoulder. 

The primary cause of shoulder pain is a rotator cuff tear. 

The supraspinatus is most commonly involved in a rotator cuff tear.When this type of cartilage starts to wear out (a process called arthritis), the joint becomes painful and stiff.
Arthritis
Frozen shoulder
Impingement syndrome
Shoulder dislocation
Nerve entrapment syndrome


=== Imaging ===

Imaging of the shoulder includes ultrasound, X-ray and MRI, and is guided by the suspected diagnosis and presenting symptoms.
Conventional x-rays and ultrasonography are the primary tools used to confirm a diagnosis of injuries sustained to the rotator cuff. 

For extended clinical questions, imaging through Magnetic Resonance with or without intraarticular contrast agent is indicated.
Hodler et al. recommend starting scanning with conventional x-rays taken from at least two planes, since this method gives a wide first impression and even has the chance of exposing any frequent shoulder pathologies, i.e., decompensated rotator cuff tears, tendinitis calcarea, dislocations, fractures, usures, and/or osteophytes. 

Furthermore, x-rays are required for the planning of an optimal CT or MR image.The conventional invasive arthrography is nowadays being replaced by the non-invasive MRI and ultrasound, and is used as an imaging reserve for patients who are contraindicated for MRI, for example pacemaker-carriers with an unclear and unsure ultrasonography.


==== X-ray ====
Projectional radiography views of the shoulder include:

AP-projection 40° posterior oblique after GrasheyThe body has to be rotated about 30 to 45 degrees towards the shoulder to be imaged, and the standing or sitting patient lets the arm hang. 

This method reveals the joint gap and the vertical alignment towards the socket.
Transaxillary projectionThe arm should be abducted 80 to 100 degrees. 

This method reveals:
The horizontal alignment of the humerus head in respect to the socket and the lateral clavicle in respect to the acromion
Lesions of the anterior and posterior socket border, or of the tuberculum minus
The eventual non-closure of the acromial apophysis
The coraco-humeral intervalY-projectionThe lateral contour of the shoulder should be positioned in front of the film in a way that the longitudinal axis of the scapula continues parallel to the path of the rays. 

This method reveals:
The horizontal centralization of the humerus head and socket
The osseous margins of the coraco-acromial arch and hence the supraspinatus outlet canal
The shape of the acromionThis projection has a low tolerance for errors and, accordingly, needs proper execution. 

The Y-projection can be traced back to Wijnblath’s 1933 published cavitas-en-face projection.

		
		


==== Ultrasound ====
There are several advantages of ultrasound. 

It is relatively cheap, does not emit any radiation, is accessible, is capable of visualizing tissue function in real time, and allows the performance of provocative maneuvers in order to replicate the patient’s pain. 

Those benefits have helped ultrasound become a common initial choice for assessing tendons and soft tissues. 

Limitations include, for example, the high degree of operator dependence and the inability to define pathologies in bones. 

One also has to have an extensive anatomical knowledge of the examined region and keep an open mind to normal variations and artifacts created during the scan.Although musculoskeletal ultrasound training, like medical training in general, is a lifelong process, Kissin et al. suggests that rheumatologists who taught themselves how to manipulate ultrasound can use it just as well as international musculo-skeletal ultrasound experts to diagnose common rheumatic conditions.After the introduction of high-frequency transducers in the mid-1980s, ultrasound has become a conventional tool for taking accurate and precise images of the shoulder to support diagnosis.Adequate for the examination are high-resolution, high-frequency transducers with a transmission frequency of 5, 7.5, and 10 MHz. 

To improve the focus on structures close to the skin an additional "water start-up length" is advisable. 

During the examination the patient is asked to be seated, the affected arm is then adducted and the elbow is bent to 90 degrees. 

Slow and cautious passive lateral and/or medial rotations have the effect of being able to visualize different sections of the shoulder. 

In order to also demonstrate those parts which are hidden under the acromion in the neutral position, a maximum medial rotation with hyperextension behind the back is required.To avoid the different tendon echogenicities caused by different instrument settings, Middleton compared the tendon’s echogenicity with that of the deltoid muscle, which is still lege artis.Usually the echogenicity compared to the deltoid muscle is homogeneous intensified without dorsal echo extinction. 

Variability with reduced or intensified echo has also been found in healthy tendons. 

Bilateral comparison is very helpful when distinguishing and setting boundaries between physiological variants and a possible pathological finding. 

Degenerative changes at the rotator cuff often are found on both sides of the body. 

Consequently, unilateral differences rather point to a pathological source and bilateral changes rather to a physiological variation.In addition, a dynamic examination can help to differentiate between an ultrasound artifact and a real pathology.To accurately evaluate the echogenicity of an ultrasound, one has to take into account the physical laws of reflection, absorption and dispersion. 

It is at all times important to acknowledge that the structures in the joint of the shoulder are not aligned in the transversal, coronal or sagittal plane, and that therefore during imaging of the shoulder the transducer head has to be held perpendicularly or parallel to the structures of interest. 

Otherwise the appearing echogenicity may not be evaluated.


==== MRI ====
Orthopedics established the MRI early on as the tool of choice for joint- and soft tissue-imaging because of its non-invasiveness, lack of radiation exposure, multi planar slicing possibilities and the high soft tissue contrast.MRIs can provide joint details to the treating orthopedist, helping them to diagnose and decide the next appropriate therapeutic step.
To examine the shoulder, the patient should lay down with the concerned arm is in lateral rotation. 

For signal detection it is recommended to use a surface-coil. 

To find pathologies of the rotator cuff in the basic diagnostic investigation, T2-weighted sequences with fat-suppression or STIR sequences have proven value. 

In general, the examination should occur in the following three main planes: axial, oblique coronal and sagittal.Most morphological changes and injuries are sustained to the supraspinatus tendon. 

Traumatic rotator cuff changes are often located antero-superior, meanwhile degenerative changes more likely are supero-posterior.
Tendons are predominantly composed of dense collagen fiber bundles. 

Because of their extreme short T2-relaxation time they appear typically signal-weak, respectively, dark. 

Degenerative changes, inflammations and also partial and complete tears cause loss of the original tendon structure. 

Fatty deposits, mucous degeneration and hemorrhages lead to an increased intratendinal T1-image. 

Edema formations, inflammatory changes and ruptures increase the signals in a T2-weighted image.


==== MRA ====
While using MRI, true lesions at the rotator interval region between the parts of the supraspinatus and subscapularis are all but impossible to distinguish from normal synovium and capsule.In 1999, Weishaupt D. et al. reached through two readers a significant better visibility of pulley lesions at the rotator interval and the expected location of the reflection pulley of the long biceps and subscapularis tendon on parasagittal (reader1/reader2 sensitivity: 86%/100%; specificity: 90%/70%) and axial (reader1/reader2 sensitivity: 86%/93%; specificity: 90%/80%) MRA images.When examining the rotator cuff, the MRA has a couple of advantages compared to the native MRI. 

Through a fat suppressed T2-weighted spin echo, MRA can reproduce an extreme high fat-water-contrast, which helps to detect water-deposits with better damage diagnosis in structurally changed collagen fiber bundles.


== Other animals ==

Tetrapod forelimbs are characterised by a high degree of mobility in the shoulder-thorax connection. 

Lacking a solid skeletal connection between the shoulder girdle and the vertebral column, the forelimb's attachment to the trunk is instead mainly controlled by serratus lateralis and levator scapulae. 

Depending on locomotor style, a bone connects the shoulder girdle to the trunk in some animals; the coracoid bone in reptiles and birds, and the clavicle in primates and bats; but cursorial mammals lack this bone.In primates, the shoulder shows characteristics that differ from other mammals, including a well developed clavicle, a dorsally shifted scapula with prominent acromion and spine, and a humerus featuring a straight shaft and a spherical head.

"In terms of comparative anatomy the human scapula represents two bones that have become fused together; the (dorsal) scapula proper and the (ventral) coracoid. 

The epiphyseal line across the glenoid cavity is the line of fusion. 

They are the counterparts of the ilium and ischium of the pelvic girdle."



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shoulder
;;;ES;;;



HOMBRO


El hombro humano se compone de tres huesos: la clavícula (clavícula), la escápula (omóplato) y el húmero (hueso de la parte superior del brazo), así como los músculos, ligamentos y tendones asociados.

Las articulaciones entre los huesos del hombro forman las articulaciones del hombro.

La articulación del hombro, también conocida como articulación glenohumeral, es la articulación principal del hombro, pero puede incluir más ampliamente la articulación acromioclavicular.

En anatomía humana, la articulación del hombro comprende la parte del cuerpo donde el húmero se une a la escápula y la cabeza se asienta en la cavidad glenoidea.

El hombro es el grupo de estructuras en la región de la articulación. La articulación del hombro es la articulación principal del hombro.

Es una articulación esférica que permite que el brazo gire de forma circular o que gire hacia afuera y hacia arriba lejos del cuerpo.

La cápsula articular es una envoltura de tejido blando que rodea la articulación glenohumeral y se une a la escápula, el húmero y la cabeza del bíceps.

Está revestido por una membrana sinovial delgada y lisa.

El manguito de los rotadores es un grupo de cuatro músculos que rodean la articulación del hombro y contribuyen a la estabilidad del hombro.

Los músculos del manguito de los rotadores son el supraespinoso, el subescapular, el infraespinoso y el redondo menor.

El manguito se adhiere a la cápsula glenohumeral y se une a la cabeza humeral.
El hombro debe ser lo suficientemente móvil para la amplia gama de acciones de los brazos y las manos, pero lo suficientemente estable para permitir acciones como levantar, empujar y tirar.


== Estructura ==

El hombro consta de una articulación esférica formada por el húmero y la escápula y sus estructuras circundantes (ligamentos, músculos, tendones) que sostienen los huesos y mantienen la relación entre ellos.

Estas estructuras de soporte se unen a la clavícula, el húmero y la escápula; esta última forma la cavidad glenoidea, el acromion y las apófisis coracoides.

La articulación principal del hombro es la articulación del hombro (o articulación glenohumeral), entre el húmero y el proceso glenoideo de la escápula.

La articulación acromioclavicular y la articulación esternoclavicular también juegan un papel en los movimientos del hombro.

El cartílago hialino blanco en los extremos de los huesos (llamado cartílago articular) permite que los huesos se deslicen y se muevan entre sí, y el espacio articular está rodeado por una membrana sinovial.

Alrededor del espacio articular hay músculos, el manguito rotador, que rodea y se une directamente a la articulación del hombro, y otros músculos que ayudan a brindar estabilidad y facilitar el movimiento.
Dos estructuras parecidas a sacos transparentes llamadas bursas permiten un deslizamiento suave entre el hueso, el músculo y el tendón.

Amortiguan y protegen el manguito rotador del arco óseo del acromion. El labrum glenoideo es el segundo tipo de cartílago en el hombro que es claramente diferente del cartílago articular.

Este cartílago es más fibroso o rígido que el cartílago en los extremos de la bola y la cavidad.

Además, este cartílago también se encuentra solo alrededor del zócalo donde se une.


=== Articulación ===


La articulación del hombro (también conocida como articulación glenohumeral) es la articulación principal del hombro.

Es una articulación esférica que permite que el brazo gire de forma circular o que gire hacia afuera y hacia arriba lejos del cuerpo.

Está formado por la articulación entre la cabeza del húmero y la escápula lateral (en concreto, la cavidad glenoidea de la escápula).

La "bola" de la articulación es la superficie anterior medial redondeada del húmero y la "cavidad" está formada por la cavidad glenoidea, la porción en forma de plato de la escápula lateral.

La poca profundidad de la cavidad y las conexiones relativamente sueltas entre el hombro y el resto del cuerpo permiten que el brazo tenga una gran movilidad, a expensas de ser mucho más fácil de dislocar que la mayoría de las demás articulaciones del cuerpo.

Hay una desproporción de tamaño de aproximadamente 4 a 1 entre la cabeza grande del húmero y la cavidad glenoidea poco profunda. La cavidad glenoidea se hace más profunda mediante la adición del anillo fibrocartilaginoso del labrum glenoideo.
La cápsula es una envoltura de tejido blando que rodea la articulación glenohumeral y se une a la escápula, el húmero y la cabeza del bíceps.

Está revestido por una membrana sinovial delgada y lisa.

Esta cápsula está reforzada por el ligamento coracohumeral que une la apófisis coracoides de la escápula al tubérculo mayor del húmero.

También hay otros tres ligamentos que unen el tubérculo menor del húmero a la escápula lateral y se denominan colectivamente ligamentos glenohumerales. El ligamento humeral transverso, que pasa del tubérculo menor al tubérculo mayor del húmero, cubre el surco intertubercular, en el que el La cabeza larga del bíceps braquial viaja.


=== Manguito rotador ===


El manguito rotador es un término anatómico dado al grupo de cuatro músculos y sus tendones que actúan para estabilizar el hombro.

Estos músculos son el supraespinoso, infraespinoso, redondo menor y subescapular y que sujetan la cabeza del húmero en la cavidad glenoidea durante el movimiento.

El manguito se adhiere a la cápsula glenohumeral y se une a la cabeza del húmero.

Juntos, estos mantienen la cabeza humeral en la cavidad glenoidea, evitando la migración hacia arriba de la cabeza humeral causada por la tracción del músculo deltoides al comienzo de la elevación del brazo.

El infraespinoso y el redondo menor, junto con las fibras anteriores del músculo deltoides, son responsables de la rotación externa del brazo. Los cuatro tendones de estos músculos convergen para formar el tendón del manguito rotador.

Este tendón, junto con la cápsula articular, el ligamento coracohumeral y el complejo del ligamento glenohumeral, se mezclan en una lámina confluente antes de la inserción en las tuberosidades humerales.

El infraespinoso y el redondo menor se fusionan cerca de sus uniones musculotendinosas, mientras que los tendones del supraespinoso y del subescapular se unen como una vaina que rodea el tendón del bíceps en la entrada del surco bicipital.


=== Otros músculos ===

Músculos de la región del hombro.
Además de los cuatro músculos del manguito de los rotadores, el músculo deltoides y los músculos redondos mayores surgen y existen en la región del hombro.

El músculo deltoides cubre la articulación del hombro en tres lados, se origina en el tercio anterior superior de la clavícula, el acromion y la espina de la escápula, y viaja para insertarse en el tubérculo deltoides del húmero.

La contracción de cada parte del deltoides ayuda en diferentes movimientos del hombro: flexión (parte clavicular), abducción (parte media) y extensión (parte escapular).

El redondo mayor se une a la parte exterior de la parte posterior de la escápula, debajo del redondo menor, y se une a la parte superior del húmero.

Ayuda con la rotación medial del húmero. Músculos desde el frente
Los músculos de la pared torácica que contribuyen al hombro son:
Músculos de la espalda


=== Axila ===

La axila (latín: axilla) está formada por el espacio entre los músculos del hombro.

Los nervios y los vasos sanguíneos del brazo viajan a través de la axila y posee varios conjuntos de ganglios linfáticos que se pueden examinar.

La axila está formada por los músculos pectoral mayor y menor en la parte anterior, los músculos dorsal ancho y redondo mayor en la parte posterior, el músculo serrato anterior en su superficie interna y el surco intertubercular del húmero en la parte externa.


=== Suministro y pasaje nervioso ===


La piel alrededor del hombro está inervada por C2-C4 (superior) y C7 y T2 (área inferior).

El plexo braquial emerge como raíces nerviosas de las vértebras cervicales C5-T1.

Las ramas del plexo, en particular de C5-C6, inervan la mayoría de los músculos del hombro.


=== Vasos sanguíneos ===

La arteria subclavia surge del tronco braquiocefálico a la derecha y directamente de la aorta a la izquierda.

Esta se convierte en la arteria axilar cuando pasa más allá de la primera costilla.

La arteria axilar también suministra sangre al brazo y es una de las principales fuentes de sangre a la región del hombro.

Las otras fuentes principales son la arteria cervical transversa y la arteria supraescapular, ambas ramas del tronco tirocervical, que a su vez es una rama de la arteria subclavia.

Los vasos sanguíneos forman una red (anastomosis) detrás del hombro que ayuda a suministrar sangre al brazo incluso cuando la arteria axilar está comprometida.


== Función ==

Los músculos y las articulaciones del hombro le permiten moverse a través de un notable rango de movimiento, lo que lo convierte en una de las articulaciones más móviles del cuerpo humano.

El hombro puede abducir, aducir, rotar, elevarse por delante y por detrás del torso y moverse 360° completos en el plano sagital.

Este tremendo rango de movimiento también hace que el hombro sea extremadamente inestable, mucho más propenso a dislocaciones y lesiones que otras articulaciones. A continuación, se describen los términos utilizados para los diferentes movimientos del hombro:


== Desarrollo ==



=== Pubertad ===

Bajo la influencia de la testosterona y la hormona del crecimiento, los hombros se ensanchan en los hombres durante la pubertad.


== Importancia clínica ==


El hombro es la articulación más móvil del cuerpo.

Sin embargo, es una articulación inestable debido al rango de movimiento permitido.

Esta inestabilidad aumenta la probabilidad de lesión articular, lo que a menudo conduce a un proceso degenerativo en el que los tejidos se rompen y ya no funcionan bien.


=== Fractura ===

Las fracturas de los huesos del hombro pueden incluir fracturas claviculares, fracturas escapulares y fracturas del húmero superior.


=== Dolor ===

Los problemas del hombro, incluido el dolor, son comunes y pueden relacionarse con cualquiera de las estructuras dentro del hombro.

La causa principal del dolor de hombro es un desgarro del manguito rotador.

El supraespinoso es el más comúnmente afectado en un desgarro del manguito de los rotadores. Cuando este tipo de cartílago comienza a desgastarse (un proceso llamado artritis), la articulación se vuelve dolorosa y rígida.
Artritis
Hombro congelado
Síndrome de pinzamiento
Luxación de hombro
Síndrome de atrapamiento nervioso


=== Imágenes ===

Las imágenes del hombro incluyen ecografía, rayos X y resonancia magnética, y se guían por el diagnóstico de sospecha y los síntomas de presentación.
Las radiografías convencionales y la ecografía son las herramientas principales que se utilizan para confirmar el diagnóstico de las lesiones sufridas en el manguito de los rotadores.

Para preguntas clínicas extendidas, está indicada la imagen por Resonancia Magnética con o sin agente de contraste intraarticular.
Hodler et al. recomiendan iniciar el escaneo con radiografías convencionales tomadas de al menos dos planos, ya que este método da una primera impresión amplia e incluso tiene la posibilidad de exponer patologías frecuentes del hombro, es decir, desgarros del manguito rotador descompensados, tendinitis calcárea, luxaciones, fracturas, usuras y/o osteofitos.

Además, los rayos X son necesarios para la planificación de una imagen óptima de TC o RM. La artrografía invasiva convencional está siendo reemplazada hoy en día por la RM no invasiva y la ecografía, y se utiliza como reserva de imágenes para pacientes que están contraindicados para la RM, por ejemplo, portadores de marcapasos con una ecografía poco clara e insegura.


==== Rayos X ====
Las vistas de radiografía de proyección del hombro incluyen:

Proyección AP oblicua posterior de 40° después de Grashey El cuerpo debe girarse entre 30 y 45 grados hacia el hombro para obtener imágenes, y el paciente de pie o sentado deja que el brazo cuelgue.

Este método revela el espacio articular y la alineación vertical hacia el encaje.
Proyección transaxilar El brazo debe estar en abducción de 80 a 100 grados.

Este método revela:
La alineación horizontal de la cabeza del húmero con respecto a la cavidad y la clavícula lateral con respecto al acromion.
Lesiones del borde anterior y posterior del alvéolo, o del tubérculo menos
El eventual no cierre de la apófisis acromial
Proyección en Y del intervalo coracohumeral El contorno lateral del hombro debe colocarse frente a la película de manera que el eje longitudinal de la escápula continúe paralelo a la trayectoria de los rayos.

Este método revela:
La centralización horizontal de la cabeza y la cavidad del húmero.
Los márgenes óseos del arco coracoacromial y, por lo tanto, el canal de salida del supraespinoso.
La forma del acromionEsta proyección tiene una baja tolerancia a los errores y, en consecuencia, necesita una ejecución adecuada.

La proyección Y se remonta a la proyección cavitas-en-face publicada por Wijnblath en 1933.

 
 


==== Ultrasonido ====
Las ventajas de la ecografía son varias.

Es relativamente económico, no emite radiación, es accesible, es capaz de visualizar la función de los tejidos en tiempo real y permite realizar maniobras de provocación para replicar el dolor del paciente.

Esos beneficios han ayudado a que el ultrasonido se convierta en una opción inicial común para evaluar tendones y tejidos blandos.

Las limitaciones incluyen, por ejemplo, el alto grado de dependencia del operador y la incapacidad para definir patologías en los huesos.

También se debe tener un amplio conocimiento anatómico de la región examinada y mantener una mente abierta a las variaciones normales y los artefactos creados durante la exploración. Aunque la formación en ultrasonido musculoesquelético, como la formación médica en general, es un proceso de por vida, Kissin et al. sugiere que los reumatólogos que aprendieron por sí mismos cómo manipular el ultrasonido pueden usarlo tan bien como los expertos internacionales en ultrasonido musculoesquelético para diagnosticar afecciones reumáticas comunes. Después de la introducción de los transductores de alta frecuencia a mediados de la década de 1980, el ultrasonido se ha convertido en una herramienta convencional para tomar imágenes exactas y precisas del hombro para respaldar el diagnóstico. Son adecuados para el examen los transductores de alta resolución y alta frecuencia con una frecuencia de transmisión de 5, 7,5 y 10 MHz.

Para mejorar el enfoque en las estructuras cercanas a la piel, se recomienda una "longitud de inicio de agua" adicional.

Durante el examen se le pide al paciente que se siente, luego se aduce el brazo afectado y se dobla el codo a 90 grados.

Las rotaciones laterales y/o mediales pasivas lentas y cautelosas tienen el efecto de poder visualizar diferentes secciones del hombro.

Para demostrar también aquellas partes que están ocultas bajo el acromion en la posición neutra, se requiere una rotación medial máxima con hiperextensión detrás de la espalda. Para evitar las diferentes ecogenicidades del tendón causadas por diferentes ajustes del instrumento, Middleton comparó la ecogenicidad del tendón con la de el músculo deltoides, que todavía es lege artis. Por lo general, la ecogenicidad en comparación con el músculo deltoides se intensifica homogéneamente sin extinción del eco dorsal.

También se ha encontrado variabilidad con eco reducido o intensificado en tendones sanos.

La comparación bilateral es muy útil a la hora de distinguir y establecer límites entre las variantes fisiológicas y un posible hallazgo patológico.

Los cambios degenerativos en el manguito de los rotadores a menudo se encuentran en ambos lados del cuerpo.

En consecuencia, las diferencias unilaterales apuntan más a una fuente patológica y los cambios bilaterales a una variación fisiológica. Además, un examen dinámico puede ayudar a diferenciar entre un artefacto de ultrasonido y una patología real. Para evaluar con precisión la ecogenicidad de un ultrasonido, uno tiene que tener en cuenta las leyes físicas de reflexión, absorción y dispersión.

Es importante reconocer en todo momento que las estructuras en la articulación del hombro no están alineadas en el plano transversal, coronal o sagital y que, por lo tanto, durante la toma de imágenes del hombro, la cabeza del transductor debe mantenerse perpendicular o paralela a las estructuras. de interés.

De lo contrario, es posible que no se evalúe la ecogenicidad que aparece.


==== Resonancia magnética ====
La ortopedia estableció la resonancia magnética desde el principio como la herramienta de elección para la obtención de imágenes de tejidos blandos y articulaciones debido a su no invasividad, falta de exposición a la radiación, posibilidades de corte multiplanar y el alto contraste de tejidos blandos. Las resonancias magnéticas pueden proporcionar detalles de las articulaciones al tratamiento. ortopedista, ayudándoles a diagnosticar y decidir el siguiente paso terapéutico adecuado.
Para examinar el hombro, el paciente debe acostarse con el brazo afectado en rotación lateral.

Para la detección de señal se recomienda utilizar una bobina de superficie.

Para encontrar patologías del manguito de los rotadores en la investigación diagnóstica básica, las secuencias ponderadas en T2 con supresión de grasa o secuencias STIR tienen un valor probado.

En general, el examen debe realizarse en los tres planos principales siguientes: axial, coronal oblicuo y sagital. La mayoría de los cambios morfológicos y las lesiones se producen en el tendón del supraespinoso.

Los cambios traumáticos del manguito de los rotadores a menudo se ubican en la parte anterosuperior, mientras que los cambios degenerativos son más probables en la parte superoposterior.
Los tendones se componen predominantemente de densos haces de fibras de colágeno.

Debido a su tiempo de relajación T2 extremadamente corto, aparecen típicamente con señal débil, respectivamente, oscuros.

Los cambios degenerativos, las inflamaciones y también los desgarros parciales y completos provocan la pérdida de la estructura original del tendón.

Los depósitos grasos, la degeneración mucosa y las hemorragias conducen a una imagen T1 intratendinal aumentada.

Las formaciones de edema, los cambios inflamatorios y las rupturas aumentan las señales en una imagen potenciada en T2.


==== ARM ====
Durante el uso de MRI, las lesiones verdaderas en la región del intervalo rotador entre las partes del supraespinoso y el subescapular son casi imposibles de distinguir del sinovio y la cápsula normales. En 1999, Weishaupt D. et al. alcanzado a través de dos lectores una visibilidad significativamente mejor de las lesiones de la polea en el intervalo de los rotadores y la ubicación esperada de la polea de reflexión del tendón largo del bíceps y del subescapular en parasagital (sensibilidad lector1/lector2: 86%/100%; especificidad: 90%/70 %) y axial (sensibilidad del lector 1/lector 2: 86 %/93 %; especificidad: 90 %/80 %) Imágenes de ARM. Al examinar el manguito de los rotadores, la ARM tiene un par de ventajas en comparación con la RMN nativa.

A través de un eco de espín ponderado en T2 con supresión de grasa, la MRA puede reproducir un contraste de agua y grasa extremadamente alto, lo que ayuda a detectar depósitos de agua con un mejor diagnóstico de daños en haces de fibras de colágeno estructuralmente modificados.


== Otros animales ==

Las extremidades anteriores de los tetrápodos se caracterizan por un alto grado de movilidad en la conexión hombro-tórax.

Al carecer de una conexión esquelética sólida entre la cintura escapular y la columna vertebral, la unión de la extremidad anterior al tronco está controlada principalmente por el serrato lateral y el elevador de la escápula.

Según el estilo locomotor, un hueso conecta la cintura escapular con el tronco en algunos animales; el hueso coracoides en reptiles y aves, y la clavícula en primates y murciélagos; pero los mamíferos cursoriales carecen de este hueso. En los primates, el hombro muestra características que difieren de otros mamíferos, incluida una clavícula bien desarrollada, una escápula desplazada dorsalmente con un acromion y una columna vertebral prominentes, y un húmero con un eje recto y una cabeza esférica.

"En términos de anatomía comparativa, la escápula humana representa dos huesos que se han fusionado; la escápula (dorsal) propiamente dicha y la coracoides (ventral).

La línea epifisaria que atraviesa la cavidad glenoidea es la línea de fusión.

Son las contrapartes del ilion y el isquion de la cintura pélvica".



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hombro

;;;PT;;;



OMBRO


O ombro humano é composto por três ossos: a clavícula (clavícula), a escápula (omoplata) e o úmero (osso do braço), bem como músculos, ligamentos e tendões associados.

As articulações entre os ossos do ombro formam as articulações do ombro.

A articulação do ombro, também conhecida como articulação glenoumeral, é a principal articulação do ombro, mas pode incluir mais amplamente a articulação acromioclavicular.

Na anatomia humana, a articulação do ombro compreende a parte do corpo onde o úmero se liga à escápula e a cabeça fica na cavidade glenóide.

O ombro é o grupo de estruturas na região da articulação. A articulação do ombro é a principal articulação do ombro.

É uma articulação esférica que permite que o braço gire de forma circular ou se dobre e se afaste do corpo.

A cápsula articular é um envelope de tecido mole que circunda a articulação glenoumeral e se liga à escápula, úmero e cabeça do bíceps.

É revestido por uma membrana sinovial fina e lisa.

O manguito rotador é um grupo de quatro músculos que circundam a articulação do ombro e contribuem para a estabilidade do ombro.

Os músculos do manguito rotador são supraespinhal, subescapular, infraespinhal e redondo menor.

O manguito adere à cápsula glenoumeral e fixa-se à cabeça do úmero.
O ombro deve ser móvel o suficiente para as ações de amplo alcance dos braços e mãos, mas estável o suficiente para permitir ações como levantar, empurrar e puxar.


== Estrutura ==

O ombro consiste em uma articulação esferográfica formada pelo úmero e pela escápula e suas estruturas circundantes - ligamentos, músculos, tendões - que sustentam os ossos e mantêm a relação de um com o outro.

Essas estruturas de suporte se ligam à clavícula, úmero e escápula, esta última fornecendo a cavidade glenoidal, acrômio e processos coracóides.

A principal articulação do ombro é a articulação do ombro (ou articulação glenoumeral), entre o úmero e o processo glenóide da escápula.

A articulação acromioclavicular e a articulação esternoclavicular também desempenham um papel nos movimentos do ombro.

A cartilagem hialina branca nas extremidades dos ossos (chamada de cartilagem articular) permite que os ossos deslizem e se movam uns sobre os outros, e o espaço articular é cercado por uma membrana sinovial.

Ao redor do espaço articular estão os músculos - o manguito rotador, que envolve e se conecta diretamente à articulação do ombro - e outros músculos que ajudam a proporcionar estabilidade e facilitar o movimento.
Duas estruturas semelhantes a bolsas chamadas bursas permitem um deslizamento suave entre osso, músculo e tendão.

Eles amortecem e protegem o manguito rotador do arco ósseo do acrômio. O lábio glenoidal é o segundo tipo de cartilagem do ombro que é distintamente diferente da cartilagem articular.

Esta cartilagem é mais fibrosa ou rígida do que a cartilagem nas extremidades da bola e do encaixe.

Além disso, essa cartilagem também é encontrada apenas ao redor do soquete onde está conectada.


=== Articulação ===


A articulação do ombro (também conhecida como articulação glenoumeral) é a principal articulação do ombro.

É uma articulação esférica que permite que o braço gire de forma circular ou se dobre e se afaste do corpo.

É formado pela articulação entre a cabeça do úmero e a escápula lateral (especificamente a cavidade glenoidal da escápula).

A "bola" da articulação é a superfície anterior medial arredondada do úmero e o "soquete" é formado pela cavidade glenóide, a porção em forma de disco da escápula lateral.

A superficialidade da cavidade e as conexões relativamente frouxas entre o ombro e o resto do corpo permitem que o braço tenha uma tremenda mobilidade, à custa de ser muito mais fácil de deslocar do que a maioria das outras articulações do corpo.

Há uma desproporção de tamanho de aproximadamente 4 para 1 entre a grande cabeça do úmero e a cavidade glenoidal rasa. A cavidade glenoidal é aprofundada pela adição do anel fibrocartilaginoso do lábio glenoidal.
A cápsula é um envelope de tecido mole que circunda a articulação glenoumeral e se liga à escápula, úmero e cabeça do bíceps.

É revestido por uma membrana sinovial fina e lisa.

Esta cápsula é reforçada pelo ligamento coracoumeral que liga o processo coracóide da escápula ao tubérculo maior do úmero.

Existem também três outros ligamentos que ligam o tubérculo menor do úmero à escápula lateral e são chamados coletivamente de ligamentos glenoumerais. cabeça longa do bíceps braquial viaja.


=== Manguito rotador ===


O manguito rotador é um termo anatômico dado ao grupo de quatro músculos e seus tendões que atuam na estabilização do ombro.

Esses músculos são o supraespinhal, infraespinhal, redondo menor e subescapular e que mantêm a cabeça do úmero na cavidade glenoidal durante o movimento.

O manguito adere à cápsula glenoumeral e fixa-se à cabeça do úmero.

Juntos, eles mantêm a cabeça do úmero na cavidade glenoidal, impedindo a migração ascendente da cabeça do úmero causada pela tração do músculo deltoide no início da elevação do braço.

O infraespinal e o redondo menor, juntamente com as fibras anteriores do músculo deltoide, são responsáveis ​​pela rotação externa do braço. Os quatro tendões desses músculos convergem para formar o tendão do manguito rotador.

Esse tendão, juntamente com a cápsula articular, o ligamento coracoumeral e o complexo do ligamento glenoumeral, fundem-se em uma lâmina confluente antes da inserção nas tuberosidades do úmero.

Os tendões infraespinal e redondo menor se fundem perto de suas junções musculotendíneas, enquanto os tendões supraespinal e subescapular se unem como uma bainha que envolve o tendão do bíceps na entrada do sulco bicipital.


=== Outros músculos ===

Músculos da região do ombro
Além dos quatro músculos do manguito rotador, os músculos deltoide e redondo maior surgem e existem na própria região do ombro.

O músculo deltóide cobre a articulação do ombro em três lados, originando-se do terço superior anterior da clavícula, do acrômio e da espinha da escápula, e viaja para se inserir no tubérculo deltóide do úmero.

A contração de cada parte do deltoide auxilia em diferentes movimentos do ombro - flexão (parte clavicular), abdução (parte média) e extensão (parte escapular).

O redondo maior prende-se à parte externa da parte posterior da escápula, abaixo do redondo menor, e prende-se à parte superior do úmero.

Ajuda na rotação medial do úmero. Músculos da frente
Os músculos da parede torácica que contribuem para o ombro são:
Músculos das costas


=== Axila ===

A axila (latim: axila) é formada pelo espaço entre os músculos do ombro.

Os nervos e vasos sanguíneos do braço passam pela axila e ela possui vários conjuntos de linfonodos que podem ser examinados.

A axila é formada pelos músculos peitoral maior e menor na frente, os músculos grande dorsal e redondo maior na parte de trás, o músculo serrátil anterior em sua superfície interna e o sulco intertubercular do úmero no lado externo.


=== Suprimento e passagem do nervo ===


A pele ao redor do ombro é suprida por C2-C4 (superior) e C7 e T2 (região inferior).

O plexo braquial emerge como raízes nervosas das vértebras cervicais C5-T1.

Ramos do plexo, em particular de C5-C6, suprem a maioria dos músculos do ombro.


=== Vasos sanguíneos ===

A artéria subclávia origina-se do tronco braquiocefálico à direita e diretamente da aorta à esquerda.

Esta se torna a artéria axilar à medida que passa além da primeira costela.

A artéria axilar também fornece sangue para o braço e é uma das principais fontes de sangue para a região do ombro.

As outras fontes principais são a artéria cervical transversa e a artéria supraescapular, ambos ramos do tronco tireocervical, que por sua vez é um ramo da artéria subclávia.

Os vasos sanguíneos formam uma rede (anastamose) atrás do ombro que ajuda a fornecer sangue ao braço, mesmo quando a artéria axilar está comprometida.


== Função ==

Os músculos e articulações do ombro permitem que ele se mova através de uma notável amplitude de movimento, tornando-o uma das articulações mais móveis do corpo humano.

O ombro pode abduzir, aduzir, girar, ser elevado na frente e atrás do tronco e mover-se em 360° no plano sagital.

Essa tremenda amplitude de movimento também torna o ombro extremamente instável, muito mais propenso a luxações e lesões do que outras articulações. O seguinte descreve os termos usados ​​para diferentes movimentos do ombro:


== Desenvolvimento ==



=== Puberdade ===

Sob a influência da testosterona e do hormônio do crescimento, os ombros se alargam nos homens durante a puberdade.


== Significado clínico ==


O ombro é a articulação mais móvel do corpo.

No entanto, é uma articulação instável devido à amplitude de movimento permitida.

Essa instabilidade aumenta a probabilidade de lesão articular, o que muitas vezes leva a um processo degenerativo no qual os tecidos se quebram e não funcionam mais bem.


=== Fratura ===

As fraturas dos ossos do ombro podem incluir fraturas claviculares, fraturas escapulares e fraturas do úmero superior.


=== Dor ===

Problemas no ombro, incluindo dor, são comuns e podem estar relacionados a qualquer uma das estruturas do ombro.

A principal causa de dor no ombro é uma ruptura do manguito rotador.

O supraespinhoso é mais comumente envolvido em uma ruptura do manguito rotador. Quando esse tipo de cartilagem começa a se desgastar (um processo chamado artrite), a articulação se torna dolorosa e rígida.
Artrite
Ombro congelado
Síndrome do impacto
Luxação do ombro
Síndrome do aprisionamento do nervo


=== Imagens ===

A imagem do ombro inclui ultrassonografia, raio-X e ressonância magnética, e é guiada pelo diagnóstico suspeito e pelos sintomas apresentados.
Radiografias convencionais e ultrassonografia são as principais ferramentas usadas para confirmar o diagnóstico de lesões sofridas no manguito rotador.

Para questões clínicas extensas, está indicada a imagem por Ressonância Magnética com ou sem agente de contraste intra-articular.
Hodler et ai. recomendamos iniciar a varredura com radiografias convencionais em pelo menos dois planos, pois esse método dá uma primeira impressão ampla e ainda tem a chance de expor qualquer patologia frequente do ombro, ou seja, roturas descompensadas do manguito rotador, tendinite calcárea, luxações, fraturas, usuras e/ou osteófitos.

Além disso, os raios X são necessários para o planejamento de uma imagem ideal de TC ou RM. por exemplo, portadores de marcapasso com ultrassonografia pouco clara e incerta.


==== Raio X ====
As radiografias projecionais do ombro incluem:

Projeção AP 40° posterior oblíqua após Grashey O corpo deve ser girado cerca de 30 a 45 graus em direção ao ombro a ser visualizado, e o paciente em pé ou sentado deixa o braço pendurado.

Este método revela a folga da junta e o alinhamento vertical em direção ao soquete.
Projeção transaxilar O braço deve ser abduzido de 80 a 100 graus.

Este método revela:
O alinhamento horizontal da cabeça do úmero em relação ao encaixe e a clavícula lateral em relação ao acrômio
Lesões da borda anterior e posterior do alvéolo ou do tubérculo menos
O eventual não fechamento da apófise acromial
A projeção do intervalo coraco-umeral O contorno lateral do ombro deve ser posicionado à frente do filme de forma que o eixo longitudinal da escápula continue paralelo ao trajeto dos raios.

Este método revela:
A centralização horizontal da cabeça e do encaixe do úmero
As margens ósseas do arco coracoacromial e, portanto, o canal de saída do supraespinal
A forma do acrômioEsta projeção tem baixa tolerância a erros e, portanto, necessita de execução adequada.

A projeção Y pode ser rastreada até a projeção cavitas-en-face publicada por Wijnblath em 1933.

 
 


==== Ultrassom ====
Existem várias vantagens do ultrassom.

É relativamente barato, não emite radiação, é acessível, é capaz de visualizar a função tecidual em tempo real e permite a realização de manobras provocativas para replicar a dor do paciente.

Esses benefícios ajudaram o ultrassom a se tornar uma escolha inicial comum para avaliar tendões e tecidos moles.

As limitações incluem, por exemplo, o alto grau de dependência do operador e a incapacidade de definir patologias nos ossos.

Também é preciso ter amplo conhecimento anatômico da região examinada e manter a mente aberta às variações normais e artefatos criados durante o exame. Embora o treinamento em ultrassom musculoesquelético, como o treinamento médico em geral, seja um processo para toda a vida, Kissin et al. sugere que reumatologistas que aprenderam a manipular o ultrassom podem usá-lo tão bem quanto especialistas internacionais em ultrassom musculoesquelético para diagnosticar condições reumáticas comuns. tirar imagens precisas e precisas do ombro para apoiar o diagnóstico. Adequado para o exame são transdutores de alta resolução e alta frequência com uma frequência de transmissão de 5, 7,5 e 10 MHz.

Para melhorar o foco nas estruturas próximas à pele, é aconselhável um "comprimento inicial de água" adicional.

Durante o exame, o paciente é solicitado a se sentar, o braço afetado é então aduzido e o cotovelo é dobrado a 90 graus.

Rotações laterais e/ou mediais passivas lentas e cautelosas têm o efeito de poder visualizar diferentes seções do ombro.

Para demonstrar também aquelas partes que estão escondidas sob o acrômio na posição neutra, é necessária uma rotação medial máxima com hiperextensão atrás das costas. o músculo deltóide, que ainda é lege artis. Geralmente a ecogenicidade em relação ao músculo deltóide é homogênea intensificada sem extinção do eco dorsal.

Variabilidade com eco reduzido ou intensificado também foi encontrada em tendões saudáveis.

A comparação bilateral é muito útil para distinguir e estabelecer limites entre variantes fisiológicas e um possível achado patológico.

Alterações degenerativas no manguito rotador geralmente são encontradas em ambos os lados do corpo.

Consequentemente, as diferenças unilaterais apontam para uma fonte patológica e as alterações bilaterais para uma variação fisiológica. Além disso, um exame dinâmico pode ajudar a diferenciar entre um artefato de ultrassom e uma patologia real. levar em conta as leis físicas de reflexão, absorção e dispersão.

É sempre importante reconhecer que as estruturas na articulação do ombro não estão alinhadas no plano transversal, coronal ou sagital e que, portanto, durante a imagem do ombro, a cabeça do transdutor deve ser mantida perpendicular ou paralelamente às estruturas de interesse.

Caso contrário, a ecogenicidade aparente pode não ser avaliada.


==== ressonância magnética ====
A ortopedia estabeleceu a RM desde o início como a ferramenta de escolha para imagens de articulações e tecidos moles devido à sua não invasividade, falta de exposição à radiação, possibilidades de cortes multiplanares e alto contraste de tecidos moles. ortopedista, ajudando-os a diagnosticar e decidir o próximo passo terapêutico adequado.
Para examinar o ombro, o paciente deve se deitar com o braço em questão em rotação lateral.

Para detecção de sinal é recomendado o uso de uma bobina de superfície.

Para encontrar patologias do manguito rotador na investigação diagnóstica básica, as sequências ponderadas em T2 com supressão de gordura ou sequências STIR têm valor comprovado.

Em geral, o exame deve ocorrer nos três planos principais a seguir: axial, oblíquo coronal e sagital. A maioria das alterações morfológicas e lesões são sustentadas no tendão supraespinal.

As alterações traumáticas do manguito rotador são frequentemente localizadas ântero-superior, enquanto as alterações degenerativas mais provavelmente são súpero-posteriores.
Os tendões são predominantemente compostos por feixes de fibras colágenas densas.

Devido ao seu tempo de relaxamento T2 extremamente curto, eles parecem tipicamente fracos de sinal, respectivamente, escuros.

Alterações degenerativas, inflamações e também rupturas parciais e completas causam a perda da estrutura original do tendão.

Depósitos de gordura, degeneração mucosa e hemorragias levam a um aumento da imagem T1 intratendinal.

Formações de edema, alterações inflamatórias e rupturas aumentam os sinais em uma imagem ponderada em T2.


==== ARM ====
Ao usar MRI, lesões verdadeiras na região do intervalo rotador entre as partes do supraespinhal e subescapular são quase impossíveis de distinguir da sinóvia e cápsula normais. Em 1999, Weishaupt D. et al. alcançou através de dois leitores uma visibilidade significativamente melhor das lesões da polia no intervalo dos rotadores e a localização esperada da polia de reflexão do tendão do bíceps longo e subescapular na parassagital (sensibilidade leitor1/leitor2: 86%/100%; especificidade: 90%/70 %) e axial (sensibilidade do leitor1/leitor2: 86%/93%; especificidade: 90%/80%) imagens de RM. Ao examinar o manguito rotador, a ARM tem algumas vantagens em comparação com a RM nativa.

Por meio de um spin-eco ponderado em T2 com supressão de gordura, o MRA pode reproduzir um contraste extremamente alto de gordura-água, o que ajuda a detectar depósitos de água com melhor diagnóstico de danos em feixes de fibras de colágeno estruturalmente alterados.


== Outros animais ==

Os membros anteriores tetrápodes são caracterizados por um alto grau de mobilidade na conexão ombro-tórax.

Na falta de uma conexão esquelética sólida entre a cintura escapular e a coluna vertebral, a fixação do membro anterior ao tronco é controlada principalmente pelo serrátil lateral e pelo elevador da escápula.

Dependendo do estilo locomotor, um osso conecta a cintura escapular ao tronco em alguns animais; o osso coracóide em répteis e aves, e a clavícula em primatas e morcegos; mas os mamíferos cursoriais não possuem esse osso. Nos primatas, o ombro apresenta características que diferem de outros mamíferos, incluindo uma clavícula bem desenvolvida, uma escápula deslocada dorsalmente com acrômio e espinha proeminentes, e um úmero com haste reta e cabeça esférica.

"Em termos de anatomia comparada, a escápula humana representa dois ossos que se fundiram; a escápula (dorsal) propriamente dita e o coracóide (ventral).

A linha epifisária através da cavidade glenoidal é a linha de fusão.

Eles são as contrapartes do ílio e ísquio da cintura pélvica."



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shoulder

;;;FR;;;



ÉPAULE


L'épaule humaine est composée de trois os : la clavicule (clavicule), l'omoplate (omoplate) et l'humérus (os du bras) ainsi que les muscles, ligaments et tendons associés.

Les articulations entre les os de l'épaule constituent les articulations de l'épaule.

L'articulation de l'épaule, également connue sous le nom d'articulation gléno-humérale, est l'articulation principale de l'épaule, mais peut plus largement inclure l'articulation acromio-claviculaire.

Dans l'anatomie humaine, l'articulation de l'épaule comprend la partie du corps où l'humérus s'attache à l'omoplate et la tête se trouve dans la cavité glénoïde.

L'épaule est le groupe de structures dans la région de l'articulation. L'articulation de l'épaule est l'articulation principale de l'épaule.

Il s'agit d'une articulation à rotule qui permet au bras de tourner de manière circulaire ou de s'articuler et de s'éloigner du corps.

La capsule articulaire est une enveloppe de tissu mou qui entoure l'articulation gléno-humérale et se fixe à l'omoplate, à l'humérus et à la tête du biceps.

Il est bordé par une fine membrane synoviale lisse.

La coiffe des rotateurs est un groupe de quatre muscles qui entourent l'articulation de l'épaule et contribuent à la stabilité de l'épaule.

Les muscles de la coiffe des rotateurs sont le sus-épineux, le sous-scapulaire, l'infra-épineux et le petit rond.

La manchette adhère à la capsule gléno-humérale et se fixe à la tête humérale.
L'épaule doit être suffisamment mobile pour le large éventail d'actions des bras et des mains, mais suffisamment stable pour permettre des actions telles que soulever, pousser et tirer.


== Structure ==

L'épaule est constituée d'une articulation à rotule formée par l'humérus et l'omoplate et leurs structures environnantes - ligaments, muscles, tendons - qui soutiennent les os et maintiennent la relation les uns avec les autres.

Ces structures de soutien se fixent à la clavicule, à l'humérus et à l'omoplate, cette dernière fournissant la cavité glénoïde, l'acromion et les processus coracoïdes.

L'articulation principale de l'épaule est l'articulation de l'épaule (ou articulation gléno-humérale), entre l'humérus et l'apophyse glénoïde du scapulaire.

L'articulation acromio-claviculaire et l'articulation sterno-claviculaire jouent également un rôle dans les mouvements de l'épaule.

Le cartilage hyalin blanc aux extrémités des os (appelé cartilage articulaire) permet aux os de glisser et de se déplacer les uns sur les autres, et l'espace articulaire est entouré d'une membrane synoviale.

Autour de l'espace articulaire se trouvent des muscles - la coiffe des rotateurs, qui entoure et s'attache directement à l'articulation de l'épaule - et d'autres muscles qui aident à assurer la stabilité et facilitent les mouvements.
Deux structures vaporeuses en forme de sac appelées bourses permettent un glissement en douceur entre l'os, le muscle et le tendon.

Ils amortissent et protègent la coiffe des rotateurs de l'arc osseux de l'acromion. Le labrum glénoïdien est le deuxième type de cartilage de l'épaule qui est nettement différent du cartilage articulaire.

Ce cartilage est plus fibreux ou rigide que le cartilage aux extrémités de la rotule.

De plus, ce cartilage se trouve également uniquement autour de la douille où il est attaché.


=== Joint ===


L'articulation de l'épaule (également connue sous le nom d'articulation gléno-humérale) est l'articulation principale de l'épaule.

Il s'agit d'une articulation à rotule qui permet au bras de tourner de manière circulaire ou de s'articuler et de s'éloigner du corps.

Il est formé par l'articulation entre la tête de l'humérus et l'omoplate latérale (plus précisément la cavité glénoïde de l'omoplate).

La «boule» de l'articulation est la surface antérieure médiale arrondie de l'humérus et la «prise» est formée par la cavité glénoïde, la partie en forme de cuvette de l'omoplate latérale.

La faible profondeur de la cavité et les connexions relativement lâches entre l'épaule et le reste du corps permettent au bras d'avoir une mobilité énorme, au prix d'être beaucoup plus facile à disloquer que la plupart des autres articulations du corps.

Il existe une disproportion de taille d'environ 4 pour 1 entre la grosse tête de l'humérus et la cavité glénoïdienne peu profonde. La cavité glénoïdienne est rendue plus profonde par l'ajout de l'anneau fibrocartilagineux du bourrelet glénoïdien.
La capsule est une enveloppe de tissu mou qui entoure l'articulation gléno-humérale et se fixe à l'omoplate, à l'humérus et à la tête du biceps.

Il est bordé par une fine membrane synoviale lisse.

Cette capsule est renforcée par le ligament coracohuméral qui rattache le processus coracoïde de l'omoplate au tubercule majeur de l'humérus.

Il y a aussi trois autres ligaments attachant le petit tubercule de l'humérus à l'omoplate latérale et sont collectivement appelés les ligaments glénohuméraux. Le ligament huméral transverse, qui passe du petit tubercule au grand tubercule de l'humérus, recouvre la rainure intertuberculaire, dans laquelle le la longue tête du biceps brachial se déplace.


=== Coiffe des rotateurs ===


La coiffe des rotateurs est un terme anatomique donné au groupe de quatre muscles et de leurs tendons qui agissent pour stabiliser l'épaule.

Ces muscles sont le sus-épineux, l'infraspinatus, le petit rond et le sous-scapulaire et qui maintiennent la tête de l'humérus dans la cavité glénoïde pendant le mouvement.

La manchette adhère à la capsule gléno-humérale et se fixe à la tête de l'humérus.

Ensemble, ceux-ci maintiennent la tête humérale dans la cavité glénoïde, empêchant la migration vers le haut de la tête humérale causée par la traction du muscle deltoïde au début de l'élévation du bras.

L'infraspinatus et le teres minor, ainsi que les fibres antérieures du muscle deltoïde, sont responsables de la rotation externe du bras. Les quatre tendons de ces muscles convergent pour former le tendon de la coiffe des rotateurs.

Ce tendon, avec la capsule articulaire, le ligament coraco-huméral et le complexe ligamentaire gléno-huméral, se fond en un feuillet confluent avant son insertion dans les tubérosités humérales.

L'infraspinatus et le teres minor fusionnent près de leurs jonctions musculo-tendineuses, tandis que les tendons supraspinatus et subscapularis se rejoignent en une gaine qui entoure le tendon du biceps à l'entrée de la gouttière bicipitale.


=== Autres muscles ===

Muscles de la région des épaules
En plus des quatre muscles de la coiffe des rotateurs, le muscle deltoïde et les muscles du grand rond apparaissent et existent dans la région de l'épaule elle-même.

Le muscle deltoïde recouvre l'articulation de l'épaule sur trois côtés, naissant du tiers supérieur avant de la clavicule, de l'acromion et de la colonne vertébrale de l'omoplate, et se déplaçant pour s'insérer sur le tubercule deltoïde de l'humérus.

La contraction de chaque partie du deltoïde aide à différents mouvements de l'épaule - flexion (partie claviculaire), abduction (partie médiane) et extension (partie scapulaire).

Le grand rond s'attache à la partie externe de l'arrière de l'omoplate, sous le petit rond, et s'attache à la partie supérieure de l'humérus.

Il aide à la rotation médiale de l'humérus.Muscles de l'avant
Les muscles de la paroi thoracique qui contribuent à l'épaule sont :
Muscles du dos


=== Aisselle ===

L'aisselle (en latin : aisselle) est formée par l'espace entre les muscles de l'épaule.

Les nerfs et les vaisseaux sanguins du bras traversent l'aisselle et possèdent plusieurs ensembles de ganglions lymphatiques pouvant être examinés.

L'aisselle est formée par les muscles grand pectoral et petit pectoral à l'avant, les muscles grand dorsal et grand rond à l'arrière, le muscle dentelé antérieur sur sa face interne et le sillon intertuberculaire de l'humérus sur la face externe.


=== Innervation et passage ===


La peau autour de l'épaule est alimentée par C2-C4 (supérieur) et C7 et T2 (zone inférieure).

Le plexus brachial émerge sous forme de racines nerveuses des vertèbres cervicales C5-T1.

Les branches du plexus, en particulier de C5-C6, alimentent la majorité des muscles de l'épaule.


=== Vaisseaux sanguins ===

L'artère sous-clavière naît du tronc brachiocéphalique à droite et directement de l'aorte à gauche.

Cela devient l'artère axillaire lorsqu'elle passe au-delà de la première côte.

L'artère axillaire fournit également du sang au bras et est l'une des principales sources de sang dans la région de l'épaule.

Les autres sources majeures sont l'artère cervicale transverse et l'artère suprascapulaire, les deux branches du tronc thyrocervical qui lui-même est une branche de l'artère sous-clavière.

Les vaisseaux sanguins forment un réseau (anastamose) derrière l'épaule qui aide à fournir du sang au bras même lorsque l'artère axillaire est compromise.


== Fonction ==

Les muscles et les articulations de l'épaule lui permettent de se déplacer dans une amplitude de mouvement remarquable, ce qui en fait l'une des articulations les plus mobiles du corps humain.

L'épaule peut être mise en abduction, en adduction, en rotation, être soulevée devant et derrière le torse et se déplacer sur 360° dans le plan sagittal.

Cette énorme amplitude de mouvement rend également l'épaule extrêmement instable, beaucoup plus sujette à la luxation et aux blessures que les autres articulations. Ce qui suit décrit les termes utilisés pour différents mouvements de l'épaule :


== Développement ==



=== Puberté ===

Sous l'influence de la testostérone et de l'hormone de croissance, les épaules s'élargissent chez les hommes pendant la puberté.


== Signification clinique ==


L'épaule est l'articulation la plus mobile du corps.

Cependant, il s'agit d'une articulation instable en raison de l'amplitude de mouvement autorisée.

Cette instabilité augmente la probabilité de lésions articulaires, ce qui conduit souvent à un processus dégénératif dans lequel les tissus se décomposent et ne fonctionnent plus correctement.


=== Rupture ===

Les fractures des os de l'épaule peuvent inclure des fractures claviculaires, des fractures scapulaires et des fractures de l'humérus supérieur.


=== Douleur ===

Les problèmes d'épaule, y compris la douleur, sont courants et peuvent être liés à n'importe quelle structure de l'épaule.

La principale cause de douleur à l'épaule est une déchirure de la coiffe des rotateurs.

Le sus-épineux est le plus souvent impliqué dans une déchirure de la coiffe des rotateurs. Lorsque ce type de cartilage commence à s'user (un processus appelé arthrite), l'articulation devient douloureuse et raide.
Arthrite
Épaule gelée
Conflit sous-acromial
Luxation de l'épaule
Syndrome de compression nerveuse


=== Imagerie ===

L'imagerie de l'épaule comprend une échographie, une radiographie et une IRM, et est guidée par le diagnostic suspecté et les symptômes présentés.
Les rayons X et l'échographie conventionnels sont les principaux outils utilisés pour confirmer un diagnostic de blessures subies à la coiffe des rotateurs.

Pour les questions cliniques étendues, l'imagerie par résonance magnétique avec ou sans agent de contraste intra-articulaire est indiquée.
Hodler et al. recommandent de commencer la numérisation avec des radiographies conventionnelles prises à partir d'au moins deux plans, car cette méthode donne une première impression large et a même la possibilité d'exposer toutes les pathologies fréquentes de l'épaule, c'est-à-dire les déchirures décompensées de la coiffe des rotateurs, les tendinites calcarées, les luxations, les fractures, les usures , et/ou des ostéophytes.

De plus, les rayons X sont nécessaires pour la planification d'une image CT ou IRM optimale. L'arthrographie invasive conventionnelle est aujourd'hui remplacée par l'IRM et l'échographie non invasives, et est utilisée comme réserve d'imagerie pour les patients contre-indiqués à l'IRM, par exemple porteurs de stimulateur cardiaque avec une échographie peu claire et incertaine.


==== Radiographie ====
Les radiographies projetées de l'épaule comprennent :

AP-projection oblique postérieure de 40° après GrasheyLe corps doit être tourné d'environ 30 à 45 degrés vers l'épaule à imager, et le patient debout ou assis laisse pendre le bras.

Cette méthode révèle l'écart du joint et l'alignement vertical vers l'emboîture.
Projection transaxillaireLe bras doit être en abduction de 80 à 100 degrés.

Cette méthode révèle :
L'alignement horizontal de la tête de l'humérus par rapport à la cavité et de la clavicule latérale par rapport à l'acromion
Lésions du bord antérieur et postérieur de l'alvéole ou du tuberculum moins
La non-fermeture éventuelle de l'apophyse acromiale
L'intervalle coraco-huméralY-projectionLe contour latéral de l'épaule doit être positionné devant le film de manière à ce que l'axe longitudinal de l'omoplate continue parallèlement au trajet des rayons.

Cette méthode révèle :
La centralisation horizontale de la tête et de la douille de l'humérus
Les marges osseuses de l'arc coraco-acromial et donc le canal de sortie du sus-épineux
La forme de l'acromionCette projection a une faible tolérance aux erreurs et, par conséquent, nécessite une exécution correcte.

La projection en Y remonte à la projection cavitas-en-face publiée par Wijnblath en 1933.

 
 


==== Échographie ====
Les ultrasons présentent plusieurs avantages.

Il est relativement bon marché, n'émet aucun rayonnement, est accessible, est capable de visualiser la fonction tissulaire en temps réel et permet d'effectuer des manœuvres provocatrices afin de reproduire la douleur du patient.

Ces avantages ont aidé l'échographie à devenir un choix initial courant pour l'évaluation des tendons et des tissus mous.

Les limites comprennent, par exemple, le degré élevé de dépendance à l'opérateur et l'incapacité à définir les pathologies osseuses.

Il faut également avoir une connaissance anatomique approfondie de la région examinée et garder l'esprit ouvert aux variations normales et aux artefacts créés lors de l'examen. Bien que la formation en échographie musculo-squelettique, comme la formation médicale en général, soit un processus continu, Kissin et al. suggère que les rhumatologues qui ont appris par eux-mêmes à manipuler l'échographie peuvent l'utiliser aussi bien que les experts internationaux en échographie musculo-squelettique pour diagnostiquer les affections rhumatismales courantes. Après l'introduction des transducteurs à haute fréquence au milieu des années 1980, l'échographie est devenue un outil conventionnel pour prendre des images exactes et précises de l'épaule pour étayer le diagnostic. Des transducteurs haute résolution et haute fréquence avec une fréquence de transmission de 5, 7,5 et 10 MHz sont adéquats pour l'examen.

Pour améliorer la focalisation sur les structures proches de la peau, une "longueur de démarrage de l'eau" supplémentaire est recommandée.

Au cours de l'examen, le patient est invité à s'asseoir, le bras affecté est ensuite mis en adduction et le coude est plié à 90 degrés.

Des rotations latérales et/ou médiales passives lentes et prudentes ont pour effet de pouvoir visualiser différentes sections de l'épaule.

Afin de démontrer également les parties qui sont cachées sous l'acromion en position neutre, une rotation médiale maximale avec hyperextension derrière le dos est nécessaire. le muscle deltoïde, qui est toujours lege artis. Habituellement, l'échogénicité par rapport au muscle deltoïde est intensifiée de manière homogène sans extinction de l'écho dorsal.

Une variabilité avec écho réduit ou intensifié a également été trouvée dans les tendons sains.

La comparaison bilatérale est très utile pour distinguer et établir des limites entre les variantes physiologiques et une éventuelle découverte pathologique.

Les modifications dégénératives de la coiffe des rotateurs se retrouvent souvent des deux côtés du corps.

Par conséquent, les différences unilatérales indiquent plutôt une source pathologique et les modifications bilatérales plutôt une variation physiologique. De plus, un examen dynamique peut aider à différencier un artefact échographique d'une pathologie réelle. Pour évaluer avec précision l'échogénicité d'une échographie, il faut prendre en compte les lois physiques de la réflexion, de l'absorption et de la dispersion.

Il est à tout moment important de reconnaître que les structures de l'articulation de l'épaule ne sont pas alignées dans le plan transversal, coronal ou sagittal et que, par conséquent, lors de l'imagerie de l'épaule, la tête du transducteur doit être maintenue perpendiculairement ou parallèlement aux structures. d'intérêt.

Sinon, l'échogénicité apparente peut ne pas être évaluée.


==== IRM ====
L'orthopédie a établi l'IRM très tôt comme l'outil de choix pour l'imagerie des articulations et des tissus mous en raison de son caractère non invasif, de son absence d'exposition aux rayonnements, de ses possibilités de coupes multiplanaires et du contraste élevé des tissus mous. L'IRM peut fournir des détails articulaires au traitement. orthopédiste, en les aidant à diagnostiquer et à décider de la prochaine étape thérapeutique appropriée.
Pour examiner l'épaule, le patient doit être allongé avec le bras concerné en rotation latérale.

Pour la détection du signal, il est recommandé d'utiliser une bobine de surface.

Pour rechercher les pathologies de la coiffe des rotateurs dans l'investigation diagnostique de base, les séquences pondérées en T2 avec suppression de la graisse ou les séquences STIR ont fait leurs preuves.

En général, l'examen doit se dérouler dans les trois plans principaux suivants : axial, oblique coronal et sagittal. La plupart des modifications morphologiques et des lésions concernent le tendon sus-épineux.

Les changements traumatiques de la coiffe des rotateurs sont souvent situés en antéro-supérieur, tandis que les changements dégénératifs sont plus susceptibles d'être en supéro-postérieur.
Les tendons sont principalement composés de faisceaux denses de fibres de collagène.

En raison de leur temps de relaxation T2 extrêmement court, ils apparaissent généralement en signal faible, respectivement, sombres.

Les changements dégénératifs, les inflammations ainsi que les déchirures partielles et complètes entraînent la perte de la structure originale du tendon.

Les dépôts graisseux, la dégénérescence muqueuse et les hémorragies entraînent une augmentation de l'image T1 intratendinale.

Les formations d'œdème, les changements inflammatoires et les ruptures augmentent les signaux dans une image pondérée en T2.


==== ARM ====
Lors de l'utilisation de l'IRM, les véritables lésions dans la région de l'intervalle des rotateurs entre les parties du sus-épineux et du sous-scapulaire sont pratiquement impossibles à distinguer de la synoviale et de la capsule normales. En 1999, Weishaupt D. et al. atteint grâce à deux lecteurs une meilleure visibilité significative des lésions de la poulie au niveau de l'intervalle des rotateurs et de l'emplacement attendu de la poulie de réflexion du long biceps et du tendon sous-scapulaire sur le parasagittal (sensibilité lecteur1/lecteur2 : 86 %/100 % ; spécificité : 90 %/70 %) et axiales (sensibilité lecteur1/lecteur2 : 86 %/93 % ; spécificité : 90 %/80 %). Lors de l'examen de la coiffe des rotateurs, l'ARM présente quelques avantages par rapport à l'IRM native.

Grâce à un écho de spin pondéré en T2 avec suppression de la graisse, l'ARM peut reproduire un contraste graisse-eau extrêmement élevé, ce qui aide à détecter les dépôts d'eau avec un meilleur diagnostic des dommages dans les faisceaux de fibres de collagène structurellement modifiés.


== Autres animaux ==

Les membres antérieurs des tétrapodes sont caractérisés par un degré élevé de mobilité dans la connexion épaule-thorax.

En l'absence d'une connexion squelettique solide entre la ceinture scapulaire et la colonne vertébrale, l'attachement du membre antérieur au tronc est plutôt principalement contrôlé par le serratus lateralis et le levator scapulae.

Selon le style locomoteur, un os relie la ceinture scapulaire au tronc chez certains animaux; l'os coracoïde chez les reptiles et les oiseaux, et la clavicule chez les primates et les chauves-souris ; mais les mammifères curseurs manquent de cet os. Chez les primates, l'épaule présente des caractéristiques qui diffèrent des autres mammifères, notamment une clavicule bien développée, une omoplate décalée dorsalement avec un acromion et une colonne vertébrale proéminents, et un humérus avec une tige droite et une tête sphérique.

"En termes d'anatomie comparée, l'omoplate humaine représente deux os qui ont fusionné; l'omoplate (dorsale) proprement dite et la coracoïde (ventrale).

La ligne épiphysaire à travers la cavité glénoïdienne est la ligne de fusion.

Ce sont les pendants de l'ilium et de l'ischion de la ceinture pelvienne."



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Épaule
