

THYROID GLAND


The thyroid, or thyroid gland, is an endocrine gland in vertebrates. 

In humans it is in the neck and consists of two connected lobes. 

The lower two thirds of the lobes are connected by a thin band of tissue called the thyroid isthmus. 

The thyroid is located at the front of the neck, below the Adam's apple. 

Microscopically, the functional unit of the thyroid gland is the spherical thyroid follicle, lined with follicular cells (thyrocytes), and occasional parafollicular cells that surround a lumen containing colloid. 

The thyroid gland secretes three hormones: the two thyroid hormones – triiodothyronine (T3) and thyroxine (T4) – and a peptide hormone, calcitonin. 

The thyroid hormones influence the metabolic rate and protein synthesis, and in children, growth and development. 

Calcitonin plays a role in calcium homeostasis. 

Secretion of the two thyroid hormones is regulated by thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), which is secreted from the anterior pituitary gland. 

TSH is regulated by thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH), which is produced by the hypothalamus.

The thyroid gland develops in the floor of the pharynx at the base of the tongue at 3–4 weeks gestation; it then descends in front of the pharyngeal gut, and ultimately over the next few weeks, it migrates to the base of the neck. 

During migration, the thyroid remains connected to the tongue by a narrow canal, the thyroglossal duct. 

At the end of the fifth week the thyroglossal duct degenerates, and over the following two weeks the detached thyroid migrates to its final position.

Euthyroid is the term used to describe a state of normal thyroid function in the body. 

Thyroid disorders include hyperthyroidism, hypothyroidism, thyroid inflammation (thyroiditis), thyroid enlargement (goitre), thyroid nodules, and thyroid cancer. 

Hyperthyroidism is characterized by excessive secretion of thyroid hormones: the most common cause is the autoimmune disorder Graves' disease. 

Hypothyroidism is characterized by a deficient secretion of thyroid hormones: the most common cause is iodine deficiency. 

In iodine-deficient regions, hypothyroidism secondary to iodine deficiency is the leading cause of preventable intellectual disability in children. 

In iodine-sufficient regions, the most common cause of hypothyroidism is the autoimmune disorder Hashimoto's thyroiditis. 

The presence of the thyroid and its various diseases have been noted and treated for centuries, although the gland itself has only been described and named since the Renaissance. 

Knowledge of the thyroid, its biochemistry, and its disorders developed throughout the late nineteenth and twentieth centuries. 

Many modern treatments and investigative modalities evolved throughout the mid-twentieth century, including refinement of surgical techniques for thyroid removal (thyroidectomy) for the treatment of goitre; the use of radioactive iodine and thiouracil for the treatment of Graves' disease; and fine needle aspiration for diagnosis of thyroid nodules.


== Structure ==

=== Features ===

The thyroid gland is a butterfly-shaped organ composed of two lobes, left and right, connected by a narrow tissue band, called an "isthmus". 

It weighs 25 grams in adults, with each lobe being about 5 cm long, 3 cm wide, and 2 cm thick and the isthmus about 1.25 cm in height and width. 

The gland is usually larger in women than in men, and increases in size during pregnancy.

The thyroid is near the front of the neck, lying against and around the front of the larynx and trachea. 

The thyroid cartilage and cricoid cartilage lie just above the gland, below the Adam's apple. 

The isthmus extends from the second to third rings of the trachea, with the uppermost part of the lobes extending to the thyroid cartilage and the lowermost around the fourth to sixth tracheal rings. 

The infrahyoid muscles lie in front of the gland and the sternocleidomastoid muscle to the side. 

Behind the outer wings of the thyroid lie the two carotid arteries. 

The trachea, larynx, lower pharynx and esophagus all lie behind the thyroid. 

In this region, the recurrent laryngeal nerve and the inferior thyroid artery pass next to or in the ligament. 

Typically, four parathyroid glands, two on each side, lie on each side between the two layers of the thyroid capsule, at the back of the thyroid lobes.

The thyroid gland is covered by a thin fibrous capsule, which has an inner and an outer layer. 

The inner layer extrudes into the gland and forms the septae that divides the thyroid tissue into microscopic lobules. 

The outer layer is continuous with the pretracheal fascia, attaching the gland to the cricoid and thyroid cartilages via a thickening of the fascia to form the posterior suspensory ligament of thyroid gland, also known as Berry's ligament. 

This causes the thyroid to move up and down with the movement of these cartilages when swallowing occurs.


=== Blood, lymph and nerve supply ===

The thyroid is supplied with arterial blood from the superior thyroid artery, a branch of the external carotid artery, and the inferior thyroid artery, a branch of the thyrocervical trunk, and sometimes by an anatomical variant the thyroid ima artery, which has a variable origin. 

The superior thyroid artery splits into anterior and posterior branches supplying the thyroid, and the inferior thyroid artery splits into superior and inferior branches. 

The superior and inferior thyroid arteries join together behind the outer part of the thyroid lobes. 

The venous blood is drained via superior and middle thyroid veins, which drain to the internal jugular vein, and via the inferior thyroid veins. 

The inferior thyroid veins originate in a network of veins and drain into the left and right brachiocephalic veins. 

Both arteries and veins form a plexus between the two layers of the capsule of the thyroid gland.Lymphatic drainage frequently passes the prelaryngeal lymph nodes (located just above the isthmus) and the pretracheal and paratracheal lymph nodes. 

The gland receives sympathetic nerve supply from the superior, middle and inferior cervical ganglion of the sympathetic trunk. 

The gland receives parasympathetic nerve supply from the superior laryngeal nerve and the recurrent laryngeal nerve.


=== Variation ===

There are many variants in the size and shape of the thyroid gland, and in the position of the embedded parathyroid glands.

Sometimes there is a third lobe present called the pyramidal lobe. 

When present, this lobe often stretches up the hyoid bone from the thyroid isthmus and may be one to several divided lobes. 

The presence of this lobe ranges in reported studies from 18.3% to 44.6%. 

It was shown to more often arise from the left side and occasionally separated. 

The pyramidal lobe is also known as Lalouette's pyramid. 

The pyramidal lobe is a remnant of the thyroglossal duct, which usually wastes away during the thyroid gland's descent. 

Small accessory thyroid glands may in fact occur anywhere along the thyroglossal duct, from the foramen cecum of the tongue to the position of the thyroid in the adult. 

A small horn at the back of the thyroid lobes, usually close to the recurrent laryngeal nerve and the inferior thyroid artery, is called Zuckerkandl's tubercle.

Other variants include a levator muscle of thyroid gland, connecting the isthmus to the body of the hyoid bone, and the presence of the small thyroid ima artery.


=== Microanatomy ===
 
At the microscopic level, there are three primary features of the thyroid—follicles, follicular cells, and parafollicular cells, first discovered by Geoffery Websterson in 1664.

FolliclesThyroid follicles are small spherical groupings of cells 0.02–0.9mm in diameter that play the main role in thyroid function. 

They consist of a rim that has a rich blood supply, nerve and lymphatic presence, that surrounds a core of colloid that consists mostly of thyroid hormone precursor proteins called thyroglobulin, an iodinated glycoprotein.

Follicular cellsThe core of a follicle is surrounded by a single layer of follicular cells. 

When stimulated by thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH), these secrete the thyroid hormones T3 and T4. 

They do this by transporting and metabolising the thyroglobulin contained in the colloid. 

Follicular cells vary in shape from flat to cuboid to columnar, depending on how active they are.

Parafollicular cellsScattered among follicular cells and in spaces between the spherical follicles are another type of thyroid cell, parafollicular cells. 

These cells secrete calcitonin and so are also called C cells.


== Development ==

In the development of the embryo, at 3–4 weeks gestational age, the thyroid gland appears as an epithelial proliferation in the floor of the pharynx at the base of the tongue between the tuberculum impar and the copula linguae. 

The copula soon becomes covered over by the hypopharyngeal eminence at a point later indicated by the foramen cecum. 

The thyroid then descends in front of the pharyngeal gut as a bilobed diverticulum through the thyroglossal duct. 

Over the next few weeks, it migrates to the base of the neck, passing in front of the hyoid bone. 

During migration, the thyroid remains connected to the tongue by a narrow canal, the thyroglossal duct. 

At the end of the fifth week the thyroglossal duct degenerates, and over the following two weeks the detached thyroid migrates to its final position.

The fetal hypothalamus and pituitary start to secrete thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) and thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH). 

TSH is first measurable at 11 weeks. 

By 18–20 weeks, the production of thyroxine (T4) reaches a clinically significant and self-sufficient level. 

Fetal triiodothyronine (T3) remains low, less than 15 ng/dL until 30 weeks, and increases to 50 ng/dL at full-term. 

The fetus needs to be self-sufficient in thyroid hormones in order to guard against neurodevelopmental disorders that would arise from maternal hypothyroidism. 

The presence of sufficient iodine is essential for healthy neurodevelopment.

The neuroendocrine parafollicular cells, also known as C cells, responsible for the production of calcitonin, are derived from foregut endoderm. 

This part of the thyroid then first forms as the ultimopharyngeal body, which begins in the ventral fourth pharyngeal pouch and joins the primordial thyroid gland during its descent to its final location.

Aberrations in prenatal development can result in various forms of thyroid dysgenesis which can cause congenital hypothyroidism, and if untreated this can lead to cretinism.


== Function ==

=== Thyroid hormones ===

The primary function of the thyroid is the production of the iodine-containing thyroid hormones, triiodothyronine (T3) and thyroxine (T4) and the peptide hormone calcitonin. 

The thyroid hormones are created from iodine and tyrosine. 

T3 is so named because it contains three atoms of iodine per molecule and T4 contains four atoms of iodine per molecule. 

The thyroid hormones have a wide range of effects on the human body. 

These include:

-Metabolic. 

The thyroid hormones increase the basal metabolic rate and have effects on almost all body tissues. 

Appetite, the absorption of substances, and gut motility are all influenced by thyroid hormones. 

They increase the absorption in the gut, generation, uptake by cells, and breakdown of glucose. 

They stimulate the breakdown of fats, and increase the number of free fatty acids. 

Despite increasing free fatty acids, thyroid hormones decrease cholesterol levels, perhaps by increasing the rate of secretion of cholesterol in bile.

-Cardiovascular. 

The hormones increase the rate and strength of the heartbeat. 

They increase the rate of breathing, intake and consumption of oxygen, and increase the activity of mitochondria. 

Combined, these factors increase blood flow and the body's temperature.

-Developmental. 

Thyroid hormones are important for normal development. 

They increase the growth rate of young people, and cells of the developing brain are a major target for the thyroid hormones T3 and T4. 

Thyroid hormones play a particularly crucial role in brain maturation during fetal development and first few years of postnatal life.

The thyroid hormones also play a role in maintaining normal sexual function, sleep, and thought patterns. 

Increased levels are associated with increased speed of thought generation but decreased focus. 

Sexual function, including libido and the maintenance of a normal menstrual cycle, are influenced by thyroid hormones.After secretion, only a very small proportion of the thyroid hormones travel freely in the blood. 

Most are bound to thyroxine-binding globulin (about 70%), transthyretin (10%), and albumin (15%). 

Only the 0.03% of T4 and 0.3% of T3 traveling freely have hormonal activity. 

In addition, up to 85% of the T3 in blood is produced following conversion from T4 by iodothyronine deiodinases in organs around the body.

Thyroid hormones act by crossing the cell membrane and binding to intracellular nuclear thyroid hormone receptors TR-α1,TR-α2,TR-β1 and TR-β2, which bind with hormone response elements and transcription factors to modulate DNA transcription. 

In addition to these actions on DNA, the thyroid hormones also act within the cell membrane or within cytoplasm via reactions with enzymes, including calcium ATPase, adenylyl cyclase, and glucose transporters.


=== Hormone production ===

The thyroid hormones are created from thyroglobulin. 

This is a protein within the colloid in the follicular lumen that is originally created within the rough endoplasmic reticulum of follicular cells and then transported into the follicular lumen. 

Thyroglobulin contains 123 units of tyrosine, which reacts with iodine within the follicular lumen.Iodine is essential for the production of the thyroid hormones. 

Iodine (I0) travels in the blood as iodide (I−), which is taken up into the follicular cells by a sodium-iodide symporter. 

This is an ion channel on the cell membrane which in the same action transports two sodium ions and an iodide ion into the cell. 

Iodide then travels from within the cell into the lumen, through the action of pendrin, an iodide-chloride antiporter. 

In the follicular lumen, the iodide is then oxidized to iodine. 

This makes it more reactive, and the iodine is attached to the active tyrosine units in thyroglobulin by the enzyme thyroid peroxidase. 

This forms the precursors of thyroid hormones monoiodotyrosine (MIT), and diiodotyrosine (DIT).When the follicular cells are stimulated by thyroid-stimulating hormone, the follicular cells reabsorb thyroglobulin from the follicular lumen. 

The iodinated tyrosines are cleaved, forming the thyroid hormones T4, T3, DIT, MIT, and traces of reverse triiodothyronine. 

T3 and T4 are released into the blood. 

The hormones secreted from the gland are about 80–90% T4 and about 10–20% T3. 

Deiodinase enzymes in peripheral tissues remove the iodine from MIT and DIT and convert T4 to T3 and RT3. 

This is a major source of both RT3 (95%) and T3 (87%) in peripheral tissues.


=== Regulation ===

The production of thyroxine and triiodothyronine is primarily regulated by thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), released by the anterior pituitary gland. 

TSH release in turn is stimulated by thyrotropin releasing hormone (TRH), released in a pulsatile manner from the hypothalamus. 

The thyroid hormones provide negative feedback to the thyrotropes TSH and TRH: when the thyroid hormones are high, TSH production is suppressed. 

This negative feedback also occurs when levels of TSH are high, causing TRH production to be suppressed.

TRH is secreted at an increased rate in situations such as cold exposure in order to stimulate thermogenesis. 

In addition to being suppressed by the presence of thyroid hormones, TSH production is blunted by dopamine, somatostatin, and glucocorticoids.


=== Calcitonin ===

The thyroid gland also produces the hormone calcitonin, which helps regulate blood calcium levels. 

Parafollicular cells produce calcitonin in response to high blood calcium. 

Calcitonin decreases the release of calcium from bone, by decreasing the activity of osteoclasts, cells which break down bone. 

Bone is constantly reabsorbed by osteoclasts and created by osteoblasts, so calcitonin effectively stimulates movement of calcium into bone. 

The effects of calcitonin are opposite those of the parathyroid hormone (PTH) produced in the parathyroid glands. 

However, calcitonin seems far less essential than PTH, since calcium metabolism remains clinically normal after removal of the thyroid (thyroidectomy), but not the parathyroid glands.


== Gene and protein expression ==

About 20,000 protein coding genes are expressed in human cells: 70% of these genes are expressed in thyroid cells. 

Two-hundred fifty of these genes are more specifically expressed in the thyroid, and about 20 genes are highly thyroid specific. 

In the follicular cells, the proteins synthesized by these genes direct thyroid hormone synthesis—thyroglobulin, TPO, and IYD; while in the parafollicular c-cells, they direct calcitonin synthesis—CALCA, and CALCB.


== Clinical significance ==

General practitioners, family physicians, and internal medicine specialists play a role in identifying and monitoring the treatment of thyroid disease. 

Endocrinologists and thyroidologists are thyroid specialists. 

Thyroid surgeons or otolaryngologists are responsible for the surgical management of thyroid disease.


=== Functional disorders ===

==== Hyperthyroidism ====

Excessive production of the thyroid hormones is called hyperthyroidism. 

Causes include Graves' disease, toxic multinodular goitre, solitary thyroid adenoma, inflammation, and a pituitary adenoma which secretes excess TSH. 

Another cause is excess iodine availability, either from excess ingestion, induced by the drug amiodarone, or following iodinated contrast imaging.

Hyperthyroidism often causes a variety of non-specific symptoms including weight loss, increased appetite, insomnia, decreased tolerance of heat, tremor, palpitations, anxiety and nervousness. 

In some cases it can cause chest pain, diarrhoea, hair loss and muscle weakness. 

Such symptoms may be managed temporarily with drugs such as beta blockers.Long-term management of hyperthyroidism may include drugs that suppress thyroid function such as propylthiouracil, carbimazole and methimazole. 

Alternatively, radioactive iodine-131 can be used to destroy thyroid tissue: radioactive iodine is selectively taken up by thyroid cells, which over time destroys them. 

The chosen first-line treatment will depend on the individual and on the country where being treated. 

Surgery to remove the thyroid can sometimes be performed as a transoral thyroidectomy, a minimally-invasive procedure. 

Surgery does however carry a risk of damage to the parathyroid glands and the recurrent laryngeal nerve, which innervates the vocal cords. 

If the entire thyroid gland is removed, hypothyroidism will inevitably result, and thyroid hormone substitutes will be needed.


==== Hypothyroidism ====

An underactive thyroid gland results in hypothyroidism. 

Typical symptoms are abnormal weight gain, tiredness, constipation, heavy menstrual bleeding, hair loss, cold intolerance, and a slow heart rate. 

Iodine deficiency is the most common cause of hypothyroidism worldwide, and the autoimmune disease Hashimoto's thyroiditis is the most common cause in the developed world. 

Other causes include congenital abnormalities, diseases causing transient inflammation, surgical removal or radioablation of the thyroid, the drugs amiodarone and lithium, amyloidosis, and sarcoidosis. 

Some forms of hypothyroidism can result in myxedema and severe cases can result in myxedema coma.Hypothyroidism is managed with replacement of the hormone thyroxine. 

This is usually given daily as an oral supplement, and may take a few weeks to become effective. 

Some causes of hypothyroidism, such as Postpartum thyroiditis and Subacute thyroiditis may be transient and pass over time, and other causes such as iodine deficiency may be able to be rectified with dietary supplementation.


=== Diseases ===

==== Graves' disease ====

Graves' disease is an autoimmune disorder that is the most common cause of hyperthyroidism. 

In Graves' disease, for an unknown reason autoantibodies develop against the thyroid stimulating hormone receptor. 

These antibodies activate the receptor, leading to development of a goitre and symptoms of hyperthyroidism, such as heat intolerance, weight loss, diarrhoea and palpitations. 

Occasionally such antibodies block but do not activate the receptor, leading to symptoms associated with hypothyroidism. 

In addition, gradual protrusion of the eyes may occur, called Graves' ophthalmopathy, as may swelling of the front of the shins. 

Graves' disease can be diagnosed by the presence of pathomnomonic features such as involvement of the eyes and shins, or isolation of autoantibodies, or by results of a radiolabelled uptake scan. 

Graves' disease is treated with anti-thyroid drugs such as propylthiouracil, which decrease the production of thyroid hormones, but hold a high rate of relapse. 

If there is no involvement of the eyes, then use of radioactive isotopes to ablate the gland may be considered. 

Surgical removal of the gland with subsequent thyroid hormone replacement may be considered, however this will not control symptoms associated with the eye or skin.


==== Nodules ====

Thyroid nodules are often found on the gland, with a prevalence of 4–7%. 

The majority of nodules do not cause any symptoms, thyroid hormone secretion is normal, and they are non-cancerous. 

Non-cancerous cases include simple cysts, colloid nodules, and thyroid adenomas. 

Malignant nodules, which only occur in about 5% of nodules, include follicular, papillary, medullary carcinomas and metastases from other sites Nodules are more likely in females, those who are exposed to radiation, and in those who are iodine deficient.

When a nodule is present, thyroid function tests determine whether the nodule is secreting excess thyroid hormones, causing hyperthyroidism. 

When the thyroid function tests are normal, an ultrasound is often used to investigate the nodule, and provide information such as whether the nodule is fluid-filled or a solid mass, and whether the appearance is suggestive of a benign or malignant cancer. 

A needle aspiration biopsy may then be performed, and the sample undergoes cytology, in which the appearance of cells is viewed to determine whether they resemble normal or cancerous cells.

The presence of multiple nodules is called a multinodular goitre; and if it is associated with hyperthyroidism, it is called a toxic multinodular goitre.


==== Goitre ====

An enlarged thyroid gland is called a goitre. 

Goitres are present in some form in about 5% of people, and are the result of a large number of causes, including iodine deficiency, autoimmune disease (both Graves' disease and Hashimoto's thyroiditis), infection, inflammation, and infiltrative disease such as sarcoidosis and amyloidosis. 

Sometimes no cause can be found, a state called "simple goitre".Some forms of goitre are associated with pain, whereas many do not cause any symptoms. 

Enlarged goitres may extend beyond the normal position of the thyroid gland to below the sternum, around the airway or esophagus. 

Goitres may be associated with hyperthyroidism or hypothyroidism, relating to the underlying cause of the goitre. 

Thyroid function tests may be done to investigate the cause and effects of the goitre. 

The underlying cause of the goitre may be treated, however many goitres with no associated symptoms are simply monitored.


==== Inflammation ====

Inflammation of the thyroid is called thyroiditis, and may cause symptoms of hyperthyroidism or hypothyroidism. 

Two types of thyroiditis initially present with hyperthyroidism and are sometimes followed by a period of hypothyroidism – Hashimoto's thyroiditis and postpartum thyroiditis. 

There are other disorders that cause inflammation of the thyroid, and these include subacute thyroiditis, acute thyroiditis, silent thyroiditis, Riedel's thyroiditis and traumatic injury, including palpation thyroiditis.

Hashimoto's thyroiditis is an autoimmune disorder in which the thyroid gland is infiltrated by the lymphocytes B-cell and T-cells. 

These progressively destroy the thyroid gland. 

In this way, Hasimoto's thyroiditis may have occurred insidiously, and only be noticed when thyroid hormone production decreases, causing symptoms of hypothyroidism. 

Hashimoto's is more common in females than males, much more common after the age of 60, and has known genetic risk factors. 

Also more common in individuals with Hashimoto's thyroiditis are type 1 diabetes, pernicious anaemia, Addison's disease vitiligo.Postpartum thyroiditis occurs in some females following childbirth. 

After delivery, the gland becomes inflamed and the condition initially presents with a period of hyperthyroidism followed by hypothyroidism and, usually, a return to normal function. 

The course of the illness takes place over several months, and is characterised by a painless goitre. 

Antibodies against thyroid peroxidase can be found on testing. 

The inflammation usually resolves without treatment, although thyroid hormone replacement may be needed during the period of hypothyroidism.


==== Cancer ====

The most common neoplasm affecting the thyroid gland is a benign adenoma, usually presenting as a painless mass in the neck. 

Malignant thyroid cancers are most often carcinomas, although cancer can occur in any tissue that the thyroid consists of, including cancer of C-cells and lymphomas. 

Cancers from other sites also rarely lodge in the thyroid. 

Radiation of the head and neck presents a risk factor for thyroid cancer, and cancer is more common in women than men, occurring at a rate of about 2:1.

In most cases, thyroid cancer presents as a painless mass in the neck. 

It is very unusual for thyroid cancers to present with other symptoms, although in some cases cancer may cause hyperthyroidism. 

Most malignant thyroid cancers are papillary, followed by follicular, medullary, and thyroid lymphoma. 

Because of the prominence of the thyroid gland, cancer is often detected earlier in the course of disease as the cause of a nodule, which may undergo fine needle aspiration. 

Thyroid function tests will help reveal whether the nodule produces excess thyroid hormones. 

A radioactive iodine uptake test can help reveal the activity and location of the cancer and metastases.

Thyroid cancers are treated by removing the whole or part of thyroid gland. 

Radioactive Iodine 131 may be given to radioablate the thyroid. 

Thyroxine is given to replace the hormones lost and to suppress TSH production, as TSH may stimulate recurrence. 

With the exception of the rare anaplastic thyroid cancer, which carries a very poor prognosis, most thyroid cancers carry an excellent prognosis and can even be considered curable.


==== Congenital ====
A persistent thyroglossal duct is the most common clinically significant congenital disorder of the thyroid gland. 

A persistent sinus tract may remain as a vestigial remnant of the tubular development of the thyroid gland. 

Parts of this tube may be obliterated, leaving small segments to form thyroglossal cysts. 

Preterm neonates are at risk of hypothyroidism as their thyroid glands are insufficiently developed to meet their postnatal needs. 

In order to detect hypothyroidism in newborn babies, to prevent growth and development abnormalities in later life, many countries have newborn screening programs at birth.

Infants with thyroid hormone deficiency (congenital hypothyroidism) can manifest problems of physical growth and development as well as brain development, termed cretinism. 

Children with congenital hypothyroidism are treated supplementally with levothyroxine, which facilitates normal growth and development.Mucinous, clear secretions may collect within these cysts to form either spherical masses or fusiform swellings, rarely larger than 2 to 3 cm in diameter. 

These are present in the midline of the neck anterior to the trachea. 

Segments of the duct and cysts that occur high in the neck are lined by stratified squamous epithelium, which is essentially identical to that covering the posterior portion of the tongue in the region of the foramen cecum. 

The disorders that occur in the lower neck more proximal to the thyroid gland are lined by epithelium resembling the thyroidal acinar epithelium. 

Characteristically, next to the lining epithelium, there is an intense lymphocytic infiltrate. 

Superimposed infection may convert these lesions into abscess cavities, and rarely, give rise to cancers.

Another disorder is that of thyroid dysgenesis which can result in various presentations of one or more misplaced accessory thyroid glands. 

These can be asymptomatic.


==== Iodine ====

Iodine deficiency, most common in inland and mountainous areas, can predispose to goitre – if widespread, known as endemic goitre. 

Pregnant women deficient of iodine can give birth to infants with thyroid hormone deficiency. 

The use of iodised salt to add iodine to the diet has eliminated endemic cretinism in most developed countries, and over 120 countries have made the iodination of salt mandatory.

Because the thyroid concentrates iodine, it also concentrates the various radioactive isotopes of iodine produced by nuclear fission. 

In the event of large accidental releases of such material into the environment, the uptake of radioactive iodine isotopes by the thyroid can, in theory, be blocked by saturating the uptake mechanism with a large surplus of non-radioactive iodine, taken in the form of potassium iodide tablets. 

One consequence of the Chernobyl disaster was an increase in thyroid cancers in children in the years following the accident.

Excessive iodine intake is uncommon and usually has no effect on the thyroid function. 

Sometimes though it may cause hyperthyroidism, and sometimes hypothyroidism with a resulting goitre.


=== Evaluation ===

The thyroid is examined by observation of the gland and surrounding neck for swelling or enlargement. 

It is then felt, usually from behind, and a person is often asked to swallow to better feel the gland against the fingers of the examiner. 

The gland moves up and down with swallowing because of its attachments to the thyroid and cricoid cartilages. 

In a healthy person the gland is not visible yet is palpable as a soft mass. 

Examination of the thyroid gland includes the search for abnormal masses and the assessment of overall thyroid size. 

The character of the thyroid, swellings, nodules, and their consistency may all be able to be felt. 

If a goitre is present, an examiner may also feel down the neck consider tapping the upper part of the chest to check for extension. 

Further tests may include raising the arms (Pemberton's sign), listening to the gland with a stethoscope for bruits, testing of reflexes, and palpation of the lymph nodes in the head and neck. 

An examination of the thyroid will also include observation of the person as a whole, to look for systemic signs such as weight gain or loss, hair loss, and signs in other locations – such as protrusion of the eyes or swelling of the calves in Graves' disease.


=== Tests ===

Thyroid function tests include a battery of blood tests, including the measurement of the thyroid hormones, as well as the measurement of thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH). 

They may reveal hyperthyroidism (high T3 and T4), hypothyroidism (low T3, T4), or subclinical hyperthyroidism (normal T3 and T4 with a low TSH).TSH levels are considered the most sensitive marker of thyroid dysfunction. 

They are however not always accurate, particularly if the cause of hypothyroidism is thought to be related to insufficient thyrotropin releasing hormone (TRH) secretion, in which case it may be low or falsely normal. 

In such a case a TRH stimulation test, in which TRH is given and TSH levels are measured at 30 and 60-minutes after, may be conducted.T3 and T4 can be measured directly. 

However, as the two thyroid hormones travel bound to other molecules, and it is the "free" component that is biologically active, free T3 and free T4 levels can be measured. 

T4 is preferred, because in hypothyroidism T3 levels may be normal. 

The ratio of bound to unbound thyroid hormones is known as the thyroid hormone binding ratio (THBR). 

It is also possible to measure directly the main carriers of the thyroid hormones, thryoglobulin and throxine-binding globulin. 

Thyroglobulin will also be measurable in a healthy thyroid, and will increase with inflammation, and may also be used to measure the success of thyroid removal or ablation. 

If successful, thyroglobulin should be undetectable. 

Lastly, antibodies against components of the thyroid, particularly anti-TPO and anti-thyroglobulin, can be measured. 

These may be present in normal individuals but are highly sensitive for autoimmune-related disease.


==== Imaging ====

Ultrasound of the thyroid may be used to reveal whether structures are solid or filled with fluid, helping to differentiate between nodules and goitres and cysts. 

It may also help differentiate between malignant and benign lesions.When further imaging is required, a radiolabelled iodine-123 or technetium-99 uptake scan may take place. 

This can determine the size and shape of lesions, reveal whether nodules or goitres are metabolically active, and reveal and monitor sites of thyroid disease or cancer deposits outside the thyroid.

A fine needle aspiration of a sample of thyroid tissue may be taken in order to evaluate a lesion seen on ultrasound which is then sent for histopathology and cytology.Computed tomography of the thyroid plays an important role in the evaluation of thyroid cancer. 

CT scans often incidentally find thyroid abnormalities, and thereby practically becomes the first investigation modality.


== History ==

The thyroid gland received its modern name in the 1600s, when the anatomist Thomas Wharton likened its shape to that of an Ancient Greek shield or thyos. 

However, the existence of the gland, and of the diseases associated with it, was known long before then.


=== Antiquity ===

The presence and diseases of the thyroid have been noted and treated for thousands of years. 

In 1600 BCE burnt sponge and seaweed (which contain iodine) were used within China for the treatment of goitres, a practice which has developed in many parts of the world. 

In Ayurvedic medicine, the book Sushruta Samhita written about 1400 BCE described hyperthyroidism, hypothyroidism and goitre. 

Aristotle and Xenophon in the fifth century BCE describe cases of diffuse toxic goitre. 

Hippocrates and Plato in the fourth century BCE provided some of the first descriptions of the gland itself, proposing its function as a salivary gland. 

Pliny the Elder in the first century BCE referred to epidemics of goitre in the Alps and proposed treatment with burnt seaweed, a practice also referred to by Galen in the second century, referred to burnt sponge for the treatment of goitre. 

The Chinese pharmacology text Shennong Ben Cao Jing, written ca. 200-250, also refers to goitre.


=== Scientific era ===

In 1500 polymath Leonardo da Vinci provided the first illustration of the thyroid. 

In 1543 anatomist Andreas Vesalius gave the first anatomic description and illustration of the gland. 

In 1656 the thyroid received its modern name, by the anatomist Thomas Wharton. 

The gland was named thyroid, meaning shield, as its shape resembled the shields commonly used in Ancient Greece. 

The English name thyroid gland is derived from the medical Latin used by Wharton – glandula thyreoidea. 

Glandula means 'gland' in Latin, and thyreoidea can be traced back to the Ancient Greek word θυρεοειδής, meaning 'shield-like/shield-shaped'.

French chemist Bernard Courtois discovered iodine in 1811, and in 1896 Eugen Baumann documented it as the central ingredient in the thyroid gland. 

He did this by boiling the thyroid glands of a thousand sheep, and named the precipitate, a combination of the thyroid hormones, 'iodothyrin'. 

David Marine in 1907 proved that iodine is necessary for thyroid function.Graves' disease was described by Robert James Graves in 1834. 

The role of the thyroid gland in metabolism was demonstrated in 1895 by Adolf Magnus-Levy. 

Thyroxine was first isolated in 1914 and synthesized in 1927, and triiodothyroxine in 1952. 

The conversion of T4 to T3 was discovered in 1970. 

The process of discovering TSH took place over the early to mid twentieth century. 

TRH was discovered by Polish endocrinologist Andrew Schally in 1970, contributing in part to his Nobel Prize in Medicine in 1977.

In the nineteenth century numerous authors described both cretinism and myxedema, and their relationship to the thyroid. 

Charles Mayo coined the term hyperthyroidism in 1910. 

Hakaru Hashimoto documented a case of Hashimoto's thyroiditis in 1912, antibodies in this disease were demonstrated in 1956. 

Knowledge of the thyroid and its conditions developed throughout the late nineteenth and twentieth centuries, with many modern treatments and investigative modalities evolving throughout the mid twentieth century, including the use of radioactive iodine, thiouracil and fine needle aspiration.


=== Surgery ===

Either Aetius in the sixth century CE or Persian Ali ibn Abbas al-Magusi in 990 CE conducted the first recorded thyroidectomy as a treatment for goitre. 

Operations remained risky and generally were not successful until the 19th century, when descriptions emerged from a number of authors including Prussian surgeon Theodor Billroth, Swiss surgeon and physiologist Theodor Kocher, American physician Charles Mayo, American surgeons William Halsted and George Crile. 

These descriptions provided the basis for modern thyroid surgery. 

Theodor Kocher went on to win the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1909 "for his work on the physiology, pathology and surgery of the thyroid gland".


== Other animals ==

The thyroid gland is found in all vertebrates. 

In fish, it is usually located below the gills and is not always divided into distinct lobes. 

However, in some teleosts, patches of thyroid tissue are found elsewhere in the body, associated with the kidneys, spleen, heart, or eyes.

In tetrapods, the thyroid is always found somewhere in the neck region. 

In most tetrapod species, there are two paired thyroid glands – that is, the right and left lobes are not joined together. 

However, there is only ever a single thyroid gland in most mammals, and the shape found in humans is common to many other species.

In larval lampreys, the thyroid originates as an exocrine gland, secreting its hormones into the gut, and associated with the larva's filter-feeding apparatus. 

In the adult lamprey, the gland separates from the gut, and becomes endocrine, but this path of development may reflect the evolutionary origin of the thyroid. 

For instance, the closest living relatives of vertebrates, the tunicates and amphioxi (lancelets), have a structure very similar to that of larval lampreys (the endostyle), and this also secretes iodine-containing compounds, though not thyroxine.

Thyroxine is critical to metabolic regulation, and growth throughout the vertebrate clade. 

Iodine and T4 trigger the change from a plant-eating water-dwelling tadpole into a meat-eating land-dwelling frog, with better neurological, visuospatial, smell and cognitive abilities for hunting, as seen in other predatory animals. 

A similar phenomenon happens in the neotenic amphibian salamanders, which, without introducing iodine, don't transform into land-dwelling adults, and live and reproduce in the larval form of aquatic axolotl. 

Among amphibians, administering a thyroid-blocking agent such as propylthiouracil (PTU) can prevent tadpoles from metamorphosing into frogs; in contrast, administering thyroxine will trigger metamorphosis. 

In amphibian metamorphosis, thyroxine and iodine also exert a well-studied experimental model of apoptosis on the cells of gills, tail, and fins of tadpoles. 

Iodine, via iodolipids, has favored the evolution of terrestrial animal species and has likely played a crucial role in the evolution of the human brain.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thyroid
;;;ES;;;



GLÁNDULA TIROIDES


La tiroides, o glándula tiroides, es una glándula endocrina en los vertebrados.

En los humanos está en el cuello y consta de dos lóbulos conectados.

Los dos tercios inferiores de los lóbulos están conectados por una delgada banda de tejido llamada istmo tiroideo.

La tiroides se encuentra en la parte delantera del cuello, debajo de la nuez de Adán.

Microscópicamente, la unidad funcional de la glándula tiroides es el folículo tiroideo esférico, revestido con células foliculares (tirocitos) y células parafoliculares ocasionales que rodean una luz que contiene coloide.

La glándula tiroides secreta tres hormonas: las dos hormonas tiroideas, triyodotironina (T3) y tiroxina (T4), y una hormona peptídica, la calcitonina.

Las hormonas tiroideas influyen en la tasa metabólica y la síntesis de proteínas, y en los niños, en el crecimiento y desarrollo.

La calcitonina juega un papel en la homeostasis del calcio.

La secreción de las dos hormonas tiroideas está regulada por la hormona estimulante de la tiroides (TSH), que es secretada por la glándula pituitaria anterior.

La TSH está regulada por la hormona liberadora de tirotropina (TRH), que es producida por el hipotálamo.

La glándula tiroides se desarrolla en el piso de la faringe en la base de la lengua a las 3 a 4 semanas de gestación; luego desciende frente al intestino faríngeo y, finalmente, durante las próximas semanas, migra a la base del cuello.

Durante la migración, la tiroides permanece conectada a la lengua por un canal estrecho, el conducto tirogloso.

Al final de la quinta semana el conducto tirogloso degenera y durante las siguientes dos semanas la tiroides desprendida migra a su posición final.

Eutiroideo es el término utilizado para describir un estado de función tiroidea normal en el cuerpo.

Los trastornos de la tiroides incluyen hipertiroidismo, hipotiroidismo, inflamación de la tiroides (tiroiditis), agrandamiento de la tiroides (bocio), nódulos tiroideos y cáncer de tiroides.

El hipertiroidismo se caracteriza por una secreción excesiva de hormonas tiroideas: la causa más común es el trastorno autoinmune, la enfermedad de Graves.

El hipotiroidismo se caracteriza por una secreción deficiente de hormonas tiroideas: la causa más común es la deficiencia de yodo.

En las regiones con deficiencia de yodo, el hipotiroidismo secundario a la deficiencia de yodo es la principal causa de discapacidad intelectual prevenible en los niños.

En regiones con suficiente yodo, la causa más común de hipotiroidismo es el trastorno autoinmune tiroiditis de Hashimoto.

La presencia de la tiroides y sus diversas enfermedades se ha observado y tratado durante siglos, aunque la glándula en sí misma solo ha sido descrita y nombrada desde el Renacimiento.

El conocimiento de la tiroides, su bioquímica y sus trastornos se desarrolló a lo largo de finales del siglo XIX y XX.

Muchos tratamientos modernos y modalidades de investigación evolucionaron a mediados del siglo XX, incluido el perfeccionamiento de las técnicas quirúrgicas para la extirpación de la tiroides (tiroidectomía) para el tratamiento del bocio; el uso de yodo radiactivo y tiouracilo para el tratamiento de la enfermedad de Graves; y aspiración con aguja fina para el diagnóstico de nódulos tiroideos.


== Estructura ==

=== Características ===

La glándula tiroides es un órgano con forma de mariposa compuesto por dos lóbulos, izquierdo y derecho, conectados por una estrecha banda de tejido, llamada "istmo".

Pesa 25 gramos en adultos, siendo cada lóbulo de unos 5 cm de largo, 3 cm de ancho y 2 cm de grosor y el istmo de unos 1,25 cm de alto y ancho.

La glándula suele ser más grande en las mujeres que en los hombres y aumenta de tamaño durante el embarazo.

La tiroides está cerca de la parte delantera del cuello, apoyada contra y alrededor de la parte delantera de la laringe y la tráquea.

El cartílago tiroides y el cartílago cricoides se encuentran justo encima de la glándula, debajo de la nuez de Adán.

El istmo se extiende desde el segundo al tercer anillo de la tráquea, con la parte superior de los lóbulos extendiéndose hasta el cartílago tiroides y la inferior alrededor del cuarto al sexto anillo traqueal.

Los músculos infrahioideos se encuentran frente a la glándula y el músculo esternocleidomastoideo al costado.

Detrás de las alas exteriores de la tiroides se encuentran las dos arterias carótidas.

La tráquea, la laringe, la faringe inferior y el esófago se encuentran detrás de la tiroides.

En esta región, el nervio laríngeo recurrente y la arteria tiroidea inferior pasan al lado o en el ligamento.

Por lo general, cuatro glándulas paratiroides, dos a cada lado, se encuentran a cada lado entre las dos capas de la cápsula tiroidea, en la parte posterior de los lóbulos tiroideos.

La glándula tiroides está cubierta por una cápsula fibrosa delgada, que tiene una capa interna y otra externa.

La capa interna se extruye en la glándula y forma los tabiques que dividen el tejido tiroideo en lóbulos microscópicos.

La capa exterior se continúa con la fascia pretraqueal y une la glándula a los cartílagos cricoides y tiroides a través de un engrosamiento de la fascia para formar el ligamento suspensorio posterior de la glándula tiroides, también conocido como ligamento de Berry.

Esto hace que la tiroides se mueva hacia arriba y hacia abajo con el movimiento de estos cartílagos cuando se produce la deglución.


=== Suministro de sangre, linfa y nervios ===

La tiroides recibe sangre arterial de la arteria tiroidea superior, rama de la arteria carótida externa, y de la arteria tiroidea inferior, rama del tronco tirocervical, y en ocasiones por una variante anatómica de la arteria tiroidea ima, que tiene un origen variable. .

La arteria tiroidea superior se divide en ramas anterior y posterior que irrigan la tiroides, y la arteria tiroidea inferior se divide en ramas superior e inferior.

Las arterias tiroideas superior e inferior se unen detrás de la parte externa de los lóbulos tiroideos.

La sangre venosa se drena a través de las venas tiroideas superior y media, que drenan a la vena yugular interna, y a través de las venas tiroideas inferiores.

Las venas tiroideas inferiores se originan en una red de venas y drenan en las venas braquiocefálicas izquierda y derecha.

Tanto las arterias como las venas forman un plexo entre las dos capas de la cápsula de la glándula tiroides. El drenaje linfático pasa con frecuencia por los ganglios linfáticos prelaríngeos (ubicados justo encima del istmo) y los ganglios linfáticos pretraqueales y paratraqueales.

La glándula recibe inervación simpática del ganglio cervical superior, medio e inferior del tronco simpático.

La glándula recibe inervación parasimpática del nervio laríngeo superior y del nervio laríngeo recurrente.


=== Variación ===

Hay muchas variantes en el tamaño y la forma de la glándula tiroides, y en la posición de las glándulas paratiroides incrustadas.

A veces hay un tercer lóbulo presente llamado lóbulo piramidal.

Cuando está presente, este lóbulo a menudo se extiende hacia arriba del hueso hioides desde el istmo tiroideo y puede tener uno o varios lóbulos divididos.

La presencia de este lóbulo varía en los estudios informados del 18,3 % al 44,6 %.

Se demostró que surge más a menudo del lado izquierdo y, en ocasiones, se separa.

El lóbulo piramidal también se conoce como pirámide de Lalouette.

El lóbulo piramidal es un remanente del conducto tirogloso, que generalmente se desgasta durante el descenso de la glándula tiroides.

De hecho, las pequeñas glándulas tiroideas accesorias pueden aparecer en cualquier lugar a lo largo del conducto tirogloso, desde el agujero ciego de la lengua hasta la posición de la tiroides en el adulto.

Un pequeño cuerno en la parte posterior de los lóbulos de la tiroides, generalmente cerca del nervio laríngeo recurrente y la arteria tiroidea inferior, se llama tubérculo de Zuckerkandl.

Otras variantes incluyen un músculo elevador de la glándula tiroides, que conecta el istmo con el cuerpo del hueso hioides, y la presencia de la pequeña arteria tiroidea ima.


=== Microanatomía ===
 
A nivel microscópico, hay tres características principales de la tiroides: folículos, células foliculares y células parafoliculares, descubiertas por primera vez por Geoffery Websterson en 1664.

Folículos Los folículos tiroideos son pequeños grupos esféricos de células de 0,02 a 0,9 mm de diámetro que desempeñan el papel principal en la función tiroidea.

Consisten en un borde que tiene un rico suministro de sangre, nervios y presencia linfática, que rodea un núcleo de coloide que consiste principalmente en proteínas precursoras de la hormona tiroidea llamada tiroglobulina, una glicoproteína yodada.

Células foliculares El núcleo de un folículo está rodeado por una sola capa de células foliculares.

Cuando son estimulados por la hormona estimulante de la tiroides (TSH), estos secretan las hormonas tiroideas T3 y T4.

Lo hacen transportando y metabolizando la tiroglobulina contenida en el coloide.

Las células foliculares varían en forma de planas a cuboides a columnares, dependiendo de qué tan activas sean.

Células parafolicularesDispersas entre las células foliculares y en los espacios entre los folículos esféricos hay otro tipo de células tiroideas, las células parafoliculares.

Estas células secretan calcitonina, por lo que también se denominan células C.


== Desarrollo ==

En el desarrollo del embrión, a las 3-4 semanas de edad gestacional, la glándula tiroides aparece como una proliferación epitelial en el piso de la faringe en la base de la lengua entre el tuberculum impar y la cópula linguae.

La cópula pronto queda cubierta por la eminencia hipofaríngea en un punto indicado más tarde por el agujero ciego.

Luego, la tiroides desciende por delante del intestino faríngeo como un divertículo bilobulado a través del conducto tirogloso.

Durante las próximas semanas, migra a la base del cuello, pasando por delante del hueso hioides.

Durante la migración, la tiroides permanece conectada a la lengua por un canal estrecho, el conducto tirogloso.

Al final de la quinta semana el conducto tirogloso degenera y durante las siguientes dos semanas la tiroides desprendida migra a su posición final.

El hipotálamo y la hipófisis fetales comienzan a secretar la hormona liberadora de tirotropina (TRH) y la hormona estimulante de la tiroides (TSH).

La TSH se mide por primera vez a las 11 semanas.

A las 18-20 semanas, la producción de tiroxina (T4) alcanza un nivel clínicamente significativo y autosuficiente.

La triyodotironina fetal (T3) permanece baja, menos de 15 ng/dl hasta las 30 semanas y aumenta a 50 ng/dl al término.

El feto necesita ser autosuficiente en hormonas tiroideas para protegerse contra los trastornos del neurodesarrollo que surgirían del hipotiroidismo materno.

La presencia de suficiente yodo es esencial para un neurodesarrollo saludable.

Las células parafoliculares neuroendocrinas, también conocidas como células C, responsables de la producción de calcitonina, se derivan del endodermo del intestino anterior.

Esta parte de la tiroides se forma primero como el cuerpo ultrafaríngeo, que comienza en la cuarta bolsa faríngea ventral y se une a la glándula tiroides primordial durante su descenso hasta su ubicación final.

Las aberraciones en el desarrollo prenatal pueden dar lugar a diversas formas de disgenesia tiroidea que pueden causar hipotiroidismo congénito y, si no se tratan, pueden provocar cretinismo.


== Función ==

=== Hormonas tiroideas ===

La función principal de la tiroides es la producción de hormonas tiroideas que contienen yodo, triyodotironina (T3) y tiroxina (T4) y la hormona peptídica calcitonina.

Las hormonas tiroideas se crean a partir de yodo y tirosina.

T3 se llama así porque contiene tres átomos de yodo por molécula y T4 contiene cuatro átomos de yodo por molécula.

Las hormonas tiroideas tienen una amplia gama de efectos en el cuerpo humano.

Éstos incluyen:

-Metabólico.

Las hormonas tiroideas aumentan la tasa metabólica basal y tienen efectos en casi todos los tejidos del cuerpo.

El apetito, la absorción de sustancias y la motilidad intestinal están influenciados por las hormonas tiroideas.

Aumentan la absorción en el intestino, la generación, la absorción por las células y la descomposición de la glucosa.

Estimulan la descomposición de las grasas y aumentan el número de ácidos grasos libres.

A pesar de aumentar los ácidos grasos libres, las hormonas tiroideas disminuyen los niveles de colesterol, quizás al aumentar la tasa de secreción de colesterol en la bilis.

-Cardiovascular.

Las hormonas aumentan la frecuencia y la fuerza de los latidos del corazón.

Aumentan la tasa de respiración, la ingesta y el consumo de oxígeno y aumentan la actividad de las mitocondrias.

Combinados, estos factores aumentan el flujo sanguíneo y la temperatura del cuerpo.

-De desarrollo.

Las hormonas tiroideas son importantes para el desarrollo normal.

Aumentan la tasa de crecimiento de los jóvenes, y las células del cerebro en desarrollo son un objetivo importante para las hormonas tiroideas T3 y T4.

Las hormonas tiroideas juegan un papel particularmente crucial en la maduración del cerebro durante el desarrollo fetal y los primeros años de vida posnatal.

Las hormonas tiroideas también desempeñan un papel en el mantenimiento de la función sexual normal, el sueño y los patrones de pensamiento.

Los niveles elevados se asocian con una mayor velocidad de generación de pensamientos, pero con una disminución del enfoque.

Las hormonas tiroideas influyen en la función sexual, incluida la libido y el mantenimiento de un ciclo menstrual normal. Después de la secreción, solo una proporción muy pequeña de las hormonas tiroideas viaja libremente en la sangre.

La mayoría se une a la globulina transportadora de tiroxina (alrededor del 70 %), la transtiretina (10 %) y la albúmina (15 %).

Sólo el 0,03% de T4 y el 0,3% de T3 que viajan libremente tienen actividad hormonal.

Además, hasta el 85 % de la T3 en sangre se produce después de la conversión de T4 por las yodotironina desyodasas en órganos de todo el cuerpo.

Las hormonas tiroideas actúan cruzando la membrana celular y uniéndose a los receptores de hormonas tiroideas nucleares intracelulares TR-α1,TR-α2,TR-β1 y TR-β2, que se unen a elementos de respuesta hormonal y factores de transcripción para modular la transcripción del ADN.

Además de estas acciones sobre el ADN, las hormonas tiroideas también actúan dentro de la membrana celular o dentro del citoplasma a través de reacciones con enzimas, que incluyen calcio ATPasa, adenilil ciclasa y transportadores de glucosa.


=== Producción de hormonas ===

Las hormonas tiroideas se crean a partir de la tiroglobulina.

Esta es una proteína dentro del coloide en la luz folicular que se crea originalmente dentro del retículo endoplásmico rugoso de las células foliculares y luego se transporta a la luz folicular.

La tiroglobulina contiene 123 unidades de tirosina, que reacciona con el yodo dentro de la luz folicular. El yodo es esencial para la producción de hormonas tiroideas.

El yodo (I0) viaja en la sangre como yoduro (I-), que es absorbido por las células foliculares por un simportador de yoduro de sodio.

Este es un canal de iones en la membrana celular que en la misma acción transporta dos iones de sodio y un ion de yoduro a la célula.

Luego, el yoduro viaja desde el interior de la célula hacia la luz, a través de la acción de la pendrina, un antiportador de yoduro-cloruro.

En la luz folicular, el yoduro se oxida a yodo.

Esto lo hace más reactivo y el yodo se une a las unidades de tirosina activas en la tiroglobulina por la enzima peroxidasa tiroidea.

Esto forma los precursores de las hormonas tiroideas monoyodotirosina (MIT) y diyodotirosina (DIT). Cuando las células foliculares son estimuladas por la hormona estimulante de la tiroides, las células foliculares reabsorben la tiroglobulina de la luz folicular.

Las tirosinas yodadas se escinden, formando las hormonas tiroideas T4, T3, DIT, MIT y trazas de triyodotironina inversa.

T3 y T4 se liberan en la sangre.

Las hormonas secretadas por la glándula son aproximadamente 80 a 90 % de T4 y aproximadamente 10 a 20 % de T3.

Las enzimas desyodasas en los tejidos periféricos eliminan el yodo de MIT y DIT y convierten T4 en T3 y RT3.

Esta es una fuente importante tanto de RT3 (95%) como de T3 (87%) en los tejidos periféricos.


=== Reglamento ===

La producción de tiroxina y triyodotironina está regulada principalmente por la hormona estimulante de la tiroides (TSH), liberada por la glándula pituitaria anterior.

La liberación de TSH, a su vez, es estimulada por la hormona liberadora de tirotropina (TRH), liberada de manera pulsátil desde el hipotálamo.

Las hormonas tiroideas proporcionan retroalimentación negativa a los tirotropos TSH y TRH: cuando las hormonas tiroideas están altas, se suprime la producción de TSH.

Esta retroalimentación negativa también ocurre cuando los niveles de TSH son altos, lo que hace que se suprima la producción de TRH.

La TRH se secreta a un ritmo mayor en situaciones como la exposición al frío para estimular la termogénesis.

Además de suprimirse por la presencia de hormonas tiroideas, la dopamina, la somatostatina y los glucocorticoides frenan la producción de TSH.


=== Calcitonina ===

La glándula tiroides también produce la hormona calcitonina, que ayuda a regular los niveles de calcio en la sangre.

Las células parafoliculares producen calcitonina en respuesta al alto nivel de calcio en la sangre.

La calcitonina disminuye la liberación de calcio del hueso al disminuir la actividad de los osteoclastos, células que descomponen el hueso.

Los osteoclastos reabsorben constantemente el hueso y los osteoblastos lo crean, por lo que la calcitonina estimula eficazmente el movimiento del calcio hacia el hueso.

Los efectos de la calcitonina son opuestos a los de la hormona paratiroidea (PTH) producida en las glándulas paratiroides.

Sin embargo, la calcitonina parece mucho menos esencial que la PTH, ya que el metabolismo del calcio permanece clínicamente normal después de la extirpación de la tiroides (tiroidectomía), pero no de las glándulas paratiroides.


== Expresión de genes y proteínas ==

Aproximadamente 20.000 genes que codifican proteínas se expresan en células humanas: el 70% de estos genes se expresan en células tiroideas.

Doscientos cincuenta de estos genes se expresan más específicamente en la tiroides, y alrededor de 20 genes son muy específicos de la tiroides.

En las células foliculares, las proteínas sintetizadas por estos genes dirigen la síntesis de hormona tiroidea: tiroglobulina, TPO e IYD; mientras que en las células C parafoliculares, dirigen la síntesis de calcitonina: CALCA y CALCB.


== Importancia clínica ==

Los médicos generales, los médicos de familia y los especialistas en medicina interna desempeñan un papel en la identificación y el seguimiento del tratamiento de la enfermedad de la tiroides.

Los endocrinólogos y los tiroidólogos son especialistas en tiroides.

Los cirujanos de tiroides u otorrinolaringólogos son los responsables del manejo quirúrgico de la enfermedad tiroidea.


=== Trastornos funcionales ===

==== Hipertiroidismo ====

La producción excesiva de hormonas tiroideas se denomina hipertiroidismo.

Las causas incluyen la enfermedad de Graves, el bocio multinodular tóxico, el adenoma tiroideo solitario, la inflamación y un adenoma hipofisario que secreta un exceso de TSH.

Otra causa es la disponibilidad excesiva de yodo, ya sea por ingestión excesiva, inducida por el fármaco amiodarona, o después de imágenes de contraste yodado.

El hipertiroidismo a menudo causa una variedad de síntomas no específicos que incluyen pérdida de peso, aumento del apetito, insomnio, disminución de la tolerancia al calor, temblores, palpitaciones, ansiedad y nerviosismo.

En algunos casos puede causar dolor torácico, diarrea, caída del cabello y debilidad muscular.

Dichos síntomas pueden controlarse temporalmente con medicamentos como los bloqueadores beta. El tratamiento a largo plazo del hipertiroidismo puede incluir medicamentos que suprimen la función tiroidea, como propiltiouracilo, carbimazol y metimazol.

Alternativamente, el yodo-131 radiactivo se puede usar para destruir el tejido tiroideo: las células tiroideas absorben selectivamente el yodo radiactivo, que con el tiempo las destruye.

El tratamiento de primera línea elegido dependerá de la persona y del país donde se esté tratando.

La cirugía para extirpar la tiroides a veces se puede realizar como una tiroidectomía transoral, un procedimiento mínimamente invasivo.

Sin embargo, la cirugía conlleva el riesgo de dañar las glándulas paratiroides y el nervio laríngeo recurrente, que inerva las cuerdas vocales.

Si se extirpa toda la glándula tiroides, inevitablemente se producirá hipotiroidismo y se necesitarán sustitutos de la hormona tiroidea.


==== Hipotiroidismo ====

Una glándula tiroides hipoactiva resulta en hipotiroidismo.

Los síntomas típicos son aumento anormal de peso, cansancio, estreñimiento, sangrado menstrual abundante, pérdida de cabello, intolerancia al frío y frecuencia cardíaca lenta.

La deficiencia de yodo es la causa más común de hipotiroidismo en todo el mundo, y la tiroiditis de Hashimoto, una enfermedad autoinmune, es la causa más común en el mundo desarrollado.

Otras causas incluyen anomalías congénitas, enfermedades que causan inflamación transitoria, extirpación quirúrgica o radioablación de la tiroides, los fármacos amiodarona y litio, amiloidosis y sarcoidosis.

Algunas formas de hipotiroidismo pueden resultar en mixedema y los casos graves pueden resultar en coma mixedematoso. El hipotiroidismo se controla con el reemplazo de la hormona tiroxina.

Esto generalmente se administra diariamente como un suplemento oral y puede tardar algunas semanas en hacer efecto.

Algunas causas de hipotiroidismo, como la tiroiditis posparto y la tiroiditis subaguda, pueden ser transitorias y pasar con el tiempo, y otras causas, como la deficiencia de yodo, pueden corregirse con suplementos dietéticos.


=== Enfermedades ===

==== Enfermedad de Graves ====

La enfermedad de Graves es un trastorno autoinmune que es la causa más común de hipertiroidismo.

En la enfermedad de Graves, por una razón desconocida, se desarrollan autoanticuerpos contra el receptor de la hormona estimulante de la tiroides.

Estos anticuerpos activan el receptor, lo que lleva al desarrollo de bocio y síntomas de hipertiroidismo, como intolerancia al calor, pérdida de peso, diarrea y palpitaciones.

Ocasionalmente, estos anticuerpos bloquean pero no activan el receptor, lo que provoca síntomas asociados con el hipotiroidismo.

Además, puede ocurrir una protrusión gradual de los ojos, llamada oftalmopatía de Graves, al igual que la hinchazón de la parte delantera de las espinillas.

La enfermedad de Graves se puede diagnosticar por la presencia de características patomnónicas, como la afectación de los ojos y las espinillas, o el aislamiento de autoanticuerpos, o por los resultados de una gammagrafía de captación radiomarcada.

La enfermedad de Graves se trata con medicamentos antitiroideos como el propiltiouracilo, que disminuyen la producción de hormonas tiroideas, pero tienen una alta tasa de recaídas.

Si no hay afectación de los ojos, se puede considerar el uso de isótopos radiactivos para extirpar la glándula.

Se puede considerar la extirpación quirúrgica de la glándula con el reemplazo posterior de la hormona tiroidea; sin embargo, esto no controlará los síntomas asociados con el ojo o la piel.


==== Nódulos ====

Los nódulos tiroideos a menudo se encuentran en la glándula, con una prevalencia de 4 a 7%.

La mayoría de los nódulos no causan ningún síntoma, la secreción de hormona tiroidea es normal y no son cancerosos.

Los casos no cancerosos incluyen quistes simples, nódulos coloides y adenomas tiroideos.

Los nódulos malignos, que solo ocurren en alrededor del 5% de los nódulos, incluyen carcinomas foliculares, papilares, medulares y metástasis de otros sitios. Los nódulos son más probables en las mujeres, las que están expuestas a la radiación y las que tienen deficiencia de yodo.

Cuando hay un nódulo, las pruebas de función tiroidea determinan si el nódulo está secretando un exceso de hormonas tiroideas, lo que provoca hipertiroidismo.

Cuando las pruebas de función tiroidea son normales, a menudo se usa una ecografía para investigar el nódulo y proporcionar información como si el nódulo está lleno de líquido o es una masa sólida, y si la apariencia sugiere un cáncer benigno o maligno.

Luego se puede realizar una biopsia por aspiración con aguja y la muestra se somete a una citología, en la que se observa la apariencia de las células para determinar si se parecen a células normales o cancerosas.

La presencia de múltiples nódulos se denomina bocio multinodular; y si se asocia con hipertiroidismo, se denomina bocio multinodular tóxico.


==== Bocio ====

Una glándula tiroides agrandada se llama bocio.

El bocio está presente de alguna forma en aproximadamente el 5% de las personas y es el resultado de una gran cantidad de causas, que incluyen la deficiencia de yodo, enfermedades autoinmunes (tanto la enfermedad de Graves como la tiroiditis de Hashimoto), infecciones, inflamación y enfermedades infiltrativas como la sarcoidosis. y amiloidosis.

A veces no se puede encontrar la causa, un estado llamado "bocio simple". Algunas formas de bocio se asocian con dolor, mientras que muchas no causan ningún síntoma.

Los bocios agrandados pueden extenderse más allá de la posición normal de la glándula tiroides hasta debajo del esternón, alrededor de las vías respiratorias o el esófago.

El bocio puede estar asociado con hipertiroidismo o hipotiroidismo, en relación con la causa subyacente del bocio.

Se pueden realizar pruebas de función tiroidea para investigar la causa y los efectos del bocio.

La causa subyacente del bocio puede tratarse, sin embargo, muchos bocios sin síntomas asociados simplemente se controlan.


==== Inflamación ====

La inflamación de la tiroides se llama tiroiditis y puede causar síntomas de hipertiroidismo o hipotiroidismo.

Dos tipos de tiroiditis se presentan inicialmente con hipertiroidismo y, a veces, van seguidos de un período de hipotiroidismo: la tiroiditis de Hashimoto y la tiroiditis posparto.

Hay otros trastornos que causan inflamación de la tiroides, y estos incluyen tiroiditis subaguda, tiroiditis aguda, tiroiditis silenciosa, tiroiditis de Riedel y lesiones traumáticas, incluida la tiroiditis por palpación.

La tiroiditis de Hashimoto es un trastorno autoinmune en el que los linfocitos B y T infiltran la glándula tiroides.

Estos destruyen progresivamente la glándula tiroides.

De esta forma, la tiroiditis de Hasimoto puede haber ocurrido de manera insidiosa, y solo notarse cuando la producción de hormonas tiroideas disminuye, provocando síntomas de hipotiroidismo.

Hashimoto es más común en mujeres que en hombres, mucho más común después de los 60 años, y tiene factores de riesgo genéticos conocidos.

También son más comunes en las personas con tiroiditis de Hashimoto la diabetes tipo 1, la anemia perniciosa y el vitíligo de la enfermedad de Addison. La tiroiditis posparto ocurre en algunas mujeres después del parto.

Después del parto, la glándula se inflama y la afección se presenta inicialmente con un período de hipertiroidismo seguido de hipotiroidismo y, por lo general, un retorno a la función normal.

El curso de la enfermedad dura varios meses y se caracteriza por un bocio indoloro.

Los anticuerpos contra la peroxidasa tiroidea se pueden encontrar en las pruebas.

La inflamación generalmente se resuelve sin tratamiento, aunque puede ser necesario el reemplazo de hormonas tiroideas durante el período de hipotiroidismo.


==== Cáncer ====

La neoplasia más frecuente que afecta a la glándula tiroides es un adenoma benigno, que suele presentarse como una masa indolora en el cuello.

Los cánceres de tiroides malignos son con mayor frecuencia carcinomas, aunque el cáncer puede ocurrir en cualquier tejido que contenga la tiroides, incluido el cáncer de células C y los linfomas.

Los cánceres de otros sitios también rara vez se alojan en la tiroides.

La radiación de la cabeza y el cuello presenta un factor de riesgo para el cáncer de tiroides, y el cáncer es más común en mujeres que en hombres, con una tasa de aproximadamente 2:1.

En la mayoría de los casos, el cáncer de tiroides se presenta como una masa indolora en el cuello.

Es muy inusual que los cánceres de tiroides se presenten con otros síntomas, aunque en algunos casos el cáncer puede causar hipertiroidismo.

La mayoría de los cánceres tiroideos malignos son papilares, seguidos por linfoma folicular, medular y tiroideo.

Debido a la prominencia de la glándula tiroides, el cáncer a menudo se detecta antes en el curso de la enfermedad como la causa de un nódulo, que puede someterse a una aspiración con aguja fina.

Las pruebas de función tiroidea ayudarán a revelar si el nódulo produce un exceso de hormonas tiroideas.

Una prueba de captación de yodo radiactivo puede ayudar a revelar la actividad y la ubicación del cáncer y las metástasis.

Los cánceres de tiroides se tratan mediante la extirpación total o parcial de la glándula tiroides.

Se puede administrar yodo radiactivo 131 para radioablacionar la tiroides.

La tiroxina se administra para reemplazar las hormonas perdidas y para suprimir la producción de TSH, ya que la TSH puede estimular la recurrencia.

Con la excepción del raro cáncer de tiroides anaplásico, que conlleva un pronóstico muy malo, la mayoría de los cánceres de tiroides tienen un pronóstico excelente e incluso pueden considerarse curables.


==== Congénita ====
Un conducto tirogloso persistente es el trastorno congénito clínicamente significativo más común de la glándula tiroides.

Un tracto sinusal persistente puede permanecer como un remanente vestigial del desarrollo tubular de la glándula tiroides.

Partes de este tubo pueden obliterarse, dejando pequeños segmentos para formar quistes tiroglosos.

Los recién nacidos prematuros corren el riesgo de hipotiroidismo ya que sus glándulas tiroides no están lo suficientemente desarrolladas para satisfacer sus necesidades posnatales.

Con el fin de detectar el hipotiroidismo en los recién nacidos y prevenir anomalías en el crecimiento y el desarrollo en etapas posteriores de la vida, muchos países cuentan con programas de detección de recién nacidos al nacer.

Los bebés con deficiencia de la hormona tiroidea (hipotiroidismo congénito) pueden manifestar problemas de crecimiento y desarrollo físico, así como del desarrollo del cerebro, lo que se denomina cretinismo.

Los niños con hipotiroidismo congénito se tratan de forma complementaria con levotiroxina, que facilita el crecimiento y el desarrollo normales. Se pueden acumular secreciones mucinosas y claras dentro de estos quistes para formar masas esféricas o hinchazones fusiformes, rara vez mayores de 2 a 3 cm de diámetro.

Estos están presentes en la línea media del cuello anterior a la tráquea.

Los segmentos del conducto y los quistes que aparecen en la parte alta del cuello están revestidos por epitelio escamoso estratificado, que es esencialmente idéntico al que cubre la porción posterior de la lengua en la región del agujero ciego.

Los trastornos que ocurren en la parte inferior del cuello más proximal a la glándula tiroides están revestidos por un epitelio que se asemeja al epitelio acinar tiroideo.

De forma característica, junto al epitelio de revestimiento, existe un intenso infiltrado linfocitario.

La infección superpuesta puede convertir estas lesiones en cavidades de absceso y, en raras ocasiones, dar lugar a cánceres.

Otro trastorno es el de la disgenesia tiroidea que puede resultar en varias presentaciones de una o más glándulas tiroideas accesorias fuera de lugar.

Estos pueden ser asintomáticos.


==== Yodo ====

La deficiencia de yodo, más común en las zonas interiores y montañosas, puede predisponer al bocio, que si está muy extendido, se conoce como bocio endémico.

Las mujeres embarazadas con deficiencia de yodo pueden dar a luz a bebés con deficiencia de hormona tiroidea.

El uso de sal yodada para agregar yodo a la dieta ha eliminado el cretinismo endémico en la mayoría de los países desarrollados, y más de 120 países han hecho obligatoria la yodación de la sal.

Debido a que la tiroides concentra yodo, también concentra los diversos isótopos radiactivos de yodo producidos por la fisión nuclear.

En el caso de grandes liberaciones accidentales de dicho material al medio ambiente, la captación de isótopos de yodo radiactivo por la tiroides puede, en teoría, bloquearse saturando el mecanismo de captación con un gran excedente de yodo no radiactivo, tomado en forma de tabletas de yoduro de potasio.

Una consecuencia del desastre de Chernobyl fue un aumento de los cánceres de tiroides en los niños en los años posteriores al accidente.

La ingesta excesiva de yodo es poco común y generalmente no tiene efecto sobre la función tiroidea.

Aunque a veces puede causar hipertiroidismo y, a veces, hipotiroidismo con el bocio resultante.


=== Evaluación ===

La tiroides se examina mediante la observación de la glándula y el cuello circundante en busca de hinchazón o agrandamiento.

Luego se palpa, por lo general desde atrás, y con frecuencia se le pide a la persona que trague para sentir mejor la glándula contra los dedos del examinador.

La glándula se mueve hacia arriba y hacia abajo al tragar debido a sus uniones con los cartílagos tiroides y cricoides.

En una persona sana, la glándula no es visible pero se palpa como una masa blanda.

El examen de la glándula tiroides incluye la búsqueda de masas anormales y la evaluación del tamaño total de la tiroides.

El carácter de la tiroides, las hinchazones, los nódulos y su consistencia pueden sentirse todos.

Si hay bocio, un examinador también puede palpar el cuello y considerar tocar la parte superior del tórax para verificar la extensión.

Otras pruebas pueden incluir levantar los brazos (signo de Pemberton), escuchar la glándula con un estetoscopio en busca de soplos, probar los reflejos y palpar los ganglios linfáticos en la cabeza y el cuello.

Un examen de la tiroides también incluirá la observación de la persona en su conjunto, para buscar signos sistémicos como aumento o pérdida de peso, pérdida de cabello y signos en otros lugares, como protrusión de los ojos o hinchazón de las pantorrillas en Graves. ' enfermedad.


=== Pruebas ===

Las pruebas de función tiroidea incluyen una batería de análisis de sangre, incluida la medición de las hormonas tiroideas, así como la medición de la hormona estimulante de la tiroides (TSH).

Pueden revelar hipertiroidismo (T3 y T4 altas), hipotiroidismo (T3, T4 bajas) o hipertiroidismo subclínico (T3 y T4 normales con TSH baja). Los niveles de TSH se consideran el marcador más sensible de la disfunción tiroidea.

Sin embargo, no siempre son precisos, particularmente si se cree que la causa del hipotiroidismo está relacionada con una secreción insuficiente de la hormona liberadora de tirotropina (TRH), en cuyo caso puede ser baja o falsamente normal.

En tal caso, se puede realizar una prueba de estimulación con TRH, en la que se administra TRH y se miden los niveles de TSH a los 30 y 60 minutos después. Las T3 y T4 se pueden medir directamente.

Sin embargo, como las dos hormonas tiroideas viajan unidas a otras moléculas, y es el componente "libre" el que es biológicamente activo, se pueden medir los niveles de T3 libre y T4 libre.

Se prefiere la T4, porque en el hipotiroidismo los niveles de T3 pueden ser normales.

La proporción de hormonas tiroideas unidas a no unidas se conoce como la proporción de unión de hormonas tiroideas (THBR).

También es posible medir directamente los principales transportadores de hormonas tiroideas, la tiroglobulina y la globulina fijadora de tiroxina.

La tiroglobulina también será medible en una tiroides saludable y aumentará con la inflamación, y también se puede usar para medir el éxito de la extirpación o ablación de la tiroides.

Si tiene éxito, la tiroglobulina debería ser indetectable.

Por último, se pueden medir anticuerpos contra componentes de la tiroides, en particular anti-TPO y anti-tiroglobulina.

Estos pueden estar presentes en individuos normales, pero son muy sensibles a enfermedades autoinmunes relacionadas.


==== Imágenes ====

La ecografía de la tiroides se puede usar para revelar si las estructuras son sólidas o están llenas de líquido, lo que ayuda a diferenciar entre nódulos, bocios y quistes.

También puede ayudar a diferenciar entre lesiones malignas y benignas. Cuando se requieren más imágenes, se puede realizar una gammagrafía con captación de yodo-123 o tecnecio-99 radiomarcados.

Esto puede determinar el tamaño y la forma de las lesiones, revelar si los nódulos o los bocios son metabólicamente activos y revelar y controlar los sitios de enfermedad de la tiroides o depósitos de cáncer fuera de la tiroides.

Se puede realizar una aspiración con aguja fina de una muestra de tejido tiroideo para evaluar una lesión observada en una ecografía que luego se envía para histopatología y citología. La tomografía computarizada de la tiroides juega un papel importante en la evaluación del cáncer de tiroides.

Las tomografías computarizadas a menudo encuentran incidentalmente anomalías tiroideas y, por lo tanto, prácticamente se convierten en la primera modalidad de investigación.


== Historia ==

La glándula tiroides recibió su nombre moderno en el siglo XVII, cuando el anatomista Thomas Wharton comparó su forma con la de un escudo griego antiguo o thyos.

Sin embargo, la existencia de la glándula y de las enfermedades asociadas a ella se conocía mucho antes.


=== Antigüedad ===

La presencia y enfermedades de la tiroides se han observado y tratado durante miles de años.

En 1600 a. C., esponjas quemadas y algas marinas (que contienen yodo) se usaban en China para el tratamiento del bocio, una práctica que se ha desarrollado en muchas partes del mundo.

En la medicina ayurvédica, el libro Sushruta Samhita, escrito alrededor del año 1400 a. C., describía el hipertiroidismo, el hipotiroidismo y el bocio.

Aristóteles y Jenofonte en el siglo V a. C. describen casos de bocio tóxico difuso.

Hipócrates y Platón en el siglo IV a. C. proporcionaron algunas de las primeras descripciones de la glándula en sí, proponiendo su función como glándula salival.

Plinio el Viejo en el siglo I a. C. se refirió a las epidemias de bocio en los Alpes y propuso el tratamiento con algas quemadas, una práctica a la que también se refirió Galeno en el siglo II, refiriéndose a la esponja quemada para el tratamiento del bocio.

El texto de farmacología china Shennong Ben Cao Jing, escrito ca. 200-250, también se refiere al bocio.


=== Era científica ===

En 1500, el erudito Leonardo da Vinci proporcionó la primera ilustración de la tiroides.

En 1543, el anatomista Andreas Vesalius dio la primera descripción e ilustración anatómica de la glándula.

En 1656 la tiroides recibió su nombre moderno, por el anatomista Thomas Wharton.

La glándula recibió el nombre de tiroides, que significa escudo, ya que su forma se parecía a los escudos que se usaban comúnmente en la antigua Grecia.

El nombre inglés glándula tiroides se deriva del latín médico utilizado por Wharton: glandula thyreoidea.

Glandula significa 'glándula' en latín, y thyreoidea se remonta a la palabra griega antigua θυρεοειδής, que significa 'como un escudo/en forma de escudo'.

El químico francés Bernard Courtois descubrió el yodo en 1811 y en 1896 Eugen Baumann lo documentó como el ingrediente central de la glándula tiroides.

Hizo esto hirviendo las glándulas tiroideas de mil ovejas y llamó al precipitado, una combinación de hormonas tiroideas, 'yodotirina'.

David Marine en 1907 demostró que el yodo es necesario para la función tiroidea. La enfermedad de Graves fue descrita por Robert James Graves en 1834.

El papel de la glándula tiroides en el metabolismo fue demostrado en 1895 por Adolf Magnus-Levy.

La tiroxina se aisló por primera vez en 1914 y se sintetizó en 1927, y la triyodotiroxina en 1952.

La conversión de T4 a T3 se descubrió en 1970.

El proceso de descubrimiento de la TSH tuvo lugar entre principios y mediados del siglo XX.

La TRH fue descubierta por el endocrinólogo polaco Andrew Schally en 1970, contribuyendo en parte a su Premio Nobel de Medicina en 1977.

En el siglo XIX numerosos autores describieron tanto el cretinismo como el mixedema, y ​​su relación con el tiroides.

Charles Mayo acuñó el término hipertiroidismo en 1910.

Hakaru Hashimoto documentó un caso de tiroiditis de Hashimoto en 1912, los anticuerpos en esta enfermedad se demostraron en 1956.

El conocimiento de la tiroides y sus condiciones se desarrolló a finales del siglo XIX y XX, con muchos tratamientos modernos y modalidades de investigación que evolucionaron a mediados del siglo XX, incluido el uso de yodo radiactivo, tiouracilo y aspiración con aguja fina.


=== Cirugía ===

O Aecio en el siglo VI EC o el persa Ali ibn Abbas al-Magusi en 990 EC realizaron la primera tiroidectomía registrada como tratamiento para el bocio.

Las operaciones siguieron siendo riesgosas y, en general, no tuvieron éxito hasta el siglo XIX, cuando surgieron descripciones de varios autores, incluido el cirujano prusiano Theodor Billroth, el cirujano y fisiólogo suizo Theodor Kocher, el médico estadounidense Charles Mayo, los cirujanos estadounidenses William Halsted y George Crile.

Estas descripciones sirvieron de base para la cirugía tiroidea moderna.

Theodor Kocher ganó el Premio Nobel de Fisiología o Medicina en 1909 "por su trabajo sobre la fisiología, patología y cirugía de la glándula tiroides".


== Otros animales ==

La glándula tiroides se encuentra en todos los vertebrados.

En los peces, generalmente se encuentra debajo de las branquias y no siempre se divide en lóbulos distintos.

Sin embargo, en algunos teleósteos, se encuentran parches de tejido tiroideo en otras partes del cuerpo, asociados con los riñones, el bazo, el corazón o los ojos.

En los tetrápodos, la tiroides siempre se encuentra en algún lugar de la región del cuello.

En la mayoría de las especies de tetrápodos, hay dos glándulas tiroideas emparejadas, es decir, los lóbulos derecho e izquierdo no están unidos.

Sin embargo, solo hay una sola glándula tiroides en la mayoría de los mamíferos, y la forma que se encuentra en los humanos es común a muchas otras especies.

En las larvas de lampreas, la tiroides se origina como una glándula exocrina, secreta sus hormonas en el intestino y se asocia con el aparato de alimentación por filtración de la larva.

En la lamprea adulta, la glándula se separa del intestino y se vuelve endocrina, pero esta vía de desarrollo puede reflejar el origen evolutivo de la tiroides.

Por ejemplo, los parientes vivos más cercanos de los vertebrados, los tunicados y los anfioxi (lancetas), tienen una estructura muy similar a la de las larvas de las lampreas (el endóstilo), y también secretan compuestos que contienen yodo, aunque no tiroxina.

La tiroxina es fundamental para la regulación metabólica y el crecimiento en todo el clado de vertebrados.

El yodo y la T4 desencadenan el cambio de un renacuajo que vive en el agua y se alimenta de plantas a una rana terrestre que se alimenta de carne, con mejores habilidades neurológicas, visuoespaciales, olfativas y cognitivas para la caza, como se ve en otros animales depredadores.

Un fenómeno similar ocurre en las salamandras anfibias neoténicas, que, sin la introducción de yodo, no se transforman en adultos terrestres, y viven y se reproducen en forma de larvas de ajolote acuático.

Entre los anfibios, la administración de un agente bloqueador de la tiroides como el propiltiouracilo (PTU) puede evitar que los renacuajos se transformen en ranas; por el contrario, la administración de tiroxina desencadenará la metamorfosis.

En la metamorfosis de los anfibios, la tiroxina y el yodo también ejercen un modelo experimental bien estudiado de apoptosis en las células de las branquias, la cola y las aletas de los renacuajos.

El yodo, a través de los yodolípidos, ha favorecido la evolución de las especies de animales terrestres y probablemente haya jugado un papel crucial en la evolución del cerebro humano.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tiroides

;;;PT;;;



GLÂNDULA TIREÓIDE


A tireóide, ou glândula tireóide, é uma glândula endócrina em vertebrados.

Nos humanos, está no pescoço e consiste em dois lobos conectados.

Os dois terços inferiores dos lobos são conectados por uma fina faixa de tecido chamada istmo da tireoide.

A tireóide está localizada na frente do pescoço, abaixo do pomo de Adão.

Microscopicamente, a unidade funcional da glândula tireoide é o folículo tireoidiano esférico, revestido por células foliculares (tirócitos) e células parafoliculares ocasionais que circundam um lúmen contendo coloide.

A glândula tireoide secreta três hormônios: os dois hormônios tireoidianos – triiodotironina (T3) e tiroxina (T4) – e um hormônio peptídico, a calcitonina.

Os hormônios tireoidianos influenciam a taxa metabólica e a síntese protéica e, em crianças, o crescimento e o desenvolvimento.

A calcitonina desempenha um papel na homeostase do cálcio.

A secreção dos dois hormônios tireoidianos é regulada pelo hormônio estimulante da tireoide (TSH), que é secretado pela glândula pituitária anterior.

O TSH é regulado pelo hormônio liberador de tireotropina (TRH), que é produzido pelo hipotálamo.

A glândula tireoide se desenvolve no assoalho da faringe na base da língua com 3 a 4 semanas de gestação; ele então desce na frente do intestino faríngeo e, finalmente, nas próximas semanas, migra para a base do pescoço.

Durante a migração, a tireoide permanece conectada à língua por um canal estreito, o ducto tireoglosso.

No final da quinta semana, o ducto tireoglosso degenera e, nas duas semanas seguintes, a tireoide descolada migra para sua posição final.

Eutireóideo é o termo usado para descrever um estado de função normal da tireóide no corpo.

Os distúrbios da tireoide incluem hipertireoidismo, hipotireoidismo, inflamação da tireoide (tireoidite), aumento da tireoide (bócio), nódulos da tireoide e câncer de tireoide.

O hipertireoidismo é caracterizado pela secreção excessiva de hormônios tireoidianos: a causa mais comum é a doença autoimune doença de Graves.

O hipotireoidismo é caracterizado por uma secreção deficiente de hormônios tireoidianos: a causa mais comum é a deficiência de iodo.

Em regiões com deficiência de iodo, o hipotireoidismo secundário à deficiência de iodo é a principal causa de deficiência intelectual evitável em crianças.

Em regiões com insuficiência de iodo, a causa mais comum de hipotireoidismo é o distúrbio autoimune tireoidite de Hashimoto.

A presença da tireóide e suas várias doenças têm sido notadas e tratadas há séculos, embora a glândula em si só tenha sido descrita e nomeada desde o Renascimento.

O conhecimento da tireoide, sua bioquímica e seus distúrbios se desenvolveram ao longo do final do século XIX e do século XX.

Muitos tratamentos modernos e modalidades de investigação evoluíram ao longo de meados do século XX, incluindo o refinamento das técnicas cirúrgicas para remoção da tireoide (tireoidectomia) para o tratamento do bócio; o uso de iodo radioativo e tiouracil para o tratamento da doença de Graves; e punção aspirativa por agulha fina para diagnóstico de nódulos tireoidianos.


== Estrutura ==

=== Características ===

A glândula tireoide é um órgão em forma de borboleta composto por dois lobos, esquerdo e direito, conectados por uma estreita faixa de tecido, chamada de "istmo".

Pesa 25 gramas em adultos, com cada lobo com cerca de 5 cm de comprimento, 3 cm de largura e 2 cm de espessura e o istmo cerca de 1,25 cm de altura e largura.

A glândula é geralmente maior nas mulheres do que nos homens e aumenta de tamanho durante a gravidez.

A tireóide está perto da frente do pescoço, deitada contra e ao redor da frente da laringe e da traqueia.

A cartilagem tireóide e a cartilagem cricóide ficam logo acima da glândula, abaixo do pomo de Adão.

O istmo estende-se do segundo ao terceiro anéis da traqueia, com a parte superior dos lobos estendendo-se até a cartilagem tireóide e a parte inferior ao redor do quarto ao sexto anéis traqueais.

Os músculos infra-hióideos situam-se na frente da glândula e o músculo esternocleidomastóideo ao lado.

Atrás das asas externas da tireóide estão as duas artérias carótidas.

A traqueia, a laringe, a parte inferior da faringe e o esôfago ficam atrás da tireoide.

Nessa região, o nervo laríngeo recorrente e a artéria tireóidea inferior passam próximos ou no ligamento.

Normalmente, quatro glândulas paratireoides, duas de cada lado, situam-se de cada lado entre as duas camadas da cápsula da tireoide, na parte de trás dos lobos da tireoide.

A glândula tireoide é coberta por uma fina cápsula fibrosa, que possui uma camada interna e uma externa.

A camada interna se projeta para dentro da glândula e forma os septos que dividem o tecido tireoidiano em lóbulos microscópicos.

A camada externa é contínua com a fáscia pré-traqueal, ligando a glândula às cartilagens cricóide e tireóide através de um espessamento da fáscia para formar o ligamento suspensor posterior da glândula tireóide, também conhecido como ligamento de Berry.

Isso faz com que a tireóide se mova para cima e para baixo com o movimento dessas cartilagens quando ocorre a deglutição.


=== Sangue, linfa e suprimento nervoso ===

A tireóide é suprida com sangue arterial da artéria tireóidea superior, um ramo da artéria carótida externa, e da artéria tireóidea inferior, um ramo do tronco tireocervical e, às vezes, por uma variante anatômica da artéria tireóidea ima, que tem origem variável .

A artéria tireóidea superior se divide em ramos anterior e posterior que suprem a tireóide, e a artéria tireóidea inferior se divide em ramos superior e inferior.

As artérias tireóideas superior e inferior unem-se atrás da parte externa dos lobos tireoidianos.

O sangue venoso é drenado pelas veias tireóideas superior e média, que drenam para a veia jugular interna, e pelas veias tireóideas inferiores.

As veias tireóideas inferiores originam-se em uma rede de veias e drenam para as veias braquiocefálicas esquerda e direita.

Ambas as artérias e veias formam um plexo entre as duas camadas da cápsula da glândula tireoide. A drenagem linfática passa frequentemente pelos linfonodos pré-laríngeos (localizados logo acima do istmo) e pelos linfonodos pré-traqueais e paratraqueais.

A glândula recebe inervação simpática do gânglio cervical superior, médio e inferior do tronco simpático.

A glândula recebe inervação parassimpática do nervo laríngeo superior e do nervo laríngeo recorrente.


=== Variação ===

Existem muitas variantes no tamanho e na forma da glândula tireoide e na posição das glândulas paratireoides incorporadas.

Às vezes, há um terceiro lobo presente chamado lobo piramidal.

Quando presente, esse lobo geralmente se estende até o osso hióide a partir do istmo da tireoide e pode ser de um a vários lobos divididos.

A presença desse lobo varia em estudos relatados de 18,3% a 44,6%.

Mostrou-se mais frequentemente surgir do lado esquerdo e ocasionalmente separado.

O lobo piramidal também é conhecido como pirâmide de Lalouette.

O lobo piramidal é um remanescente do ducto tireoglosso, que geralmente definha durante a descida da glândula tireóide.

Pequenas glândulas tireoides acessórias podem, de fato, ocorrer em qualquer lugar ao longo do ducto tireoglosso, desde o forame ceco da língua até a posição da tireoide no adulto.

Um pequeno corno na parte posterior dos lobos da tireoide, geralmente próximo ao nervo laríngeo recorrente e à artéria tireoidiana inferior, é chamado de tubérculo de Zuckerkandl.

Outras variantes incluem um músculo levantador da glândula tireóide, conectando o istmo ao corpo do osso hióide, e a presença da pequena artéria tireóidea ima.


=== Microanatomia ===
 
No nível microscópico, existem três características primárias da tireoide – folículos, células foliculares e células parafoliculares, descobertas pela primeira vez por Geoffery Websterson em 1664.

Folículos Os folículos tireoidianos são pequenos agrupamentos esféricos de células de 0,02 a 0,9 mm de diâmetro que desempenham o papel principal na função tireoidiana.

Eles consistem em uma borda que possui um rico suprimento sanguíneo, presença de nervos e linfáticos, que circunda um núcleo de coloide que consiste principalmente de proteínas precursoras do hormônio tireoidiano chamadas tireoglobulina, uma glicoproteína iodada.

Células foliculares O núcleo de um folículo é circundado por uma única camada de células foliculares.

Quando estimulados pelo hormônio estimulante da tireoide (TSH), estes secretam os hormônios tireoidianos T3 e T4.

Eles fazem isso transportando e metabolizando a tireoglobulina contida no colóide.

As células foliculares variam em forma de plana a cubóide a colunar, dependendo de quão ativas elas são.

Células parafoliculares Espalhadas entre as células foliculares e nos espaços entre os folículos esféricos estão outro tipo de célula da tireoide, as células parafoliculares.

Essas células secretam calcitonina e, portanto, também são chamadas de células C.


== Desenvolvimento ==

No desenvolvimento do embrião, com 3-4 semanas de idade gestacional, a glândula tireoide aparece como uma proliferação epitelial no assoalho da faringe na base da língua entre o tubérculo impar e a cópula lingual.

A cópula logo fica coberta pela eminência hipofaríngea em um ponto mais tarde indicado pelo forame cego.

A tireóide então desce na frente do intestino faríngeo como um divertículo bilobado através do ducto tireoglosso.

Nas semanas seguintes, migra para a base do pescoço, passando na frente do osso hióide.

Durante a migração, a tireoide permanece conectada à língua por um canal estreito, o ducto tireoglosso.

No final da quinta semana, o ducto tireoglosso degenera e, nas duas semanas seguintes, a tireoide descolada migra para sua posição final.

O hipotálamo e a hipófise fetais começam a secretar o hormônio liberador de tireotropina (TRH) e o hormônio estimulante da tireoide (TSH).

O TSH é mensurável pela primeira vez às 11 semanas.

Em 18-20 semanas, a produção de tiroxina (T4) atinge um nível clinicamente significativo e autossuficiente.

A triiodotironina fetal (T3) permanece baixa, inferior a 15 ng/dL até 30 semanas, e aumenta para 50 ng/dL a termo.

O feto precisa ser autossuficiente em hormônios tireoidianos para se proteger contra distúrbios do neurodesenvolvimento que surgiriam do hipotireoidismo materno.

A presença de iodo suficiente é essencial para o neurodesenvolvimento saudável.

As células parafoliculares neuroendócrinas, também conhecidas como células C, responsáveis ​​pela produção de calcitonina, são derivadas do endoderma do intestino anterior.

Esta parte da tireoide então se forma primeiro como o corpo ultimofaríngeo, que começa na quarta bolsa faríngea ventral e se une à glândula tireoide primordial durante sua descida até sua localização final.

Aberrações no desenvolvimento pré-natal podem resultar em várias formas de disgenesia da tireoide que podem causar hipotireoidismo congênito e, se não tratadas, podem levar ao cretinismo.


== Função ==

=== Hormônios da tireoide ===

A função primária da tireoide é a produção dos hormônios tireoidianos contendo iodo, triiodotironina (T3) e tiroxina (T4) e o hormônio peptídico calcitonina.

Os hormônios da tireóide são criados a partir de iodo e tirosina.

T3 é assim chamado porque contém três átomos de iodo por molécula e T4 contém quatro átomos de iodo por molécula.

Os hormônios da tireóide têm uma ampla gama de efeitos sobre o corpo humano.

Esses incluem:

-Metabólico.

Os hormônios da tireoide aumentam a taxa metabólica basal e têm efeitos em quase todos os tecidos do corpo.

O apetite, a absorção de substâncias e a motilidade intestinal são todos influenciados pelos hormônios da tireoide.

Eles aumentam a absorção no intestino, a geração, a absorção pelas células e a degradação da glicose.

Eles estimulam a quebra de gorduras e aumentam o número de ácidos graxos livres.

Apesar de aumentar os ácidos graxos livres, os hormônios tireoidianos diminuem os níveis de colesterol, talvez aumentando a taxa de secreção de colesterol na bile.

-Cardiovascular.

Os hormônios aumentam a taxa e a força dos batimentos cardíacos.

Eles aumentam a taxa de respiração, ingestão e consumo de oxigênio e aumentam a atividade das mitocôndrias.

Combinados, esses fatores aumentam o fluxo sanguíneo e a temperatura do corpo.

-Desenvolvimento.

Os hormônios da tireóide são importantes para o desenvolvimento normal.

Eles aumentam a taxa de crescimento dos jovens, e as células do cérebro em desenvolvimento são um dos principais alvos dos hormônios tireoidianos T3 e T4.

Os hormônios tireoidianos desempenham um papel particularmente crucial na maturação do cérebro durante o desenvolvimento fetal e nos primeiros anos de vida pós-natal.

Os hormônios da tireóide também desempenham um papel na manutenção da função sexual normal, sono e padrões de pensamento.

Níveis aumentados estão associados com maior velocidade de geração de pensamento, mas diminuição do foco.

A função sexual, incluindo a libido e a manutenção de um ciclo menstrual normal, são influenciadas pelos hormônios da tireoide. Após a secreção, apenas uma proporção muito pequena dos hormônios da tireoide circula livremente no sangue.

A maioria está ligada à globulina de ligação à tiroxina (cerca de 70%), transtirretina (10%) e albumina (15%).

Apenas 0,03% do T4 e 0,3% do T3 que viajam livremente têm atividade hormonal.

Além disso, até 85% do T3 no sangue é produzido após a conversão de T4 por iodotironina deiodinases em órgãos ao redor do corpo.

Os hormônios tireoidianos atuam atravessando a membrana celular e ligando-se aos receptores nucleares intracelulares do hormônio tireoidiano TR-α1,TR-α2,TR-β1 e TR-β2, que se ligam a elementos de resposta hormonal e fatores de transcrição para modular a transcrição do DNA.

Além dessas ações no DNA, os hormônios tireoidianos também atuam na membrana celular ou no citoplasma por meio de reações com enzimas, incluindo ATPase de cálcio, adenilil ciclase e transportadores de glicose.


=== Produção hormonal ===

Os hormônios da tireóide são criados a partir de tireoglobulina.

Esta é uma proteína dentro do colóide no lúmen folicular que é originalmente criada dentro do retículo endoplasmático rugoso das células foliculares e depois transportada para o lúmen folicular.

A tiroglobulina contém 123 unidades de tirosina, que reage com o iodo dentro do lúmen folicular. O iodo é essencial para a produção dos hormônios tireoidianos.

O iodo (I0) viaja no sangue como iodeto (I-), que é absorvido pelas células foliculares por um simportador de iodeto de sódio.

Este é um canal iônico na membrana celular que na mesma ação transporta dois íons sódio e um íon iodeto para dentro da célula.

O iodeto então viaja de dentro da célula para o lúmen, através da ação da pendrina, um antiportador de iodeto-cloreto.

No lúmen folicular, o iodeto é então oxidado a iodo.

Isso o torna mais reativo, e o iodo é ligado às unidades de tirosina ativas na tireoglobulina pela enzima tireóide peroxidase.

Isso forma os precursores dos hormônios tireoidianos monoiodotirosina (MIT) e diiodotirosina (DIT). Quando as células foliculares são estimuladas pelo hormônio estimulante da tireoide, as células foliculares reabsorvem a tireoglobulina do lúmen folicular.

As tirosinas iodadas são clivadas, formando os hormônios tireoidianos T4, T3, DIT, MIT e traços de triiodotironina reversa.

T3 e T4 são liberados no sangue.

Os hormônios secretados pela glândula são cerca de 80 a 90% de T4 e cerca de 10 a 20% de T3.

As enzimas deiodinase nos tecidos periféricos removem o iodo do MIT e DIT e convertem T4 em T3 e RT3.

Esta é uma fonte importante de RT3 (95%) e T3 (87%) em tecidos periféricos.


=== Regulamento ===

A produção de tiroxina e triiodotironina é regulada principalmente pelo hormônio estimulante da tireoide (TSH), liberado pela glândula pituitária anterior.

A liberação de TSH, por sua vez, é estimulada pelo hormônio liberador de tireotropina (TRH), liberado de forma pulsátil pelo hipotálamo.

Os hormônios tireoidianos fornecem feedback negativo aos tireotrópicos TSH e TRH: quando os hormônios tireoidianos estão altos, a produção de TSH é suprimida.

Esse feedback negativo também ocorre quando os níveis de TSH estão altos, fazendo com que a produção de TRH seja suprimida.

O TRH é secretado em uma taxa aumentada em situações como exposição ao frio para estimular a termogênese.

Além de ser suprimida pela presença de hormônios tireoidianos, a produção de TSH é embotada pela dopamina, somatostatina e glicocorticóides.


=== Calcitonina ===

A glândula tireóide também produz o hormônio calcitonina, que ajuda a regular os níveis de cálcio no sangue.

As células parafoliculares produzem calcitonina em resposta ao alto nível de cálcio no sangue.

A calcitonina diminui a liberação de cálcio do osso, diminuindo a atividade dos osteoclastos, células que quebram o osso.

O osso é constantemente reabsorvido pelos osteoclastos e criado pelos osteoblastos, de modo que a calcitonina estimula efetivamente o movimento do cálcio no osso.

Os efeitos da calcitonina são opostos aos do hormônio da paratireoide (PTH) produzido nas glândulas paratireoides.

No entanto, a calcitonina parece muito menos essencial do que o PTH, uma vez que o metabolismo do cálcio permanece clinicamente normal após a remoção da tireoide (tireoidectomia), mas não das glândulas paratireoides.


== Expressão de genes e proteínas ==

Cerca de 20.000 genes codificadores de proteínas são expressos em células humanas: 70% desses genes são expressos em células da tireóide.

Duzentos e cinquenta desses genes são expressos mais especificamente na tireoide, e cerca de 20 genes são altamente específicos da tireoide.

Nas células foliculares, as proteínas sintetizadas por esses genes direcionam a síntese dos hormônios tireoidianos — tireoglobulina, TPO e IYD; enquanto nas células C parafoliculares, elas direcionam a síntese de calcitonina – CALCA e CALCB.


== Significado clínico ==

Clínicos gerais, médicos de família e especialistas em medicina interna desempenham um papel na identificação e monitoramento do tratamento da doença da tireoide.

Endocrinologistas e tireoidologistas são especialistas em tireoide.

Os cirurgiões da tireoide ou otorrinolaringologistas são responsáveis ​​pelo tratamento cirúrgico da doença da tireoide.


=== Distúrbios funcionais ===

==== Hipertireoidismo ====

A produção excessiva de hormônios da tireoide é chamada de hipertireoidismo.

As causas incluem doença de Graves, bócio multinodular tóxico, adenoma solitário da tireoide, inflamação e adenoma hipofisário que secreta excesso de TSH.

Outra causa é a disponibilidade excessiva de iodo, seja por ingestão excessiva, induzida pela droga amiodarona, ou após imagem com contraste iodado.

O hipertireoidismo geralmente causa uma variedade de sintomas inespecíficos, incluindo perda de peso, aumento do apetite, insônia, diminuição da tolerância ao calor, tremores, palpitações, ansiedade e nervosismo.

Em alguns casos, pode causar dor no peito, diarreia, queda de cabelo e fraqueza muscular.

Esses sintomas podem ser controlados temporariamente com medicamentos como betabloqueadores. O controle a longo prazo do hipertireoidismo pode incluir medicamentos que suprimem a função da tireoide, como propiltiouracil, carbimazol e metimazol.

Alternativamente, o iodo-131 radioativo pode ser usado para destruir o tecido da tireoide: o iodo radioativo é absorvido seletivamente pelas células da tireoide, que com o tempo as destrói.

O tratamento de primeira linha escolhido dependerá do indivíduo e do país onde está sendo tratado.

A cirurgia para remover a tireoide às vezes pode ser realizada como uma tireoidectomia transoral, um procedimento minimamente invasivo.

A cirurgia, no entanto, traz um risco de danos às glândulas paratireoides e ao nervo laríngeo recorrente, que inerva as cordas vocais.

Se toda a glândula tireoide for removida, o hipotireoidismo inevitavelmente resultará e serão necessários substitutos do hormônio tireoidiano.


==== Hipotireoidismo ====

Uma glândula tireoide hipoativa resulta em hipotireoidismo.

Os sintomas típicos são ganho de peso anormal, cansaço, constipação, sangramento menstrual intenso, perda de cabelo, intolerância ao frio e ritmo cardíaco lento.

A deficiência de iodo é a causa mais comum de hipotireoidismo em todo o mundo, e a doença autoimune tireoidite de Hashimoto é a causa mais comum no mundo desenvolvido.

Outras causas incluem anormalidades congênitas, doenças que causam inflamação transitória, remoção cirúrgica ou radioablação da tireoide, as drogas amiodarona e lítio, amiloidose e sarcoidose.

Algumas formas de hipotireoidismo podem resultar em mixedema e casos graves podem resultar em coma mixedema. O hipotireoidismo é controlado com reposição do hormônio tiroxina.

Isso geralmente é administrado diariamente como um suplemento oral e pode levar algumas semanas para se tornar eficaz.

Algumas causas de hipotireoidismo, como tireoidite pós-parto e tireoidite subaguda, podem ser transitórias e passar ao longo do tempo, e outras causas, como deficiência de iodo, podem ser corrigidas com suplementação dietética.


=== Doenças ===

==== Doença de Graves ====

A doença de Graves é uma doença autoimune que é a causa mais comum de hipertireoidismo.

Na doença de Graves, por uma razão desconhecida, autoanticorpos se desenvolvem contra o receptor do hormônio estimulante da tireoide.

Esses anticorpos ativam o receptor, levando ao desenvolvimento de bócio e sintomas de hipertireoidismo, como intolerância ao calor, perda de peso, diarreia e palpitações.

Ocasionalmente, esses anticorpos bloqueiam, mas não ativam o receptor, levando a sintomas associados ao hipotireoidismo.

Além disso, pode ocorrer protrusão gradual dos olhos, chamada oftalmopatia de Graves, assim como inchaço da frente das canelas.

A doença de Graves pode ser diagnosticada pela presença de características patonomônicas, como envolvimento dos olhos e das canelas, ou isolamento de autoanticorpos, ou pelos resultados de um exame de captação radiomarcado.

A doença de Graves é tratada com medicamentos antitireoidianos, como o propiltiouracil, que diminuem a produção de hormônios tireoidianos, mas mantêm uma alta taxa de recaída.

Se não houver envolvimento dos olhos, o uso de isótopos radioativos para ablação da glândula pode ser considerado.

A remoção cirúrgica da glândula com reposição subsequente de hormônio tireoidiano pode ser considerada, no entanto, isso não controlará os sintomas associados ao olho ou à pele.


==== Nódulos ====

Nódulos de tireoide são frequentemente encontrados na glândula, com prevalência de 4 a 7%.

A maioria dos nódulos não causa nenhum sintoma, a secreção de hormônio tireoidiano é normal e não são cancerígenas.

Casos não cancerosos incluem cistos simples, nódulos coloides e adenomas de tireoide.

Nódulos malignos, que ocorrem apenas em cerca de 5% dos nódulos, incluem carcinomas foliculares, papilares, medulares e metástases de outros locais. Os nódulos são mais prováveis ​​em mulheres, naqueles expostos à radiação e naqueles com deficiência de iodo.

Quando um nódulo está presente, os testes de função da tireoide determinam se o nódulo está secretando hormônios tireoidianos em excesso, causando hipertireoidismo.

Quando os testes de função da tireoide são normais, um ultrassom é frequentemente usado para investigar o nódulo e fornecer informações como se o nódulo é cheio de líquido ou uma massa sólida e se a aparência é sugestiva de um câncer benigno ou maligno.

Uma biópsia por aspiração por agulha pode então ser realizada, e a amostra passa por citologia, na qual a aparência das células é observada para determinar se elas se assemelham a células normais ou cancerosas.

A presença de múltiplos nódulos é chamada de bócio multinodular; e se estiver associado ao hipertireoidismo, é chamado de bócio multinodular tóxico.


==== Bócio ====

Uma glândula tireóide aumentada é chamada de bócio.

Os bócios estão presentes de alguma forma em cerca de 5% das pessoas e são o resultado de um grande número de causas, incluindo deficiência de iodo, doença autoimune (doença de Graves e tireoidite de Hashimoto), infecção, inflamação e doença infiltrativa, como sarcoidose e amiloidose.

Às vezes, nenhuma causa pode ser encontrada, um estado chamado de "bócio simples". Algumas formas de bócio estão associadas à dor, enquanto muitas não causam nenhum sintoma.

Bócios aumentados podem se estender além da posição normal da glândula tireoide até abaixo do esterno, ao redor das vias aéreas ou do esôfago.

O bócio pode estar associado ao hipertireoidismo ou hipotireoidismo, relacionado à causa subjacente do bócio.

Testes de função da tireoide podem ser feitos para investigar a causa e os efeitos do bócio.

A causa subjacente do bócio pode ser tratada, porém muitos bócios sem sintomas associados são simplesmente monitorados.


==== Inflamação ====

A inflamação da tireoide é chamada de tireoidite e pode causar sintomas de hipertireoidismo ou hipotireoidismo.

Dois tipos de tireoidite se apresentam inicialmente com hipertireoidismo e às vezes são seguidos por um período de hipotireoidismo – tireoidite de Hashimoto e tireoidite pós-parto.

Existem outros distúrbios que causam inflamação da tireoide, e estes incluem tireoidite subaguda, tireoidite aguda, tireoidite silenciosa, tireoidite de Riedel e lesões traumáticas, incluindo tireoidite de palpação.

A tireoidite de Hashimoto é uma doença autoimune na qual a glândula tireoide é infiltrada pelos linfócitos B e T.

Estes destroem progressivamente a glândula tireóide.

Dessa forma, a tireoidite de Hasimoto pode ter ocorrido de forma insidiosa, e só ser percebida quando a produção de hormônios tireoidianos diminui, causando sintomas de hipotireoidismo.

A doença de Hashimoto é mais comum em mulheres do que em homens, muito mais comum após os 60 anos e tem fatores de risco genéticos conhecidos.

Também mais comuns em indivíduos com tireoidite de Hashimoto são diabetes tipo 1, anemia perniciosa, vitiligo da doença de Addison. A tireoidite pós-parto ocorre em algumas mulheres após o parto.

Após o parto, a glândula fica inflamada e a condição se apresenta inicialmente com um período de hipertireoidismo seguido de hipotireoidismo e, geralmente, um retorno à função normal.

O curso da doença ocorre ao longo de vários meses e é caracterizado por um bócio indolor.

Anticorpos contra a tireóide peroxidase podem ser encontrados em testes.

A inflamação geralmente se resolve sem tratamento, embora a reposição do hormônio tireoidiano possa ser necessária durante o período de hipotireoidismo.


==== Câncer ====

A neoplasia mais comum que acomete a glândula tireoide é um adenoma benigno, geralmente apresentando-se como uma massa indolor no pescoço.

Os cânceres malignos da tireoide são mais frequentemente carcinomas, embora o câncer possa ocorrer em qualquer tecido em que a tireoide consiste, incluindo câncer de células C e linfomas.

Cânceres de outros locais também raramente se alojam na tireoide.

A radiação da cabeça e pescoço apresenta um fator de risco para câncer de tireoide, e o câncer é mais comum em mulheres do que em homens, ocorrendo em uma taxa de cerca de 2:1.

Na maioria dos casos, o câncer de tireoide se apresenta como uma massa indolor no pescoço.

É muito incomum que os cânceres de tireoide apresentem outros sintomas, embora em alguns casos o câncer possa causar hipertireoidismo.

A maioria dos cânceres malignos da tireoide são papilares, seguidos por linfoma folicular, medular e tireoidiano.

Por causa da proeminência da glândula tireoide, o câncer é frequentemente detectado mais cedo no curso da doença como a causa de um nódulo, que pode sofrer aspiração com agulha fina.

Os testes de função da tireoide ajudarão a revelar se o nódulo produz excesso de hormônios tireoidianos.

Um teste de captação de iodo radioativo pode ajudar a revelar a atividade e a localização do câncer e das metástases.

Os cânceres de tireoide são tratados com a remoção total ou parcial da glândula tireoide.

Iodo radioativo 131 pode ser administrado para radioablação da tireóide.

A tiroxina é administrada para repor os hormônios perdidos e para suprimir a produção de TSH, pois o TSH pode estimular a recorrência.

Com exceção do raro câncer de tireoide anaplásico, que tem um prognóstico muito ruim, a maioria dos cânceres de tireoide tem um excelente prognóstico e pode até ser considerado curável.


==== Congênito ====
Um ducto tireoglosso persistente é o distúrbio congênito clinicamente significativo mais comum da glândula tireoide.

Um trato sinusal persistente pode permanecer como um vestígio vestigial do desenvolvimento tubular da glândula tireoide.

Partes desse tubo podem ser obliteradas, deixando pequenos segmentos para formar cistos tireoglossos.

Os recém-nascidos prematuros correm o risco de hipotireoidismo, pois suas glândulas tireoides são insuficientemente desenvolvidas para atender às suas necessidades pós-natais.

A fim de detectar hipotireoidismo em recém-nascidos, para prevenir anormalidades de crescimento e desenvolvimento mais tarde na vida, muitos países têm programas de triagem neonatal ao nascimento.

Bebês com deficiência de hormônio tireoidiano (hipotireoidismo congênito) podem manifestar problemas de crescimento e desenvolvimento físico, bem como no desenvolvimento do cérebro, denominado cretinismo.

Crianças com hipotireoidismo congênito são tratadas suplementarmente com levotiroxina, que facilita o crescimento e o desenvolvimento normais. Secreções claras e mucinosas podem se acumular dentro desses cistos para formar massas esféricas ou inchaços fusiformes, raramente maiores que 2 a 3 cm de diâmetro.

Estes estão presentes na linha média do pescoço anterior à traqueia.

Segmentos do ducto e cistos que ocorrem no alto do pescoço são revestidos por epitélio escamoso estratificado, que é essencialmente idêntico ao que reveste a porção posterior da língua na região do forame ceco.

Os distúrbios que ocorrem na parte inferior do pescoço mais proximal à glândula tireoide são revestidos por epitélio semelhante ao epitélio acinar tireoidiano.

Caracteristicamente, próximo ao epitélio de revestimento, há um intenso infiltrado linfocitário.

A infecção sobreposta pode converter essas lesões em cavidades de abscesso e, raramente, dar origem a cânceres.

Outro distúrbio é o da disgenesia da tireoide, que pode resultar em várias apresentações de uma ou mais glândulas tireoides acessórias mal posicionadas.

Estes podem ser assintomáticos.


==== Iodo ====

A deficiência de iodo, mais comum em áreas do interior e montanhosas, pode predispor ao bócio – se generalizado, conhecido como bócio endêmico.

Mulheres grávidas com deficiência de iodo podem dar à luz bebês com deficiência de hormônio tireoidiano.

O uso de sal iodado para adicionar iodo à dieta eliminou o cretinismo endêmico na maioria dos países desenvolvidos, e mais de 120 países tornaram obrigatória a iodação do sal.

Como a tireoide concentra iodo, ela também concentra os vários isótopos radioativos de iodo produzidos pela fissão nuclear.

No caso de grandes liberações acidentais desse material no meio ambiente, a captação de isótopos de iodo radioativo pela tireoide pode, em teoria, ser bloqueada pela saturação do mecanismo de captação com um grande excesso de iodo não radioativo, tomado na forma de comprimidos de iodeto de potássio.

Uma das consequências do desastre de Chernobyl foi o aumento de câncer de tireoide em crianças nos anos que se seguiram ao acidente.

A ingestão excessiva de iodo é incomum e geralmente não tem efeito sobre a função da tireoide.

Às vezes, porém, pode causar hipertireoidismo e, às vezes, hipotireoidismo com bócio resultante.


=== Avaliação ===

A tireoide é examinada pela observação da glândula e do pescoço ao redor para verificar se há inchaço ou aumento.

É então sentida, geralmente por trás, e uma pessoa é frequentemente solicitada a engolir para sentir melhor a glândula contra os dedos do examinador.

A glândula se move para cima e para baixo com a deglutição por causa de suas ligações com as cartilagens tireóide e cricóide.

Em uma pessoa saudável, a glândula não é visível, mas é palpável como uma massa mole.

O exame da glândula tireoide inclui a pesquisa de massas anormais e a avaliação do tamanho geral da tireoide.

O caráter da tireóide, inchaços, nódulos e sua consistência podem ser sentidos.

Se um bócio estiver presente, um examinador também pode sentir o pescoço, considere bater na parte superior do tórax para verificar a extensão.

Outros testes podem incluir levantar os braços (sinal de Pemberton), ouvir a glândula com um estetoscópio para sopros, teste de reflexos e palpação dos gânglios linfáticos na cabeça e pescoço.

Um exame da tireoide também incluirá a observação da pessoa como um todo, para procurar sinais sistêmicos, como ganho ou perda de peso, perda de cabelo e sinais em outros locais - como protrusão dos olhos ou inchaço das panturrilhas em Graves ' doença.


=== Testes ===

Os testes de função da tireoide incluem uma bateria de exames de sangue, incluindo a medição dos hormônios tireoidianos, bem como a medição do hormônio estimulante da tireoide (TSH).

Podem revelar hipertireoidismo (T3 e T4 elevados), hipotireoidismo (T3 e T4 baixos) ou hipertireoidismo subclínico (T3 e T4 normais com TSH baixo). Os níveis de TSH são considerados o marcador mais sensível de disfunção tireoidiana.

No entanto, eles nem sempre são precisos, principalmente se a causa do hipotireoidismo estiver relacionada à secreção insuficiente do hormônio liberador de tireotropina (TRH), caso em que pode ser baixa ou falsamente normal.

Nesse caso, um teste de estimulação de TRH, no qual o TRH é administrado e os níveis de TSH são medidos 30 e 60 minutos depois, pode ser realizado. T3 e T4 podem ser medidos diretamente.

No entanto, como os dois hormônios da tireoide viajam ligados a outras moléculas, e é o componente "livre" que é biologicamente ativo, os níveis de T3 e T4 livre podem ser medidos.

T4 é o preferido, porque no hipotireoidismo os níveis de T3 podem ser normais.

A proporção de hormônios tireoidianos ligados e não ligados é conhecida como proporção de ligação do hormônio tireoidiano (THBR).

Também é possível medir diretamente os principais transportadores dos hormônios tireoidianos, a tiroglobulina e a globulina ligadora de troxina.

A tireoglobulina também será mensurável em uma tireoide saudável e aumentará com a inflamação, e também pode ser usada para medir o sucesso da remoção ou ablação da tireoide.

Se for bem sucedido, a tireoglobulina deve ser indetectável.

Por último, anticorpos contra componentes da tireóide, particularmente anti-TPO e anti-tiroglobulina, podem ser medidos.

Estes podem estar presentes em indivíduos normais, mas são altamente sensíveis para doenças autoimunes.


==== Imagens ====

A ultrassonografia da tireoide pode ser usada para revelar se as estruturas são sólidas ou cheias de líquido, ajudando a diferenciar entre nódulos e bócios e cistos.

Também pode ajudar a diferenciar entre lesões malignas e benignas. Quando mais exames de imagem são necessários, um exame de captação de iodo-123 ou tecnécio-99 radiomarcado pode ser realizado.

Isso pode determinar o tamanho e a forma das lesões, revelar se os nódulos ou bócios são metabolicamente ativos e revelar e monitorar locais de doenças da tireoide ou depósitos de câncer fora da tireoide.

Uma aspiração por agulha fina de uma amostra de tecido da tireoide pode ser feita para avaliar uma lesão vista na ultrassonografia que é então enviada para histopatologia e citologia. A tomografia computadorizada da tireoide desempenha um papel importante na avaliação do câncer de tireoide.

A tomografia computadorizada muitas vezes encontra anormalidades da tireoide e, portanto, torna-se praticamente a primeira modalidade de investigação.


== História ==

A glândula tireóide recebeu seu nome moderno em 1600, quando o anatomista Thomas Wharton comparou sua forma à de um escudo grego antigo ou thyos.

No entanto, a existência da glândula, e das doenças a ela associadas, era conhecida muito antes disso.


=== Antiguidade ===

A presença e as doenças da tireóide têm sido observadas e tratadas há milhares de anos.

Em 1600 aC, esponja queimada e algas marinhas (que contêm iodo) eram usadas na China para o tratamento de bócio, uma prática que se desenvolveu em muitas partes do mundo.

Na medicina ayurvédica, o livro Sushruta Samhita escrito por volta de 1400 aC descreveu hipertireoidismo, hipotireoidismo e bócio.

Aristóteles e Xenofonte no século V aC descrevem casos de bócio tóxico difuso.

Hipócrates e Platão, no século IV aC, forneceram algumas das primeiras descrições da própria glândula, propondo sua função como glândula salivar.

Plínio, o Velho, no século I a.C. referiu-se a epidemias de bócio nos Alpes e propôs tratamento com algas queimadas, prática também referida por Galeno no século II, referindo-se à esponja queimada para o tratamento do bócio.

O texto de farmacologia chinesa Shennong Ben Cao Jing, escrito ca. 200-250, também se refere ao bócio.


=== Era científica ===

Em 1500 polímata Leonardo da Vinci forneceu a primeira ilustração da tireóide.

Em 1543 o anatomista Andreas Vesalius deu a primeira descrição anatômica e ilustração da glândula.

Em 1656 a tireóide recebeu seu nome moderno, pelo anatomista Thomas Wharton.

A glândula foi chamada de tireóide, que significa escudo, pois sua forma se assemelhava aos escudos comumente usados ​​na Grécia Antiga.

O nome em inglês glândula tireóide é derivado do latim médico usado por Wharton – glandula thyreoidea.

Glandula significa 'glândula' em latim, e thyreoidea pode ser rastreada até a palavra grega antiga θυρεοειδής, que significa 'em forma de escudo'.

O químico francês Bernard Courtois descobriu o iodo em 1811 e, em 1896, Eugen Baumann o documentou como o ingrediente central da glândula tireóide.

Ele fez isso fervendo as glândulas tireoides de mil ovelhas e chamou o precipitado, uma combinação dos hormônios tireoidianos, de 'iodotirina'.

David Marine em 1907 provou que o iodo é necessário para a função da tireóide. A doença de Graves foi descrita por Robert James Graves em 1834.

O papel da glândula tireóide no metabolismo foi demonstrado em 1895 por Adolf Magnus-Levy.

A tiroxina foi isolada pela primeira vez em 1914 e sintetizada em 1927, e a triiodotiroxina em 1952.

A conversão de T4 em T3 foi descoberta em 1970.

O processo de descoberta do TSH ocorreu entre o início e meados do século XX.

O TRH foi descoberto pelo endocrinologista polonês Andrew Schally em 1970, contribuindo em parte para seu Prêmio Nobel de Medicina em 1977.

No século XIX, vários autores descreveram tanto o cretinismo quanto o mixedema e sua relação com a tireoide.

Charles Mayo cunhou o termo hipertireoidismo em 1910.

Hakaru Hashimoto documentou um caso de tireoidite de Hashimoto em 1912, anticorpos nesta doença foram demonstrados em 1956.

O conhecimento da tireóide e suas condições se desenvolveu ao longo do final do século XIX e XX, com muitos tratamentos modernos e modalidades de investigação evoluindo ao longo de meados do século XX, incluindo o uso de iodo radioativo, tiouracil e aspiração por agulha fina.


=== Cirurgia ===

Ou Aécio no século VI dC ou o persa Ali ibn Abbas al-Magusi em 990 dC realizaram a primeira tireoidectomia registrada como tratamento para o bócio.

As operações permaneceram arriscadas e geralmente não foram bem-sucedidas até o século 19, quando surgiram descrições de vários autores, incluindo o cirurgião prussiano Theodor Billroth, o cirurgião e fisiologista suíço Theodor Kocher, o médico americano Charles Mayo, os cirurgiões americanos William Halsted e George Crile.

Essas descrições forneceram a base para a cirurgia moderna da tireoide.

Theodor Kocher passou a ganhar o Prêmio Nobel de Fisiologia ou Medicina em 1909 "por seu trabalho na fisiologia, patologia e cirurgia da glândula tireóide".


== Outros animais ==

A glândula tireóide é encontrada em todos os vertebrados.

Nos peixes, geralmente está localizado abaixo das brânquias e nem sempre é dividido em lobos distintos.

No entanto, em alguns teleósteos, manchas de tecido da tireoide são encontradas em outras partes do corpo, associadas aos rins, baço, coração ou olhos.

Nos tetrápodes, a tireóide é sempre encontrada em algum lugar na região do pescoço.

Na maioria das espécies de tetrápodes, existem duas glândulas tireoides emparelhadas – ou seja, os lobos direito e esquerdo não estão unidos.

No entanto, existe apenas uma única glândula tireóide na maioria dos mamíferos, e a forma encontrada em humanos é comum a muitas outras espécies.

Nas larvas de lampreias, a tireoide se origina como uma glândula exócrina, secretando seus hormônios no intestino e associada ao aparelho filtrador da larva.

Na lampreia adulta, a glândula se separa do intestino e se torna endócrina, mas esse caminho de desenvolvimento pode refletir a origem evolutiva da tireoide.

Por exemplo, os parentes vivos mais próximos dos vertebrados, os tunicados e os anfioxis (lancetas), têm uma estrutura muito semelhante à das lampreias larvais (o endóstilo), e isso também secreta compostos contendo iodo, mas não tiroxina.

A tiroxina é fundamental para a regulação metabólica e o crescimento em todo o clado de vertebrados.

O iodo e o T4 desencadeiam a mudança de um girino que vive na água e come plantas para um sapo carnívoro que vive na terra, com melhores habilidades neurológicas, visuoespaciais, olfativas e cognitivas para caçar, como visto em outros animais predadores.

Fenômeno semelhante ocorre nas salamandras anfíbias neotênicas, que, sem introduzir iodo, não se transformam em adultos terrestres, e vivem e se reproduzem na forma larval de axolote aquático.

Entre os anfíbios, a administração de um agente bloqueador da tireoide como o propiltiouracil (PTU) pode impedir que os girinos se metamorfoseiem em sapos; em contraste, a administração de tiroxina irá desencadear a metamorfose.

Na metamorfose de anfíbios, tiroxina e iodo também exercem um modelo experimental bem estudado de apoptose nas células das brânquias, cauda e nadadeiras dos girinos.

O iodo, via iodolipídios, favoreceu a evolução das espécies de animais terrestres e provavelmente desempenhou um papel crucial na evolução do cérebro humano.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tyroid

;;;FR;;;



GLANDE THYROÏDE


La thyroïde, ou glande thyroïde, est une glande endocrine chez les vertébrés.

Chez l'homme, il se trouve dans le cou et se compose de deux lobes connectés.

Les deux tiers inférieurs des lobes sont reliés par une fine bande de tissu appelée isthme thyroïdien.

La thyroïde est située à l'avant du cou, sous la pomme d'Adam.

Au microscope, l'unité fonctionnelle de la glande thyroïde est le follicule thyroïdien sphérique, tapissé de cellules folliculaires (thyrocytes) et occasionnellement de cellules parafolliculaires qui entourent une lumière contenant un colloïde.

La glande thyroïde sécrète trois hormones : les deux hormones thyroïdiennes – la triiodothyronine (T3) et la thyroxine (T4) – et une hormone peptidique, la calcitonine.

Les hormones thyroïdiennes influencent le taux métabolique et la synthèse des protéines, et chez les enfants, la croissance et le développement.

La calcitonine joue un rôle dans l'homéostasie du calcium.

La sécrétion des deux hormones thyroïdiennes est régulée par l'hormone stimulant la thyroïde (TSH), qui est sécrétée par l'hypophyse antérieure.

La TSH est régulée par l'hormone de libération de la thyrotropine (TRH), qui est produite par l'hypothalamus.

La glande thyroïde se développe dans le plancher du pharynx à la base de la langue à 3–4 semaines de gestation ; il descend ensuite devant l'intestin pharyngé et, finalement, au cours des semaines suivantes, il migre vers la base du cou.

Lors de la migration, la thyroïde reste reliée à la langue par un canal étroit, le canal thyréoglosse.

À la fin de la cinquième semaine, le canal thyréoglosse dégénère et, au cours des deux semaines suivantes, la thyroïde détachée migre vers sa position finale.

Euthyroïde est le terme utilisé pour décrire un état de fonction thyroïdienne normale dans le corps.

Les troubles thyroïdiens comprennent l'hyperthyroïdie, l'hypothyroïdie, l'inflammation de la thyroïde (thyroïdite), l'hypertrophie thyroïdienne (goitre), les nodules thyroïdiens et le cancer de la thyroïde.

L'hyperthyroïdie se caractérise par une sécrétion excessive d'hormones thyroïdiennes : la cause la plus fréquente est la maladie auto-immune de Basedow.

L'hypothyroïdie se caractérise par une sécrétion déficiente des hormones thyroïdiennes : la cause la plus fréquente est une carence en iode.

Dans les régions carencées en iode, l'hypothyroïdie secondaire à une carence en iode est la principale cause de déficience intellectuelle évitable chez les enfants.

Dans les régions où l'iode est suffisant, la cause la plus fréquente d'hypothyroïdie est la thyroïdite de Hashimoto, une maladie auto-immune.

La présence de la thyroïde et de ses diverses maladies est constatée et traitée depuis des siècles, bien que la glande elle-même n'ait été décrite et nommée que depuis la Renaissance.

La connaissance de la thyroïde, de sa biochimie et de ses troubles s'est développée tout au long de la fin du XIXe et du XXe siècle.

De nombreux traitements modernes et modalités d'investigation ont évolué tout au long du milieu du XXe siècle, notamment le raffinement des techniques chirurgicales d'ablation de la thyroïde (thyroïdectomie) pour le traitement du goitre ; l'utilisation d'iode radioactif et de thiouracile pour le traitement de la maladie de Basedow ; et aspiration à l'aiguille fine pour le diagnostic des nodules thyroïdiens.


== Structure ==

=== Fonctionnalités ===

La glande thyroïde est un organe en forme de papillon composé de deux lobes, gauche et droit, reliés par une étroite bande de tissu, appelée « isthme ».

Il pèse 25 grammes chez l'adulte, chaque lobe mesurant environ 5 cm de long, 3 cm de large et 2 cm d'épaisseur et l'isthme environ 1,25 cm de hauteur et de largeur.

La glande est généralement plus grosse chez les femmes que chez les hommes et sa taille augmente pendant la grossesse.

La thyroïde est près de l'avant du cou, située contre et autour de l'avant du larynx et de la trachée.

Le cartilage thyroïde et le cartilage cricoïde se trouvent juste au-dessus de la glande, sous la pomme d'Adam.

L'isthme s'étend du deuxième au troisième anneaux de la trachée, la partie la plus haute des lobes s'étendant jusqu'au cartilage thyroïde et la plus basse autour des quatrième au sixième anneaux trachéaux.

Les muscles infrahyoïdiens se trouvent devant la glande et le muscle sternocléidomastoïdien sur le côté.

Derrière les ailes externes de la thyroïde se trouvent les deux artères carotides.

La trachée, le larynx, le pharynx inférieur et l'œsophage se trouvent tous derrière la thyroïde.

Dans cette région, le nerf laryngé récurrent et l'artère thyroïdienne inférieure passent à côté ou dans le ligament.

En règle générale, quatre glandes parathyroïdes, deux de chaque côté, se trouvent de chaque côté entre les deux couches de la capsule thyroïdienne, à l'arrière des lobes thyroïdiens.

La glande thyroïde est recouverte d'une fine capsule fibreuse, qui a une couche interne et une couche externe.

La couche interne s'extrude dans la glande et forme les cloisons qui divisent le tissu thyroïdien en lobules microscopiques.

La couche externe est continue avec le fascia prétrachéal, attachant la glande aux cartilages cricoïde et thyroïdien via un épaississement du fascia pour former le ligament suspenseur postérieur de la glande thyroïde, également connu sous le nom de ligament de Berry.

Cela fait monter et descendre la thyroïde avec le mouvement de ces cartilages lors de la déglutition.


=== Sang, lymphe et nerfs ===

La thyroïde est alimentée en sang artériel par l'artère thyroïdienne supérieure, une branche de l'artère carotide externe, et l'artère thyroïdienne inférieure, une branche du tronc thyrocervical, et parfois par une variante anatomique l'artère ima thyroïdienne, qui a une origine variable .

L'artère thyroïdienne supérieure se divise en branches antérieure et postérieure alimentant la thyroïde, et l'artère thyroïdienne inférieure se divise en branches supérieure et inférieure.

Les artères thyroïdiennes supérieure et inférieure se rejoignent derrière la partie externe des lobes thyroïdiens.

Le sang veineux est drainé via les veines thyroïdiennes supérieures et moyennes, qui se drainent vers la veine jugulaire interne, et via les veines thyroïdiennes inférieures.

Les veines thyroïdiennes inférieures proviennent d'un réseau de veines et se drainent dans les veines brachiocéphaliques gauche et droite.

Les artères et les veines forment un plexus entre les deux couches de la capsule de la glande thyroïde. Le drainage lymphatique passe fréquemment par les ganglions lymphatiques prélaryngés (situés juste au-dessus de l'isthme) et les ganglions lymphatiques prétrachéaux et paratrachéaux.

La glande reçoit l'apport nerveux sympathique des ganglions cervicaux supérieur, moyen et inférieur du tronc sympathique.

La glande reçoit l'innervation parasympathique du nerf laryngé supérieur et du nerf laryngé récurrent.


=== Variante ===

Il existe de nombreuses variantes dans la taille et la forme de la glande thyroïde et dans la position des glandes parathyroïdes intégrées.

Parfois, il y a un troisième lobe présent appelé le lobe pyramidal.

Lorsqu'il est présent, ce lobe étire souvent l'os hyoïde à partir de l'isthme thyroïdien et peut être un à plusieurs lobes divisés.

La présence de ce lobe varie dans les études rapportées de 18,3 % à 44,6 %.

Il a été démontré qu'il surgit plus souvent du côté gauche et parfois séparé.

Le lobe pyramidal est également connu sous le nom de pyramide de Lalouette.

Le lobe pyramidal est un vestige du canal thyréoglosse, qui se dégrade généralement lors de la descente de la glande thyroïde.

De petites glandes thyroïdiennes accessoires peuvent en fait se trouver n'importe où le long du canal thyréoglosse, du foramen caecum de la langue à la position de la thyroïde chez l'adulte.

Une petite corne à l'arrière des lobes thyroïdiens, généralement près du nerf laryngé récurrent et de l'artère thyroïdienne inférieure, est appelée tubercule de Zuckerkandl.

D'autres variantes incluent un muscle releveur de la glande thyroïde, reliant l'isthme au corps de l'os hyoïde, et la présence de la petite artère ima thyroïdienne.


=== Microanatomie ===
 
Au niveau microscopique, il existe trois caractéristiques principales de la thyroïde : les follicules, les cellules folliculaires et les cellules parafolliculaires, découvertes pour la première fois par Geoffery Websterson en 1664.

FolliculesLes follicules thyroïdiens sont de petits groupements sphériques de cellules de 0,02 à 0,9 mm de diamètre qui jouent le rôle principal dans la fonction thyroïdienne.

Ils se composent d'un rebord qui a une riche circulation sanguine, une présence nerveuse et lymphatique, qui entoure un noyau de colloïde qui se compose principalement de protéines précurseurs d'hormones thyroïdiennes appelées thyroglobuline, une glycoprotéine iodée.

Cellules folliculairesLe noyau d'un follicule est entouré d'une seule couche de cellules folliculaires.

Lorsqu'elles sont stimulées par la thyréostimuline (TSH), elles sécrètent les hormones thyroïdiennes T3 et T4.

Pour ce faire, ils transportent et métabolisent la thyroglobuline contenue dans le colloïde.

Les cellules folliculaires varient en forme de plate à cuboïde à colonnaire, selon leur degré d'activité.

Cellules parafolliculairesDispersées parmi les cellules folliculaires et dans les espaces entre les follicules sphériques se trouvent un autre type de cellule thyroïdienne, les cellules parafolliculaires.

Ces cellules sécrètent de la calcitonine et sont donc également appelées cellules C.


== Développement ==

Dans le développement de l'embryon, à 3-4 semaines d'âge gestationnel, la glande thyroïde apparaît comme une prolifération épithéliale dans le plancher du pharynx à la base de la langue entre le tuberculum impar et la copula linguae.

La copule devient bientôt recouverte par l'éminence hypopharyngienne à un point indiqué plus tard par le foramen caecum.

La thyroïde descend ensuite devant l'intestin pharyngé sous la forme d'un diverticule bilobé à travers le canal thyréoglosse.

Au cours des semaines suivantes, il migre vers la base du cou en passant devant l'os hyoïde.

Lors de la migration, la thyroïde reste reliée à la langue par un canal étroit, le canal thyréoglosse.

À la fin de la cinquième semaine, le canal thyréoglosse dégénère et, au cours des deux semaines suivantes, la thyroïde détachée migre vers sa position finale.

L'hypothalamus et l'hypophyse fœtaux commencent à sécréter l'hormone de libération de la thyrotropine (TRH) et l'hormone stimulant la thyroïde (TSH).

La TSH est mesurable pour la première fois à 11 semaines.

Au bout de 18 à 20 semaines, la production de thyroxine (T4) atteint un niveau cliniquement significatif et autosuffisant.

La triiodothyronine fœtale (T3) reste faible, inférieure à 15 ng/dL jusqu'à 30 semaines, et augmente à 50 ng/dL à terme.

Le fœtus doit être autosuffisant en hormones thyroïdiennes afin de se prémunir contre les troubles neurodéveloppementaux qui découleraient de l'hypothyroïdie maternelle.

La présence d'une quantité suffisante d'iode est essentielle pour un développement neurologique sain.

Les cellules parafolliculaires neuroendocrines, également appelées cellules C, responsables de la production de calcitonine, sont dérivées de l'endoderme de l'intestin antérieur.

Cette partie de la thyroïde se forme alors d'abord sous la forme du corps ultimopharyngé, qui commence dans la quatrième poche pharyngée ventrale et rejoint la glande thyroïde primordiale lors de sa descente vers son emplacement final.

Les aberrations du développement prénatal peuvent entraîner diverses formes de dysgénésie thyroïdienne qui peuvent provoquer une hypothyroïdie congénitale, et si elles ne sont pas traitées, elles peuvent conduire au crétinisme.


== Fonction ==

=== Hormones thyroïdiennes ===

La fonction principale de la thyroïde est la production des hormones thyroïdiennes contenant de l'iode, la triiodothyronine (T3) et la thyroxine (T4) et l'hormone peptidique calcitonine.

Les hormones thyroïdiennes sont créées à partir d'iode et de tyrosine.

T3 est ainsi nommé car il contient trois atomes d'iode par molécule et T4 contient quatre atomes d'iode par molécule.

Les hormones thyroïdiennes ont un large éventail d'effets sur le corps humain.

Ceux-ci inclus:

-Métabolique.

Les hormones thyroïdiennes augmentent le taux métabolique basal et ont des effets sur presque tous les tissus du corps.

L'appétit, l'absorption de substances et la motilité intestinale sont tous influencés par les hormones thyroïdiennes.

Ils augmentent l'absorption dans l'intestin, la génération, l'absorption par les cellules et la dégradation du glucose.

Ils stimulent la dégradation des graisses et augmentent le nombre d'acides gras libres.

Malgré l'augmentation des acides gras libres, les hormones thyroïdiennes diminuent le taux de cholestérol, peut-être en augmentant le taux de sécrétion de cholestérol dans la bile.

-Cardiovasculaire.

Les hormones augmentent le rythme et la force du rythme cardiaque.

Ils augmentent le rythme respiratoire, l'apport et la consommation d'oxygène et augmentent l'activité des mitochondries.

Combinés, ces facteurs augmentent le flux sanguin et la température du corps.

-Du développement.

Les hormones thyroïdiennes sont importantes pour le développement normal.

Ils augmentent le taux de croissance des jeunes et les cellules du cerveau en développement sont une cible majeure pour les hormones thyroïdiennes T3 et T4.

Les hormones thyroïdiennes jouent un rôle particulièrement crucial dans la maturation cérébrale au cours du développement fœtal et des premières années de la vie postnatale.

Les hormones thyroïdiennes jouent également un rôle dans le maintien de la fonction sexuelle, du sommeil et des schémas de pensée normaux.

Des niveaux accrus sont associés à une vitesse accrue de génération de pensée mais à une diminution de la concentration.

La fonction sexuelle, y compris la libido et le maintien d'un cycle menstruel normal, est influencée par les hormones thyroïdiennes. Après la sécrétion, seule une très petite proportion des hormones thyroïdiennes circule librement dans le sang.

La plupart sont liés à la globuline liant la thyroxine (environ 70 %), à la transthyrétine (10 %) et à l'albumine (15 %).

Seuls 0,03% des T4 et 0,3% des T3 voyageant librement ont une activité hormonale.

De plus, jusqu'à 85 % de la T3 dans le sang est produite suite à la conversion de la T4 par les iodothyronine déiodinases dans les organes du corps.

Les hormones thyroïdiennes agissent en traversant la membrane cellulaire et en se liant aux récepteurs nucléaires intracellulaires des hormones thyroïdiennes TR-α1, TR-α2, TR-β1 et TR-β2, qui se lient aux éléments de réponse hormonale et aux facteurs de transcription pour moduler la transcription de l'ADN.

En plus de ces actions sur l'ADN, les hormones thyroïdiennes agissent également dans la membrane cellulaire ou dans le cytoplasme via des réactions avec des enzymes, notamment l'ATPase de calcium, l'adénylyl cyclase et les transporteurs de glucose.


=== Production d'hormones ===

Les hormones thyroïdiennes sont créées à partir de la thyroglobuline.

Il s'agit d'une protéine dans le colloïde de la lumière folliculaire qui est créée à l'origine dans le réticulum endoplasmique rugueux des cellules folliculaires, puis transportée dans la lumière folliculaire.

La thyroglobuline contient 123 unités de tyrosine, qui réagit avec l'iode dans la lumière folliculaire. L'iode est essentiel à la production des hormones thyroïdiennes.

L'iode (I0) se déplace dans le sang sous forme d'iodure (I−), qui est absorbé dans les cellules folliculaires par un symporteur d'iodure de sodium.

Il s'agit d'un canal ionique sur la membrane cellulaire qui, dans la même action, transporte deux ions sodium et un ion iodure dans la cellule.

L'iodure se déplace ensuite de l'intérieur de la cellule vers la lumière, grâce à l'action de la pendrine, un antiporteur iodure-chlorure.

Dans la lumière folliculaire, l'iodure est ensuite oxydé en iode.

Cela le rend plus réactif et l'iode est attaché aux unités de tyrosine actives dans la thyroglobuline par l'enzyme thyroïde peroxydase.

Cela forme les précurseurs des hormones thyroïdiennes monoiodotyrosine (MIT) et diiodotyrosine (DIT). Lorsque les cellules folliculaires sont stimulées par l'hormone stimulant la thyroïde, les cellules folliculaires réabsorbent la thyroglobuline de la lumière folliculaire.

Les tyrosines iodées sont clivées, formant les hormones thyroïdiennes T4, T3, DIT, MIT et des traces de triiodothyronine inverse.

T3 et T4 sont libérés dans le sang.

Les hormones sécrétées par la glande sont d'environ 80 à 90 % de T4 et d'environ 10 à 20 % de T3.

Les enzymes déiodinase dans les tissus périphériques éliminent l'iode de MIT et DIT et convertissent T4 en T3 et RT3.

Il s'agit d'une source majeure de RT3 (95 %) et de T3 (87 %) dans les tissus périphériques.


=== Règlement ===

La production de thyroxine et de triiodothyronine est principalement régulée par l'hormone stimulant la thyroïde (TSH), libérée par l'hypophyse antérieure.

La libération de TSH est à son tour stimulée par l'hormone de libération de la thyrotropine (TRH), libérée de manière pulsatile par l'hypothalamus.

Les hormones thyroïdiennes fournissent une rétroaction négative aux thyrotropes TSH et TRH : lorsque les hormones thyroïdiennes sont élevées, la production de TSH est supprimée.

Cette rétroaction négative se produit également lorsque les niveaux de TSH sont élevés, ce qui entraîne la suppression de la production de TRH.

La TRH est sécrétée à un taux accru dans des situations telles que l'exposition au froid afin de stimuler la thermogenèse.

En plus d'être supprimée par la présence d'hormones thyroïdiennes, la production de TSH est émoussée par la dopamine, la somatostatine et les glucocorticoïdes.


=== Calcitonine ===

La glande thyroïde produit également l'hormone calcitonine, qui aide à réguler les niveaux de calcium dans le sang.

Les cellules parafolliculaires produisent de la calcitonine en réponse à une hypercalcémie.

La calcitonine diminue la libération de calcium par les os, en diminuant l'activité des ostéoclastes, cellules qui décomposent les os.

L'os est constamment réabsorbé par les ostéoclastes et créé par les ostéoblastes, de sorte que la calcitonine stimule efficacement le mouvement du calcium dans les os.

Les effets de la calcitonine sont opposés à ceux de l'hormone parathyroïdienne (PTH) produite dans les glandes parathyroïdes.

Cependant, la calcitonine semble beaucoup moins essentielle que la PTH, puisque le métabolisme du calcium reste cliniquement normal après ablation de la thyroïde (thyroïdectomie), mais pas des glandes parathyroïdes.


== Expression des gènes et des protéines ==

Environ 20 000 gènes codant pour des protéines sont exprimés dans les cellules humaines : 70 % de ces gènes sont exprimés dans les cellules thyroïdiennes.

Deux cent cinquante de ces gènes sont plus spécifiquement exprimés dans la thyroïde, et environ 20 gènes sont hautement spécifiques à la thyroïde.

Dans les cellules folliculaires, les protéines synthétisées par ces gènes dirigent la synthèse des hormones thyroïdiennes : thyroglobuline, TPO et IYD ; tandis que dans les cellules c parafolliculaires, elles dirigent la synthèse de la calcitonine - CALCA et CALCB.


== Signification clinique ==

Les médecins généralistes, les médecins de famille et les spécialistes en médecine interne jouent un rôle dans l'identification et le suivi du traitement des maladies thyroïdiennes.

Les endocrinologues et les thyroïdologues sont des spécialistes de la thyroïde.

Les chirurgiens de la thyroïde ou les oto-rhino-laryngologistes sont responsables de la prise en charge chirurgicale des maladies de la thyroïde.


=== Troubles fonctionnels ===

==== Hyperthyroïdie ====

La production excessive d'hormones thyroïdiennes est appelée hyperthyroïdie.

Les causes comprennent la maladie de Basedow, le goitre multinodulaire toxique, l'adénome thyroïdien solitaire, l'inflammation et un adénome hypophysaire qui sécrète un excès de TSH.

Une autre cause est la disponibilité excessive d'iode, soit par ingestion excessive, induite par le médicament amiodarone, soit suite à une imagerie de contraste iodé.

L'hyperthyroïdie provoque souvent une variété de symptômes non spécifiques, notamment une perte de poids, une augmentation de l'appétit, de l'insomnie, une diminution de la tolérance à la chaleur, des tremblements, des palpitations, de l'anxiété et de la nervosité.

Dans certains cas, il peut provoquer des douleurs thoraciques, de la diarrhée, une perte de cheveux et une faiblesse musculaire.

Ces symptômes peuvent être pris en charge temporairement avec des médicaments tels que les bêta-bloquants. La prise en charge à long terme de l'hyperthyroïdie peut inclure des médicaments qui suppriment la fonction thyroïdienne tels que le propylthiouracile, le carbimazole et le méthimazole.

Alternativement, l'iode radioactif 131 peut être utilisé pour détruire le tissu thyroïdien : l'iode radioactif est sélectivement absorbé par les cellules thyroïdiennes, qui au fil du temps les détruit.

Le traitement de première ligne choisi dépendra de l'individu et du pays où il est traité.

La chirurgie pour enlever la thyroïde peut parfois être réalisée sous la forme d'une thyroïdectomie transorale, une procédure peu invasive.

La chirurgie comporte cependant un risque de lésion des glandes parathyroïdes et du nerf laryngé récurrent, qui innerve les cordes vocales.

Si toute la glande thyroïde est retirée, une hypothyroïdie en résultera inévitablement et des substituts d'hormones thyroïdiennes seront nécessaires.


==== Hypothyroïdie ====

Une glande thyroïde sous-active entraîne une hypothyroïdie.

Les symptômes typiques sont une prise de poids anormale, de la fatigue, de la constipation, des saignements menstruels abondants, une perte de cheveux, une intolérance au froid et un rythme cardiaque lent.

La carence en iode est la cause la plus fréquente d'hypothyroïdie dans le monde, et la thyroïdite de Hashimoto, une maladie auto-immune, est la cause la plus fréquente dans le monde développé.

Les autres causes comprennent les anomalies congénitales, les maladies provoquant une inflammation transitoire, l'ablation chirurgicale ou la radioablation de la thyroïde, les médicaments amiodarone et lithium, l'amylose et la sarcoïdose.

Certaines formes d'hypothyroïdie peuvent entraîner un myxœdème et les cas graves peuvent entraîner un coma myxœdème. L'hypothyroïdie est gérée par le remplacement de l'hormone thyroxine.

Ceci est généralement administré quotidiennement sous forme de supplément oral et peut prendre quelques semaines pour devenir efficace.

Certaines causes d'hypothyroïdie, telles que la thyroïdite post-partum et la thyroïdite subaiguë, peuvent être transitoires et passer au fil du temps, et d'autres causes telles que la carence en iode peuvent être corrigées par une supplémentation alimentaire.


=== Maladies ===

==== Maladie de Basedow ====

La maladie de Basedow est une maladie auto-immune qui est la cause la plus fréquente d'hyperthyroïdie.

Dans la maladie de Basedow, pour une raison inconnue, des auto-anticorps se développent contre le récepteur de l'hormone stimulant la thyroïde.

Ces anticorps activent le récepteur, entraînant le développement d'un goitre et des symptômes d'hyperthyroïdie, tels que l'intolérance à la chaleur, la perte de poids, la diarrhée et les palpitations.

Parfois, ces anticorps bloquent mais n'activent pas le récepteur, entraînant des symptômes associés à l'hypothyroïdie.

De plus, une saillie progressive des yeux peut survenir, appelée ophtalmopathie de Graves, tout comme un gonflement de l'avant des tibias.

La maladie de Basedow peut être diagnostiquée par la présence de caractéristiques pathomnomoniques telles que l'atteinte des yeux et des tibias, ou l'isolement d'auto-anticorps, ou par les résultats d'une scintigraphie radiomarquée.

La maladie de Graves est traitée avec des médicaments anti-thyroïdiens tels que le propylthiouracile, qui diminuent la production d'hormones thyroïdiennes, mais maintiennent un taux élevé de rechute.

S'il n'y a pas d'implication des yeux, l'utilisation d'isotopes radioactifs pour enlever la glande peut être envisagée.

L'ablation chirurgicale de la glande suivie d'un remplacement de l'hormone thyroïdienne peut être envisagée, mais cela ne contrôlera pas les symptômes associés aux yeux ou à la peau.


==== Nodule ====

Les nodules thyroïdiens se trouvent souvent sur la glande, avec une prévalence de 4 à 7 %.

La majorité des nodules ne provoquent aucun symptôme, la sécrétion d'hormones thyroïdiennes est normale et ils ne sont pas cancéreux.

Les cas non cancéreux comprennent les kystes simples, les nodules colloïdes et les adénomes thyroïdiens.

Les nodules malins, qui ne surviennent que dans environ 5 % des nodules, comprennent les carcinomes folliculaires, papillaires, médullaires et les métastases provenant d'autres sites. Les nodules sont plus probables chez les femmes, celles qui sont exposées aux radiations et celles qui présentent une carence en iode.

Lorsqu'un nodule est présent, les tests de la fonction thyroïdienne déterminent si le nodule sécrète un excès d'hormones thyroïdiennes, provoquant une hyperthyroïdie.

Lorsque les tests de la fonction thyroïdienne sont normaux, une échographie est souvent utilisée pour étudier le nodule et fournir des informations telles que si le nodule est rempli de liquide ou une masse solide, et si l'apparence suggère un cancer bénin ou malin.

Une biopsie par aspiration à l'aiguille peut ensuite être effectuée et l'échantillon subit une cytologie, dans laquelle l'apparence des cellules est visualisée pour déterminer si elles ressemblent à des cellules normales ou cancéreuses.

La présence de nodules multiples s'appelle un goitre multinodulaire ; et s'il est associé à une hyperthyroïdie, on parle de goitre multinodulaire toxique.


==== Goitre ====

Une glande thyroïde hypertrophiée s'appelle un goitre.

Les goitres sont présents sous une forme ou une autre chez environ 5 % des personnes et sont le résultat d'un grand nombre de causes, notamment une carence en iode, une maladie auto-immune (à la fois la maladie de Basedow et la thyroïdite de Hashimoto), une infection, une inflammation et une maladie infiltrante telle que la sarcoïdose. et l'amylose.

Parfois, aucune cause ne peut être trouvée, un état appelé "goitre simple". Certaines formes de goitre sont associées à la douleur, alors que beaucoup ne provoquent aucun symptôme.

Les goitres élargis peuvent s'étendre au-delà de la position normale de la glande thyroïde jusqu'en dessous du sternum, autour des voies respiratoires ou de l'œsophage.

Les goitres peuvent être associés à une hyperthyroïdie ou à une hypothyroïdie, liées à la cause sous-jacente du goitre.

Des tests de la fonction thyroïdienne peuvent être effectués pour rechercher la cause et les effets du goitre.

La cause sous-jacente du goitre peut être traitée, mais de nombreux goitres sans symptômes associés sont simplement surveillés.


==== Inflammations ====

L'inflammation de la thyroïde est appelée thyroïdite et peut provoquer des symptômes d'hyperthyroïdie ou d'hypothyroïdie.

Deux types de thyroïdite présentent initialement une hyperthyroïdie et sont parfois suivies d'une période d'hypothyroïdie - la thyroïdite de Hashimoto et la thyroïdite post-partum.

Il existe d'autres troubles qui provoquent une inflammation de la thyroïde, notamment la thyroïdite subaiguë, la thyroïdite aiguë, la thyroïdite silencieuse, la thyroïdite de Riedel et les lésions traumatiques, y compris la thyroïdite à la palpation.

La thyroïdite de Hashimoto est une maladie auto-immune dans laquelle la glande thyroïde est infiltrée par les lymphocytes B et T.

Ceux-ci détruisent progressivement la glande thyroïde.

De cette façon, la thyroïdite de Hasimoto peut s'être produite insidieusement et n'être remarquée que lorsque la production d'hormones thyroïdiennes diminue, provoquant des symptômes d'hypothyroïdie.

La maladie de Hashimoto est plus fréquente chez les femmes que chez les hommes, beaucoup plus fréquente après l'âge de 60 ans et présente des facteurs de risque génétiques connus.

Le diabète de type 1, l'anémie pernicieuse, le vitiligo de la maladie d'Addison sont également plus fréquents chez les personnes atteintes de la thyroïdite de Hashimoto. La thyroïdite post-partum survient chez certaines femmes après l'accouchement.

Après l'accouchement, la glande s'enflamme et l'état se présente initialement par une période d'hyperthyroïdie suivie d'hypothyroïdie et, généralement, d'un retour à une fonction normale.

L'évolution de la maladie se déroule sur plusieurs mois, et se caractérise par un goitre indolore.

Des anticorps contre la peroxydase thyroïdienne peuvent être trouvés lors des tests.

L'inflammation disparaît généralement sans traitement, bien qu'un remplacement de l'hormone thyroïdienne puisse être nécessaire pendant la période d'hypothyroïdie.


==== Cancer ====

Le néoplasme le plus courant affectant la glande thyroïde est un adénome bénin, se présentant généralement comme une masse indolore dans le cou.

Les cancers malins de la thyroïde sont le plus souvent des carcinomes, bien que le cancer puisse survenir dans n'importe quel tissu constituant la thyroïde, y compris le cancer des cellules C et les lymphomes.

Les cancers d'autres sites se logent également rarement dans la thyroïde.

La radiothérapie de la tête et du cou présente un facteur de risque de cancer de la thyroïde, et le cancer est plus fréquent chez les femmes que chez les hommes, survenant à un taux d'environ 2:1.

Dans la plupart des cas, le cancer de la thyroïde se présente comme une masse indolore dans le cou.

Il est très rare que les cancers de la thyroïde présentent d'autres symptômes, bien que dans certains cas, le cancer puisse provoquer une hyperthyroïdie.

La plupart des cancers malins de la thyroïde sont papillaires, suivis des lymphomes folliculaires, médullaires et thyroïdiens.

En raison de la proéminence de la glande thyroïde, le cancer est souvent détecté plus tôt au cours de la maladie comme cause d'un nodule, qui peut subir une aspiration à l'aiguille fine.

Les tests de la fonction thyroïdienne aideront à révéler si le nodule produit un excès d'hormones thyroïdiennes.

Un test d'absorption d'iode radioactif peut aider à révéler l'activité et l'emplacement du cancer et des métastases.

Les cancers de la thyroïde sont traités en enlevant tout ou partie de la glande thyroïde.

L'iode radioactif 131 peut être administré pour radioabler la thyroïde.

La thyroxine est administrée pour remplacer les hormones perdues et pour supprimer la production de TSH, car la TSH peut stimuler la récidive.

À l'exception du rare cancer anaplasique de la thyroïde, qui est de très mauvais pronostic, la plupart des cancers de la thyroïde ont un excellent pronostic et peuvent même être considérés comme curables.


==== Congénital ====
Un canal thyréoglosse persistant est le trouble congénital cliniquement significatif le plus courant de la glande thyroïde.

Un tractus sinusal persistant peut rester comme un vestige du développement tubulaire de la glande thyroïde.

Des parties de ce tube peuvent être oblitérées, laissant de petits segments pour former des kystes thyréoglosses.

Les nouveau-nés prématurés sont à risque d'hypothyroïdie car leurs glandes thyroïdiennes ne sont pas suffisamment développées pour répondre à leurs besoins postnatals.

Afin de détecter l'hypothyroïdie chez les nouveau-nés, afin de prévenir les anomalies de croissance et de développement plus tard dans la vie, de nombreux pays ont des programmes de dépistage néonatal à la naissance.

Les nourrissons présentant un déficit en hormones thyroïdiennes (hypothyroïdie congénitale) peuvent manifester des problèmes de croissance et de développement physiques ainsi que de développement cérébral, appelés crétinisme.

Les enfants atteints d'hypothyroïdie congénitale sont traités en complément par de la lévothyroxine, qui facilite la croissance et le développement normaux. Des sécrétions mucineuses et claires peuvent s'accumuler dans ces kystes pour former soit des masses sphériques, soit des gonflements fusiformes, dépassant rarement 2 à 3 cm de diamètre.

Ceux-ci sont présents sur la ligne médiane du cou en avant de la trachée.

Les segments du canal et des kystes situés en haut du cou sont tapissés d'un épithélium pavimenteux stratifié, essentiellement identique à celui recouvrant la partie postérieure de la langue dans la région du foramen caecum.

Les troubles qui surviennent dans la partie inférieure du cou plus à proximité de la glande thyroïde sont bordés par un épithélium ressemblant à l'épithélium acinaire thyroïdien.

De manière caractéristique, à côté de l'épithélium de revêtement, il existe un infiltrat lymphocytaire intense.

Une infection superposée peut transformer ces lésions en cavités d'abcès et, rarement, donner lieu à des cancers.

Un autre trouble est celui de la dysgénésie thyroïdienne qui peut entraîner diverses présentations d'une ou plusieurs glandes thyroïdiennes accessoires mal placées.

Ceux-ci peuvent être asymptomatiques.


==== Iode ====

La carence en iode, plus fréquente dans les régions intérieures et montagneuses, peut prédisposer au goitre - s'il est répandu, connu sous le nom de goitre endémique.

Les femmes enceintes carencées en iode peuvent donner naissance à des bébés présentant un déficit en hormones thyroïdiennes.

L'utilisation de sel iodé pour ajouter de l'iode à l'alimentation a éliminé le crétinisme endémique dans la plupart des pays développés, et plus de 120 pays ont rendu obligatoire l'iodation du sel.

Parce que la thyroïde concentre l'iode, elle concentre également les divers isotopes radioactifs de l'iode produits par la fission nucléaire.

En cas de rejets accidentels importants de ces matières dans l'environnement, l'absorption d'isotopes radioactifs de l'iode par la thyroïde peut, en théorie, être bloquée en saturant le mécanisme d'absorption avec un large excédent d'iode non radioactif, pris sous forme de comprimés d'iodure de potassium.

L'une des conséquences de la catastrophe de Tchernobyl a été une augmentation des cancers de la thyroïde chez les enfants dans les années qui ont suivi l'accident.

L'apport excessif d'iode est rare et n'a généralement aucun effet sur la fonction thyroïdienne.

Parfois, bien qu'il puisse provoquer une hyperthyroïdie, et parfois une hypothyroïdie avec un goitre résultant.


=== Évaluation ===

La thyroïde est examinée par l'observation de la glande et du cou environnant pour un gonflement ou une hypertrophie.

Il est ensuite ressenti, généralement par derrière, et on demande souvent à une personne d'avaler pour mieux sentir la glande contre les doigts de l'examinateur.

La glande monte et descend avec la déglutition en raison de ses attaches aux cartilages thyroïde et cricoïde.

Chez une personne en bonne santé, la glande n'est pas visible mais est palpable comme une masse molle.

L'examen de la glande thyroïde comprend la recherche de masses anormales et l'évaluation de la taille globale de la thyroïde.

Le caractère de la thyroïde, les gonflements, les nodules et leur consistance peuvent tous être ressentis.

Si un goitre est présent, un examinateur peut également sentir le cou, envisager de tapoter la partie supérieure de la poitrine pour vérifier l'extension.

D'autres tests peuvent inclure l'élévation des bras (signe de Pemberton), l'écoute de la glande avec un stéthoscope pour les bruits, le test des réflexes et la palpation des ganglions lymphatiques de la tête et du cou.

Un examen de la thyroïde comprendra également l'observation de la personne dans son ensemble, pour rechercher des signes systémiques tels qu'un gain ou une perte de poids, une perte de cheveux et des signes à d'autres endroits - tels que la saillie des yeux ou le gonflement des mollets à Graves ' maladie.


=== Essais ===

Les tests de la fonction thyroïdienne comprennent une batterie de tests sanguins, y compris la mesure des hormones thyroïdiennes, ainsi que la mesure de la thyréostimuline (TSH).

Ils peuvent révéler une hyperthyroïdie (T3 et T4 élevées), une hypothyroïdie (T3, T4 basses) ou une hyperthyroïdie subclinique (T3 et T4 normales avec une TSH basse). Les taux de TSH sont considérés comme le marqueur le plus sensible du dysfonctionnement thyroïdien.

Ils ne sont cependant pas toujours précis, en particulier si l'on pense que la cause de l'hypothyroïdie est liée à une sécrétion insuffisante de l'hormone de libération de la thyrotropine (TRH), auquel cas elle peut être faible ou faussement normale.

Dans un tel cas, un test de stimulation par la TRH, dans lequel la TRH est administrée et les niveaux de TSH sont mesurés 30 et 60 minutes après, peut être effectué. La T3 et la T4 peuvent être mesurées directement.

Cependant, comme les deux hormones thyroïdiennes se déplacent liées à d'autres molécules et que c'est le composant "libre" qui est biologiquement actif, les niveaux de T3 libre et de T4 libre peuvent être mesurés.

La T4 est préférée, car dans l'hypothyroïdie, les taux de T3 peuvent être normaux.

Le rapport des hormones thyroïdiennes liées aux hormones non liées est connu sous le nom de taux de liaison des hormones thyroïdiennes (THBR).

Il est également possible de doser directement les principaux transporteurs des hormones thyroïdiennes, la thyroglobuline et la throxine-binding globulin.

La thyroglobuline sera également mesurable dans une thyroïde saine et augmentera avec l'inflammation, et peut également être utilisée pour mesurer le succès de l'ablation ou de l'ablation de la thyroïde.

En cas de succès, la thyroglobuline devrait être indétectable.

Enfin, les anticorps dirigés contre les composants de la thyroïde, notamment les anti-TPO et les anti-thyroglobulines, peuvent être dosés.

Ceux-ci peuvent être présents chez les individus normaux mais sont très sensibles aux maladies auto-immunes.


==== Imagerie ====

L'échographie de la thyroïde peut être utilisée pour révéler si les structures sont solides ou remplies de liquide, aidant à différencier les nodules et les goitres et les kystes.

Cela peut également aider à différencier les lésions malignes des lésions bénignes. Lorsqu'une imagerie supplémentaire est nécessaire, une scintigraphie d'absorption d'iode-123 radiomarqué ou de technétium-99 peut avoir lieu.

Cela peut déterminer la taille et la forme des lésions, révéler si les nodules ou les goitres sont métaboliquement actifs, et révéler et surveiller les sites de maladie thyroïdienne ou les dépôts cancéreux en dehors de la thyroïde.

Une aspiration à l'aiguille fine d'un échantillon de tissu thyroïdien peut être effectuée afin d'évaluer une lésion vue à l'échographie qui est ensuite envoyée pour histopathologie et cytologie. La tomodensitométrie de la thyroïde joue un rôle important dans l'évaluation du cancer de la thyroïde.

Les tomodensitogrammes trouvent souvent par hasard des anomalies thyroïdiennes et deviennent ainsi pratiquement la première modalité d'investigation.


== Historique ==

La glande thyroïde a reçu son nom moderne dans les années 1600, lorsque l'anatomiste Thomas Wharton a comparé sa forme à celle d'un bouclier grec ancien ou thyos.

Cependant, l'existence de la glande et des maladies qui lui sont associées était connue bien avant.


=== Antiquité ===

La présence et les maladies de la thyroïde sont constatées et traitées depuis des milliers d'années.

En 1600 avant notre ère, l'éponge brûlée et les algues (qui contiennent de l'iode) étaient utilisées en Chine pour le traitement des goitres, une pratique qui s'est développée dans de nombreuses régions du monde.

En médecine ayurvédique, le livre Sushruta Samhita écrit vers 1400 avant notre ère décrivait l'hyperthyroïdie, l'hypothyroïdie et le goitre.

Aristote et Xénophon au Ve siècle avant notre ère décrivent des cas de goitre toxique diffus.

Hippocrate et Platon au quatrième siècle avant notre ère ont fourni certaines des premières descriptions de la glande elle-même, proposant sa fonction de glande salivaire.

Pline l'Ancien au premier siècle avant notre ère a fait référence aux épidémies de goitre dans les Alpes et a proposé un traitement aux algues brûlées, une pratique également évoquée par Galien au deuxième siècle, faisant référence à l'éponge brûlée pour le traitement du goitre.

Le texte de pharmacologie chinoise Shennong Ben Cao Jing, écrit ca. 200-250, fait également référence au goitre.


=== ère scientifique ===

En 1500, le polymathe Léonard de Vinci a fourni la première illustration de la thyroïde.

En 1543, l'anatomiste Andreas Vesalius a donné la première description et illustration anatomique de la glande.

En 1656, la thyroïde a reçu son nom moderne, par l'anatomiste Thomas Wharton.

La glande a été nommée thyroïde, ce qui signifie bouclier, car sa forme ressemblait aux boucliers couramment utilisés dans la Grèce antique.

Le nom anglais glande thyroïde est dérivé du latin médical utilisé par Wharton – glandula thyreoidea.

Glandula signifie «glande» en latin, et thyreoidea remonte au mot grec ancien θυρεοειδής, qui signifie «en forme de bouclier / en forme de bouclier».

Le chimiste français Bernard Courtois a découvert l'iode en 1811 et, en 1896, Eugen Baumann l'a documenté comme l'ingrédient central de la glande thyroïde.

Il l'a fait en faisant bouillir les glandes thyroïdiennes d'un millier de moutons et a nommé le précipité, une combinaison des hormones thyroïdiennes, « iodothyrine ».

David Marine en 1907 a prouvé que l'iode est nécessaire à la fonction thyroïdienne. La maladie de Graves a été décrite par Robert James Graves en 1834.

Le rôle de la glande thyroïde dans le métabolisme a été démontré en 1895 par Adolf Magnus-Levy.

La thyroxine a été isolée pour la première fois en 1914 et synthétisée en 1927, et la triiodothyroxine en 1952.

La conversion de T4 en T3 a été découverte en 1970.

Le processus de découverte de la TSH s'est déroulé du début au milieu du XXe siècle.

La TRH a été découverte par l'endocrinologue polonais Andrew Schally en 1970, contribuant en partie à son prix Nobel de médecine en 1977.

Au XIXe siècle, de nombreux auteurs ont décrit à la fois le crétinisme et le myxoedème, et leur relation avec la thyroïde.

Charles Mayo a inventé le terme hyperthyroïdie en 1910.

Hakaru Hashimoto a documenté un cas de thyroïdite de Hashimoto en 1912, les anticorps de cette maladie ont été démontrés en 1956.

La connaissance de la thyroïde et de ses conditions s'est développée tout au long de la fin du XIXe et du XXe siècle, avec de nombreux traitements modernes et modalités d'investigation évoluant tout au long du milieu du XXe siècle, y compris l'utilisation d'iode radioactif, de thiouracile et d'aspiration à l'aiguille fine.


=== Chirurgie ===

Soit Aetius au sixième siècle de notre ère, soit le persan Ali ibn Abbas al-Magusi en 990 de notre ère a effectué la première thyroïdectomie enregistrée comme traitement du goitre.

Les opérations sont restées risquées et n'ont généralement pas réussi jusqu'au XIXe siècle, lorsque des descriptions ont émergé d'un certain nombre d'auteurs, dont le chirurgien prussien Theodor Billroth, le chirurgien et physiologiste suisse Theodor Kocher, le médecin américain Charles Mayo, les chirurgiens américains William Halsted et George Crile.

Ces descriptions ont fourni la base de la chirurgie thyroïdienne moderne.

Theodor Kocher a ensuite remporté le prix Nobel de physiologie ou médecine en 1909 "pour ses travaux sur la physiologie, la pathologie et la chirurgie de la glande thyroïde".


== Autres animaux ==

La glande thyroïde se trouve chez tous les vertébrés.

Chez les poissons, il est généralement situé sous les branchies et n'est pas toujours divisé en lobes distincts.

Cependant, chez certains téléostéens, des plaques de tissu thyroïdien se trouvent ailleurs dans le corps, associées aux reins, à la rate, au cœur ou aux yeux.

Chez les tétrapodes, la thyroïde se trouve toujours quelque part dans la région du cou.

Chez la plupart des espèces de tétrapodes, il existe deux glandes thyroïdes appariées, c'est-à-dire que les lobes droit et gauche ne sont pas reliés.

Cependant, il n'y a jamais qu'une seule glande thyroïde chez la plupart des mammifères, et la forme trouvée chez l'homme est commune à de nombreuses autres espèces.

Chez les lamproies larvaires, la thyroïde est à l'origine une glande exocrine, sécrétant ses hormones dans l'intestin et associée à l'appareil d'alimentation par filtre de la larve.

Chez la lamproie adulte, la glande se sépare de l'intestin et devient endocrine, mais cette voie de développement peut refléter l'origine évolutive de la thyroïde.

Par exemple, les plus proches parents vivants des vertébrés, les tuniciers et les amphioxi (lancelettes), ont une structure très similaire à celle des larves de lamproies (l'endostyle), et cela sécrète également des composés contenant de l'iode, mais pas de la thyroxine.

La thyroxine est essentielle à la régulation métabolique et à la croissance dans tout le clade des vertébrés.

L'iode et la T4 déclenchent le passage d'un têtard aquatique mangeur de plantes à une grenouille terrestre mangeuse de viande, avec de meilleures capacités neurologiques, visuospatiales, olfactives et cognitives pour la chasse, comme on le voit chez d'autres animaux prédateurs.

Un phénomène similaire se produit chez les salamandres amphibies néoténiques, qui, sans introduire d'iode, ne se transforment pas en adultes terrestres, et vivent et se reproduisent sous la forme larvaire d'axolotl aquatique.

Chez les amphibiens, l'administration d'un agent bloquant la thyroïde tel que le propylthiouracile (PTU) peut empêcher les têtards de se métamorphoser en grenouilles ; en revanche, l'administration de thyroxine déclenchera une métamorphose.

Dans la métamorphose des amphibiens, la thyroxine et l'iode exercent également un modèle expérimental bien étudié d'apoptose sur les cellules des branchies, de la queue et des nageoires des têtards.

L'iode, via les iodolipides, a favorisé l'évolution des espèces animales terrestres et a probablement joué un rôle crucial dans l'évolution du cerveau humain.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/thyroïde
