

VERTEBRA


The spinal column, characteristic of each vertebrate species, 
is a moderately flexible series of vertebrae (singular vertebra), each constituting a characteristic irregular bone whose complex structure is composed primarily of bone, and secondarily of hyaline cartilage. 

They show variation in the proportion contributed by these two tissue types; such variations correlate on one hand with the cerebral/caudal rank (i.e., location within the backbone), and on the other with phylogenetic differences among the vertebrate taxa.

The basic configuration of a vertebra varies, but the bone is its body, with the central part of the body constituting the centrum. 

The upper (closer to) and lower (further from), respectively, the cranium and its central nervous system surfaces of the vertebra body support attachment to the intervertebral discs. 

The posterior part of a vertebra forms a vertebral arch (in eleven parts, consisting of two pedicles (pedicle of vertebral arch) two laminae, and seven processes.

The laminae give attachment to the ligamenta flava, which are ligaments of the spine. 

There are vertebral notches, each constituted by the shape of the pedicles, which form the intervertebral foramina when vertebrae articulate. 

These foramina are the entry and exit conduits accommodating the spinal nerves. 

The body of the vertebra, and it's vertebral arch, form the vertebral foramen, which is the larger, stable and central opening: this accommodates the spinal canal, and encloses and protects the spinal cord.

Vertebrae articulate with each other to give strength and flexibility to the spinal column, and the shape at their back and front aspects determines the range of movement. 

Structurally, vertebrae are essentially alike across the vertebrate species, with the greatest difference seen between an aquatic animal and other vertebrate animals. 

As such, vertebrates take their name from the vertebrae that compose the vertebral column.


== Structure ==

=== General structure ===

In the human vertebral column the size of the vertebrae varies according to placement in the vertebral column, spinal loading, posture and pathology. 

Along the length of the spine the vertebrae change to accommodate different needs related to stress and mobility. 

Each vertebra is an irregular bone.

Every vertebra has a body (vertebral body), which consists of a large anterior middle portion called the centrum (vertebral centrum, plural centra) and a posterior vertebral arch, also called a neural arch. 

The body is composed of cancellous bone, which is the spongy type of osseous tissue, whose microanatomy has been specifically studied within the pedicle bones. 

This cancellous bone is in turn, covered by a thin coating of cortical bone (or compact bone), the hard and dense type of osseous tissue. 

The vertebral arch and processes have thicker coverings of cortical bone. 

The upper and lower surfaces of the body of the vertebra are flattened and rough in order to give attachment to the intervertebral discs. 

These surfaces are the vertebral endplates which are in direct contact with the intervertebral discs and form the joint. 

The endplates are formed from a thickened layer of the cancellous bone of the vertebral body, the top layer being more dense. 

The endplates function to contain the adjacent discs, to evenly spread the applied loads, and to provide anchorage for the collagen fibers of the disc. 

They also act as a semi-permeable interface for the exchange of water and solutes.

The vertebral arch is formed by pedicles and laminae. 

Two pedicles extend from the sides of the vertebral body to join the body to the arch. 

The pedicles are short thick processes that extend, one from each side, posteriorly, from the junctions of the posteriolateral surfaces of the centrum, on its upper surface.

From each pedicle a broad plate, a lamina, projects backwards and medialwards to join and complete the vertebral arch and form the posterior border of the vertebral foramen, which completes the triangle of the vertebral foramen. 

The upper surfaces of the laminae are rough to give attachment to the ligamenta flava. 

These ligaments connect the laminae of adjacent vertebra along the length of the spine from the level of the second cervical vertebra. 

Above and below the pedicles are shallow depressions called vertebral notches (superior and inferior). 

When the vertebrae articulate the notches align with those on adjacent vertebrae and these form the openings of the intervertebral foramina. 

The foramina allow the entry and exit of the spinal nerves from each vertebra, together with associated blood vessels. 

The articulating vertebrae provide a strong pillar of support for the body.


==== Processes ====

There are seven processes projecting from the vertebra:

one spinous process
two transverse processes
four articular processesA major part of a vertebra is a backward extending spinous process (sometimes called the neural spine) which projects centrally. 

This process points dorsally and caudally from the junction of the laminae. 

The spinous process serves to attach muscles and ligaments.

The two transverse processes, one on each side of the vertebral body, project laterally from either side at the point where the lamina joins the pedicle, between the superior and inferior articular processes. 

They also serve for the attachment of muscles and ligaments, in particular the intertransverse ligaments. 

There is a facet on each of the transverse processes of thoracic vertebrae which articulates with the tubercle of the rib. 

A facet on each side of the thoracic vertebral body articulates with the head of the rib. 

The transverse process of a lumbar vertebra is also sometimes called the costal or costiform process because it corresponds to a rudimentary rib (costa) which, as opposed to the thorax, is not developed in the lumbar region.

There are superior and inferior articular facet joints on each side of the vertebra, which serve to restrict the range of movement possible. 

These facets are joined by a thin portion of the vertebral arch called the pars interarticularis.


=== Regional variation ===

Vertebrae take their names from the regions of the vertebral column that they occupy. 

There are thirty-three vertebrae in the human vertebral column—seven cervical vertebrae, twelve thoracic vertebrae, five lumbar vertebrae, five fused sacral vertebrae forming the sacrum and three to five coccygeal vertebrae, forming the coccyx. 

The regional vertebrae increase in size as they progress downwards but become smaller in the coccyx.


==== Cervical vertebrae ====

There are seven cervical vertebrae (but eight cervical spinal nerves), designated C1 through C7. 

These bones are, in general, small and delicate. 

Their spinous processes are short (with the exception of C2 and C7, which have palpable spinous processes). 

C1 is also called the atlas, and C2 is also called the axis. 

The structure of these vertebrae is the reason why the neck and head have a large range of motion. 

The atlanto-occipital joint allows the skull to move up and down, while the atlanto-axial joint allows the upper neck to twist left and right. 

The axis also sits upon the first intervertebral disc of the spinal column.

Cervical vertebrae possess transverse foramina to allow for the vertebral arteries to pass through on their way to the foramen magnum to end in the circle of Willis. 

These are the smallest, lightest vertebrae and the vertebral foramina are triangular in shape. 

The spinous processes are short and often bifurcated (the spinous process of C7, however, is not bifurcated, and is substantially longer than that of the other cervical spinous processes).

The atlas differs from the other vertebrae in that it has no body and no spinous process. 

It has instead a ring-like form, having an anterior and a posterior arch and two lateral masses. 

At the outside centre points of both arches there is a tubercle, an anterior tubercle and a posterior tubercle, for the attachment of muscles. 

The front surface of the anterior arch is convex and its anterior tubercle gives attachment to the longus colli muscle. 

The posterior tubercle is a rudimentary spinous process and gives attachment to the rectus capitis posterior minor muscle. 

The spinous process is small so as not to interfere with the movement between the atlas and the skull. 

On the under surface is a facet for articulation with the dens of the axis.
Specific to the cervical vertebra is the transverse foramen (also known as foramen transversarium). 

This is an opening on each of the transverse processes which gives passage to the vertebral artery and vein and a sympathetic nerve plexus. 

On the cervical vertebrae other than the atlas, the anterior and posterior tubercles are on either side of the transverse foramen on each transverse process. 

The anterior tubercle on the sixth cervical vertebra is called the carotid tubercle because it separates the carotid artery from the vertebral artery.

There is a hook-shaped uncinate process on the side edges of the top surface of the bodies of the third to the seventh cervical vertebrae and of the first thoracic vertebra. 

Together with the vertebral disc, this uncinate process prevents a vertebra from sliding backwards off the vertebra below it and limits lateral flexion (side-bending). 

Luschka's joints involve the vertebral uncinate processes.
The spinous process on C7 is distinctively long and gives the name vertebra prominens to this vertebra. 

Also a cervical rib can develop from C7 as an anatomical variation.

The term cervicothoracic is often used to refer to the cervical and thoracic vertebrae together, and sometimes also their surrounding areas.


==== Thoracic vertebrae ====

The twelve thoracic vertebrae and their transverse processes have surfaces that articulate with the ribs. 

Some rotation can occur between the thoracic vertebrae, but their connection with the rib cage prevents much flexion or other movement. 

They may also be known as "dorsal vertebrae" in the human context.

The vertebral bodies are roughly heart-shaped and are about as wide anterio-posteriorly as they are in the transverse dimension. 

Vertebral foramina are roughly circular in shape.
The top surface of the first thoracic vertebra has a hook-shaped uncinate process, just like the cervical vertebrae.

The thoracolumbar division refers to the thoracic and lumbar vertebrae together, and sometimes also their surrounding areas.

The thoracic vertebrae attach to ribs and so have articular facets specific to them; these are the superior, transverse and inferior costal facets. 

As the vertebrae progress down the spine they increase in size to match up with the adjoining lumbar section.


==== Lumbar vertebrae ====

The five lumbar vertebrae are the largest of the vertebrae, their robust construction being necessary for supporting greater weight than the other vertebrae. 

They allow significant flexion, extension and moderate lateral flexion (side-bending). 

The discs between these vertebrae create a natural lumbar lordosis (a spinal curvature that is concave posteriorly). 

This is due to the difference in thickness between the front and back parts of the intervertebral discs.

The lumbar vertebrae are located between the ribcage and the pelvis and are the largest of the vertebrae. 

The pedicles are strong, as are the laminae, and the spinous process is thick and broad. 

The vertebral foramen is large and triangular. 

The transverse processes are long and narrow and three tubercles can be seen on them. 

These are a lateral costiform process, a mammillary process and an accessory process. 

The superior, or upper tubercle is the mammillary process which connects with the superior articular process. 

The multifidus muscle attaches to the mammillary process and this muscle extends through the length of the vertebral column, giving support. 

The inferior, or lower tubercle is the accessory process and this is found at the back part of the base of the transverse process. 

The term lumbosacral is often used to refer to the lumbar and sacral vertebrae together, and sometimes includes their surrounding areas.


==== Sacrum ====

There are five sacral vertebrae (S1–S5) which are fused in maturity, into one large bone, the sacrum, with no intervertebral discs. 

The sacrum with the ilium forms a sacroiliac joint on each side of the pelvis, which articulates with the hips.


==== Coccyx ====

The last three to five coccygeal vertebrae (but usually four) (Co1–Co5) make up the tailbone or coccyx. 

There are no intervertebral discs.


=== Development ===


Somites form in the early embryo and some of these develop into sclerotomes. 

The sclerotomes form the vertebrae as well as the rib cartilage and part of the occipital bone. 

From their initial location within the somite, the sclerotome cells migrate medially towards the notochord. 

These cells meet the sclerotome cells from the other side of the paraxial mesoderm. 

The lower half of one sclerotome fuses with the upper half of the adjacent one to form each vertebral body. 

From this vertebral body, sclerotome cells move dorsally and surround the developing spinal cord, forming the vertebral arch. 

Other cells move distally to the costal processes of thoracic vertebrae to form the ribs.


== Function ==

Functions of vertebrae include:

Support of the vertebrae function in the skeletomuscular system by forming the vertebral column to support the body
Protection. 

Vertebrae contain a vertebral foramen for the passage of the spinal canal and its enclosed spinal cord and covering meninges. 

They also afford sturdy protection for the spinal cord. 

The upper and lower surfaces of the centrum are flattened and rough in order to give attachment to the intervertebral discs.
Movement. 

The vertebrae also provide the openings, the intervertebral foramina which allow the entry and exit of the spinal nerves. 

Similarly to the surfaces of the centrum, the upper and lower surfaces of the fronts of the laminae are flattened and rough to give attachment to the ligamenta flava. 

Working together in the vertebral column their sections provide controlled movement and flexibility.

Feeding of the intervertebral discs through the reflex (hyaline ligament) plate that separates the cancellous bone of the vertebral body from each disk


== Clinical significance ==

There are a number of congenital vertebral anomalies, mostly involving variations in the shape or number of vertebrae, and many of which are unproblematic. 

Others though can cause compression of the spinal cord. 

Wedge-shaped vertebrae, called hemivertebrae can cause an angle to form in the spine which can result in the spinal curvature diseases of kyphosis, scoliosis and lordosis. 

Severe cases can cause spinal cord compression. 

Block vertebrae where some vertebrae have become fused can cause problems. 

Spina bifida can result from the incomplete formation of the vertebral arch.

Spondylolysis is a defect in the pars interarticularis of the vertebral arch. 

In most cases this occurs in the lowest of the lumbar vertebrae (L5), but may also occur in the other lumbar vertebrae, as well as in the thoracic vertebrae.

Spinal disc herniation, more commonly called a slipped disc, is the result of a tear in the outer ring (anulus fibrosus) of the intervertebral disc, which lets some of the soft gel-like material, the nucleus pulposus, bulge out in a hernia. 

This may be treated by a minimally-invasive endoscopic procedure called Tessys method.

A laminectomy is a surgical operation to remove the laminae in order to access the spinal canal. 

The removal of just part of a lamina is called a laminotomy.

A pinched nerve caused by pressure from a disc, vertebra or scar tissue might be remedied by a foraminotomy to broaden the intervertebral foramina and relieve pressure. 

It can also be caused by a foramina stenosis, a narrowing of the nerve opening, as a result of arthritis.
Another condition is spondylolisthesis when one vertebra slips forward onto another. 

The reverse of this condition is retrolisthesis where one vertebra slips backwards onto another.

The vertebral pedicle is often used as a radiographic marker and entry point in vertebroplasty, kyphoplasty, and spinal fusion procedures.

The arcuate foramen is a common anatomical variation more frequently seen in females. 

It is a bony bridge found on the first cervical vertebra, the atlas where it covers the groove for the vertebral artery.

Degenerative disc disease is a condition usually associated with ageing in which one or more discs degenerate. 

This can often be a painfree condition but can also be very painful.


== Other animals ==


In other animals the vertebrae take the same regional names except for the coccygeal – in animals with tails the separate vertebrae are usually called the caudal vertebrae. 

Because of the different types of locomotion and support needed between the aquatic and other vertebrates, the vertebrae between them show the most variation, though basic features are shared. 

The spinous processes which are backward extending are directed upwards in animals without an erect stance. 

These processes can be very large in the larger animals since they attach to the muscles and ligaments of the body. 

In the elephant the vertebrae are connected by tight joints, which limit the backbone's flexibility. 

Spinous processes are exaggerated in some animals, such as the extinct Dimetrodon and Spinosaurus, where they form a sailback or finback.

Vertebrae with saddle-shaped articular surfaces on their bodies, called "heterocoelous", allow vertebrae to flex both vertically and horizontally while preventing twisting motions. 

Such vertebrae are found in the necks of birds and some turtles.

"Procoelous" vertebrae feature a spherical protrusion extending from the caudal end of the centrum of one vertebra that fits into a concave socket on the cranial end of the centrum of an adjacent vertebra. 

These vertebrae are most often found in reptiles, but are found in some amphibians such as frogs. 

The vertebrae fit together in a ball-and-socket articulation, in which the convex articular feature of an anterior vertebra acts as the ball to the socket of a caudal vertebra. 

This type of connection permits a wide range of motion in most directions, while still protecting the underlying nerve cord. 

The central point of rotation is located at the midline of each centrum, and therefore flexion of the muscle surrounding the vertebral column does not lead to an opening between vertebrae.

In many species, though not in mammals, the cervical vertebrae bear ribs. 

In many groups, such as lizards and saurischian dinosaurs, the cervical ribs are large; in birds, they are small and completely fused to the vertebrae. 

The transverse processes of mammals are homologous to the cervical ribs of other amniotes. 

In the whale the cervical vertebrae are typically fused, an adaptation trading flexibility for stability during swimming. 

All mammals except manatees and sloths have seven cervical vertebrae, whatever the length of the neck. 

This includes seemingly unlikely animals such as the giraffe, the camel, and the blue whale, for example. 

Birds usually have more cervical vertebrae with most having a highly flexible neck consisting of 13–25 vertebrae.

In all mammals, the thoracic vertebrae are connected to ribs and their bodies differ from the other regional vertebrae due to the presence of facets. 

Each vertebra has a facet on each side of the vertebral body, which articulates with the head of a rib. 

There is also a facet on each of the transverse processes which articulates with the tubercle of a rib. 

The number of thoracic vertebrae varies considerably across the species. 

Most marsupials have thirteen, but koalas only have eleven. 

The norm is twelve to fifteen in mammals, (twelve in the human), though there are from eighteen to twenty in the horse, tapir, rhinoceros and elephant. 

In certain sloths there is an extreme number of twenty-five and at the other end only nine in the cetacean.

There are fewer lumbar vertebrae in chimpanzees and gorillas, which have three in contrast to the five in the genus Homo. 

This reduction in number gives an inability of the lumbar spine to lordose but gives an anatomy that favours vertical climbing, and hanging ability more suited to feeding locations in high-canopied regions. 

The bonobo differs by having four lumbar vertebrae.
Caudal vertebrae are the bones that make up the tails of vertebrates. 

They range in number from a few to fifty, depending on the length of the animal's tail.

In humans and other tailless primates, they are called the coccygeal vertebrae, number from three to five and are fused into the coccyx.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vertebra
;;;ES;;;



VÉRTEBRA


La columna vertebral, característica de cada especie de vertebrado,
es una serie de vértebras moderadamente flexibles (vértebra singular), cada una de las cuales constituye un hueso irregular característico cuya estructura compleja está compuesta principalmente de hueso y secundariamente de cartílago hialino.

Muestran variación en la proporción aportada por estos dos tipos de tejido; tales variaciones se correlacionan, por un lado, con el rango cerebral/caudal (es decir, la ubicación dentro de la columna vertebral) y, por el otro, con las diferencias filogenéticas entre los taxones de vertebrados.

La configuración básica de una vértebra varía, pero el hueso es su cuerpo, y la parte central del cuerpo constituye el centro.

Las superficies superior (más cerca) e inferior (más lejos), respectivamente, del cráneo y del sistema nervioso central del cuerpo de las vértebras soportan la unión a los discos intervertebrales.

La parte posterior de una vértebra forma un arco vertebral (en once partes, que consta de dos pedículos (pedículo del arco vertebral) dos láminas y siete procesos.

Las láminas se adhieren a los ligamentos amarillos, que son ligamentos de la columna vertebral.

Hay muescas vertebrales, cada una de ellas constituida por la forma de los pedículos, que forman los agujeros intervertebrales cuando se articulan las vértebras.

Estos forámenes son los conductos de entrada y salida que alojan los nervios espinales.

El cuerpo de la vértebra, y su arco vertebral, forman el agujero vertebral, que es la abertura central más grande y estable: acomoda el canal espinal y encierra y protege la médula espinal.

Las vértebras se articulan entre sí para dar fuerza y ​​flexibilidad a la columna vertebral, y la forma de sus aspectos anterior y posterior determina el rango de movimiento.

Estructuralmente, las vértebras son esencialmente similares en todas las especies de vertebrados, y la mayor diferencia se observa entre un animal acuático y otros animales vertebrados.

Como tal, los vertebrados toman su nombre de las vértebras que componen la columna vertebral.


== Estructura ==

=== Estructura general ===

En la columna vertebral humana, el tamaño de las vértebras varía según la ubicación en la columna vertebral, la carga espinal, la postura y la patología.

A lo largo de la columna vertebral, las vértebras cambian para adaptarse a diferentes necesidades relacionadas con el estrés y la movilidad.

Cada vértebra es un hueso irregular.

Cada vértebra tiene un cuerpo (cuerpo vertebral), que consiste en una gran porción media anterior llamada centrum (centrum vertebral, centro plural) y un arco vertebral posterior, también llamado arco neural.

El cuerpo está compuesto por hueso esponjoso, que es el tipo de tejido óseo esponjoso, cuya microanatomía se ha estudiado específicamente dentro de los huesos pedunculares.

Este hueso esponjoso está a su vez recubierto por una fina capa de hueso cortical (o hueso compacto), el tipo de tejido óseo duro y denso.

El arco y los procesos vertebrales tienen cubiertas más gruesas de hueso cortical.

Las superficies superior e inferior del cuerpo de la vértebra son aplanadas y ásperas para dar unión a los discos intervertebrales.

Estas superficies son los platillos vertebrales que están en contacto directo con los discos intervertebrales y forman la articulación.

Las placas terminales están formadas por una capa engrosada del hueso esponjoso del cuerpo vertebral, siendo la capa superior más densa.

Las placas terminales funcionan para contener los discos adyacentes, distribuir uniformemente las cargas aplicadas y proporcionar anclaje para las fibras de colágeno del disco.

También actúan como una interfaz semipermeable para el intercambio de agua y solutos.

El arco vertebral está formado por pedículos y láminas.

Dos pedículos se extienden desde los lados del cuerpo vertebral para unir el cuerpo al arco.

Los pedículos son procesos cortos y gruesos que se extienden, uno de cada lado, posteriormente, desde las uniones de las superficies posteriolaterales del centro, en su superficie superior.

De cada pedículo, una placa ancha, una lámina, se proyecta hacia atrás y medialmente para unirse y completar el arco vertebral y formar el borde posterior del agujero vertebral, que completa el triángulo del agujero vertebral.

Las superficies superiores de las láminas son ásperas para dar unión a los ligamentos amarillos.

Estos ligamentos conectan las láminas de las vértebras adyacentes a lo largo de la columna desde el nivel de la segunda vértebra cervical.

Por encima y por debajo de los pedículos hay depresiones poco profundas llamadas muescas vertebrales (superior e inferior).

Cuando las vértebras se articulan, las muescas se alinean con las de las vértebras adyacentes y forman las aberturas de los agujeros intervertebrales.

Los forámenes permiten la entrada y salida de los nervios espinales de cada vértebra, junto con los vasos sanguíneos asociados.

Las vértebras articuladas proporcionan un fuerte pilar de apoyo para el cuerpo.


==== Procesos ====

Hay siete procesos que se proyectan desde la vértebra:

un proceso espinoso
dos procesos transversales
cuatro procesos articulares Una parte importante de una vértebra es un proceso espinoso que se extiende hacia atrás (a veces llamado columna neural) que se proyecta centralmente.

Este proceso apunta dorsal y caudalmente desde la unión de las láminas.

El proceso espinoso sirve para unir músculos y ligamentos.

Las dos apófisis transversas, una a cada lado del cuerpo vertebral, se proyectan lateralmente desde cualquier lado en el punto donde la lámina se une al pedículo, entre las apófisis articulares superior e inferior.

También sirven para la unión de músculos y ligamentos, en particular los ligamentos intertransversos.

Hay una faceta en cada uno de los procesos transversales de las vértebras torácicas que se articula con el tubérculo de la costilla.

Una faceta a cada lado del cuerpo vertebral torácico se articula con la cabeza de la costilla.

La apófisis transversa de una vértebra lumbar también se denomina a veces apófisis costal o costiforme porque corresponde a una costilla rudimentaria (costa) que, a diferencia del tórax, no está desarrollada en la región lumbar.

Hay articulaciones facetarias articulares superiores e inferiores a cada lado de la vértebra, que sirven para restringir el rango de movimiento posible.

Estas facetas están unidas por una porción delgada del arco vertebral llamada pars interarticularis.


=== Variación regional ===

Las vértebras toman su nombre de las regiones de la columna vertebral que ocupan.

Hay treinta y tres vértebras en la columna vertebral humana: siete vértebras cervicales, doce vértebras torácicas, cinco vértebras lumbares, cinco vértebras sacras fusionadas que forman el sacro y de tres a cinco vértebras coccígeas, que forman el cóccix.

Las vértebras regionales aumentan de tamaño a medida que avanzan hacia abajo, pero se vuelven más pequeñas en el cóccix.


==== Vértebras cervicales ====

Hay siete vértebras cervicales (pero ocho nervios espinales cervicales), designados C1 a C7.

Estos huesos son, en general, pequeños y delicados.

Sus apófisis espinosas son cortas (con la excepción de C2 y C7, que tienen apófisis espinosas palpables).

C1 también se llama atlas y C2 también se llama eje.

La estructura de estas vértebras es la razón por la que el cuello y la cabeza tienen un amplio rango de movimiento.

La articulación atlanto-occipital permite que el cráneo se mueva hacia arriba y hacia abajo, mientras que la articulación atlanto-axial permite que la parte superior del cuello gire hacia la izquierda y hacia la derecha.

El eje también se asienta sobre el primer disco intervertebral de la columna vertebral.

Las vértebras cervicales poseen forámenes transversales para permitir el paso de las arterias vertebrales en su camino hacia el foramen magnum para terminar en el polígono de Willis.

Estas son las vértebras más pequeñas y ligeras y los agujeros vertebrales tienen forma triangular.

Las apófisis espinosas son cortas y, a menudo, bifurcadas (la apófisis espinosa de C7, sin embargo, no está bifurcada y es sustancialmente más larga que la de las otras apófisis espinosas cervicales).

El atlas se diferencia de las otras vértebras en que no tiene cuerpo ni apófisis espinosa.

En cambio, tiene una forma de anillo, con un arco anterior y posterior y dos masas laterales.

En los puntos centrales exteriores de ambos arcos hay un tubérculo, un tubérculo anterior y un tubérculo posterior, para la unión de los músculos.

La superficie anterior del arco anterior es convexa y su tubérculo anterior se inserta en el músculo largo del cuello.

El tubérculo posterior es una apófisis espinosa rudimentaria y se inserta en el músculo recto posterior de la cabeza menor.

El proceso espinoso es pequeño para no interferir con el movimiento entre el atlas y el cráneo.

En la superficie inferior hay una faceta para la articulación con las guaridas del eje.
Específico de la vértebra cervical es el foramen transverso (también conocido como foramen transversarium).

Esta es una abertura en cada uno de los procesos transversos que da paso a la arteria y la vena vertebral y un plexo nervioso simpático.

En las vértebras cervicales distintas del atlas, los tubérculos anterior y posterior están a ambos lados del agujero transverso en cada proceso transverso.

El tubérculo anterior de la sexta vértebra cervical se denomina tubérculo carotídeo porque separa la arteria carótida de la arteria vertebral.

Hay un proceso uncinado en forma de gancho en los bordes laterales de la superficie superior de los cuerpos de la tercera a la séptima vértebra cervical y de la primera vértebra torácica.

Junto con el disco vertebral, este proceso uncinado evita que una vértebra se deslice hacia atrás de la vértebra debajo de ella y limita la flexión lateral (flexión lateral).

Las articulaciones de Luschka involucran los procesos uncinados vertebrales.
La apófisis espinosa de C7 es distintivamente larga y le da el nombre de vértebra prominente a esta vértebra.

También se puede desarrollar una costilla cervical a partir de C7 como una variación anatómica.

El término cervicotorácico se usa a menudo para referirse a las vértebras cervicales y torácicas juntas y, a veces, también a sus áreas circundantes.


==== Vértebras torácicas ====

Las doce vértebras torácicas y sus procesos transversales tienen superficies que se articulan con las costillas.

Puede ocurrir algo de rotación entre las vértebras torácicas, pero su conexión con la caja torácica impide mucha flexión u otro movimiento.

También pueden ser conocidas como "vértebras dorsales" en el contexto humano.

Los cuerpos vertebrales tienen una forma aproximada de corazón y son tan anchos anteroposteriormente como en la dimensión transversal.

Los agujeros vertebrales tienen una forma aproximadamente circular.
La superficie superior de la primera vértebra torácica tiene un proceso uncinado en forma de gancho, al igual que las vértebras cervicales.

La división toracolumbar se refiere a las vértebras torácicas y lumbares juntas y, a veces, también a sus áreas circundantes.

Las vértebras torácicas se unen a las costillas y, por lo tanto, tienen facetas articulares específicas para ellas; estas son las facetas costales superior, transversal e inferior.

A medida que las vértebras descienden por la columna, aumentan de tamaño para coincidir con la sección lumbar contigua.


==== Vértebras lumbares ====

Las cinco vértebras lumbares son las más grandes de las vértebras, siendo necesaria su construcción robusta para soportar un peso mayor que las otras vértebras.

Permiten una flexión y extensión significativas y una flexión lateral moderada (flexión lateral).

Los discos entre estas vértebras crean una lordosis lumbar natural (una curvatura de la columna que es cóncava en la parte posterior).

Esto se debe a la diferencia de grosor entre las partes anterior y posterior de los discos intervertebrales.

Las vértebras lumbares se encuentran entre la caja torácica y la pelvis y son las vértebras más grandes.

Los pedículos son fuertes, al igual que las láminas, y el proceso espinoso es grueso y ancho.

El agujero vertebral es grande y triangular.

Los procesos transversos son largos y angostos y en ellos se pueden ver tres tubérculos.

Estos son un proceso costiforme lateral, un proceso mamilar y un proceso accesorio.

El tubérculo superior o superior es el proceso mamilar que se conecta con el proceso articular superior.

El músculo multífido se une al proceso mamilar y este músculo se extiende a lo largo de la columna vertebral, dando soporte.

El tubérculo inferior o inferior es el proceso accesorio y se encuentra en la parte posterior de la base del proceso transverso.

El término lumbosacro se usa a menudo para referirse a las vértebras lumbares y sacras juntas y, a veces, incluye sus áreas circundantes.


==== Sacro ====

Hay cinco vértebras sacras (S1-S5) que se fusionan en la madurez, en un hueso grande, el sacro, sin discos intervertebrales.

El sacro con el ilion forma una articulación sacroilíaca a cada lado de la pelvis, que se articula con las caderas.


==== Coxis ====

Las últimas tres a cinco vértebras coccígeas (pero generalmente cuatro) (Co1-Co5) forman el coxis o coxis.

No hay discos intervertebrales.


=== Desarrollo ===


Los somitas se forman en el embrión temprano y algunos de ellos se convierten en esclerotomos.

Los esclerotomos forman las vértebras así como el cartílago de las costillas y parte del hueso occipital.

Desde su ubicación inicial dentro del somita, las células del esclerotomo migran medialmente hacia la notocorda.

Estas células se encuentran con las células del esclerotomo del otro lado del mesodermo paraxial.

La mitad inferior de un esclerotomo se fusiona con la mitad superior del adyacente para formar cada cuerpo vertebral.

Desde este cuerpo vertebral, las células del esclerotomo se mueven dorsalmente y rodean la médula espinal en desarrollo, formando el arco vertebral.

Otras células se mueven distalmente a los procesos costales de las vértebras torácicas para formar las costillas.


== Función ==

Las funciones de las vértebras incluyen:

Soporte de la función de las vértebras en el sistema esqueletomuscular al formar la columna vertebral para sostener el cuerpo.
Proteccion.

Las vértebras contienen un agujero vertebral para el paso del canal espinal y su médula espinal encerrada y las meninges que lo cubren.

También brindan una protección sólida para la médula espinal.

Las superficies superior e inferior del centro son aplanadas y ásperas para dar unión a los discos intervertebrales.
Movimienot.

Las vértebras también proporcionan las aberturas, los agujeros intervertebrales que permiten la entrada y salida de los nervios espinales.

De manera similar a las superficies del centro, las superficies superior e inferior de los frentes de las láminas son aplanadas y ásperas para unirse a los ligamentos amarillos.

Trabajando juntas en la columna vertebral, sus secciones proporcionan movimiento controlado y flexibilidad.

Alimentación de los discos intervertebrales a través de la placa refleja (ligamento hialino) que separa el hueso esponjoso del cuerpo vertebral de cada disco


== Importancia clínica ==

Hay una serie de anomalías vertebrales congénitas, que en su mayoría implican variaciones en la forma o el número de vértebras, y muchas de las cuales no presentan problemas.

Sin embargo, otros pueden causar compresión de la médula espinal.

Las vértebras en forma de cuña, llamadas hemivértebras, pueden hacer que se forme un ángulo en la columna que puede provocar enfermedades de curvatura espinal como cifosis, escoliosis y lordosis.

Los casos severos pueden causar compresión de la médula espinal.

Las vértebras bloqueadas donde algunas vértebras se han fusionado pueden causar problemas.

La espina bífida puede resultar de la formación incompleta del arco vertebral.

La espondilolisis es un defecto en la pars interarticularis del arco vertebral.

En la mayoría de los casos, esto ocurre en la vértebra lumbar más baja (L5), pero también puede ocurrir en las otras vértebras lumbares, así como en las vértebras torácicas.

La hernia de disco espinal, más comúnmente llamada hernia de disco, es el resultado de un desgarro en el anillo exterior (anulus fibrosus) del disco intervertebral, lo que permite que parte del material blando similar al gel, el núcleo pulposo, sobresalga en una hernia. .

Esto se puede tratar con un procedimiento endoscópico mínimamente invasivo llamado método Tessys.

Una laminectomía es una operación quirúrgica para extirpar las láminas con el fin de acceder al canal espinal.

La eliminación de solo una parte de una lámina se denomina laminotomía.

Un nervio pellizcado causado por la presión de un disco, vértebra o tejido cicatricial puede remediarse con una foraminotomía para ensanchar los agujeros intervertebrales y aliviar la presión.

También puede ser causado por una estenosis del foramen, un estrechamiento de la abertura del nervio, como resultado de la artritis.
Otra condición es la espondilolistesis cuando una vértebra se desliza hacia adelante sobre otra.

El reverso de esta condición es la retrolistesis, donde una vértebra se desliza hacia atrás sobre otra.

El pedículo vertebral se utiliza a menudo como marcador radiográfico y punto de entrada en los procedimientos de vertebroplastia, cifoplastia y fusión espinal.

El foramen arqueado es una variación anatómica común que se observa con más frecuencia en las mujeres.

Es un puente óseo que se encuentra en la primera vértebra cervical, el atlas donde cubre el surco de la arteria vertebral.

La enfermedad degenerativa del disco es una condición generalmente asociada con el envejecimiento en la que uno o más discos se degeneran.

Esto a menudo puede ser una condición sin dolor, pero también puede ser muy doloroso.


== Otros animales ==


En otros animales, las vértebras toman los mismos nombres regionales, excepto coccígea; en animales con cola, las vértebras separadas generalmente se denominan vértebras caudales.

Debido a los diferentes tipos de locomoción y apoyo necesarios entre los vertebrados acuáticos y otros, las vértebras entre ellos muestran la mayor variación, aunque comparten características básicas.

Los procesos espinosos que se extienden hacia atrás se dirigen hacia arriba en animales sin una postura erguida.

Estos procesos pueden ser muy grandes en los animales más grandes, ya que se adhieren a los músculos y ligamentos del cuerpo.

En el elefante, las vértebras están conectadas por articulaciones estrechas, que limitan la flexibilidad de la columna vertebral.

Los procesos espinosos se exageran en algunos animales, como los extintos Dimetrodon y Spinosaurus, donde forman un dorso de vela o aleta.

Las vértebras con superficies articulares en forma de silla de montar en sus cuerpos, llamadas "heterocoelous", permiten que las vértebras se flexionen tanto vertical como horizontalmente mientras evitan los movimientos de torsión.

Tales vértebras se encuentran en el cuello de las aves y algunas tortugas.

Las vértebras "procelosas" presentan una protuberancia esférica que se extiende desde el extremo caudal del centro de una vértebra que encaja en una cavidad cóncava en el extremo craneal del centro de una vértebra adyacente.

Estas vértebras se encuentran con mayor frecuencia en los reptiles, pero se encuentran en algunos anfibios como las ranas.

Las vértebras encajan en una articulación de bola y cavidad, en la que la característica articular convexa de una vértebra anterior actúa como la bola en la cavidad de una vértebra caudal.

Este tipo de conexión permite un amplio rango de movimiento en la mayoría de las direcciones, al mismo tiempo que protege el cordón nervioso subyacente.

El punto central de rotación se encuentra en la línea media de cada centrum y, por lo tanto, la flexión del músculo que rodea la columna vertebral no conduce a una abertura entre las vértebras.

En muchas especies, aunque no en los mamíferos, las vértebras cervicales tienen costillas.

En muchos grupos, como los lagartos y los dinosaurios saurisquios, las costillas cervicales son grandes; en las aves, son pequeños y están completamente fusionados con las vértebras.

Los procesos transversos de los mamíferos son homólogos a las costillas cervicales de otros amniotas.

En la ballena, las vértebras cervicales suelen estar fusionadas, una adaptación que intercambia flexibilidad por estabilidad durante la natación.

Todos los mamíferos, excepto los manatíes y los perezosos, tienen siete vértebras cervicales, cualquiera que sea la longitud del cuello.

Esto incluye animales aparentemente improbables como la jirafa, el camello y la ballena azul, por ejemplo.

Las aves suelen tener más vértebras cervicales y la mayoría tiene un cuello muy flexible que consta de 13 a 25 vértebras.

En todos los mamíferos, las vértebras torácicas están conectadas a las costillas y sus cuerpos difieren de las otras vértebras regionales debido a la presencia de facetas.

Cada vértebra tiene una faceta a cada lado del cuerpo vertebral, que se articula con la cabeza de una costilla.

También hay una faceta en cada uno de los procesos transversales que se articula con el tubérculo de una costilla.

El número de vértebras torácicas varía considerablemente entre las especies.

La mayoría de los marsupiales tienen trece, pero los koalas solo tienen once.

La norma es de doce a quince en los mamíferos (doce en el humano), aunque hay de dieciocho a veinte en el caballo, el tapir, el rinoceronte y el elefante.

En ciertos perezosos hay un número extremo de veinticinco y en el otro extremo sólo nueve en el cetáceo.

Hay menos vértebras lumbares en chimpancés y gorilas, que tienen tres en contraste con las cinco del género Homo.

Esta reducción en número da una incapacidad de la columna lumbar para lordose pero da una anatomía que favorece la escalada vertical y la capacidad de colgar más adecuada para lugares de alimentación en regiones con dosel alto.

El bonobo se diferencia por tener cuatro vértebras lumbares.
Las vértebras caudales son los huesos que forman la cola de los vertebrados.

Varían en número desde unos pocos hasta cincuenta, dependiendo de la longitud de la cola del animal.

En humanos y otros primates sin cola, se denominan vértebras coccígeas, su número es de tres a cinco y se fusionan con el cóccix.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vértebra

;;;PT;;;



VÉRTEBRA


A coluna vertebral, característica de cada espécie de vertebrado,
é uma série moderadamente flexível de vértebras (vértebra singular), cada uma constituindo um osso irregular característico cuja estrutura complexa é composta principalmente de osso e secundariamente de cartilagem hialina.

Eles mostram variação na proporção contribuída por esses dois tipos de tecido; tais variações correlacionam-se, por um lado, com a classificação cerebral/caudal (isto é, localização dentro da espinha dorsal) e, por outro, com diferenças filogenéticas entre os táxons de vertebrados.

A configuração básica de uma vértebra varia, mas o osso é seu corpo, com a parte central do corpo constituindo o centro.

A parte superior (mais próxima) e inferior (mais distante), respectivamente, do crânio e suas superfícies do sistema nervoso central do corpo da vértebra suportam a fixação aos discos intervertebrais.

A parte posterior de uma vértebra forma um arco vertebral (em onze partes, consistindo em dois pedículos (pedículo do arco vertebral), duas lâminas e sete processos.

As lâminas dão fixação aos ligamentos amarelos, que são ligamentos da coluna.

Existem entalhes vertebrais, cada um constituído pela forma dos pedículos, que formam os forames intervertebrais quando as vértebras se articulam.

Esses forames são os condutos de entrada e saída que acomodam os nervos espinhais.

O corpo da vértebra, e seu arco vertebral, formam o forame vertebral, que é a abertura maior, estável e central: ela acomoda o canal espinhal e envolve e protege a medula espinhal.

As vértebras se articulam umas com as outras para dar força e flexibilidade à coluna vertebral, e a forma em seus aspectos anteriores e posteriores determina a amplitude de movimento.

Estruturalmente, as vértebras são essencialmente semelhantes entre as espécies de vertebrados, com a maior diferença observada entre um animal aquático e outros animais vertebrados.

Como tal, os vertebrados recebem o nome das vértebras que compõem a coluna vertebral.


== Estrutura ==

=== Estrutura geral ===

Na coluna vertebral humana, o tamanho das vértebras varia de acordo com a colocação na coluna vertebral, carga espinhal, postura e patologia.

Ao longo do comprimento da coluna, as vértebras mudam para acomodar diferentes necessidades relacionadas ao estresse e à mobilidade.

Cada vértebra é um osso irregular.

Cada vértebra tem um corpo (corpo vertebral), que consiste em uma grande porção anterior média chamada centrum (centrum vertebral, plural centra) e um arco vertebral posterior, também chamado de arco neural.

O corpo é composto de osso esponjoso, que é o tipo de tecido ósseo esponjoso, cuja microanatomia foi especificamente estudada dentro dos ossos pediculados.

Este osso esponjoso é, por sua vez, recoberto por uma fina camada de osso cortical (ou osso compacto), do tipo duro e denso de tecido ósseo.

O arco e os processos vertebrais têm revestimentos mais espessos de osso cortical.

As superfícies superior e inferior do corpo da vértebra são achatadas e ásperas para dar fixação aos discos intervertebrais.

Essas superfícies são as placas terminais vertebrais que estão em contato direto com os discos intervertebrais e formam a articulação.

As placas terminais são formadas a partir de uma camada espessa do osso esponjoso do corpo vertebral, sendo a camada superior mais densa.

As placas terminais funcionam para conter os discos adjacentes, distribuir uniformemente as cargas aplicadas e fornecer ancoragem para as fibras de colágeno do disco.

Eles também atuam como uma interface semipermeável para a troca de água e solutos.

O arco vertebral é formado por pedículos e lâminas.

Dois pedículos se estendem das laterais do corpo vertebral para unir o corpo ao arco.

Os pedículos são processos curtos e espessos que se estendem, um de cada lado, posteriormente, a partir das junções das superfícies póstero-laterais do centro, em sua superfície superior.

De cada pedículo uma placa larga, uma lâmina, projeta-se para trás e medialmente para unir e completar o arco vertebral e formar a borda posterior do forame vertebral, que completa o triângulo do forame vertebral.

As superfícies superiores das lâminas são ásperas para dar fixação ao ligamento amarelo.

Esses ligamentos conectam as lâminas da vértebra adjacente ao longo do comprimento da coluna a partir do nível da segunda vértebra cervical.

Acima e abaixo dos pedículos há depressões rasas chamadas incisuras vertebrais (superior e inferior).

Quando as vértebras se articulam, os entalhes se alinham com os das vértebras adjacentes e formam as aberturas dos forames intervertebrais.

Os forames permitem a entrada e saída dos nervos espinhais de cada vértebra, juntamente com os vasos sanguíneos associados.

As vértebras articuladas fornecem um forte pilar de sustentação para o corpo.


==== Processos ====

Existem sete processos que se projetam da vértebra:

um processo espinhoso
dois processos transversos
quatro processos articulares A maior parte de uma vértebra é um processo espinhoso que se estende para trás (às vezes chamado de espinha neural) que se projeta centralmente.

Este processo aponta dorsal e caudalmente a partir da junção das lâminas.

O processo espinhoso serve para anexar músculos e ligamentos.

Os dois processos transversos, um de cada lado do corpo vertebral, projetam-se lateralmente de cada lado no ponto onde a lâmina se une ao pedículo, entre os processos articulares superior e inferior.

Eles também servem para a fixação de músculos e ligamentos, em particular os ligamentos intertransversais.

Existe uma faceta em cada um dos processos transversos das vértebras torácicas que se articula com o tubérculo da costela.

Uma faceta de cada lado do corpo vertebral torácico articula-se com a cabeça da costela.

O processo transverso de uma vértebra lombar também é às vezes chamado de processo costal ou costiforme porque corresponde a uma costela rudimentar (costa) que, ao contrário do tórax, não se desenvolve na região lombar.

Existem articulações facetárias superiores e inferiores em cada lado da vértebra, que servem para restringir a amplitude de movimento possível.

Essas facetas são unidas por uma fina porção do arco vertebral chamada pars interarticularis.


=== Variação regional ===

As vértebras recebem seus nomes das regiões da coluna vertebral que ocupam.

Há trinta e três vértebras na coluna vertebral humana – sete vértebras cervicais, doze vértebras torácicas, cinco vértebras lombares, cinco vértebras sacrais fundidas formando o sacro e três a cinco vértebras coccígeas, formando o cóccix.

As vértebras regionais aumentam de tamanho à medida que progridem para baixo, mas tornam-se menores no cóccix.


==== Vértebras cervicais ====

Existem sete vértebras cervicais (mas oito nervos espinhais cervicais), designados de C1 a C7.

Esses ossos são, em geral, pequenos e delicados.

Seus processos espinhosos são curtos (com exceção de C2 e C7, que possuem processos espinhosos palpáveis).

C1 também é chamado de atlas e C2 também é chamado de eixo.

A estrutura dessas vértebras é a razão pela qual o pescoço e a cabeça têm uma grande amplitude de movimento.

A articulação atlanto-occipital permite que o crânio se mova para cima e para baixo, enquanto a articulação atlanto-axial permite que a parte superior do pescoço gire para a esquerda e para a direita.

O eixo também fica sobre o primeiro disco intervertebral da coluna vertebral.

As vértebras cervicais possuem forames transversos para permitir que as artérias vertebrais passem em seu caminho para o forame magno para terminar no círculo de Willis.

Estas são as vértebras menores e mais leves e os forames vertebrais são de forma triangular.

Os processos espinhosos são curtos e muitas vezes bifurcados (o processo espinhoso de C7, no entanto, não é bifurcado e é substancialmente mais longo que o dos outros processos espinhosos cervicais).

O atlas difere das outras vértebras por não ter corpo e nenhum processo espinhoso.

Em vez disso, tem uma forma anular, com um arco anterior e um posterior e duas massas laterais.

Nos pontos centrais externos de ambos os arcos há um tubérculo, um tubérculo anterior e um tubérculo posterior, para a fixação dos músculos.

A superfície frontal do arco anterior é convexa e seu tubérculo anterior dá fixação ao músculo longo do pescoço.

O tubérculo posterior é um processo espinhoso rudimentar e dá fixação ao músculo reto menor posterior da cabeça.

O processo espinhoso é pequeno para não interferir no movimento entre o atlas e o crânio.

Na superfície inferior há uma faceta para articulação com os antros do eixo.
Específico para a vértebra cervical é o forame transverso (também conhecido como forame transverso).

Esta é uma abertura em cada um dos processos transversos que dá passagem à artéria e veia vertebrais e a um plexo nervoso simpático.

Nas vértebras cervicais, exceto no atlas, os tubérculos anterior e posterior estão em ambos os lados do forame transverso em cada processo transverso.

O tubérculo anterior na sexta vértebra cervical é chamado de tubérculo carotídeo porque separa a artéria carótida da artéria vertebral.

Há um processo uncinado em forma de gancho nas bordas laterais da superfície superior dos corpos da terceira à sétima vértebra cervical e da primeira vértebra torácica.

Juntamente com o disco vertebral, esse processo uncinado evita que uma vértebra deslize para trás da vértebra abaixo dela e limita a flexão lateral (flexão lateral).

As articulações de Luschka envolvem os processos uncinados vertebrais.
O processo espinhoso em C7 é distintamente longo e dá o nome de vértebra prominens a esta vértebra.

Também uma costela cervical pode se desenvolver a partir de C7 como uma variação anatômica.

O termo cervicotorácica é frequentemente usado para se referir às vértebras cervicais e torácicas juntas e, às vezes, também às áreas circundantes.


==== Vértebras torácicas ====

As doze vértebras torácicas e seus processos transversos possuem superfícies que se articulam com as costelas.

Alguma rotação pode ocorrer entre as vértebras torácicas, mas sua conexão com a caixa torácica impede muita flexão ou outro movimento.

Eles também podem ser conhecidos como "vértebras dorsais" no contexto humano.

Os corpos vertebrais são aproximadamente em forma de coração e são tão largos antero-posteriormente quanto na dimensão transversal.

Os forames vertebrais são aproximadamente circulares.
A superfície superior da primeira vértebra torácica tem um processo uncinado em forma de gancho, assim como as vértebras cervicais.

A divisão toracolombar refere-se às vértebras torácicas e lombares juntas e, às vezes, também às áreas circundantes.

As vértebras torácicas se ligam às costelas e, portanto, possuem facetas articulares específicas para elas; estas são as facetas costais superior, transversa e inferior.

À medida que as vértebras progridem pela coluna, elas aumentam de tamanho para corresponder à seção lombar adjacente.


==== Vértebras lombares ====

As cinco vértebras lombares são as maiores das vértebras, sendo sua construção robusta necessária para suportar maior peso do que as outras vértebras.

Eles permitem flexão significativa, extensão e flexão lateral moderada (flexão lateral).

Os discos entre essas vértebras criam uma lordose lombar natural (uma curvatura espinhal que é côncava posteriormente).

Isso se deve à diferença de espessura entre as partes anterior e posterior dos discos intervertebrais.

As vértebras lombares estão localizadas entre a caixa torácica e a pelve e são as maiores das vértebras.

Os pedículos são fortes, assim como as lâminas, e o processo espinhoso é grosso e largo.

O forame vertebral é grande e triangular.

Os processos transversos são longos e estreitos e três tubérculos podem ser vistos neles.

Estes são um processo costiforme lateral, um processo mamilar e um processo acessório.

O tubérculo superior ou superior é o processo mamilar que se conecta com o processo articular superior.

O músculo multífido se insere no processo mamilar e este músculo se estende ao longo da coluna vertebral, dando sustentação.

O tubérculo inferior ou inferior é o processo acessório e se encontra na parte posterior da base do processo transverso.

O termo lombossacral é frequentemente usado para se referir às vértebras lombares e sacrais juntas e, às vezes, inclui suas áreas circundantes.


==== Sacro ====

Existem cinco vértebras sacrais (S1-S5) que são fundidas na maturidade, em um grande osso, o sacro, sem discos intervertebrais.

O sacro com o ílio forma uma articulação sacroilíaca em cada lado da pelve, que se articula com os quadris.


==== Cóccix ====

As últimas três a cinco vértebras coccígeas (mas geralmente quatro) (Co1-Co5) compõem o cóccix ou cóccix.

Não há discos intervertebrais.


=== Desenvolvimento ===


Os somitos se formam no embrião inicial e alguns deles se desenvolvem em esclerótomos.

Os esclerótomos formam as vértebras, bem como a cartilagem das costelas e parte do osso occipital.

De sua localização inicial dentro do somito, as células do esclerótomo migram medialmente em direção à notocorda.

Essas células encontram as células do esclerótomo do outro lado do mesoderma paraxial.

A metade inferior de um esclerótomo se funde com a metade superior do adjacente para formar cada corpo vertebral.

A partir deste corpo vertebral, as células do esclerótomo movem-se dorsalmente e circundam a medula espinhal em desenvolvimento, formando o arco vertebral.

Outras células movem-se distalmente aos processos costais das vértebras torácicas para formar as costelas.


== Função ==

As funções das vértebras incluem:

Suporte da função das vértebras no sistema esqueletomuscular formando a coluna vertebral para sustentar o corpo
Proteção.

As vértebras contêm um forame vertebral para a passagem do canal espinhal e sua medula espinhal fechada e as meninges que cobrem.

Eles também oferecem proteção robusta para a medula espinhal.

As superfícies superior e inferior do centro são achatadas e ásperas para dar fixação aos discos intervertebrais.
Movimento.

As vértebras também fornecem as aberturas, os forames intervertebrais, que permitem a entrada e saída dos nervos espinhais.

Da mesma forma que as superfícies do centro, as superfícies superior e inferior das frentes das lâminas são achatadas e ásperas para dar fixação aos ligamentos amarelos.

Trabalhando em conjunto na coluna vertebral, suas seções proporcionam movimento controlado e flexibilidade.

Alimentação dos discos intervertebrais através da placa reflexa (ligamento hialino) que separa o osso esponjoso do corpo vertebral de cada disco


== Significado clínico ==

Há uma série de anomalias vertebrais congênitas, principalmente envolvendo variações na forma ou número de vértebras, e muitas das quais não são problemáticas.

Outros, porém, podem causar compressão da medula espinhal.

As vértebras em forma de cunha, chamadas hemivértebras, podem causar a formação de um ângulo na coluna, o que pode resultar nas doenças da curvatura espinhal da cifose, escoliose e lordose.

Casos graves podem causar compressão da medula espinhal.

O bloqueio de vértebras onde algumas vértebras se fundiram pode causar problemas.

A espinha bífida pode resultar da formação incompleta do arco vertebral.

A espondilólise é um defeito na pars interarticularis do arco vertebral.

Na maioria dos casos isso ocorre na parte inferior das vértebras lombares (L5), mas também pode ocorrer nas outras vértebras lombares, bem como nas vértebras torácicas.

A hérnia de disco espinhal, mais comumente chamada de hérnia de disco, é o resultado de um rasgo no anel externo (anulus fibroso) do disco intervertebral, que deixa parte do material gelatinoso macio, o núcleo pulposo, protuberante em uma hérnia .

Isso pode ser tratado por um procedimento endoscópico minimamente invasivo chamado método Tessys.

A laminectomia é uma operação cirúrgica para remover as lâminas para acessar o canal espinhal.

A remoção de apenas parte de uma lâmina é chamada de laminotomia.

Um nervo comprimido causado pela pressão de um disco, vértebra ou tecido cicatricial pode ser remediado por uma foraminotomia para ampliar os forames intervertebrais e aliviar a pressão.

Também pode ser causada por uma estenose do forame, um estreitamento da abertura do nervo, como resultado da artrite.
Outra condição é a espondilolistese quando uma vértebra desliza para a frente sobre outra.

O reverso dessa condição é a retrolistese, onde uma vértebra desliza para trás sobre outra.

O pedículo vertebral é frequentemente usado como marcador radiográfico e ponto de entrada em procedimentos de vertebroplastia, cifoplastia e fusão espinhal.

O forame arqueado é uma variação anatômica comum mais frequentemente observada no sexo feminino.

É uma ponte óssea encontrada na primeira vértebra cervical, o atlas, onde cobre o sulco da artéria vertebral.

A doença degenerativa do disco é uma condição geralmente associada ao envelhecimento em que um ou mais discos se degeneram.

Isso muitas vezes pode ser uma condição indolor, mas também pode ser muito dolorosa.


== Outros animais ==


Em outros animais, as vértebras recebem os mesmos nomes regionais, exceto a coccígea – em animais com cauda, ​​as vértebras separadas são geralmente chamadas de vértebras caudais.

Devido aos diferentes tipos de locomoção e suporte necessários entre os vertebrados aquáticos e outros vertebrados, as vértebras entre eles mostram a maior variação, embora características básicas sejam compartilhadas.

Os processos espinhosos que se estendem para trás são direcionados para cima em animais sem uma postura ereta.

Esses processos podem ser muito grandes nos animais maiores, uma vez que se ligam aos músculos e ligamentos do corpo.

No elefante, as vértebras são conectadas por juntas apertadas, que limitam a flexibilidade da coluna vertebral.

Os processos espinhosos são exagerados em alguns animais, como os extintos Dimetrodon e Spinosaurus, onde formam um sailback ou finback.

As vértebras com superfícies articulares em forma de sela em seus corpos, chamadas de "heterocelosas", permitem que as vértebras se flexionem vertical e horizontalmente, evitando movimentos de torção.

Tais vértebras são encontradas no pescoço de pássaros e algumas tartarugas.

As vértebras "procelosas" apresentam uma protrusão esférica que se estende da extremidade caudal do centro de uma vértebra que se encaixa em um encaixe côncavo na extremidade cranial do centro de uma vértebra adjacente.

Essas vértebras são mais frequentemente encontradas em répteis, mas são encontradas em alguns anfíbios, como sapos.

As vértebras se encaixam em uma articulação em esfera e soquete, na qual a característica articular convexa de uma vértebra anterior atua como a esfera para a cavidade de uma vértebra caudal.

Este tipo de conexão permite uma ampla amplitude de movimento na maioria das direções, enquanto ainda protege o cordão nervoso subjacente.

O ponto central de rotação está localizado na linha média de cada centro e, portanto, a flexão do músculo que envolve a coluna vertebral não leva a uma abertura entre as vértebras.

Em muitas espécies, embora não em mamíferos, as vértebras cervicais apresentam costelas.

Em muitos grupos, como lagartos e dinossauros saurísquios, as costelas cervicais são grandes; nas aves, eles são pequenos e completamente fundidos às vértebras.

Os processos transversos dos mamíferos são homólogos às costelas cervicais de outros amniotas.

Na baleia, as vértebras cervicais são tipicamente fundidas, uma adaptação que troca a flexibilidade pela estabilidade durante a natação.

Todos os mamíferos, exceto peixes-boi e preguiças, têm sete vértebras cervicais, qualquer que seja o comprimento do pescoço.

Isso inclui animais aparentemente improváveis, como a girafa, o camelo e a baleia azul, por exemplo.

As aves geralmente têm mais vértebras cervicais, com a maioria tendo um pescoço altamente flexível, consistindo de 13 a 25 vértebras.

Em todos os mamíferos, as vértebras torácicas são conectadas às costelas e seus corpos diferem das demais vértebras regionais pela presença de facetas.

Cada vértebra tem uma faceta de cada lado do corpo vertebral, que se articula com a cabeça de uma costela.

Há também uma faceta em cada um dos processos transversos que se articula com o tubérculo de uma costela.

O número de vértebras torácicas varia consideravelmente entre as espécies.

A maioria dos marsupiais tem treze, mas os coalas só têm onze.

A norma é de doze a quinze em mamíferos (doze no humano), embora haja de dezoito a vinte no cavalo, anta, rinoceronte e elefante.

Em certas preguiças há um número extremo de vinte e cinco e na outra extremidade apenas nove no cetáceo.

Há menos vértebras lombares em chimpanzés e gorilas, que têm três em contraste com as cinco do gênero Homo.

Esta redução no número dá uma incapacidade da coluna lombar para lordose, mas dá uma anatomia que favorece a escalada vertical e a capacidade de suspensão mais adequada para locais de alimentação em regiões de dossel alto.

O bonobo difere por ter quatro vértebras lombares.
As vértebras caudais são os ossos que compõem as caudas dos vertebrados.

Eles variam em número de alguns a cinquenta, dependendo do comprimento da cauda do animal.

Em humanos e outros primatas sem cauda, ​​eles são chamados de vértebras coccígeas, numeram de três a cinco e são fundidos no cóccix.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vertebra

;;;FR;;;



VERTÈBRE


La colonne vertébrale, caractéristique de chaque espèce de vertébrés,
est une série de vertèbres moyennement flexibles (vertèbre singulière), chacune constituant un os irrégulier caractéristique dont la structure complexe est composée principalement d'os, et secondairement de cartilage hyalin.

Ils montrent une variation dans la proportion apportée par ces deux types de tissus ; ces variations sont corrélées d'une part avec le rang cérébral/caudal (c'est-à-dire la localisation dans la colonne vertébrale), et d'autre part avec les différences phylogénétiques entre les taxons de vertébrés.

La configuration de base d'une vertèbre varie, mais l'os est son corps, la partie centrale du corps constituant le centrum.

Les surfaces supérieure (plus proche) et inférieure (plus éloignée), respectivement, du crâne et de ses surfaces du système nerveux central du corps vertébral soutiennent l'attachement aux disques intervertébraux.

La partie postérieure d'une vertèbre forme un arc vertébral (en onze parties, composé de deux pédicules (pédicule d'arc vertébral) deux lames, et sept processus.

Les lamelles s'attachent aux ligamenta flava, qui sont des ligaments de la colonne vertébrale.

Il existe des encoches vertébrales, chacune constituée par la forme des pédicules, qui forment les foramens intervertébraux lorsque les vertèbres s'articulent.

Ces foramens sont les conduits d'entrée et de sortie accueillant les nerfs rachidiens.

Le corps de la vertèbre et son arc vertébral forment le foramen vertébral, qui est l'ouverture la plus grande, la plus stable et la plus centrale : il accueille le canal rachidien, et enferme et protège la moelle épinière.

Les vertèbres s'articulent les unes avec les autres pour donner force et flexibilité à la colonne vertébrale, et la forme de leurs aspects arrière et avant détermine l'amplitude des mouvements.

Structurellement, les vertèbres sont essentiellement similaires dans toutes les espèces de vertébrés, la plus grande différence étant observée entre un animal aquatique et d'autres animaux vertébrés.

Ainsi, les vertébrés tirent leur nom des vertèbres qui composent la colonne vertébrale.


== Structure ==

=== Structure générale ===

Dans la colonne vertébrale humaine, la taille des vertèbres varie en fonction du placement dans la colonne vertébrale, de la charge vertébrale, de la posture et de la pathologie.

Le long de la colonne vertébrale, les vertèbres changent pour répondre aux différents besoins liés au stress et à la mobilité.

Chaque vertèbre est un os irrégulier.

Chaque vertèbre a un corps (corps vertébral), qui se compose d'une grande partie médiane antérieure appelée centrum (centrum vertébral, pluriel centra) et d'un arc vertébral postérieur, également appelé arc neural.

Le corps est composé d'os spongieux, qui est le type de tissu osseux spongieux, dont la microanatomie a été spécifiquement étudiée au sein des os pédiculaires.

Cet os spongieux est quant à lui, recouvert d'une fine couche d'os cortical (ou os compact), le type de tissu osseux dur et dense.

L'arc vertébral et les processus ont des revêtements plus épais d'os cortical.

Les surfaces supérieure et inférieure du corps de la vertèbre sont aplaties et rugueuses afin de donner une fixation aux disques intervertébraux.

Ces surfaces sont les plateaux vertébraux qui sont en contact direct avec les disques intervertébraux et forment l'articulation.

Les plateaux vertébraux sont formés d'une couche épaissie de l'os spongieux du corps vertébral, la couche supérieure étant plus dense.

Les plaques d'extrémité ont pour fonction de contenir les disques adjacents, de répartir uniformément les charges appliquées et de fournir un ancrage aux fibres de collagène du disque.

Ils agissent également comme une interface semi-perméable pour l'échange d'eau et de solutés.

L'arc vertébral est formé de pédicules et de lames.

Deux pédicules s'étendent des côtés du corps vertébral pour joindre le corps à l'arc.

Les pédicules sont de courts processus épais qui s'étendent, un de chaque côté, vers l'arrière, à partir des jonctions des surfaces postéro-latérales du centrum, sur sa surface supérieure.

À partir de chaque pédicule, une large plaque, une lame, se projette vers l'arrière et vers l'intérieur pour rejoindre et compléter l'arc vertébral et former le bord postérieur du foramen vertébral, qui complète le triangle du foramen vertébral.

Les surfaces supérieures des lames sont rugueuses pour donner une attache au ligament jaune.

Ces ligaments relient les lames des vertèbres adjacentes sur toute la longueur de la colonne vertébrale à partir du niveau de la deuxième vertèbre cervicale.

Au-dessus et au-dessous des pédicules se trouvent des dépressions peu profondes appelées encoches vertébrales (supérieures et inférieures).

Lorsque les vertèbres s'articulent, les encoches s'alignent sur celles des vertèbres adjacentes et forment les ouvertures des foramens intervertébraux.

Les foramens permettent l'entrée et la sortie des nerfs rachidiens de chaque vertèbre, ainsi que des vaisseaux sanguins associés.

Les vertèbres articulées fournissent un solide pilier de soutien pour le corps.


==== Processus ====

Il y a sept processus faisant saillie à partir de la vertèbre :

une apophyse épineuse
deux processus transverses
quatre processus articulaires Une partie importante d'une vertèbre est un processus épineux s'étendant vers l'arrière (parfois appelé épine neurale) qui se projette au centre.

Ce processus pointe dorsalement et caudalement à partir de la jonction des lames.

L'apophyse épineuse sert à attacher les muscles et les ligaments.

Les deux apophyses transverses, une de chaque côté du corps vertébral, se projettent latéralement de part et d'autre au point où la lame rejoint le pédicule, entre les apophyses articulaires supérieures et inférieures.

Ils servent également à la fixation des muscles et des ligaments, en particulier les ligaments intertransversaux.

Il y a une facette sur chacune des apophyses transverses des vertèbres thoraciques qui s'articule avec le tubercule de la côte.

Une facette de chaque côté du corps vertébral thoracique s'articule avec la tête de la côte.

L'apophyse transverse d'une vertèbre lombaire est aussi parfois appelée apophyse costale ou costiforme car elle correspond à une côte rudimentaire (costa) qui, contrairement au thorax, n'est pas développée dans la région lombaire.

Il existe des articulations facettaires articulaires supérieures et inférieures de chaque côté de la vertèbre, qui servent à limiter l'amplitude des mouvements possibles.

Ces facettes sont reliées par une fine portion de l'arc vertébral appelée la pars interarticularis.


=== Variation régionale ===

Les vertèbres tirent leur nom des régions de la colonne vertébrale qu'elles occupent.

Il y a trente-trois vertèbres dans la colonne vertébrale humaine - sept vertèbres cervicales, douze vertèbres thoraciques, cinq vertèbres lombaires, cinq vertèbres sacrées fusionnées formant le sacrum et trois à cinq vertèbres coccygiennes, formant le coccyx.

Les vertèbres régionales augmentent de taille à mesure qu'elles progressent vers le bas mais deviennent plus petites dans le coccyx.


==== Vertèbres cervicales ====

Il y a sept vertèbres cervicales (mais huit nerfs rachidiens cervicaux), désignées C1 à C7.

Ces os sont, en général, petits et délicats.

Leurs apophyses épineuses sont courtes (à l'exception de C2 et C7, qui ont des apophyses épineuses palpables).

C1 est aussi appelé l'atlas, et C2 est aussi appelé l'axe.

La structure de ces vertèbres est la raison pour laquelle le cou et la tête ont une grande amplitude de mouvement.

L'articulation atlanto-occipitale permet au crâne de monter et descendre, tandis que l'articulation atlanto-axiale permet au haut du cou de se tordre à gauche et à droite.

L'axe repose également sur le premier disque intervertébral de la colonne vertébrale.

Les vertèbres cervicales possèdent des foramens transversaux pour permettre aux artères vertébrales de passer à travers leur chemin vers le foramen magnum pour se terminer dans le cercle de Willis.

Ce sont les vertèbres les plus petites et les plus légères et les foramens vertébraux sont de forme triangulaire.

Les apophyses épineuses sont courtes et souvent bifurquées (l'apophyse épineuse de C7, cependant, n'est pas bifurquée et est sensiblement plus longue que celle des autres apophyses épineuses cervicales).

L'atlas diffère des autres vertèbres en ce qu'il n'a ni corps ni apophyse épineuse.

Il a plutôt une forme annulaire, ayant un arc antérieur et un arc postérieur et deux masses latérales.

Aux points centraux extérieurs des deux arcs, il y a un tubercule, un tubercule antérieur et un tubercule postérieur, pour la fixation des muscles.

La face avant de l'arc antérieur est convexe et son tubercule antérieur donne attache au muscle longus colli.

Le tubercule postérieur est un processus épineux rudimentaire et s'attache au muscle mineur postérieur du rectus capitis.

L'apophyse épineuse est petite pour ne pas gêner le mouvement entre l'atlas et le crâne.

Sur la face inférieure se trouve une facette d'articulation avec les tanières de l'axe.
Spécifique à la vertèbre cervicale est le foramen transverse (également connu sous le nom de foramen transversarium).

Il s'agit d'une ouverture sur chacun des processus transverses qui donne passage à l'artère et à la veine vertébrales et à un plexus nerveux sympathique.

Sur les vertèbres cervicales autres que l'atlas, les tubercules antérieur et postérieur se trouvent de part et d'autre du foramen transverse sur chaque apophyse transverse.

Le tubercule antérieur de la sixième vertèbre cervicale est appelé tubercule carotidien car il sépare l'artère carotide de l'artère vertébrale.

Il y a un processus unciforme en forme de crochet sur les bords latéraux de la surface supérieure des corps de la troisième à la septième vertèbre cervicale et de la première vertèbre thoracique.

Avec le disque vertébral, ce processus uncinated empêche une vertèbre de glisser vers l'arrière de la vertèbre en dessous et limite la flexion latérale (flexion latérale).

Les articulations de Luschka impliquent les processus vertébraux uncinés.
L'apophyse épineuse sur C7 est distinctement longue et donne le nom de vertèbre proéminente à cette vertèbre.

Une côte cervicale peut également se développer à partir de C7 en tant que variation anatomique.

Le terme cervicothoracique est souvent utilisé pour désigner les vertèbres cervicales et thoraciques ensemble, et parfois aussi leurs zones environnantes.


==== Vertèbres thoraciques ====

Les douze vertèbres thoraciques et leurs apophyses transverses ont des surfaces qui s'articulent avec les côtes.

Une certaine rotation peut se produire entre les vertèbres thoraciques, mais leur connexion avec la cage thoracique empêche beaucoup de flexion ou d'autres mouvements.

Ils peuvent également être connus sous le nom de «vertèbres dorsales» dans le contexte humain.

Les corps vertébraux sont à peu près en forme de cœur et sont à peu près aussi larges antéro-postérieurement que dans la dimension transversale.

Les foramens vertébraux sont de forme à peu près circulaire.
La surface supérieure de la première vertèbre thoracique a un processus unciforme en forme de crochet, tout comme les vertèbres cervicales.

La division thoracolombaire fait référence aux vertèbres thoraciques et lombaires ensemble, et parfois aussi à leurs zones environnantes.

Les vertèbres thoraciques s'attachent aux côtes et ont donc des facettes articulaires qui leur sont propres ; ce sont les facettes costales supérieure, transversale et inférieure.

Au fur et à mesure que les vertèbres progressent le long de la colonne vertébrale, leur taille augmente pour correspondre à la section lombaire adjacente.


==== Vertèbres lombaires ====

Les cinq vertèbres lombaires sont les plus grandes des vertèbres, leur construction robuste étant nécessaire pour supporter un poids plus important que les autres vertèbres.

Ils permettent une flexion importante, une extension et une flexion latérale modérée (flexion latérale).

Les disques entre ces vertèbres créent une lordose lombaire naturelle (une courbure vertébrale concave vers l'arrière).

Cela est dû à la différence d'épaisseur entre les parties avant et arrière des disques intervertébraux.

Les vertèbres lombaires sont situées entre la cage thoracique et le bassin et sont les plus grandes des vertèbres.

Les pédicules sont forts, tout comme les lames, et l'apophyse épineuse est épaisse et large.

Le foramen vertébral est large et triangulaire.

Les processus transverses sont longs et étroits et trois tubercules peuvent être vus dessus.

Il s'agit d'un processus costiforme latéral, d'un processus mammillaire et d'un processus accessoire.

Le tubercule supérieur ou supérieur est le processus mammillaire qui se connecte au processus articulaire supérieur.

Le muscle multifide s'attache au processus mammillaire et ce muscle s'étend sur toute la longueur de la colonne vertébrale, apportant un soutien.

Le tubercule inférieur ou inférieur est le processus accessoire et se trouve à l'arrière de la base du processus transverse.

Le terme lombo-sacré est souvent utilisé pour désigner les vertèbres lombaires et sacrées ensemble, et inclut parfois leurs zones environnantes.


==== Sacrum ====

Il y a cinq vertèbres sacrées (S1–S5) qui sont fusionnées à maturité, en un gros os, le sacrum, sans disques intervertébraux.

Le sacrum avec l'ilium forme une articulation sacro-iliaque de chaque côté du bassin, qui s'articule avec les hanches.


==== Coccyx ====

Les trois à cinq dernières vertèbres coccygiennes (mais généralement quatre) (Co1–Co5) constituent le coccyx ou le coccyx.

Il n'y a pas de disques intervertébraux.


=== Développement ===


Les somites se forment au début de l'embryon et certains d'entre eux se transforment en sclérotomes.

Les sclérotomes forment les vertèbres ainsi que le cartilage costal et une partie de l'os occipital.

De leur emplacement initial dans le somite, les cellules du sclérotome migrent médialement vers la notocorde.

Ces cellules rencontrent les cellules du sclérotome de l'autre côté du mésoderme paraxial.

La moitié inférieure d'un sclérotome fusionne avec la moitié supérieure du sclérotome adjacent pour former chaque corps vertébral.

À partir de ce corps vertébral, les cellules du sclérotome se déplacent dorsalement et entourent la moelle épinière en développement, formant l'arc vertébral.

D'autres cellules se déplacent distalement vers les processus costaux des vertèbres thoraciques pour former les côtes.


== Fonction ==

Les fonctions des vertèbres comprennent :

Soutien de la fonction des vertèbres dans le système squelettique en formant la colonne vertébrale pour soutenir le corps
Protection.

Les vertèbres contiennent un foramen vertébral pour le passage du canal rachidien et sa moelle épinière fermée et couvrant les méninges.

Ils offrent également une protection solide pour la moelle épinière.

Les surfaces supérieure et inférieure du centrum sont aplaties et rugueuses afin de donner une fixation aux disques intervertébraux.
Mouvement.

Les vertèbres fournissent également les ouvertures, les foramens intervertébraux qui permettent l'entrée et la sortie des nerfs rachidiens.

De même que les surfaces du centrum, les surfaces supérieure et inférieure des fronts des lames sont aplaties et rugueuses pour donner une fixation au ligament flava.

Travaillant ensemble dans la colonne vertébrale, leurs sections permettent un mouvement et une flexibilité contrôlés.

Alimentation des disques intervertébraux à travers la plaque réflexe (ligament hyalin) qui sépare l'os spongieux du corps vertébral de chaque disque


== Signification clinique ==

Il existe un certain nombre d'anomalies vertébrales congénitales, impliquant principalement des variations dans la forme ou le nombre de vertèbres, et dont beaucoup ne posent pas de problème.

D'autres cependant peuvent provoquer une compression de la moelle épinière.

Les vertèbres en forme de coin, appelées hémivertèbres, peuvent provoquer la formation d'un angle dans la colonne vertébrale, ce qui peut entraîner les maladies de courbure vertébrale de la cyphose, de la scoliose et de la lordose.

Les cas graves peuvent provoquer une compression de la moelle épinière.

Bloquer les vertèbres où certaines vertèbres ont fusionné peut causer des problèmes.

Le spina bifida peut résulter de la formation incomplète de l'arc vertébral.

La spondylolyse est un défaut de la pars interarticularis de l'arc vertébral.

Dans la plupart des cas, cela se produit dans la plus basse des vertèbres lombaires (L5), mais peut également se produire dans les autres vertèbres lombaires, ainsi que dans les vertèbres thoraciques.

La hernie discale vertébrale, plus communément appelée hernie discale, est le résultat d'une déchirure de l'anneau externe (anulus fibrosus) du disque intervertébral, qui laisse une partie du matériau ressemblant à un gel mou, le nucleus pulposus, se gonfler dans une hernie .

Cela peut être traité par une procédure endoscopique mini-invasive appelée méthode Tessys.

Une laminectomie est une opération chirurgicale pour enlever les lames afin d'accéder au canal rachidien.

L'ablation d'une partie seulement d'une lame s'appelle une laminotomie.

Un nerf pincé causé par la pression d'un disque, d'une vertèbre ou d'un tissu cicatriciel peut être corrigé par une foraminotomie pour élargir le foramen intervertébral et soulager la pression.

Elle peut également être causée par une sténose du foramen, un rétrécissement de l'ouverture nerveuse, à la suite d'une arthrite.
Une autre condition est le spondylolisthésis lorsqu'une vertèbre glisse vers l'avant sur une autre.

L'inverse de cette condition est le rétrolisthésis où une vertèbre glisse vers l'arrière sur une autre.

Le pédicule vertébral est souvent utilisé comme marqueur radiographique et point d'entrée dans les procédures de vertébroplastie, de cyphoplastie et de fusion vertébrale.

Le foramen arqué est une variation anatomique commune plus fréquemment observée chez les femmes.

C'est un pont osseux trouvé sur la première vertèbre cervicale, l'atlas où il recouvre la rainure de l'artère vertébrale.

La discopathie dégénérative est une affection généralement associée au vieillissement dans laquelle un ou plusieurs disques dégénèrent.

Cela peut souvent être une condition indolore, mais peut aussi être très douloureux.


== Autres animaux ==


Chez d'autres animaux, les vertèbres prennent les mêmes noms régionaux à l'exception du coccygien - chez les animaux à queue, les vertèbres séparées sont généralement appelées vertèbres caudales.

En raison des différents types de locomotion et de soutien nécessaires entre les vertébrés aquatiques et les autres vertébrés, les vertèbres entre eux présentent le plus de variations, bien que les caractéristiques de base soient partagées.

Les apophyses épineuses qui s'étendent vers l'arrière sont dirigées vers le haut chez les animaux sans position droite.

Ces processus peuvent être très importants chez les plus gros animaux car ils s'attachent aux muscles et aux ligaments du corps.

Chez l'éléphant, les vertèbres sont reliées par des articulations serrées, ce qui limite la flexibilité de la colonne vertébrale.

Les processus épineux sont exagérés chez certains animaux, tels que le Dimetrodon et le Spinosaurus éteints , où ils forment un sailback ou un finback .

Les vertèbres avec des surfaces articulaires en forme de selle sur leur corps, appelées « hétérocèles », permettent aux vertèbres de fléchir à la fois verticalement et horizontalement tout en empêchant les mouvements de torsion.

Ces vertèbres se trouvent dans le cou des oiseaux et de certaines tortues.

Les vertèbres "Procoelous" comportent une saillie sphérique s'étendant de l'extrémité caudale du centre d'une vertèbre qui s'insère dans une douille concave sur l'extrémité crânienne du centre d'une vertèbre adjacente.

Ces vertèbres se trouvent le plus souvent chez les reptiles, mais se retrouvent chez certains amphibiens comme les grenouilles.

Les vertèbres s'emboîtent dans une articulation à boule et douille, dans laquelle la caractéristique articulaire convexe d'une vertèbre antérieure agit comme la boule à la douille d'une vertèbre caudale.

Ce type de connexion permet une large gamme de mouvements dans la plupart des directions, tout en protégeant le cordon nerveux sous-jacent.

Le point central de rotation est situé sur la ligne médiane de chaque centrum, et donc la flexion du muscle entourant la colonne vertébrale ne conduit pas à une ouverture entre les vertèbres.

Chez de nombreuses espèces, mais pas chez les mammifères, les vertèbres cervicales portent des côtes.

Dans de nombreux groupes, tels que les lézards et les dinosaures saurischiens, les côtes cervicales sont grandes; chez les oiseaux, ils sont petits et complètement fusionnés aux vertèbres.

Les processus transverses des mammifères sont homologues aux côtes cervicales des autres amniotes.

Chez la baleine, les vertèbres cervicales sont généralement fusionnées, une adaptation échangeant la flexibilité contre la stabilité pendant la nage.

Tous les mammifères, à l'exception des lamantins et des paresseux, ont sept vertèbres cervicales, quelle que soit la longueur du cou.

Cela inclut des animaux apparemment improbables tels que la girafe, le chameau et la baleine bleue, par exemple.

Les oiseaux ont généralement plus de vertèbres cervicales, la plupart ayant un cou très flexible composé de 13 à 25 vertèbres.

Chez tous les mammifères, les vertèbres thoraciques sont reliées aux côtes et leurs corps diffèrent des autres vertèbres régionales en raison de la présence de facettes.

Chaque vertèbre a une facette de chaque côté du corps vertébral, qui s'articule avec la tête d'une côte.

Il y a aussi une facette sur chacun des processus transverses qui s'articule avec le tubercule d'une côte.

Le nombre de vertèbres thoraciques varie considérablement d'une espèce à l'autre.

La plupart des marsupiaux en ont treize, mais les koalas n'en ont que onze.

La norme est de douze à quinze chez les mammifères (douze chez l'homme), bien qu'il y en ait de dix-huit à vingt chez le cheval, le tapir, le rhinocéros et l'éléphant.

Chez certains paresseux il y en a un nombre extrême de vingt-cinq et à l'autre bout seulement neuf chez le cétacé.

Il y a moins de vertèbres lombaires chez les chimpanzés et les gorilles, qui en ont trois contrairement aux cinq dans le genre Homo.

Cette réduction du nombre donne une incapacité de la colonne lombaire à la lordose mais donne une anatomie qui favorise l'escalade verticale et une capacité de suspension plus adaptée aux emplacements d'alimentation dans les régions à haute canopée.

Le bonobo se distingue par ses quatre vertèbres lombaires.
Les vertèbres caudales sont les os qui composent la queue des vertébrés.

Leur nombre varie de quelques à cinquante, selon la longueur de la queue de l'animal.

Chez l'homme et les autres primates sans queue, on les appelle les vertèbres coccygiennes, elles sont au nombre de trois à cinq et sont fusionnées dans le coccyx.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vertebra
