

VOCAL CORDS


In humans, vocal cords, also known as vocal folds or voice reeds, are folds of throat tissues that are key in creating sounds through vocalization. 

The size of vocal cords affects the pitch of voice. 

Open when breathing and vibrating for speech or singing, the folds are controlled via the recurrent laryngeal branch of the vagus nerve. 

They are composed of twin infoldings of mucous membrane stretched horizontally, from back to front, across the larynx. 

They vibrate, modulating the flow of air being expelled from the lungs during phonation.The 'true vocal cords' are distinguished from the 'false vocal folds', known as vestibular folds or ventricular folds, which sit slightly superior to the more delicate true folds. 

These have a minimal role in normal phonation, but can produce deep sonorous tones, screams and growls.
The length of the vocal fold at birth is approximately six to eight millimeters and grows to its adult length of eight to sixteen millimeters by adolescence. 

Testosterone, an androgen secreted by the gonads, causes irreversible changes in the cartilages and musculature of the larynx when present in high enough concentrations, such as during an adolescent boy's puberty: The thyroid prominence appears, the vocal folds lengthen and become rounded, and the epithelium thickens with the formation of three distinct layers in the lamina propria.


== Structure ==



=== Location ===

The vocal folds are located within the larynx at the top of the trachea. 

They are attached at the back to the arytenoid cartilages, and at the front to the thyroid cartilage. 

They are part of the glottis. 

Their outer edges are attached to muscle in the larynx while their inner edges form an opening called the rima glottidis. 

They are constructed from epithelium, but they have a few muscle-fibres in them, namely the vocalis muscle which tightens the front part of the ligament near to the thyroid cartilage. 

They are flat triangular bands and are pearly white in color. 

Above both sides of the glottis are the two vestibular folds or false vocal folds which have a small sac between them.


=== False vocal folds ===


The vocal folds are sometimes called 'true vocal folds' to distinguish them from the 'false vocal folds' known as vestibular folds or ventricular folds. 

These are a pair of thick folds of mucous membrane that protect and sit slightly superior to the more delicate true folds. 

They have a minimal role in normal phonation, but are often used to produce deep sonorous tones in Tibetan chant and Tuvan throat singing, as well as in musical screaming and the death growl vocal style.


=== Microanatomy ===


The vocal cords are composed of twin infoldings of 3 distinct tissues: an outer layer of flat cells that do not produce keratin (squamous epithelium). 

Below this is the superficial layer of the lamina propria, a gel-like layer, which allows the vocal fold to vibrate and produce sound. 

The vocalis and thyroarytenoid muscles make up the deepest portion. 

These vocal folds are covered with a mucous membrane and are stretched horizontally, from back to front, across the larynx.


=== Variation ===

Males and females have different vocal fold sizes. 

Adult male voices are usually lower-pitched due to longer and thicker folds. 

The male's vocal folds are between 1.75 cm and 2.5 cm (approx 0.75" to 1.0") in length, while females' vocal folds are between 1.25 cm and 1.75 cm (approx 0.5" to 0.75") in length. 

The vocal folds of children are much shorter than those of adult males and females. 

The difference in vocal fold length and thickness between males and females causes a difference in vocal pitch. 

Additionally, genetic factors cause variations between members of the same sex, with males' and females' voices being categorized into voice types.


== Development ==



=== In newborns ===

Newborns have a uniform single layered lamina propria, which appears loose with no vocal ligament. 

The monolayered lamina propria is composed of ground substances such as hyaluronic acid and fibronectin, fibroblasts, elastic fibers, and collagenous fibers. 

While the fibrous components are sparse, making the lamina propria structure loose, the hyaluronic acid (HA) content is high.
HA is a bulky, negatively charged glycosaminoglycan, whose strong affinity with water procures hyaluronic acid its viscoelastic and shock absorbing properties essential to vocal biomechanics. 

Viscosity and elasticity are critical to voice production. 

Chan, Gray and Titze, quantified the effect of hyaluronic acid on both the viscosity and the elasticity of vocal folds by comparing the properties of tissues with and without HA. 

The results showed that removal of hyaluronic acid decreased the stiffness of the vocal cords by an average of 35%, but increased their dynamic viscosity by an average of 70% at frequencies higher than 1 Hz. 

Newborns have been shown to cry an average of 6.7 hours per day during the first 3 months, with a sustained pitch of 400–600 Hz, and a mean duration per day of 2 hours. 

Similar treatment on adult vocal cords would quickly result in edema, and subsequently aphonia. 

Schweinfurth and al. presented the hypothesis that high hyaluronic acid content and distribution in newborn vocal cords is directly associated with newborn crying endurance. 

These differences in newborn vocal fold composition would also be responsible for newborns inability to articulate sounds, besides the fact that their lamina propria is a uniform structure with no vocal ligament. 

The layered structure necessary for phonation will start to develop during the infancy and until the adolescence.The fibroblasts in the newborn Reinke's space are immature, showing an oval shape, and a large nucleus-cytoplasm ratio. 

The rough endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi apparatus, as shown by electron micrographs, are not well developed, indicating that the cells are in a resting phase. 

The collagenous and reticular fibers in the newborn the vocal cords are fewer than in the adult one, adding to the immaturity of the vocal fold tissue.
In the infant, many fibrous components were seen to extend from the macula flava towards the Reinke's space. 

Fibronectin is very abundant in the Reinke's space of newborn and infant. 

Fibronectin is a glycoprotein that is believed to act as a template for the oriented deposition of the collagen fibers, stabilizing the collagen fibrils. 

Fibronectin also acts as a skeleton for the elastic tissue formation. 

Reticular and collagenous fibers were seen to run along the edges of the vocal cords throughout the entire lamina propria. 

Fibronectin in the Reinke's space appeared to guide those fibers and orient the fibril deposition. 

The elastic fibers remained sparse and immature during infancy, mostly made of microfibrils. 

The fibroblasts in the infant Reinke's space were still sparse but spindle-shaped. 

Their rough endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi apparatus were still not well developed, indicating that despite the change in shape, the fibroblasts still remained mostly in a resting phase. 

Few newly released materials were seen adjacent to the fibroblasts. 

The ground substance content in the infant Reinke's space seemed to decrease over time, as the fibrous component content increased, thus slowly changing the vocal fold structure.


=== Children ===

The infant lamina propria is composed of only one layer, as compared to three in the adult, and there is no vocal ligament. 

The vocal ligament begins to be present in children at about four years of age. 

Two layers appear in the lamina propria between the ages of six and twelve, and the mature lamina propria, with the superficial, intermediate and deep layers, is only present by the conclusion of adolescence. 

As vocal fold vibration is a foundation for vocal formants, this presence or absence of tissue layers influences a difference in the number of formants between the adult and pediatric populations. 

In females, the voice is three tones lower than the child's and has five to twelve formants, as opposed to the pediatric voice with three to six.
The length of the vocal fold at birth is approximately six to eight millimeters and grows to its adult length of eight to sixteen millimeters by adolescence. 

The infant vocal fold is half membranous or anterior glottis, and half cartilaginous or posterior glottis. 

The adult fold is approximately three-fifths membranous and two-fifths cartilaginous.


=== Puberty ===

Puberty usually lasts from 2–5 years, and typically occurs between the ages of 12 to 17. 

During puberty, voice change is controlled by sex hormones. 

In females during puberty, the vocal muscle thickens slightly, but remains very supple and narrow. 

The squamous mucosa also differentiates into three distinct layers (the lamina propria) on the free edge of the vocal folds. 

The sub- and supraglottic glandular mucosa becomes hormone-dependent to estrogens and progesterone. 

For women, the actions of estrogens and progesterone produce changes in the extravascular spaces by increasing capillary permeability which allows the passage of intracapillary fluids to the interstitial space as well as modification of glandular secretions. 

Estrogens have a hypertrophic and proliferative effect on mucosa by reducing the desquamating effect on the superficial layers. 

The thyroid hormones also affect dynamic function of the vocal folds; (Hashimoto's thyroiditis affects the fluid balance in the vocal folds). 

Progesterone has an anti-proliferative effect on mucosa and accelerates desquamation. 

It causes a menstrual-like cycle in the vocal fold epithelium and a drying out of the mucosa with a reduction in secretions of the glandular epithelium. 

Progesterone has a diuretic effect and decreases capillary permeability, thus trapping the extracellular fluid out of the capillaries and causing tissue congestion.
Testosterone, an androgen secreted by the testes, will cause changes in the cartilages and musculature of the larynx for males during puberty. 

In women, androgens are secreted principally by the adrenal cortex and the ovaries and can have irreversible masculinizing effects if present in high enough concentration. 

In men, they are essential to male sexuality. 

In muscles, they cause a hypertrophy of striated muscles with a reduction in the fat cells in skeletal muscles, and a reduction in the whole body fatty mass. 

Androgens are the most important hormones responsible for the passage of the boy-child voice to man voice, and the change is irreversible. 

The thyroid prominence appears, the vocal folds lengthen and become rounded, and the epithelium thickens with the formation of three distinct layers in the lamina propria.


=== Adulthood ===

Human vocal cords are paired structures located in the larynx, just above the trachea, which vibrate and are brought in contact during phonation. 

The human vocal cords are roughly 12 – 24 mm in length, and 3–5 mm thick. 

Histologically, the human vocal cords are a laminated structure composed of five different layers. 

The vocalis muscle, main body of the vocal cords, is covered by the mucosa, which consists of the epithelium and the lamina propria. 

The latter is a pliable layer of connective tissue subdivided into three layers: the superficial layer (SL), the intermediate layer (IL), and the deep layer (DL). 

Layer distinction is either made looking at differential in cell content or extracellular matrix (extracellular matrix) content. 

The most common way being to look at the extracellular matrix content. 

The SLP has fewer elastic and collagenous fibers than the two other layers, and thus is looser and more pliable. 

The ILP is mostly composed of elastic fibers, while the DLP has fewer elastic fibers, and more collagenous fibers. 

In those two layers, which form what is known as the vocalis ligament, the elastic and collagenous fibers are densely packed as bundles that run almost parallel to the edge of the vocal fold.There is a steady increase in the elastin content of the lamina propria as humans age (elastin is a yellow scleroprotein, the essential constituent of the elastic connective tissue) resulting in a decrease in the ability of the lamina propria to expand caused by cross-branching of the elastin fibers. 

Among other things, this leads to the mature voice being better suited to the rigors of opera.The extracellular matrix of the vocal cord LP is composed of fibrous proteins such as collagen and elastin, and interstitial molecules such as HA, a non-sulfated glycosaminoglycan. 

While the SLP is rather poor in elastic and collagenous fibers, the ILP and DLP are mostly composed of it, with the concentration of elastic fibers decreasing and the concentration of collagenous fibers increasing as the vocalis muscle is approached. 

Fibrous proteins and interstitial molecules play different roles within the extracellular matrix. 

While collagen (mostly type I) provides strength and structural support to the tissue, which are useful to withstanding stress and resisting deformation when subjected to a force, elastin fibers bring elasticity to the tissue, allowing it to return to its original shape after deformation. 

Interstitial proteins, such as HA, plays important biological and mechanical roles in the vocal cord tissue. 

In the vocal cord tissue, hyaluronic acid plays a role of shear-thinner, affecting the tissue viscosity, space-filler, shock absorber, as well as wound healing and cell migration promoter. 

The distribution of those proteins and interstitial molecules has been proven to be affected by both age and gender, and is maintained by the fibroblasts.


==== Maturation ====
Vocal fold structure in adults is quite different from that in newborns. 

Exactly how the vocal cord mature from an immature monolayer in newborns to a mature three layer tissue in adults is still unknown, however a few studies have investigated the subjects and brought some answers.
Hirano et al. previously found that the newborns did not have a true lamina propria, but instead had cellular regions called maculae flavae, located at the anterior and posterior ends of the loose vocal fold tissue. 

Boseley and Hartnick examined at the development and maturation of pediatric human vocal fold lamina propria. 

Hartnick was the first one to define each layer by a change in their cellular concentration. 

He also found that the lamina propria monolayer at birth and shortly thereafter was hypercellular, thus confirming Hirano's observations. 

By 2 months of age, the vocal fold started differentiating into a bilaminar structure of distinct cellular concentration, with the superficial layer being less densely populated than the deeper layer. 

By 11 months, a three-layered structure starts to be noted in some specimens, again with different cellular population densities. 

The superficial layer is still hypocellular, followed by an intermediate more hypercellular layer, and a deeper hypercellular layer, just above the vocalis muscle. 

Even though the vocal cords seem to start organizing, this is not representative of the trilaminar structure seen in adult tissues, where the layer are defined by their differential elastin and collagen fiber compositions. 

By 7 years of age, all specimens show a three-layered vocal fold structure, based on cellular population densities. 

At this point, the superficial layer was still hypocellular, the middle layer was the hypercellular one, with also a greater content of elastin and collagen fibers, and the deeper layer was less cellularly populated. 

Again, the distinction seen between the layers at this stage is not comparable to that seen in the adult tissue. 

The maturation of the vocal cords did not appear before 13 years of age, where the layers could be defined by their differential fiber composition rather than by their differential cellular population. 

The pattern now show a hypocellular superficial layer, followed by a middle layer composed predominantly of elastin fiber, and a deeper layer composed predominantly of collagen fibers. 

This pattern can be seen in older specimens up to 17 years of age, and above. 

While this study offers a nice way to see the evolution from immature to mature vocal cords, it still does not explain what is the mechanism behind it.


==== Macula flavae ====
Maculae flavae are located at the anterior and posterior ends of the membranous parts of the vocal cords. 

The histological structure of the macula flava is unique, and Sato and Hirano speculated that it could play an important role in growth, development and aging of the vocal cords. 

The macula flava is composed of fibroblasts, ground substances, elastic and collagenous fibers. 

Fibroblasts were numerous and spindle or stellate-shaped. 

The fibroblasts have been observed to be in active phase, with some newly released amorphous materials present at their surface. 

From a biomechanical point of view, the role of the macula flava is very important. 

Hirano and Sato studies suggested that the macula flava is responsible for the synthesis of the fibrous components of the vocal cords. 

Fibroblasts have been found mostly aligned in the direction of the vocal ligament, along bundles of fibers. 

It then was suggested that the mechanical stresses during phonation were stimulating the fibroblasts to synthesize those fibers.


==== Impact of phonation ====
The viscoelastic properties of human vocal fold lamina propria are essential for their vibration, and depend on the composition and structure of their extracellular matrix. 

Adult vocal cords have a layered structure which is based on the layers differential in extracellular matrix distribution. 

Newborns on the other hand, do not have this layered structure. 

Their vocal cords are uniform, and immature, making their viscoelastic properties most likely unsuitable for phonation. hyaluronic acid plays a very important role in the vocal fold biomechanics. 

In fact, hyaluronic acid has been described as the extracellular matrix molecule that not only contributes to the maintenance of an optimal tissue viscosity that allows phonation, but also of an optimal tissue stiffness that allows frequency control. 

CD44 is a cell surface receptor for HA. 

Cells such as fibroblasts are responsible for synthesizing extracellular matrix molecules. 

Cell surface matrix receptors in return, feed back to the cells through cell-matrix interaction, allowing the cell to regulate its metabolism.
Sato et al. carried out a histopathologic investigation of unphonated human vocal cords. 

Vocal fold mucosae, which were unphonated since birth, of three young adults (17, 24, and 28 years old) were looked at using light and electron microscopy. 

The results show that the vocal fold mucosae were hypoplastic, and rudimentary, and like newborns, did not have any vocal ligament, Reinke's space, or layered structure. 

Like newborns, the lamina propria appeared as a uniform structure. 

Some stellate cells were present in the macula flava, but started to show some signs of degeneration. 

The stellate cells synthesized fewer extracellular matrix molecules, and the cytoplasmic processes were shown to be short and shrinking, suggesting a decreased activity. 

Those results confirm the hypothesis that phonation stimulates stellate cells into producing more extracellular matrix.
Furthermore, using a specially designed bioreactor, Titze et al. showed that fibroblasts exposed to mechanical stimulation have differing levels of extracellular matrix production from fibroblasts that are not exposed to mechanical stimulation. 

The gene expression levels of extracellular matrix constituents such as fibronectin, MMP1, decorin, fibromodulin, hyaluronic acid synthase 2, and CD44 were altered. 

All those genes are involved in extracellular matrix remodeling, thus suggesting that mechanical forces applied to the tissue, alter the expression levels of extracellular matrix related genes, which in turn allow the cells present in the tissue to regulate the extracellular matrix constituent synthesis, thus affecting the tissue's composition, structure, and biomechanical properties. 

In the end, cell-surface receptors close the loop by giving feedback on the surrounding extracellular matrix to the cells, affecting also their gene expression level.


==== Impact of hormones ====
Other studies suggest that hormones play also an important role in vocal fold maturation. 

Hormones are molecules secreted into the blood stream to be delivered at different targeted sites. 

They usually promote growth, differentiation and functionality in different organs or tissues. 

Their effect is due to their ability to bind to intracellular receptors, modulating the gene expression, and subsequently regulating protein synthesis. 

The interaction between the endocrine system and tissues such as breast, brain, testicles, heart, bones, etc., is being extensively studied. 

It has clearly been seen that the larynx is somewhat affected by hormonal changes, but surprisingly, very few studies are working on elucidating this relationship. 

The effect of hormonal changes in voice is clearly seen when hearing male and female voices, or when listening to a teenage voice changing during puberty. 

Actually, it is believed that the number of hormonal receptors in the pre-pubertal phase is higher than in any other age. 

Menstruation has also been seen to influence the voice. 

In fact, singers are encouraged by their instructors not to perform during their pre-menstrual period, because of a drop in their voice quality.Vocal fold phonatory functions are known to change from birth to old age. 

The most significant changes occur in development between birth and puberty, and in old age. 

Hirano et al. previously described several structural changes associated with aging, in the vocal fold tissue. 

Some of those changes are: a shortening of the membranous vocal fold in males, a thickening of the vocal fold mucosa and cover in females, and a development of edema in the superficial lamina propria layer in both sexes. 

Hammond et al. observed that the hyaluronic acid content in the vocal fold lamina propria was significantly higher in males than in females. 

Although all those studies did show that there are clear structural and functional changes seen in the human vocal cords which are associated with gender and age, none really fully elucidated the underlying cause of those changes. 

In fact, only a few recent studies started to look at the presence and role of hormone receptors in the vocal cords. 

Newman et al. found that hormone receptors are indeed present in the vocal cords, and show a statistical distribution difference with respect to age and gender. 

They have identified the presence of androgen, estrogen, and progesterone receptors in epithelial cells, granular cells and fibroblasts of the vocal cords, suggesting that some of the structural changes seen in the vocal cords could be due to hormonal influences. 

In this specific study, androgen and progesterone receptors were found more commonly in males than in females. 

In others studies, it has been suggested that the estrogen/androgen ratio be partly responsible for the voice changes observed at menopause. 

As previously said, Hammond et al. showed than the hyaluronic acid content was higher in male than in femalevocal cords. 

Bentley et al. demonstrated that sex skin swelling seen in monkey was due to an increase in hyaluronic acid content, which was in fact mediated by estrogen receptors in dermal fibroblasts. 

An increase in collagen biosynthesis mediated by the estrogen receptors of dermal fibroblasts was also observed. 

A connection between hormone levels, and extracellular matrix distribution in the vocal cords depending on age and gender could be made. 

More particularly a connection between higher hormone levels and higher hyaluronic acid content in males could exist in the human vocal fold tissue. 

Although a relationship between hormone levels and extracellular matrix biosynthesis in vocal fold can be established, the details of this relationship, and the mechanisms of the influence has not been elucidated yet.


=== Old age ===

There is a thinning in the superficial layer of the lamina propria in old age. 

In aging, the vocal fold undergoes considerable sex-specific changes. 

In the female larynx, the vocal fold cover thickens with aging. 

The superficial layer of the lamina propria loses density as it becomes more edematous. 

The intermediate layer of the lamina propria tends to atrophy only in men. 

The deep layer of the lamina propria of the male vocal fold thickens because of increased collagen deposits. 

The vocalis muscle atrophies in both men and women. 

However, the majority of elderly patients with voice disorders have disease processes associated with aging rather than physiologic aging alone.


== Function ==



=== Oscillation ===


The larynx is a major (but not the only) source of sound in speech, generating sound through the rhythmic opening and closing of the vocal folds. 

To oscillate, the vocal folds are brought near enough together such that air pressure builds up beneath the larynx. 

The folds are pushed apart by this increased subglottal pressure, with the inferior part of each fold leading the superior part. 

Such a wave-like motion causes a transfer of energy from the airflow to the fold tissues. 

Under the correct conditions, the energy transferred to the tissues is large enough to overcome losses by dissipation and the oscillation pattern will sustain itself. 

In essence, sound is generated in the larynx by chopping up a steady flow of air into little puffs of sound waves.The perceived pitch of a person's voice is determined by a number of different factors, most importantly the fundamental frequency of the sound generated by the larynx. 

The fundamental frequency is influenced by the length, size, and tension of the vocal folds. 

This frequency averages about 125 Hz in an adult male, 210 Hz in adult females, and over 300 Hz in children. 

Depth-kymography is an imaging method to visualize the complex horizontal and vertical movements of vocal folds.
The vocal folds generate a sound rich in harmonics. 

The harmonics are produced by collisions of the vocal folds with themselves, by recirculation of some of the air back through the trachea, or both. 

Some singers can isolate some of those harmonics in a way that is perceived as singing in more than one pitch at the same time—a technique called overtone singing or throat singing such as in the tradition of Tuvan throat singing.


== Clinical significance ==



=== Lesions ===

The majority of vocal fold lesions primarily arise in the cover of the folds. 

Since the basal lamina secures the epithelium to the superficial layer of the lamina propria with anchoring fibers, this is a common site for injury. 

If a person has a phonotrauma or habitual vocal hyperfunction, also known as pressed phonation, the proteins in the basal lamina can shear, causing vocal fold injury, usually seen as nodules or polyps, which increase the mass and thickness of the cover. 

The squamous cell epithelium of the anterior glottis are also a frequent site of laryngeal cancer caused by smoking.


=== Reinke's edema ===

A voice pathology called Reinke's edema, swelling due to abnormal accumulation of fluid, occurs in the superficial lamina propria or Reinke's space. 

This causes the vocal fold mucosa to appear floppy with excessive movement of the cover that has been described as looking like a loose sock. 

The greater mass of the vocal folds due to increased fluid lowers the fundamental frequency during phonation.


=== Wound healing ===

Wound healing is a natural regeneration process of dermal and epidermal tissue involving a sequence of biochemical events. 

These events are complex and can be categorized into three stages: inflammation, proliferation and tissue remodeling. 

The study on vocal fold wound healing is not as extensive as that on animal models due to the limited availability of human vocal folds. 

Vocal fold injuries can have a number of causes including chronic overuse, chemical, thermal and mechanical trauma such as smoking, laryngeal cancer, and surgery. 

Other benign pathological phenomena like polyps, vocal fold nodules and edema will also introduce disordered phonation.Any injury to human vocal folds elicits a wound healing process characterized by disorganized collagen deposition and, eventually, formation of scar tissue. 

Verdolini and her group sought to detect and describe acute tissue response of injured rabbit vocal cord model. 

They quantified the expression of two biochemical markers: interleukin 1 and prostaglandin E2, which are associated with acute wound healing. 

They found the secretions of these inflammatory mediators were significantly elevated when collected from injured vocal cords versus normal vocal cords. 

This result was consistent with their previous study about the function of IL-1 and PGE-2 in wound healing. 

Investigation about the temporal and magnitude of inflammatory response in the vocal cords may benefit for elucidating subsequent pathological events in vocal fold wounding, which is good for clinician to develop therapeutic targets to minimize scar formation. 

In the proliferative phase of vocal cord wound healing, if the production of hyaluronic acid and collagen is not balanced, which means the hyaluronic acid level is lower than normal, the fibrosis of collagen cannot be regulated. 

Consequently, regenerative-type wound healing turns to be the formation of scar. 

Scarring may lead to the deformity of vocal fold edge, the disruption of lipopolysaccharides viscosity and stiffness. 

Patients suffering from vocal fold scar complain about increased phonatory effort, vocal fatigue, breathlessness, and dysphonia. 

Vocal fold scar is one of the most challenging problems for otolaryngologists because it is hard to be diagnosed at germinal stage and the function necessity of vocal cords is delicate.


== Terminology ==

The vocal folds are commonly referred to as vocal cords, and less commonly as vocal flaps or vocal bands. 

The term vocal cords was coined by the French anatomist Antoine Ferrein in 1741. 

In his violin analogy of the human voice, he postulated that the moving air acted like a bow on cordes vocales. 

The alternative spelling in English is vocal chords, possibly due to the musical connotations or to confusion with the geometrical definition of the word chord. 

While both spellings have historical precedents, standard American spelling is cords. 

According to the Oxford English Corpus, a database of 21st-century texts that contains everything from academic journal articles to unedited writing and blog entries, contemporary writers opt for the nonstandard chords instead of cords 49% of the time. 

The cords spelling is also standard in the United Kingdom and Australia.
In phonetics, vocal folds is preferred over vocal cords, on the grounds that it is more accurate and illustrative.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vocal_cords
;;;ES;;;



CUERDAS VOCALES


En los humanos, las cuerdas vocales, también conocidas como cuerdas vocales o cañas de voz, son pliegues de tejidos de la garganta que son clave para crear sonidos a través de la vocalización.

El tamaño de las cuerdas vocales afecta el tono de la voz.

Abiertos al respirar y vibrar para hablar o cantar, los pliegues se controlan a través de la rama laríngea recurrente del nervio vago.

Se componen de pliegues gemelos de membrana mucosa estirados horizontalmente, de atrás hacia adelante, a través de la laringe.

Vibran, modulando el flujo de aire que se expulsa de los pulmones durante la fonación. Las "cuerdas vocales verdaderas" se distinguen de las "cuerdas vocales falsas", conocidas como pliegues vestibulares o pliegues ventriculares, que se asientan ligeramente por encima de los pliegues verdaderos más delicados. .

Estos tienen un papel mínimo en la fonación normal, pero pueden producir tonos sonoros profundos, gritos y gruñidos.
La longitud de las cuerdas vocales al nacer es de aproximadamente seis a ocho milímetros y crece a su longitud adulta de ocho a dieciséis milímetros en la adolescencia.

La testosterona, un andrógeno secretado por las gónadas, provoca cambios irreversibles en los cartílagos y la musculatura de la laringe cuando está presente en concentraciones lo suficientemente altas, como durante la pubertad de un adolescente: aparece la prominencia de la tiroides, las cuerdas vocales se alargan y se redondean y la el epitelio se espesa con la formación de tres capas distintas en la lámina propia.


== Estructura ==



=== Ubicación ===

Las cuerdas vocales se encuentran dentro de la laringe en la parte superior de la tráquea.

Se unen por detrás a los cartílagos aritenoides y por delante al cartílago tiroides.

Forman parte de la glotis.

Sus bordes exteriores están unidos al músculo de la laringe, mientras que sus bordes interiores forman una abertura llamada rima glottidis.

Están construidos a partir de epitelio, pero tienen algunas fibras musculares, a saber, el músculo vocalis que aprieta la parte frontal del ligamento cerca del cartílago tiroides.

Son bandas triangulares planas y son de color blanco nacarado.

Por encima de ambos lados de la glotis se encuentran los dos pliegues vestibulares o cuerdas vocales falsas que tienen un pequeño saco entre ellos.


=== Cuerdas vocales falsas ===


Las cuerdas vocales a veces se denominan "cuerdas vocales verdaderas" para distinguirlas de las "cuerdas vocales falsas" conocidas como pliegues vestibulares o pliegues ventriculares.

Estos son un par de pliegues gruesos de membrana mucosa que protegen y se asientan ligeramente por encima de los pliegues verdaderos más delicados.

Tienen un papel mínimo en la fonación normal, pero a menudo se utilizan para producir tonos sonoros profundos en el canto tibetano y el canto de garganta de Tuvan, así como en los gritos musicales y el estilo vocal de gruñido de muerte.


=== Microanatomía ===


Las cuerdas vocales están compuestas por pliegues gemelos de 3 tejidos distintos: una capa externa de células planas que no producen queratina (epitelio escamoso).

Debajo de esto está la capa superficial de la lámina propia, una capa similar a un gel, que permite que las cuerdas vocales vibren y produzcan sonido.

Los músculos vocalis y tiroaritenoideo constituyen la porción más profunda.

Estas cuerdas vocales están cubiertas por una membrana mucosa y se estiran horizontalmente, de atrás hacia adelante, a lo largo de la laringe.


=== Variación ===

Los machos y las hembras tienen diferentes tamaños de cuerdas vocales.

Las voces masculinas adultas suelen tener un tono más bajo debido a los pliegues más largos y gruesos.

Las cuerdas vocales de los machos miden entre 1,75 cm y 2,5 cm (aproximadamente de 0,75" a 1,0") de largo, mientras que las cuerdas vocales de las hembras miden entre 1,25 cm y 1,75 cm (aproximadamente de 0,5" a 0,75") de largo.

Las cuerdas vocales de los niños son mucho más cortas que las de los hombres y mujeres adultos.

La diferencia en la longitud y el grosor de las cuerdas vocales entre hombres y mujeres provoca una diferencia en el tono vocal.

Además, los factores genéticos causan variaciones entre miembros del mismo sexo, y las voces de hombres y mujeres se clasifican en tipos de voz.


== Desarrollo ==



=== En recién nacidos ===

Los recién nacidos tienen una lámina propia uniforme de una sola capa, que parece suelta sin ligamento vocal.

La lámina propia monocapa está compuesta por sustancias fundamentales como el ácido hialurónico y la fibronectina, fibroblastos, fibras elásticas y fibras colágenas.

Mientras que los componentes fibrosos son escasos, lo que hace que la estructura de la lámina propia se afloje, el contenido de ácido hialurónico (AH) es alto.
El HA es un glicosaminoglicano voluminoso con carga negativa, cuya fuerte afinidad con el agua proporciona al ácido hialurónico sus propiedades viscoelásticas y de absorción de impactos esenciales para la biomecánica vocal.

La viscosidad y la elasticidad son fundamentales para la producción de la voz.

Chan, Gray y Titze cuantificaron el efecto del ácido hialurónico tanto en la viscosidad como en la elasticidad de las cuerdas vocales comparando las propiedades de los tejidos con y sin HA.

Los resultados mostraron que la eliminación del ácido hialurónico disminuyó la rigidez de las cuerdas vocales en un promedio del 35 %, pero aumentó su viscosidad dinámica en un promedio del 70 % a frecuencias superiores a 1 Hz.

Se ha demostrado que los recién nacidos lloran un promedio de 6,7 horas por día durante los primeros 3 meses, con un tono sostenido de 400 a 600 Hz y una duración media por día de 2 horas.

Un tratamiento similar en las cuerdas vocales adultas daría como resultado rápidamente edema y, posteriormente, afonía.

Schweinfurth y col. presentó la hipótesis de que el alto contenido y distribución de ácido hialurónico en las cuerdas vocales del recién nacido está directamente asociado con la resistencia al llanto del recién nacido.

Estas diferencias en la composición de las cuerdas vocales del recién nacido también serían responsables de la incapacidad de los recién nacidos para articular sonidos, además del hecho de que su lámina propia es una estructura uniforme sin ligamento vocal.

La estructura en capas necesaria para la fonación comenzará a desarrollarse durante la infancia y hasta la adolescencia. Los fibroblastos en el espacio de Reinke del recién nacido son inmaduros, presentan una forma ovalada y una gran relación núcleo-citoplasma.

El retículo endoplásmico rugoso y el aparato de Golgi, como se muestra en las micrografías electrónicas, no están bien desarrollados, lo que indica que las células se encuentran en una fase de reposo.

Las fibras colágenas y reticulares en las cuerdas vocales del recién nacido son menores que en el adulto, lo que se suma a la inmadurez del tejido de las cuerdas vocales.
En el lactante, se observó que muchos componentes fibrosos se extendían desde la mácula amarilla hacia el espacio de Reinke.

La fibronectina es muy abundante en el espacio de Reinke del recién nacido y del lactante.

La fibronectina es una glicoproteína que se cree que actúa como molde para la deposición orientada de las fibras de colágeno, estabilizando las fibrillas de colágeno.

La fibronectina también actúa como esqueleto para la formación de tejido elástico.

Se observaron fibras reticulares y colágenas discurriendo a lo largo de los bordes de las cuerdas vocales a lo largo de toda la lámina propia.

La fibronectina en el espacio de Reinke parecía guiar esas fibras y orientar la deposición de fibrillas.

Las fibras elásticas permanecieron escasas e inmaduras durante la infancia, en su mayoría compuestas por microfibrillas.

Los fibroblastos en el espacio de Reinke del bebé aún eran escasos pero tenían forma de huso.

Su retículo endoplásmico rugoso y aparato de Golgi aún no estaban bien desarrollados, lo que indica que, a pesar del cambio de forma, los fibroblastos aún permanecían en su mayoría en una fase de reposo.

Se observaron pocos materiales recién liberados adyacentes a los fibroblastos.

El contenido de la sustancia fundamental en el espacio de Reinke del bebé parecía disminuir con el tiempo, a medida que aumentaba el contenido del componente fibroso, cambiando así lentamente la estructura de las cuerdas vocales.


=== Niños ===

La lámina propia infantil se compone de una sola capa, en comparación con tres en el adulto, y no hay ligamento vocal.

El ligamento vocal comienza a estar presente en los niños alrededor de los cuatro años de edad.

Dos capas aparecen en la lámina propia entre los seis y los doce años, y la lámina propia madura, con las capas superficial, intermedia y profunda, sólo está presente al final de la adolescencia.

Como la vibración de las cuerdas vocales es la base de los formantes vocales, esta presencia o ausencia de capas de tejido influye en la diferencia en el número de formantes entre las poblaciones adulta y pediátrica.

En las mujeres, la voz es tres tonos más baja que la del niño y tiene de cinco a doce formantes, a diferencia de la voz pediátrica que tiene de tres a seis.
La longitud de las cuerdas vocales al nacer es de aproximadamente seis a ocho milímetros y crece a su longitud adulta de ocho a dieciséis milímetros en la adolescencia.

La cuerda vocal infantil es mitad membranosa o glotis anterior y mitad cartilaginosa o glotis posterior.

El pliegue adulto es aproximadamente tres quintos membranoso y dos quintos cartilaginoso.


=== Pubertad ===

La pubertad suele durar de 2 a 5 años y suele ocurrir entre los 12 y los 17 años.

Durante la pubertad, el cambio de voz está controlado por las hormonas sexuales.

En las mujeres, durante la pubertad, el músculo vocal se engrosa ligeramente, pero sigue siendo muy flexible y estrecho.

La mucosa escamosa también se diferencia en tres capas distintas (la lámina propia) en el borde libre de las cuerdas vocales.

La mucosa glandular sub y supraglótica se vuelve dependiente de hormonas a los estrógenos y la progesterona.

Para las mujeres, las acciones de los estrógenos y la progesterona producen cambios en los espacios extravasculares al aumentar la permeabilidad capilar lo que permite el paso de fluidos intracapilares al espacio intersticial así como la modificación de las secreciones glandulares.

Los estrógenos tienen un efecto hipertrófico y proliferativo de las mucosas al reducir el efecto descamativo de las capas superficiales.

Las hormonas tiroideas también afectan la función dinámica de las cuerdas vocales; (La tiroiditis de Hashimoto afecta el equilibrio de líquidos en las cuerdas vocales).

La progesterona tiene un efecto antiproliferativo en la mucosa y acelera la descamación.

Provoca un ciclo similar al menstrual en el epitelio de las cuerdas vocales y una desecación de la mucosa con una reducción de las secreciones del epitelio glandular.

La progesterona tiene un efecto diurético y disminuye la permeabilidad capilar, atrapando así el líquido extracelular fuera de los capilares y provocando la congestión tisular.
La testosterona, un andrógeno secretado por los testículos, provocará cambios en los cartílagos y la musculatura de la laringe en los hombres durante la pubertad.

En las mujeres, los andrógenos son secretados principalmente por la corteza suprarrenal y los ovarios y pueden tener efectos masculinizantes irreversibles si están presentes en concentraciones suficientemente altas.

En los hombres, son esenciales para la sexualidad masculina.

En los músculos, provocan una hipertrofia de los músculos estriados con una reducción de las células grasas en los músculos esqueléticos y una reducción de la masa grasa corporal total.

Los andrógenos son las hormonas más importantes responsables del paso de la voz de niño a voz de hombre, y el cambio es irreversible.

Aparece la prominencia tiroidea, las cuerdas vocales se alargan y redondean, y el epitelio se espesa con la formación de tres capas distintas en la lámina propia.


=== Edad adulta ===

Las cuerdas vocales humanas son estructuras emparejadas ubicadas en la laringe, justo encima de la tráquea, que vibran y se ponen en contacto durante la fonación.

Las cuerdas vocales humanas miden aproximadamente de 12 a 24 mm de largo y de 3 a 5 mm de grosor.

Histológicamente, las cuerdas vocales humanas son una estructura laminada compuesta por cinco capas diferentes.

El músculo vocalis, cuerpo principal de las cuerdas vocales, está cubierto por la mucosa, que consiste en el epitelio y la lámina propia.

Esta última es una capa flexible de tejido conectivo subdividida en tres capas: la capa superficial (SL), la capa intermedia (IL) y la capa profunda (DL).

La distinción de capas se realiza observando el contenido diferencial de las células o el contenido de la matriz extracelular (matriz extracelular).

La forma más común es mirar el contenido de la matriz extracelular.

El SLP tiene menos fibras elásticas y colágenas que las otras dos capas y, por lo tanto, es más flexible y flexible.

El ILP se compone principalmente de fibras elásticas, mientras que el DLP tiene menos fibras elásticas y más fibras colágenas.

En esas dos capas, que forman lo que se conoce como ligamento vocal, las fibras elásticas y colágenas están densamente empaquetadas como haces que corren casi paralelos al borde de la cuerda vocal. Hay un aumento constante en el contenido de elastina de la lámina propia. a medida que los seres humanos envejecen (la elastina es una escleroproteína amarilla, el constituyente esencial del tejido conjuntivo elástico), lo que provoca una disminución de la capacidad de expansión de la lámina propia causada por la ramificación cruzada de las fibras de elastina.

Entre otras cosas, esto hace que la voz madura se adapte mejor a los rigores de la ópera. La matriz extracelular del LP de las cuerdas vocales está compuesta por proteínas fibrosas como el colágeno y la elastina, y moléculas intersticiales como el HA, un glicosaminoglicano no sulfatado. .

Mientras que el SLP es bastante pobre en fibras elásticas y colágenas, el ILP y DLP se componen principalmente de él, con una disminución de la concentración de fibras elásticas y un aumento de la concentración de fibras colágenas a medida que se acerca al músculo vocalis.

Las proteínas fibrosas y las moléculas intersticiales desempeñan diferentes funciones dentro de la matriz extracelular.

Mientras que el colágeno (principalmente de tipo I) proporciona fuerza y ​​soporte estructural al tejido, que son útiles para resistir el estrés y la deformación cuando se someten a una fuerza, las fibras de elastina aportan elasticidad al tejido, lo que le permite volver a su forma original después de la deformación.

Las proteínas intersticiales, como la HA, desempeñan funciones biológicas y mecánicas importantes en el tejido de las cuerdas vocales.

En el tejido de las cuerdas vocales, el ácido hialurónico desempeña un papel de diluyente, que afecta la viscosidad del tejido, rellena el espacio, absorbe los golpes, así como también promueve la cicatrización de heridas y la migración celular.

Se ha demostrado que la distribución de esas proteínas y moléculas intersticiales se ve afectada tanto por la edad como por el género, y es mantenida por los fibroblastos.


==== Maduración ====
La estructura de las cuerdas vocales en adultos es bastante diferente a la de los recién nacidos.

Todavía se desconoce exactamente cómo maduran las cuerdas vocales desde una monocapa inmadura en los recién nacidos hasta un tejido maduro de tres capas en los adultos; sin embargo, algunos estudios han investigado a los sujetos y han aportado algunas respuestas.
Hirano et al. encontraron previamente que los recién nacidos no tenían una verdadera lámina propia, sino regiones celulares llamadas máculas amarillas, ubicadas en los extremos anterior y posterior del tejido suelto de las cuerdas vocales.

Boseley y Hartnick examinaron el desarrollo y la maduración de la lámina propia de las cuerdas vocales humanas pediátricas.

Hartnick fue el primero en definir cada capa por un cambio en su concentración celular.

También encontró que la monocapa de la lámina propia al nacer y poco después era hipercelular, lo que confirma las observaciones de Hirano.

A los 2 meses de edad, la cuerda vocal comenzó a diferenciarse en una estructura bilaminar de distinta concentración celular, con la capa superficial menos densamente poblada que la capa más profunda.

A los 11 meses, se comienza a notar una estructura de tres capas en algunos especímenes, nuevamente con diferentes densidades de población celular.

La capa superficial sigue siendo hipocelular, seguida de una capa intermedia más hipercelular y una capa hipercelular más profunda, justo por encima del músculo vocal.

Aunque las cuerdas vocales parecen comenzar a organizarse, esto no es representativo de la estructura trilaminar que se observa en los tejidos adultos, donde las capas se definen por sus composiciones diferenciales de fibras de colágeno y elastina.

A los 7 años de edad, todos los especímenes muestran una estructura de cuerdas vocales de tres capas, según las densidades de población celular.

En este punto, la capa superficial todavía era hipocelular, la capa intermedia era la hipercelular, también con un mayor contenido de fibras de elastina y colágeno, y la capa más profunda estaba menos poblada celularmente.

Una vez más, la distinción que se observa entre las capas en esta etapa no es comparable con la que se observa en el tejido adulto.

La maduración de las cuerdas vocales no apareció antes de los 13 años de edad, donde las capas podrían definirse por su composición diferencial de fibras más que por su población celular diferencial.

El patrón ahora muestra una capa superficial hipocelular, seguida de una capa intermedia compuesta predominantemente por fibras de elastina y una capa más profunda compuesta predominantemente por fibras de colágeno.

Este patrón se puede ver en especímenes mayores de hasta 17 años de edad y más.

Si bien este estudio ofrece una buena manera de ver la evolución de las cuerdas vocales inmaduras a las maduras, todavía no explica cuál es el mecanismo detrás de esto.


==== Mácula amarilla ====
Las máculas amarillas se encuentran en los extremos anterior y posterior de las partes membranosas de las cuerdas vocales.

La estructura histológica de la mácula flava es única, y Sato e Hirano especularon que podría desempeñar un papel importante en el crecimiento, desarrollo y envejecimiento de las cuerdas vocales.

La mácula flava está compuesta por fibroblastos, sustancias fundamentales, fibras elásticas y colágenas.

Los fibroblastos eran numerosos y de forma fusiforme o estrellada.

Se ha observado que los fibroblastos están en fase activa, con algunos materiales amorfos recién liberados presentes en su superficie.

Desde un punto de vista biomecánico, el papel de la mácula flava es muy importante.

Los estudios de Hirano y Sato sugirieron que la mácula flava es responsable de la síntesis de los componentes fibrosos de las cuerdas vocales.

Se han encontrado fibroblastos en su mayoría alineados en la dirección del ligamento vocal, a lo largo de haces de fibras.

Entonces se sugirió que las tensiones mecánicas durante la fonación estimulaban a los fibroblastos para sintetizar esas fibras.


==== Impacto de la fonación ====
Las propiedades viscoelásticas de la lámina propia de las cuerdas vocales humanas son esenciales para su vibración y dependen de la composición y estructura de su matriz extracelular.

Las cuerdas vocales adultas tienen una estructura en capas que se basa en el diferencial de capas en la distribución de la matriz extracelular.

Los recién nacidos, por otro lado, no tienen esta estructura en capas.

Sus cuerdas vocales son uniformes e inmaduras, lo que hace que sus propiedades viscoelásticas probablemente no sean adecuadas para la fonación. El ácido hialurónico juega un papel muy importante en la biomecánica de las cuerdas vocales.

De hecho, el ácido hialurónico ha sido descrito como la molécula de matriz extracelular que no solo contribuye al mantenimiento de una viscosidad tisular óptima que permite la fonación, sino también de una rigidez tisular óptima que permite el control de la frecuencia.

CD44 es un receptor de superficie celular para HA.

Células como los fibroblastos son responsables de sintetizar moléculas de matriz extracelular.

A cambio, los receptores de la matriz de la superficie celular retroalimentan a las células a través de la interacción célula-matriz, lo que permite que la célula regule su metabolismo.
Sato et al. llevó a cabo una investigación histopatológica de cuerdas vocales humanas sin fonación.

Las mucosas de las cuerdas vocales, que no estaban fonadas desde el nacimiento, de tres adultos jóvenes (17, 24 y 28 años) se observaron mediante microscopía óptica y electrónica.

Los resultados muestran que las mucosas de las cuerdas vocales eran hipoplásicas y rudimentarias y, como los recién nacidos, no tenían ningún ligamento vocal, espacio de Reinke o estructura en capas.

Al igual que los recién nacidos, la lámina propia apareció como una estructura uniforme.

Algunas células estrelladas estaban presentes en la mácula flava, pero comenzaron a mostrar algunos signos de degeneración.

Las células estrelladas sintetizaron menos moléculas de matriz extracelular y se demostró que los procesos citoplásmicos eran cortos y se encogían, lo que sugiere una disminución de la actividad.

Esos resultados confirman la hipótesis de que la fonación estimula a las células estrelladas a producir más matriz extracelular.
Además, utilizando un biorreactor especialmente diseñado, Titze et al. mostró que los fibroblastos expuestos a estimulación mecánica tienen diferentes niveles de producción de matriz extracelular de los fibroblastos que no están expuestos a estimulación mecánica.

Se alteraron los niveles de expresión génica de los constituyentes de la matriz extracelular, como fibronectina, MMP1, decorina, fibromodulina, ácido hialurónico sintasa 2 y CD44.

Todos estos genes están involucrados en la remodelación de la matriz extracelular, lo que sugiere que las fuerzas mecánicas aplicadas al tejido alteran los niveles de expresión de los genes relacionados con la matriz extracelular, lo que a su vez permite que las células presentes en el tejido regulen la síntesis de los constituyentes de la matriz extracelular, lo que afecta la composición, estructura y propiedades biomecánicas del tejido.

Al final, los receptores de la superficie celular cierran el ciclo dando retroalimentación sobre la matriz extracelular circundante a las células, afectando también su nivel de expresión génica.


==== Impacto de las hormonas ====
Otros estudios sugieren que las hormonas también juegan un papel importante en la maduración de las cuerdas vocales.

Las hormonas son moléculas secretadas en el torrente sanguíneo para ser entregadas en diferentes sitios específicos.

Suelen promover el crecimiento, la diferenciación y la funcionalidad en diferentes órganos o tejidos.

Su efecto se debe a su capacidad para unirse a los receptores intracelulares, modulando la expresión génica y, posteriormente, regulando la síntesis de proteínas.

La interacción entre el sistema endocrino y tejidos como mama, cerebro, testículos, corazón, huesos, etc., está siendo ampliamente estudiada.

Claramente se ha visto que la laringe se ve algo afectada por los cambios hormonales, pero sorprendentemente son muy pocos los estudios que trabajan en dilucidar esta relación.

El efecto de los cambios hormonales en la voz se ve claramente al escuchar voces masculinas y femeninas, o al escuchar la voz de un adolescente cambiando durante la pubertad.

De hecho, se cree que el número de receptores hormonales en la fase prepuberal es mayor que en cualquier otra edad.

También se ha visto que la menstruación influye en la voz.

De hecho, los instructores alientan a las cantantes a no actuar durante su período premenstrual, debido a una disminución en la calidad de su voz. Se sabe que las funciones fonatorias de las cuerdas vocales cambian desde el nacimiento hasta la vejez.

Los cambios más significativos ocurren en el desarrollo entre el nacimiento y la pubertad, y en la vejez.

Hirano et al. describió previamente varios cambios estructurales asociados con el envejecimiento, en el tejido de las cuerdas vocales.

Algunos de esos cambios son: un acortamiento de la cuerda vocal membranosa en los hombres, un engrosamiento de la mucosa y la cubierta de las cuerdas vocales en las mujeres y un desarrollo de edema en la capa superficial de la lámina propia en ambos sexos.

Hammond et al. observaron que el contenido de ácido hialurónico en la lámina propia de las cuerdas vocales era significativamente mayor en hombres que en mujeres.

Aunque todos esos estudios demostraron que se observan cambios estructurales y funcionales claros en las cuerdas vocales humanas que están asociados con el género y la edad, ninguno aclaró completamente la causa subyacente de esos cambios.

De hecho, solo unos pocos estudios recientes comenzaron a analizar la presencia y el papel de los receptores hormonales en las cuerdas vocales.

Newmann et al. encontraron que los receptores de hormonas sí están presentes en las cuerdas vocales y muestran una diferencia de distribución estadística con respecto a la edad y el género.

Han identificado la presencia de receptores de andrógenos, estrógenos y progesterona en células epiteliales, células granulares y fibroblastos de las cuerdas vocales, lo que sugiere que algunos de los cambios estructurales observados en las cuerdas vocales podrían deberse a influencias hormonales.

En este estudio específico, los receptores de andrógenos y progesterona se encontraron con mayor frecuencia en hombres que en mujeres.

En otros estudios, se ha sugerido que la relación estrógeno/andrógeno sea en parte responsable de los cambios de voz observados en la menopausia.

Como se dijo anteriormente, Hammond et al. mostró que el contenido de ácido hialurónico era mayor en las cuerdas vocales masculinas que en las femeninas.

Bentley et al. demostraron que la inflamación de la piel sexual observada en monos se debía a un aumento en el contenido de ácido hialurónico, que de hecho estaba mediado por los receptores de estrógeno en los fibroblastos dérmicos.

También se observó un aumento en la biosíntesis de colágeno mediada por los receptores de estrógenos de los fibroblastos dérmicos.

Se podría establecer una conexión entre los niveles hormonales y la distribución de la matriz extracelular en las cuerdas vocales según la edad y el género.

Más concretamente, podría existir en el tejido de las cuerdas vocales humanas una conexión entre los niveles hormonales más altos y el contenido más alto de ácido hialurónico en los hombres.

Aunque se puede establecer una relación entre los niveles hormonales y la biosíntesis de la matriz extracelular en las cuerdas vocales, aún no se han dilucidado los detalles de esta relación y los mecanismos de la influencia.


=== Vejez ===

Hay un adelgazamiento en la capa superficial de la lámina propia en la vejez.

Con el envejecimiento, las cuerdas vocales sufren cambios considerables específicos del sexo.

En la laringe femenina, la cubierta de las cuerdas vocales se espesa con el envejecimiento.

La capa superficial de la lámina propia pierde densidad a medida que se vuelve más edematosa.

La capa intermedia de la lámina propia tiende a atrofiarse solo en los hombres.

La capa profunda de la lámina propia de la cuerda vocal masculina se engrosa debido al aumento de los depósitos de colágeno.

El músculo vocal se atrofia tanto en hombres como en mujeres.

Sin embargo, la mayoría de los pacientes de edad avanzada con trastornos de la voz tienen procesos de enfermedad asociados con el envejecimiento en lugar del envejecimiento fisiológico solo.


== Función ==



=== Oscilación ===


La laringe es una fuente principal (pero no la única) de sonido en el habla, generando sonido a través de la apertura y el cierre rítmicos de las cuerdas vocales.

Para oscilar, las cuerdas vocales se acercan lo suficiente como para que la presión del aire se acumule debajo de la laringe.

Los pliegues se separan por este aumento de la presión subglótica, y la parte inferior de cada pliegue conduce a la parte superior.

Tal movimiento ondulatorio provoca una transferencia de energía del flujo de aire a los tejidos del pliegue.

Bajo las condiciones correctas, la energía transferida a los tejidos es lo suficientemente grande como para superar las pérdidas por disipación y el patrón de oscilación se mantendrá por sí mismo.

En esencia, el sonido se genera en la laringe cortando un flujo constante de aire en pequeñas bocanadas de ondas de sonido. El tono percibido de la voz de una persona está determinado por una serie de factores diferentes, el más importante es la frecuencia fundamental del sonido generado por la laringe

La frecuencia fundamental está influenciada por la longitud, el tamaño y la tensión de las cuerdas vocales.

Esta frecuencia promedia alrededor de 125 Hz en un hombre adulto, 210 Hz en mujeres adultas y más de 300 Hz en niños.

La quimografía profunda es un método de imagen para visualizar los complejos movimientos horizontales y verticales de las cuerdas vocales.
Las cuerdas vocales generan un sonido rico en armónicos.

Los armónicos se producen por colisiones de las cuerdas vocales consigo mismas, por la recirculación de parte del aire a través de la tráquea, o por ambas cosas.

Algunos cantantes pueden aislar algunos de esos armónicos de una manera que se percibe como cantando en más de un tono al mismo tiempo, una técnica llamada canto armónico o canto de garganta, como en la tradición del canto de garganta de Tuvan.


== Importancia clínica ==



=== Lesiones ===

La mayoría de las lesiones de las cuerdas vocales surgen principalmente en la cubierta de los pliegues.

Dado que la lámina basal asegura el epitelio a la capa superficial de la lámina propia con fibras de anclaje, este es un sitio común de lesión.

Si una persona tiene un fonotrauma o una hiperfunción vocal habitual, también conocida como fonación comprimida, las proteínas de la lámina basal pueden romperse y causar lesiones en las cuerdas vocales, que generalmente se ven como nódulos o pólipos, que aumentan la masa y el grosor de la cubierta.

El epitelio de células escamosas de la glotis anterior también es un sitio frecuente de cáncer de laringe causado por el tabaquismo.


=== Edema de Reinke ===

Una patología de la voz llamada edema de Reinke, hinchazón debida a una acumulación anormal de líquido, ocurre en la lámina propia superficial o espacio de Reinke.

Esto hace que la mucosa de las cuerdas vocales parezca flácida con un movimiento excesivo de la cubierta que se ha descrito como un calcetín suelto.

La mayor masa de las cuerdas vocales debido al aumento de líquido disminuye la frecuencia fundamental durante la fonación.


=== Cicatrización de heridas ===

La curación de heridas es un proceso de regeneración natural del tejido dérmico y epidérmico que involucra una secuencia de eventos bioquímicos.

Estos eventos son complejos y se pueden categorizar en tres etapas: inflamación, proliferación y remodelación tisular.

El estudio sobre la cicatrización de heridas de las cuerdas vocales no es tan extenso como el de modelos animales debido a la disponibilidad limitada de cuerdas vocales humanas.

Las lesiones de las cuerdas vocales pueden tener varias causas, incluido el uso excesivo crónico, traumatismos químicos, térmicos y mecánicos, como fumar, cáncer de laringe y cirugía.

Otros fenómenos patológicos benignos como pólipos, nódulos de las cuerdas vocales y edema también introducirán una fonación desordenada. Cualquier lesión en las cuerdas vocales humanas provoca un proceso de curación de heridas caracterizado por una deposición de colágeno desorganizada y, finalmente, la formación de tejido cicatricial.

Verdolini y su grupo buscaron detectar y describir la respuesta tisular aguda del modelo de cuerda vocal de conejo lesionado.

Cuantificaron la expresión de dos marcadores bioquímicos: interleucina 1 y prostaglandina E2, que están asociados con la cicatrización aguda de heridas.

Descubrieron que las secreciones de estos mediadores inflamatorios estaban significativamente elevadas cuando se recolectaban de cuerdas vocales lesionadas en comparación con las cuerdas vocales normales.

Este resultado fue consistente con su estudio anterior sobre la función de IL-1 y PGE-2 en la cicatrización de heridas.

La investigación sobre el tiempo y la magnitud de la respuesta inflamatoria en las cuerdas vocales puede ser beneficiosa para dilucidar eventos patológicos posteriores en las heridas de las cuerdas vocales, lo que es bueno para que el médico desarrolle objetivos terapéuticos para minimizar la formación de cicatrices.

En la fase proliferativa de cicatrización de heridas de las cuerdas vocales, si la producción de ácido hialurónico y colágeno no está equilibrada, lo que significa que el nivel de ácido hialurónico es más bajo de lo normal, no se puede regular la fibrosis del colágeno.

En consecuencia, la cicatrización de heridas de tipo regenerativo se convierte en la formación de una cicatriz.

La cicatrización puede provocar la deformidad del borde de las cuerdas vocales, la interrupción de la viscosidad y la rigidez de los lipopolisacáridos.

Los pacientes que sufren de cicatriz en las cuerdas vocales se quejan de un mayor esfuerzo fonatorio, fatiga vocal, disnea y disfonía.

La cicatriz de las cuerdas vocales es uno de los problemas más desafiantes para los otorrinolaringólogos porque es difícil de diagnosticar en la etapa germinal y la función necesaria de las cuerdas vocales es delicada.


== Terminología ==

Las cuerdas vocales se denominan comúnmente cuerdas vocales y, con menor frecuencia, aletas vocales o bandas vocales.

El término cuerdas vocales fue acuñado por el anatomista francés Antoine Ferrein en 1741.

En su analogía del violín con la voz humana, postuló que el aire en movimiento actuaba como un arco en las cuerdas vocales.

La ortografía alternativa en inglés es cuerdas vocales, posiblemente debido a las connotaciones musicales o a la confusión con la definición geométrica de la palabra acorde.

Si bien ambas ortografías tienen precedentes históricos, la ortografía estadounidense estándar es cuerdas.

Según el Oxford English Corpus, una base de datos de textos del siglo XXI que contiene de todo, desde artículos de revistas académicas hasta escritos sin editar y entradas de blogs, los escritores contemporáneos optan por acordes no estándar en lugar de cuerdas el 49 % de las veces.

La ortografía de las cuerdas también es estándar en el Reino Unido y Australia.
En fonética, se prefieren las cuerdas vocales a las cuerdas vocales, por ser más precisas e ilustrativas.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vocal_cords

;;;PT;;;



CORDAS VOCAIS


Nos humanos, as cordas vocais, também conhecidas como pregas vocais ou palhetas de voz, são dobras dos tecidos da garganta que são fundamentais na criação de sons por meio da vocalização.

O tamanho das cordas vocais afeta o tom da voz.

Abertas ao respirar e vibrar para falar ou cantar, as pregas são controladas pelo ramo laríngeo recorrente do nervo vago.

Eles são compostos de dobras duplas de membrana mucosa esticadas horizontalmente, de trás para frente, através da laringe.

Eles vibram, modulando o fluxo de ar que é expelido dos pulmões durante a fonação. .

Estes têm um papel mínimo na fonação normal, mas podem produzir tons sonoros profundos, gritos e rosnados.
O comprimento da prega vocal ao nascimento é de aproximadamente seis a oito milímetros e cresce até o comprimento adulto de oito a dezesseis milímetros na adolescência.

A testosterona, um andrógeno secretado pelas gônadas, causa alterações irreversíveis nas cartilagens e na musculatura da laringe quando presente em concentrações suficientemente altas, como durante a puberdade de um adolescente: a proeminência da tireoide aparece, as pregas vocais se alongam e tornam-se arredondadas, e a o epitélio engrossa com a formação de três camadas distintas na lâmina própria.


== Estrutura ==



=== Localização ===

As pregas vocais estão localizadas dentro da laringe na parte superior da traqueia.

Eles estão ligados na parte de trás às cartilagens aritenóides e na frente à cartilagem tireóide.

Eles fazem parte da glote.

Suas bordas externas estão ligadas ao músculo na laringe, enquanto suas bordas internas formam uma abertura chamada rima glote.

Eles são construídos a partir de epitélio, mas possuem algumas fibras musculares, a saber, o músculo vocal, que aperta a parte frontal do ligamento próximo à cartilagem tireóide.

Eles são bandas triangulares planas e são de cor branca perolada.

Acima de ambos os lados da glote estão as duas pregas vestibulares ou pregas vocais falsas que possuem um pequeno saco entre elas.


=== Pregas vocais falsas ===


As pregas vocais são às vezes chamadas de 'pregas vocais verdadeiras' para distingui-las das 'pregas vocais falsas' conhecidas como pregas vestibulares ou pregas ventriculares.

Estas são um par de dobras grossas de membrana mucosa que protegem e ficam ligeiramente superiores às dobras verdadeiras mais delicadas.

Eles têm um papel mínimo na fonação normal, mas são frequentemente usados ​​para produzir tons sonoros profundos no canto tibetano e no canto da garganta tuvano, bem como no grito musical e no estilo vocal de rosnado da morte.


=== Microanatomia ===


As cordas vocais são compostas por dobras duplas de 3 tecidos distintos: uma camada externa de células planas que não produzem queratina (epitélio escamoso).

Abaixo disso está a camada superficial da lâmina própria, uma camada semelhante a um gel, que permite que a prega vocal vibre e produza som.

Os músculos vocal e tireoaritenóideo compõem a porção mais profunda.

Essas pregas vocais são cobertas por uma membrana mucosa e são esticadas horizontalmente, de trás para frente, através da laringe.


=== Variação ===

Machos e fêmeas têm tamanhos de pregas vocais diferentes.

As vozes masculinas adultas geralmente são mais graves devido às dobras mais longas e grossas.

As pregas vocais dos homens têm entre 1,75 cm e 2,5 cm (aproximadamente 0,75" a 1,0") de comprimento, enquanto as pregas vocais das mulheres têm entre 1,25 cm e 1,75 cm (aproximadamente 0,5" a 0,75") de comprimento.

As pregas vocais das crianças são muito mais curtas do que as dos homens e mulheres adultos.

A diferença no comprimento e espessura das pregas vocais entre homens e mulheres causa uma diferença no tom vocal.

Além disso, fatores genéticos causam variações entre membros do mesmo sexo, com vozes masculinas e femininas sendo categorizadas em tipos de voz.


== Desenvolvimento ==



=== Em recém-nascidos ===

Os recém-nascidos têm uma lâmina própria de camada única uniforme, que parece frouxa sem ligamento vocal.

A lâmina própria monocamada é composta por substâncias fundamentais como ácido hialurônico e fibronectina, fibroblastos, fibras elásticas e fibras colágenas.

Enquanto os componentes fibrosos são esparsos, deixando a estrutura da lâmina própria frouxa, o teor de ácido hialurônico (AH) é alto.
O HA é um glicosaminoglicano volumoso, carregado negativamente, cuja forte afinidade com a água confere ao ácido hialurônico suas propriedades viscoelásticas e de absorção de choque essenciais para a biomecânica vocal.

A viscosidade e a elasticidade são críticas para a produção de voz.

Chan, Gray e Titze, quantificaram o efeito do ácido hialurônico tanto na viscosidade quanto na elasticidade das pregas vocais comparando as propriedades dos tecidos com e sem AH.

Os resultados mostraram que a remoção do ácido hialurônico diminuiu a rigidez das cordas vocais em média 35%, mas aumentou sua viscosidade dinâmica em média 70% em frequências superiores a 1 Hz.

Demonstrou-se que os recém-nascidos choram em média 6,7 ​​horas por dia durante os primeiros 3 meses, com um tom sustentado de 400-600 Hz e uma duração média por dia de 2 horas.

Tratamento semelhante em cordas vocais de adultos resultaria rapidamente em edema e, posteriormente, afonia.

Schweinfurth e ai. apresentaram a hipótese de que o alto conteúdo e distribuição de ácido hialurônico nas cordas vocais do recém-nascido está diretamente associado à resistência ao choro do recém-nascido.

Essas diferenças na composição das pregas vocais do recém-nascido também seriam responsáveis ​​pela incapacidade do recém-nascido de articular sons, além do fato de sua lâmina própria ser uma estrutura uniforme e sem ligamento vocal.

A estrutura em camadas necessária para a fonação começará a se desenvolver durante a infância e até a adolescência. Os fibroblastos no espaço de Reinke do recém-nascido são imaturos, apresentando forma oval e uma grande relação núcleo-citoplasma.

O retículo endoplasmático rugoso e o aparelho de Golgi, como mostram as eletromicrografias, não estão bem desenvolvidos, indicando que as células estão em fase de repouso.

As fibras colágenas e reticulares nas pregas vocais do recém-nascido são menores do que no adulto, somando-se à imaturidade do tecido das pregas vocais.
Na criança, muitos componentes fibrosos foram vistos estendendo-se da mácula flava em direção ao espaço de Reinke.

A fibronectina é muito abundante no espaço de Reinke do recém-nascido e do lactente.

A fibronectina é uma glicoproteína que se acredita atuar como um molde para a deposição orientada das fibras de colágeno, estabilizando as fibrilas de colágeno.

A fibronectina também atua como um esqueleto para a formação do tecido elástico.

Fibras reticulares e colagenosas foram observadas ao longo das bordas das cordas vocais ao longo de toda a lâmina própria.

A fibronectina no espaço de Reinke pareceu guiar essas fibras e orientar a deposição de fibrilas.

As fibras elásticas permaneceram esparsas e imaturas durante a infância, principalmente feitas de microfibrilas.

Os fibroblastos no espaço da criança Reinke ainda eram esparsos, mas em forma de fuso.

Seu retículo endoplasmático rugoso e aparelho de Golgi ainda não estavam bem desenvolvidos, indicando que, apesar da mudança de forma, os fibroblastos ainda permaneciam principalmente em fase de repouso.

Poucos materiais recém-liberados foram vistos adjacentes aos fibroblastos.

O conteúdo de substância fundamental no espaço de Reinke do bebê pareceu diminuir ao longo do tempo, à medida que o conteúdo de componente fibroso aumentou, alterando lentamente a estrutura das pregas vocais.


=== Crianças ===

A lâmina própria infantil é composta por apenas uma camada, comparada a três no adulto, e não há ligamento vocal.

O ligamento vocal começa a estar presente em crianças por volta dos quatro anos de idade.

Duas camadas aparecem na lâmina própria entre os seis e os doze anos de idade, e a lâmina própria madura, com as camadas superficial, intermediária e profunda, só está presente no final da adolescência.

Como a vibração das pregas vocais é um alicerce para os formantes vocais, essa presença ou ausência de camadas teciduais influencia na diferença do número de formantes entre a população adulta e pediátrica.

No sexo feminino, a voz é três tons mais baixa que a da criança e possui de cinco a doze formantes, ao contrário da voz pediátrica com três a seis.
O comprimento da prega vocal ao nascimento é de aproximadamente seis a oito milímetros e cresce até o comprimento adulto de oito a dezesseis milímetros na adolescência.

A prega vocal infantil é metade membranosa ou glote anterior e metade cartilaginosa ou glote posterior.

A prega adulta é aproximadamente três quintos membranosa e dois quintos cartilaginosa.


=== Puberdade ===

A puberdade geralmente dura de 2 a 5 anos e geralmente ocorre entre as idades de 12 a 17 anos.

Durante a puberdade, a mudança de voz é controlada por hormônios sexuais.

Nas mulheres durante a puberdade, o músculo vocal engrossa ligeiramente, mas permanece muito flexível e estreito.

A mucosa escamosa também se diferencia em três camadas distintas (a lâmina própria) na borda livre das pregas vocais.

A mucosa glandular sub e supraglótica torna-se hormônio-dependente de estrogênios e progesterona.

Para as mulheres, as ações dos estrogênios e da progesterona produzem alterações nos espaços extravasculares pelo aumento da permeabilidade capilar que permite a passagem de fluidos intracapilares para o espaço intersticial, bem como a modificação das secreções glandulares.

Os estrogênios têm efeito hipertrófico e proliferativo na mucosa, reduzindo o efeito descamativo nas camadas superficiais.

Os hormônios tireoidianos também afetam a função dinâmica das pregas vocais; (A tireoidite de Hashimoto afeta o equilíbrio de fluidos nas pregas vocais).

A progesterona tem um efeito antiproliferativo na mucosa e acelera a descamação.

Causa um ciclo menstrual no epitélio das pregas vocais e ressecamento da mucosa com redução das secreções do epitélio glandular.

A progesterona tem efeito diurético e diminui a permeabilidade capilar, retendo o líquido extracelular para fora dos capilares e causando congestão tecidual.
A testosterona, um andrógeno secretado pelos testículos, causará alterações nas cartilagens e na musculatura da laringe nos homens durante a puberdade.

Nas mulheres, os andrógenos são secretados principalmente pelo córtex adrenal e pelos ovários e podem ter efeitos masculinizantes irreversíveis se presentes em concentrações suficientemente altas.

Nos homens, são essenciais para a sexualidade masculina.

Nos músculos, causam uma hipertrofia dos músculos estriados com redução das células de gordura nos músculos esqueléticos e redução da massa gordurosa de todo o corpo.

Os andrógenos são os hormônios mais importantes responsáveis ​​pela passagem da voz do menino para a voz do homem, e a mudança é irreversível.

A proeminência da tireoide aparece, as pregas vocais se alongam e tornam-se arredondadas, e o epitélio engrossa com a formação de três camadas distintas na lâmina própria.


=== Idade adulta ===

As cordas vocais humanas são estruturas pareadas localizadas na laringe, logo acima da traqueia, que vibram e são postas em contato durante a fonação.

As cordas vocais humanas têm aproximadamente 12 a 24 mm de comprimento e 3 a 5 mm de espessura.

Histologicamente, as cordas vocais humanas são uma estrutura laminada composta por cinco camadas diferentes.

O músculo vocal, corpo principal das cordas vocais, é recoberto pela mucosa, que consiste no epitélio e na lâmina própria.

Esta última é uma camada flexível de tecido conjuntivo subdividida em três camadas: a camada superficial (SL), a camada intermediária (IL) e a camada profunda (DL).

A distinção de camada é feita observando o diferencial no conteúdo celular ou o conteúdo da matriz extracelular (matriz extracelular).

A maneira mais comum é olhar para o conteúdo da matriz extracelular.

O SLP tem menos fibras elásticas e colagenosas do que as outras duas camadas e, portanto, é mais solto e flexível.

O ILP é composto principalmente por fibras elásticas, enquanto o DLP possui menos fibras elásticas e mais fibras colágenas.

Nessas duas camadas, que formam o que é conhecido como ligamento vocal, as fibras elásticas e colagenosas são densamente empacotadas como feixes que correm quase paralelamente à borda da prega vocal. à medida que os humanos envelhecem (a elastina é uma escleroproteína amarela, o constituinte essencial do tecido conjuntivo elástico), resultando em uma diminuição na capacidade de expansão da lâmina própria causada pela ramificação cruzada das fibras de elastina.

Entre outras coisas, isso faz com que a voz madura seja mais adequada aos rigores da ópera. A matriz extracelular do LP das cordas vocais é composta por proteínas fibrosas, como colágeno e elastina, e moléculas intersticiais, como HA, um glicosaminoglicano não sulfatado .

Enquanto o SLP é bastante pobre em fibras elásticas e colágenas, o ILP e o DLP são em sua maioria compostos por ele, com a concentração de fibras elásticas diminuindo e a concentração de fibras colágenas aumentando à medida que se aproxima do músculo vocal.

Proteínas fibrosas e moléculas intersticiais desempenham papéis diferentes dentro da matriz extracelular.

Enquanto o colágeno (principalmente o tipo I) fornece resistência e suporte estrutural ao tecido, úteis para suportar o estresse e resistir à deformação quando submetido a uma força, as fibras de elastina trazem elasticidade ao tecido, permitindo que ele retorne à sua forma original após a deformação.

As proteínas intersticiais, como o HA, desempenham importantes papéis biológicos e mecânicos no tecido das cordas vocais.

No tecido das cordas vocais, o ácido hialurônico desempenha um papel de diluente, afetando a viscosidade do tecido, preenchedor de espaço, absorvedor de choque, bem como promotor de cicatrização de feridas e migração celular.

A distribuição dessas proteínas e moléculas intersticiais foi comprovadamente afetada pela idade e sexo, e é mantida pelos fibroblastos.


==== Maturação ====
A estrutura das pregas vocais em adultos é bem diferente daquela em recém-nascidos.

Exatamente como as cordas vocais amadurecem de uma monocamada imatura em recém-nascidos para um tecido maduro de três camadas em adultos ainda é desconhecido, porém alguns estudos investigaram os assuntos e trouxeram algumas respostas.
Hirano et ai. descobriram anteriormente que os recém-nascidos não tinham uma lâmina própria verdadeira, mas sim regiões celulares chamadas máculas flavae, localizadas nas extremidades anterior e posterior do tecido frouxo das pregas vocais.

Boseley e Hartnick examinaram o desenvolvimento e maturação da lâmina própria da prega vocal humana pediátrica.

Hartnick foi o primeiro a definir cada camada por uma mudança em sua concentração celular.

Ele também descobriu que a monocamada da lâmina própria no nascimento e logo depois era hipercelular, confirmando assim as observações de Hirano.

Aos 2 meses de idade, a prega vocal começou a se diferenciar em uma estrutura bilaminar de concentração celular distinta, sendo a camada superficial menos densamente povoada que a camada mais profunda.

Aos 11 meses, uma estrutura de três camadas começa a ser notada em alguns espécimes, novamente com diferentes densidades populacionais celulares.

A camada superficial ainda é hipocelular, seguida por uma camada intermediária mais hipercelular, e uma camada hipercelular mais profunda, logo acima do músculo vocal.

Embora as cordas vocais pareçam começar a se organizar, isso não é representativo da estrutura trilaminar observada em tecidos adultos, onde a camada é definida por suas composições diferenciais de elastina e fibras colágenas.

Aos 7 anos de idade, todos os espécimes mostram uma estrutura de prega vocal de três camadas, com base nas densidades populacionais celulares.

Nesse ponto, a camada superficial ainda era hipocelular, a camada média era a hipercelular, com também maior teor de fibras de elastina e colágeno, e a camada mais profunda era menos povoada celularmente.

Novamente, a distinção observada entre as camadas neste estágio não é comparável àquela observada no tecido adulto.

A maturação das cordas vocais não apareceu antes dos 13 anos de idade, onde as camadas podiam ser definidas por sua composição diferencial de fibras e não por sua população celular diferencial.

O padrão agora mostra uma camada superficial hipocelular, seguida por uma camada média composta predominantemente por fibras de elastina e uma camada mais profunda composta predominantemente por fibras de colágeno.

Este padrão pode ser visto em espécimes mais velhos até 17 anos de idade e acima.

Embora este estudo ofereça uma boa maneira de ver a evolução de cordas vocais imaturas para maduras, ainda não explica qual é o mecanismo por trás disso.


==== Mácula amarela ====
As máculas flavae estão localizadas nas extremidades anterior e posterior das partes membranosas das cordas vocais.

A estrutura histológica da mácula flava é única, e Sato e Hirano especularam que ela poderia desempenhar um papel importante no crescimento, desenvolvimento e envelhecimento das cordas vocais.

A mácula flava é composta por fibroblastos, substâncias fundamentais, fibras elásticas e colagenosas.

Os fibroblastos eram numerosos e fusiformes ou estrelados.

Os fibroblastos foram observados em fase ativa, com alguns materiais amorfos recém-liberados presentes em sua superfície.

Do ponto de vista biomecânico, o papel da mácula flava é muito importante.

Os estudos de Hirano e Sato sugeriram que a mácula flava é responsável pela síntese dos componentes fibrosos das cordas vocais.

Os fibroblastos foram encontrados principalmente alinhados na direção do ligamento vocal, ao longo de feixes de fibras.

Foi então sugerido que os estresses mecânicos durante a fonação estimulavam os fibroblastos a sintetizar essas fibras.


==== Impacto da fonação ====
As propriedades viscoelásticas da lâmina própria da prega vocal humana são essenciais para sua vibração e dependem da composição e estrutura de sua matriz extracelular.

As cordas vocais adultas têm uma estrutura em camadas que se baseia no diferencial de camadas na distribuição da matriz extracelular.

Os recém-nascidos, por outro lado, não têm essa estrutura em camadas.

Suas cordas vocais são uniformes e imaturas, tornando suas propriedades viscoelásticas provavelmente inadequadas para a fonação. o ácido hialurônico desempenha um papel muito importante na biomecânica das pregas vocais.

De fato, o ácido hialurônico tem sido descrito como a molécula da matriz extracelular que não só contribui para a manutenção de uma viscosidade tecidual ótima que permite a fonação, mas também de uma rigidez tecidual ótima que permite o controle de frequência.

CD44 é um receptor de superfície celular para HA.

Células como os fibroblastos são responsáveis ​​pela síntese de moléculas da matriz extracelular.

Os receptores da matriz da superfície celular, por sua vez, realimentam as células através da interação célula-matriz, permitindo que a célula regule seu metabolismo.
Sato et ai. realizaram uma investigação histopatológica de cordas vocais humanas não fonadas.

As mucosas das pregas vocais, sem fonação desde o nascimento, de três adultos jovens (17, 24 e 28 anos) foram examinadas por meio de microscopia de luz e eletrônica.

Os resultados mostram que as mucosas das pregas vocais eram hipoplásicas, rudimentares e, assim como os recém-nascidos, não apresentavam ligamento vocal, espaço de Reinke ou estrutura em camadas.

Assim como os recém-nascidos, a lâmina própria apareceu como uma estrutura uniforme.

Algumas células estreladas estavam presentes na mácula flava, mas começaram a apresentar alguns sinais de degeneração.

As células estreladas sintetizaram menos moléculas da matriz extracelular, e os processos citoplasmáticos mostraram-se curtos e encolhidos, sugerindo uma atividade diminuída.

Esses resultados confirmam a hipótese de que a fonação estimula as células estreladas a produzirem mais matriz extracelular.
Além disso, usando um biorreator especialmente projetado, Titze et al. mostraram que os fibroblastos expostos à estimulação mecânica têm níveis diferentes de produção de matriz extracelular dos fibroblastos que não são expostos à estimulação mecânica.

Os níveis de expressão gênica de constituintes da matriz extracelular como fibronectina, MMP1, decorina, fibromodulina, ácido hialurônico sintase 2 e CD44 foram alterados.

Todos esses genes estão envolvidos na remodelação da matriz extracelular, sugerindo que forças mecânicas aplicadas ao tecido alteram os níveis de expressão de genes relacionados à matriz extracelular, que por sua vez permitem que as células presentes no tecido regulem a síntese de constituintes da matriz extracelular, afetando assim composição, estrutura e propriedades biomecânicas do tecido.

No final, os receptores de superfície celular fecham o circuito dando feedback sobre a matriz extracelular circundante às células, afetando também seu nível de expressão gênica.


==== Impacto dos hormônios ====
Outros estudos sugerem que os hormônios também desempenham um papel importante na maturação das pregas vocais.

Hormônios são moléculas secretadas na corrente sanguínea para serem entregues em diferentes locais-alvo.

Geralmente promovem crescimento, diferenciação e funcionalidade em diferentes órgãos ou tecidos.

Seu efeito se deve à sua capacidade de se ligar a receptores intracelulares, modulando a expressão gênica e, posteriormente, regulando a síntese proteica.

A interação entre o sistema endócrino e tecidos como mama, cérebro, testículos, coração, ossos, etc., está sendo amplamente estudada.

Foi visto claramente que a laringe é um pouco afetada por alterações hormonais, mas, surpreendentemente, poucos estudos estão trabalhando para elucidar essa relação.

O efeito das mudanças hormonais na voz é claramente visto ao ouvir vozes masculinas e femininas, ou ao ouvir uma voz adolescente mudando durante a puberdade.

Na verdade, acredita-se que o número de receptores hormonais na fase pré-puberal seja maior do que em qualquer outra idade.

Menstruação também foi visto para influenciar a voz.

De fato, as cantoras são incentivadas por seus instrutores a não se apresentarem durante o período pré-menstrual, devido à queda na qualidade da voz. Sabe-se que as funções fonatórias das pregas vocais mudam desde o nascimento até a velhice.

As mudanças mais significativas ocorrem no desenvolvimento entre o nascimento e a puberdade e na velhice.

Hirano et ai. descreveram anteriormente várias alterações estruturais associadas ao envelhecimento, no tecido das pregas vocais.

Algumas dessas alterações são: encurtamento da prega vocal membranosa no sexo masculino, espessamento da mucosa e cobertura das pregas vocais no sexo feminino e desenvolvimento de edema na camada superficial da lâmina própria em ambos os sexos.

Hammond et ai. observaram que o teor de ácido hialurônico na lâmina própria da prega vocal foi significativamente maior no sexo masculino do que no feminino.

Embora todos esses estudos tenham mostrado que existem claras mudanças estruturais e funcionais observadas nas cordas vocais humanas que estão associadas ao sexo e à idade, nenhum realmente elucidou completamente a causa subjacente dessas alterações.

De fato, apenas alguns estudos recentes começaram a analisar a presença e o papel dos receptores hormonais nas cordas vocais.

Newman et ai. constataram que os receptores hormonais estão de fato presentes nas pregas vocais e apresentam uma diferença estatística de distribuição em relação à idade e ao sexo.

Eles identificaram a presença de receptores de androgênio, estrogênio e progesterona em células epiteliais, células granulares e fibroblastos das cordas vocais, sugerindo que algumas das mudanças estruturais observadas nas cordas vocais podem ser devido a influências hormonais.

Neste estudo específico, os receptores de andrógenos e progesterona foram encontrados mais comumente em homens do que em mulheres.

Em outros estudos, foi sugerido que a relação estrogênio/andrógeno seja parcialmente responsável pelas alterações vocais observadas na menopausa.

Como dito anteriormente, Hammond et al. mostraram que o teor de ácido hialurônico foi maior nas cordas vocais masculinas do que nas femininas.

Bentley et ai. demonstraram que o inchaço da pele sexual observado em macacos era devido a um aumento no conteúdo de ácido hialurônico, que era de fato mediado por receptores de estrogênio nos fibroblastos dérmicos.

Também foi observado um aumento na biossíntese de colágeno mediada pelos receptores de estrogênio dos fibroblastos dérmicos.

Uma conexão entre os níveis hormonais e a distribuição da matriz extracelular nas cordas vocais, dependendo da idade e do sexo, pode ser feita.

Mais particularmente, uma conexão entre níveis hormonais mais elevados e maior teor de ácido hialurônico em homens pode existir no tecido das pregas vocais humanas.

Embora uma relação entre os níveis hormonais e a biossíntese da matriz extracelular na prega vocal possa ser estabelecida, os detalhes dessa relação e os mecanismos de influência ainda não foram elucidados.


=== Velhice ===

Há um afinamento na camada superficial da lâmina própria na velhice.

No envelhecimento, a prega vocal sofre consideráveis ​​alterações específicas do sexo.

Na laringe feminina, a cobertura das pregas vocais engrossa com o envelhecimento.

A camada superficial da lâmina própria perde densidade à medida que se torna mais edemaciada.

A camada intermediária da lâmina própria tende a atrofiar apenas nos homens.

A camada profunda da lâmina própria da prega vocal masculina engrossa devido ao aumento dos depósitos de colágeno.

O músculo vocal atrofia em homens e mulheres.

No entanto, a maioria dos pacientes idosos com distúrbios de voz tem processos patológicos associados ao envelhecimento, e não apenas ao envelhecimento fisiológico.


== Função ==



=== Oscilação ===


A laringe é a principal (mas não a única) fonte de som na fala, gerando som através da abertura e fechamento rítmico das pregas vocais.

Para oscilar, as pregas vocais são aproximadas o suficiente para que a pressão do ar se acumule sob a laringe.

As dobras são afastadas por essa pressão subglótica aumentada, com a parte inferior de cada dobra liderando a parte superior.

Tal movimento ondulatório causa uma transferência de energia do fluxo de ar para os tecidos dobrados.

Sob as condições corretas, a energia transferida para os tecidos é grande o suficiente para superar as perdas por dissipação e o padrão de oscilação se sustentará.

Em essência, o som é gerado na laringe cortando um fluxo constante de ar em pequenas baforadas de ondas sonoras. a laringe.

A frequência fundamental é influenciada pelo comprimento, tamanho e tensão das pregas vocais.

Essa frequência é em média de 125 Hz em um homem adulto, 210 Hz em mulheres adultas e mais de 300 Hz em crianças.

A quimografia de profundidade é um método de imagem para visualizar os complexos movimentos horizontais e verticais das pregas vocais.
As pregas vocais geram um som rico em harmônicos.

Os harmônicos são produzidos por colisões das pregas vocais consigo mesmas, pela recirculação de parte do ar de volta pela traqueia, ou ambos.

Alguns cantores podem isolar alguns desses harmônicos de uma maneira que é percebida como cantando em mais de um tom ao mesmo tempo - uma técnica chamada canto harmônico ou canto de garganta, como na tradição do canto de garganta tuvan.


== Significado clínico ==



=== Lesões ===

A maioria das lesões das pregas vocais surge principalmente na cobertura das pregas.

Uma vez que a lâmina basal fixa o epitélio à camada superficial da lâmina própria com fibras de ancoragem, este é um local comum de lesão.

Se uma pessoa tem um fonotrauma ou hiperfunção vocal habitual, também conhecida como fonação pressionada, as proteínas da lâmina basal podem cisalhar, causando lesão nas pregas vocais, geralmente vistas como nódulos ou pólipos, que aumentam a massa e a espessura da cobertura.

O epitélio de células escamosas da glote anterior também é um local frequente de câncer de laringe causado pelo tabagismo.


=== Edema de Reinke ===

Uma patologia da voz chamada edema de Reinke, inchaço devido ao acúmulo anormal de líquido, ocorre na lâmina própria superficial ou no espaço de Reinke.

Isso faz com que a mucosa das pregas vocais pareça flácida com movimento excessivo da capa que foi descrita como parecendo uma meia solta.

A maior massa das pregas vocais devido ao aumento do fluido diminui a frequência fundamental durante a fonação.


=== Cicatrização de feridas ===

A cicatrização de feridas é um processo natural de regeneração do tecido dérmico e epidérmico que envolve uma sequência de eventos bioquímicos.

Esses eventos são complexos e podem ser categorizados em três estágios: inflamação, proliferação e remodelação tecidual.

O estudo sobre cicatrização de pregas vocais não é tão extenso quanto em modelos animais devido à disponibilidade limitada de pregas vocais humanas.

As lesões nas pregas vocais podem ter várias causas, incluindo uso excessivo crônico, trauma químico, térmico e mecânico, como tabagismo, câncer de laringe e cirurgia.

Outros fenômenos patológicos benignos, como pólipos, nódulos e edema nas pregas vocais, também introduzirão fonação desordenada. Qualquer lesão nas pregas vocais humanas provoca um processo de cicatrização caracterizado pela deposição desorganizada de colágeno e, eventualmente, formação de tecido cicatricial.

Verdolini e seu grupo procuraram detectar e descrever a resposta tecidual aguda do modelo de prega vocal de coelho lesionado.

Eles quantificaram a expressão de dois marcadores bioquímicos: interleucina 1 e prostaglandina E2, que estão associados à cicatrização aguda de feridas.

Eles descobriram que as secreções desses mediadores inflamatórios estavam significativamente elevadas quando coletadas de cordas vocais lesionadas versus cordas vocais normais.

Este resultado foi consistente com seu estudo anterior sobre a função de IL-1 e PGE-2 na cicatrização de feridas.

A investigação sobre o tempo e a magnitude da resposta inflamatória nas pregas vocais pode beneficiar a elucidação de eventos patológicos subsequentes no ferimento das pregas vocais, o que é bom para o clínico desenvolver alvos terapêuticos para minimizar a formação de cicatrizes.

Na fase proliferativa da cicatrização de feridas nas cordas vocais, se a produção de ácido hialurônico e colágeno não estiver equilibrada, o que significa que o nível de ácido hialurônico está abaixo do normal, a fibrose do colágeno não pode ser regulada.

Consequentemente, a cicatrização de feridas do tipo regenerativo passa a ser a formação de cicatriz.

A cicatrização pode levar à deformidade da borda da prega vocal, ao rompimento da viscosidade e rigidez dos lipopolissacarídeos.

Pacientes com cicatriz de prega vocal queixam-se de aumento do esforço fonatório, fadiga vocal, falta de ar e disfonia.

A cicatriz das pregas vocais é um dos problemas mais desafiadores para o otorrinolaringologista, pois é difícil de ser diagnosticada na fase germinativa e a necessidade de função das pregas vocais é delicada.


== Terminologia ==

As pregas vocais são comumente referidas como cordas vocais e, menos comumente, como retalhos vocais ou bandas vocais.

O termo cordas vocais foi cunhado pelo anatomista francês Antoine Ferrein em 1741.

Em sua analogia do violino com a voz humana, ele postulou que o ar em movimento agia como um arco em cordas vocais.

A ortografia alternativa em inglês é cordas vocais, possivelmente devido às conotações musicais ou à confusão com a definição geométrica da palavra acorde.

Embora ambas as grafias tenham precedentes históricos, a grafia americana padrão é cords.

De acordo com o Oxford English Corpus, um banco de dados de textos do século 21 que contém tudo, desde artigos de periódicos acadêmicos até textos inéditos e entradas de blogs, escritores contemporâneos optam por acordes fora do padrão em vez de cordas 49% das vezes.

A ortografia dos cordões também é padrão no Reino Unido e na Austrália.
Na fonética, as pregas vocais são preferidas às pregas vocais, por serem mais precisas e ilustrativas.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vocal_cords

;;;FR;;;



CORDES VOCALES


Chez l'homme, les cordes vocales, également appelées cordes vocales ou anches vocales, sont des plis des tissus de la gorge qui sont essentiels à la création de sons par la vocalisation.

La taille des cordes vocales affecte la hauteur de la voix.

Ouverts lors de la respiration et vibrant pour la parole ou le chant, les plis sont contrôlés via la branche laryngée récurrente du nerf vague.

Ils sont composés de doubles replis de membrane muqueuse étirés horizontalement, d'arrière en avant, à travers le larynx.

Ils vibrent, modulant le flux d'air expulsé des poumons pendant la phonation. .

Ceux-ci ont un rôle minime dans la phonation normale, mais peuvent produire des tonalités sonores profondes, des cris et des grognements.
La longueur de la corde vocale à la naissance est d'environ six à huit millimètres et atteint sa longueur adulte de huit à seize millimètres à l'adolescence.

La testostérone, un androgène sécrété par les gonades, provoque des modifications irréversibles des cartilages et de la musculature du larynx lorsqu'elle est présente à des concentrations suffisamment élevées, comme lors de la puberté d'un adolescent : la proéminence thyroïdienne apparaît, les cordes vocales s'allongent et s'arrondissent, et la l'épithélium s'épaissit avec la formation de trois couches distinctes dans la lamina propria.


== Structure ==



=== Emplacement ===

Les cordes vocales sont situées dans le larynx au sommet de la trachée.

Ils sont attachés à l'arrière aux cartilages aryténoïdes et à l'avant au cartilage thyroïde.

Ils font partie de la glotte.

Leurs bords extérieurs sont attachés au muscle du larynx tandis que leurs bords intérieurs forment une ouverture appelée rima glottidis.

Ils sont construits à partir d'épithélium, mais ils contiennent quelques fibres musculaires, à savoir le muscle vocalis qui resserre la partie avant du ligament près du cartilage thyroïde.

Ce sont des bandes triangulaires plates et de couleur blanc nacré.

Au-dessus des deux côtés de la glotte se trouvent les deux plis vestibulaires ou fausses cordes vocales qui ont un petit sac entre eux.


=== Faux cordes vocales ===


Les cordes vocales sont parfois appelées « vraies cordes vocales » pour les distinguer des « fausses cordes vocales » appelées plis vestibulaires ou plis ventriculaires.

Il s'agit d'une paire de plis épais de membrane muqueuse qui protègent et s'assoient légèrement au-dessus des vrais plis plus délicats.

Ils ont un rôle minime dans la phonation normale, mais sont souvent utilisés pour produire des tons sonores profonds dans le chant tibétain et le chant de gorge tuvan, ainsi que dans les cris musicaux et le style vocal de grognement de la mort.


=== Microanatomie ===


Les cordes vocales sont composées de doubles replis de 3 tissus distincts : une couche externe de cellules plates qui ne produisent pas de kératine (épithélium squameux).

En dessous se trouve la couche superficielle de la lamina propria , une couche semblable à un gel, qui permet à la corde vocale de vibrer et de produire du son.

Les muscles vocalis et thyro-aryténoïdiens constituent la partie la plus profonde.

Ces cordes vocales sont recouvertes d'une membrane muqueuse et sont étirées horizontalement, d'arrière en avant, à travers le larynx.


=== Variante ===

Les mâles et les femelles ont des tailles de cordes vocales différentes.

Les voix masculines adultes sont généralement plus graves en raison de plis plus longs et plus épais.

Les cordes vocales du mâle mesurent entre 1,75 cm et 2,5 cm (environ 0,75" à 1,0") de longueur, tandis que les cordes vocales des femelles mesurent entre 1,25 cm et 1,75 cm (environ 0,5" à 0,75") de longueur.

Les cordes vocales des enfants sont beaucoup plus courtes que celles des hommes et des femmes adultes.

La différence de longueur et d'épaisseur des cordes vocales entre les hommes et les femmes entraîne une différence de hauteur de voix.

De plus, des facteurs génétiques provoquent des variations entre les membres du même sexe, les voix des hommes et des femmes étant classées en types de voix.


== Développement ==



=== Chez les nouveau-nés ===

Les nouveau-nés ont une lamina propria uniforme à une seule couche, qui semble lâche sans ligament vocal.

La lamina propria monocouche est composée de substances fondamentales telles que l'acide hyaluronique et la fibronectine, les fibroblastes, les fibres élastiques et les fibres de collagène.

Alors que les composants fibreux sont rares, rendant la structure de la lamina propria lâche, la teneur en acide hyaluronique (HA) est élevée.
L'HA est un glycosaminoglycane volumineux, chargé négativement, dont la forte affinité avec l'eau procure à l'acide hyaluronique ses propriétés viscoélastiques et antichocs indispensables à la biomécanique vocale.

La viscosité et l'élasticité sont essentielles à la production vocale.

Chan, Gray et Titze ont quantifié l'effet de l'acide hyaluronique sur la viscosité et l'élasticité des cordes vocales en comparant les propriétés des tissus avec et sans HA.

Les résultats ont montré que l'élimination de l'acide hyaluronique diminuait la rigidité des cordes vocales de 35 % en moyenne, mais augmentait leur viscosité dynamique de 70 % en moyenne à des fréquences supérieures à 1 Hz.

Il a été démontré que les nouveau-nés pleurent en moyenne 6,7 heures par jour au cours des 3 premiers mois, avec une fréquence soutenue de 400 à 600 Hz et une durée moyenne par jour de 2 heures.

Un traitement similaire sur les cordes vocales adultes entraînerait rapidement un œdème, puis une aphonie.

Schweinfurth et al. ont présenté l'hypothèse selon laquelle une teneur élevée en acide hyaluronique et sa distribution dans les cordes vocales du nouveau-né sont directement associées à l'endurance des pleurs du nouveau-né.

Ces différences dans la composition des cordes vocales du nouveau-né seraient également responsables de l'incapacité des nouveau-nés à articuler les sons, outre le fait que leur lamina propria est une structure uniforme sans ligament vocal.

La structure en couches nécessaire à la phonation commencera à se développer pendant la petite enfance et jusqu'à l'adolescence. Les fibroblastes dans l'espace de Reinke du nouveau-né sont immatures, présentant une forme ovale et un grand rapport noyau-cytoplasme.

Le réticulum endoplasmique rugueux et l'appareil de Golgi, comme le montrent les micrographies électroniques, ne sont pas bien développés, indiquant que les cellules sont dans une phase de repos.

Les fibres collagènes et réticulaires chez le nouveau-né les cordes vocales sont moins nombreuses que chez l'adulte, ce qui ajoute à l'immaturité du tissu des cordes vocales.
Chez le nourrisson, de nombreux composants fibreux s'étendent de la macula flava vers l'espace de Reinke.

La fibronectine est très abondante dans l'espace de Reinke du nouveau-né et du nourrisson.

La fibronectine est une glycoprotéine dont on pense qu'elle agit comme matrice pour le dépôt orienté des fibres de collagène, stabilisant les fibrilles de collagène.

La fibronectine agit également comme un squelette pour la formation du tissu élastique.

Des fibres réticulaires et collagènes ont été observées courir le long des bords des cordes vocales dans toute la lamina propria.

La fibronectine dans l'espace de Reinke semble guider ces fibres et orienter le dépôt de fibrilles.

Les fibres élastiques sont restées rares et immatures pendant la petite enfance, principalement constituées de microfibrilles.

Les fibroblastes dans l'espace du nourrisson Reinke étaient encore clairsemés mais en forme de fuseau.

Leur réticulum endoplasmique rugueux et leur appareil de Golgi n'étaient toujours pas bien développés, ce qui indique que malgré le changement de forme, les fibroblastes restaient pour la plupart dans une phase de repos.

Peu de matériaux nouvellement libérés ont été observés à côté des fibroblastes.

La teneur en substance fondamentale dans l'espace du nourrisson Reinke semblait diminuer avec le temps, à mesure que la teneur en composants fibreux augmentait, modifiant ainsi lentement la structure des cordes vocales.


=== Enfants ===

La lamina propria du nourrisson est composée d'une seule couche, contre trois chez l'adulte, et il n'y a pas de ligament vocal.

Le ligament vocal commence à être présent chez les enfants vers l'âge de quatre ans.

Deux couches apparaissent dans la lamina propria entre six et douze ans, et la lamina propria mature, avec les couches superficielles, intermédiaires et profondes, n'est présente qu'à la fin de l'adolescence.

Comme la vibration des cordes vocales est à la base des formants vocaux, cette présence ou absence de couches de tissus influence une différence dans le nombre de formants entre les populations adulte et pédiatrique.

Chez les femmes, la voix est de trois tons plus bas que celle de l'enfant et a cinq à douze formants, par opposition à la voix pédiatrique avec trois à six.
La longueur de la corde vocale à la naissance est d'environ six à huit millimètres et atteint sa longueur adulte de huit à seize millimètres à l'adolescence.

La corde vocale du nourrisson est à moitié membraneuse ou glotte antérieure et à moitié cartilagineuse ou glotte postérieure.

Le pli adulte est environ aux trois cinquièmes membraneux et aux deux cinquièmes cartilagineux.


=== Puberté ===

La puberté dure généralement de 2 à 5 ans et survient généralement entre 12 et 17 ans.

Pendant la puberté, le changement de voix est contrôlé par les hormones sexuelles.

Chez les femelles à la puberté, le muscle vocal s'épaissit légèrement, mais reste très souple et étroit.

La muqueuse squameuse se différencie également en trois couches distinctes (la lamina propria) sur le bord libre des cordes vocales.

La muqueuse glandulaire sous et supraglottique devient hormono-dépendante des œstrogènes et de la progestérone.

Chez la femme, les actions des œstrogènes et de la progestérone produisent des modifications des espaces extravasculaires en augmentant la perméabilité capillaire qui permet le passage des fluides intracapillaires vers l'espace interstitiel ainsi que la modification des sécrétions glandulaires.

Les estrogènes ont un effet hypertrophique et prolifératif sur les muqueuses en diminuant l'effet desquamant sur les couches superficielles.

Les hormones thyroïdiennes affectent également la fonction dynamique des cordes vocales ; (La thyroïdite de Hashimoto affecte l'équilibre hydrique des cordes vocales).

La progestérone a un effet anti-prolifératif sur les muqueuses et accélère la desquamation.

Il provoque un cycle de type menstruel dans l'épithélium des cordes vocales et un assèchement de la muqueuse avec une réduction des sécrétions de l'épithélium glandulaire.

La progestérone a un effet diurétique et diminue la perméabilité capillaire, piégeant ainsi le liquide extracellulaire hors des capillaires et provoquant une congestion des tissus.
La testostérone, un androgène sécrété par les testicules, provoquera des changements dans les cartilages et la musculature du larynx chez les hommes pendant la puberté.

Chez la femme, les androgènes sont sécrétés principalement par le cortex surrénalien et les ovaires et peuvent avoir des effets masculinisants irréversibles s'ils sont présents à une concentration suffisamment élevée.

Chez les hommes, ils sont essentiels à la sexualité masculine.

Dans les muscles, ils provoquent une hypertrophie des muscles striés avec une réduction des cellules graisseuses dans les muscles squelettiques et une réduction de la masse graisseuse de tout le corps.

Les androgènes sont les hormones les plus importantes responsables du passage de la voix du garçon-enfant à la voix de l'homme, et le changement est irréversible.

La proéminence thyroïdienne apparaît, les cordes vocales s'allongent et s'arrondissent, et l'épithélium s'épaissit avec la formation de trois couches distinctes dans la lamina propria.


=== Âge adulte ===

Les cordes vocales humaines sont des structures appariées situées dans le larynx, juste au-dessus de la trachée, qui vibrent et sont mises en contact lors de la phonation.

Les cordes vocales humaines mesurent environ 12 à 24 mm de long et 3 à 5 mm d'épaisseur.

Histologiquement, les cordes vocales humaines sont une structure stratifiée composée de cinq couches différentes.

Le muscle vocalis, corps principal des cordes vocales, est recouvert par la muqueuse, constituée de l'épithélium et de la lamina propria.

Cette dernière est une couche pliable de tissu conjonctif subdivisée en trois couches : la couche superficielle (SL), la couche intermédiaire (IL) et la couche profonde (DL).

La distinction des couches est soit faite en fonction du contenu différentiel des cellules, soit du contenu de la matrice extracellulaire (matrice extracellulaire).

La manière la plus courante étant de regarder le contenu de la matrice extracellulaire.

Le SLP a moins de fibres élastiques et collagènes que les deux autres couches, et est donc plus lâche et plus souple.

L'ILP est principalement composé de fibres élastiques, tandis que le DLP a moins de fibres élastiques et plus de fibres de collagène.

Dans ces deux couches, qui forment ce qu'on appelle le ligament vocalis, les fibres élastiques et collagènes sont densément emballées sous forme de faisceaux qui s'étendent presque parallèlement au bord de la corde vocale. Il y a une augmentation constante de la teneur en élastine de la lamina propria à mesure que les humains vieillissent (l'élastine est une scléroprotéine jaune, le constituant essentiel du tissu conjonctif élastique) entraînant une diminution de la capacité de la lamina propria à se dilater causée par la ramification croisée des fibres d'élastine.

Cela conduit, entre autres, à ce que la voix mature soit mieux adaptée aux rigueurs de l'opéra. La matrice extracellulaire de la corde vocale LP est composée de protéines fibreuses telles que le collagène et l'élastine, et de molécules interstitielles telles que l'HA, un glycosaminoglycane non sulfaté. .

Alors que le SLP est plutôt pauvre en fibres élastiques et collagènes, l'ILP et le DLP en sont principalement composés, la concentration de fibres élastiques diminuant et la concentration de fibres collagènes augmentant à mesure que l'on se rapproche du muscle vocalis.

Les protéines fibreuses et les molécules interstitielles jouent différents rôles au sein de la matrice extracellulaire.

Alors que le collagène (principalement de type I) fournit de la force et un soutien structurel au tissu, qui sont utiles pour résister au stress et à la déformation lorsqu'il est soumis à une force, les fibres d'élastine apportent de l'élasticité au tissu, lui permettant de reprendre sa forme d'origine après déformation.

Les protéines interstitielles, telles que HA, jouent des rôles biologiques et mécaniques importants dans le tissu des cordes vocales.

Dans le tissu des cordes vocales, l'acide hyaluronique joue un rôle de diluant, affectant la viscosité des tissus, de remplissage d'espace, d'amortisseur, ainsi que de promoteur de cicatrisation et de migration cellulaire.

Il a été prouvé que la distribution de ces protéines et molécules interstitielles est affectée à la fois par l'âge et le sexe, et est maintenue par les fibroblastes.


==== Maturité ====
La structure des cordes vocales chez les adultes est assez différente de celle des nouveau-nés.

On ignore encore exactement comment la corde vocale passe d'une monocouche immature chez le nouveau-né à un tissu mature à trois couches chez l'adulte, mais quelques études ont enquêté sur les sujets et apporté des réponses.
Hirano et al. ont précédemment découvert que les nouveau-nés n'avaient pas de véritable lamina propria, mais avaient à la place des régions cellulaires appelées maculae flavae, situées aux extrémités antérieure et postérieure du tissu lâche des cordes vocales.

Boseley et Hartnick ont ​​examiné le développement et la maturation de la lamina propria des cordes vocales humaines pédiatriques.

Hartnick a été le premier à définir chaque couche par un changement de leur concentration cellulaire.

Il a également découvert que la monocouche de la lamina propria à la naissance et peu de temps après était hypercellulaire, confirmant ainsi les observations d'Hirano.

À l'âge de 2 mois, la corde vocale a commencé à se différencier en une structure bilaminaire de concentration cellulaire distincte, la couche superficielle étant moins densément peuplée que la couche plus profonde.

À 11 mois, une structure à trois couches commence à être notée chez certains spécimens, encore une fois avec des densités de population cellulaire différentes.

La couche superficielle est toujours hypocellulaire, suivie d'une couche intermédiaire plus hypercellulaire et d'une couche hypercellulaire plus profonde, juste au-dessus du muscle vocalis.

Même si les cordes vocales semblent commencer à s'organiser, cela n'est pas représentatif de la structure trilaminaire observée dans les tissus adultes, où les couches sont définies par leurs compositions différentielles en fibres d'élastine et de collagène.

À l'âge de 7 ans, tous les spécimens présentent une structure de cordes vocales à trois couches, basée sur les densités de population cellulaire.

À ce stade, la couche superficielle était encore hypocellulaire, la couche intermédiaire était hypercellulaire, avec également une plus grande teneur en fibres d'élastine et de collagène, et la couche plus profonde était moins peuplée de cellules.

Encore une fois, la distinction observée entre les couches à ce stade n'est pas comparable à celle observée dans le tissu adulte.

La maturation des cordes vocales n'apparaissait pas avant 13 ans, où les couches pouvaient être définies par leur composition fibreuse différentielle plutôt que par leur population cellulaire différentielle.

Le motif montre maintenant une couche superficielle hypocellulaire, suivie d'une couche intermédiaire composée principalement de fibres d'élastine et d'une couche plus profonde composée principalement de fibres de collagène.

Ce schéma peut être observé chez les spécimens plus âgés jusqu'à 17 ans et plus.

Bien que cette étude offre un bon moyen de voir l'évolution des cordes vocales immatures à matures, elle n'explique toujours pas quel est le mécanisme derrière cela.


==== Macula flavae ====
Les maculae flavae sont situées aux extrémités antérieure et postérieure des parties membraneuses des cordes vocales.

La structure histologique de la macula flava est unique, et Sato et Hirano ont émis l'hypothèse qu'elle pourrait jouer un rôle important dans la croissance, le développement et le vieillissement des cordes vocales.

La macula flava est composée de fibroblastes, de substances fondamentales, de fibres élastiques et collagènes.

Les fibroblastes étaient nombreux et fusiformes ou étoilés.

Il a été observé que les fibroblastes sont en phase active, avec certains matériaux amorphes nouvellement libérés présents à leur surface.

D'un point de vue biomécanique, le rôle de la macula flava est très important.

Les études de Hirano et Sato ont suggéré que la macula flava est responsable de la synthèse des composants fibreux des cordes vocales.

Les fibroblastes ont été trouvés principalement alignés dans la direction du ligament vocal, le long de faisceaux de fibres.

Il a alors été suggéré que les contraintes mécaniques lors de la phonation stimulaient les fibroblastes à synthétiser ces fibres.


==== Impact de la phonation ====
Les propriétés viscoélastiques de la lamina propria des cordes vocales humaines sont essentielles pour leur vibration et dépendent de la composition et de la structure de leur matrice extracellulaire.

Les cordes vocales adultes ont une structure en couches qui est basée sur le différentiel des couches dans la distribution de la matrice extracellulaire.

Les nouveau-nés, en revanche, n'ont pas cette structure en couches.

Leurs cordes vocales sont uniformes et immatures, ce qui rend leurs propriétés viscoélastiques très probablement inadaptées à la phonation. l'acide hyaluronique joue un rôle très important dans la biomécanique des cordes vocales.

En fait, l'acide hyaluronique a été décrit comme la molécule de la matrice extracellulaire qui contribue non seulement au maintien d'une viscosité tissulaire optimale permettant la phonation, mais également d'une rigidité tissulaire optimale permettant le contrôle de la fréquence.

CD44 est un récepteur de surface cellulaire pour HA.

Les cellules telles que les fibroblastes sont responsables de la synthèse des molécules de la matrice extracellulaire.

Les récepteurs de la matrice de surface cellulaire, en retour, renvoient aux cellules par l'interaction cellule-matrice, permettant à la cellule de réguler son métabolisme.
Sato et al. ont mené une enquête histopathologique sur des cordes vocales humaines non phonées.

Les muqueuses des cordes vocales, non phonées depuis la naissance, de trois jeunes adultes (17, 24 et 28 ans) ont été examinées en microscopie optique et électronique.

Les résultats montrent que les muqueuses des cordes vocales étaient hypoplasiques et rudimentaires et, comme les nouveau-nés, n'avaient pas de ligament vocal, d'espace de Reinke ou de structure en couches.

Comme les nouveau-nés, la lamina propria est apparue comme une structure uniforme.

Certaines cellules étoilées étaient présentes dans la macula flava, mais ont commencé à montrer des signes de dégénérescence.

Les cellules étoilées ont synthétisé moins de molécules de la matrice extracellulaire et les processus cytoplasmiques se sont avérés courts et rétrécissants, suggérant une activité réduite.

Ces résultats confirment l'hypothèse selon laquelle la phonation stimule les cellules étoilées à produire plus de matrice extracellulaire.
De plus, en utilisant un bioréacteur spécialement conçu, Titze et al. ont montré que les fibroblastes exposés à une stimulation mécanique ont des niveaux de production de matrice extracellulaire différents de ceux des fibroblastes qui ne sont pas exposés à une stimulation mécanique.

Les niveaux d'expression génique des constituants de la matrice extracellulaire tels que la fibronectine, la MMP1, la décorine, la fibromoduline, l'acide hyaluronique synthase 2 et le CD44 ont été modifiés.

Tous ces gènes sont impliqués dans le remodelage de la matrice extracellulaire, suggérant ainsi que les forces mécaniques appliquées au tissu modifient les niveaux d'expression des gènes liés à la matrice extracellulaire, qui à leur tour permettent aux cellules présentes dans le tissu de réguler la synthèse des constituants de la matrice extracellulaire, affectant ainsi la composition, la structure et les propriétés biomécaniques du tissu.

En fin de compte, les récepteurs de surface cellulaire ferment la boucle en donnant aux cellules une rétroaction sur la matrice extracellulaire environnante, affectant également leur niveau d'expression génique.


==== Impact des hormones ====
D'autres études suggèrent que les hormones jouent également un rôle important dans la maturation des cordes vocales.

Les hormones sont des molécules sécrétées dans la circulation sanguine pour être délivrées à différents sites ciblés.

Ils favorisent généralement la croissance, la différenciation et la fonctionnalité dans différents organes ou tissus.

Leur effet est dû à leur capacité à se lier aux récepteurs intracellulaires, à moduler l'expression des gènes et à réguler ensuite la synthèse des protéines.

L'interaction entre le système endocrinien et les tissus tels que le sein, le cerveau, les testicules, le cœur, les os, etc., fait l'objet d'études approfondies.

On a clairement vu que le larynx est quelque peu affecté par les changements hormonaux, mais étonnamment, très peu d'études s'efforcent d'élucider cette relation.

L'effet des changements hormonaux dans la voix est clairement visible en entendant des voix masculines et féminines, ou en écoutant une voix d'adolescent qui change pendant la puberté.

En fait, on pense que le nombre de récepteurs hormonaux dans la phase pré-pubertaire est plus élevé qu'à tout autre âge.

On a également constaté que les menstruations influençaient la voix.

En effet, les chanteuses sont encouragées par leurs instructeurs à ne pas se produire pendant leur période pré-menstruelle, en raison d'une baisse de la qualité de leur voix. Les fonctions phonatoires des cordes vocales sont connues pour changer de la naissance à la vieillesse.

Les changements les plus significatifs se produisent dans le développement entre la naissance et la puberté, et dans la vieillesse.

Hirano et al. décrit précédemment plusieurs changements structurels associés au vieillissement, dans le tissu des cordes vocales.

Certains de ces changements sont : un raccourcissement de la corde vocale membraneuse chez les mâles, un épaississement de la muqueuse et de la couverture des cordes vocales chez les femelles, et un développement d'œdème dans la couche superficielle de la lamina propria chez les deux sexes.

Hammond et al. ont observé que la teneur en acide hyaluronique dans la lamina propria des cordes vocales était significativement plus élevée chez les hommes que chez les femmes.

Bien que toutes ces études aient montré qu'il existe des changements structurels et fonctionnels clairs observés dans les cordes vocales humaines qui sont associés au sexe et à l'âge, aucune n'a vraiment complètement élucidé la cause sous-jacente de ces changements.

En fait, seules quelques études récentes ont commencé à se pencher sur la présence et le rôle des récepteurs hormonaux dans les cordes vocales.

Newmann et al. ont constaté que les récepteurs hormonaux sont bien présents dans les cordes vocales, et montrent une différence de distribution statistique en fonction de l'âge et du sexe.

Ils ont identifié la présence de récepteurs aux androgènes, aux œstrogènes et à la progestérone dans les cellules épithéliales, les cellules granulaires et les fibroblastes des cordes vocales, suggérant que certains des changements structurels observés dans les cordes vocales pourraient être dus à des influences hormonales.

Dans cette étude spécifique, les récepteurs aux androgènes et à la progestérone ont été trouvés plus fréquemment chez les hommes que chez les femmes.

Dans d'autres études, il a été suggéré que le rapport œstrogène/androgène soit en partie responsable des modifications de la voix observées à la ménopause.

Comme indiqué précédemment, Hammond et al. ont montré que la teneur en acide hyaluronique était plus élevée chez les mâles que chez les cordes vocales féminines.

Bentley et al. ont démontré que le gonflement de la peau sexuelle observé chez le singe était dû à une augmentation de la teneur en acide hyaluronique, qui était en fait médiée par les récepteurs des œstrogènes dans les fibroblastes dermiques.

Une augmentation de la biosynthèse du collagène médiée par les récepteurs aux œstrogènes des fibroblastes dermiques a également été observée.

Un lien entre les niveaux d'hormones et la distribution de la matrice extracellulaire dans les cordes vocales en fonction de l'âge et du sexe pourrait être établi.

Plus particulièrement, un lien entre des niveaux d'hormones plus élevés et une teneur plus élevée en acide hyaluronique chez les hommes pourrait exister dans le tissu des cordes vocales humaines.

Bien qu'une relation entre les niveaux d'hormones et la biosynthèse de la matrice extracellulaire dans les cordes vocales puisse être établie, les détails de cette relation et les mécanismes de l'influence n'ont pas encore été élucidés.


=== Vieillesse ===

Il y a un amincissement de la couche superficielle de la lamina propria chez les personnes âgées.

En vieillissant, la corde vocale subit des changements considérables spécifiques au sexe.

Dans le larynx féminin, la couverture des cordes vocales s'épaissit avec l'âge.

La couche superficielle de la lamina propria perd de sa densité à mesure qu'elle devient plus œdémateuse.

La couche intermédiaire de la lamina propria a tendance à s'atrophier uniquement chez l'homme.

La couche profonde de la lamina propria de la corde vocale masculine s'épaissit en raison de l'augmentation des dépôts de collagène.

Le muscle vocalis s'atrophie chez les hommes et les femmes.

Cependant, la majorité des patients âgés souffrant de troubles de la voix ont des processus pathologiques associés au vieillissement plutôt qu'au vieillissement physiologique seul.


== Fonction ==



=== Oscillations ===


Le larynx est une source majeure (mais pas la seule) de son dans la parole, générant du son par l'ouverture et la fermeture rythmiques des cordes vocales.

Pour osciller, les cordes vocales sont suffisamment rapprochées pour que la pression atmosphérique s'accumule sous le larynx.

Les plis sont écartés par cette pression sous-glottale accrue, la partie inférieure de chaque pli menant à la partie supérieure.

Un tel mouvement ondulatoire provoque un transfert d'énergie du flux d'air vers les tissus du pli.

Dans les bonnes conditions, l'énergie transférée aux tissus est suffisamment importante pour surmonter les pertes par dissipation et le modèle d'oscillation se maintiendra.

Essentiellement, le son est généré dans le larynx en coupant un flux d'air constant en petites bouffées d'ondes sonores. La hauteur perçue de la voix d'une personne est déterminée par un certain nombre de facteurs différents, le plus important étant la fréquence fondamentale du son généré par le larynx.

La fréquence fondamentale est influencée par la longueur, la taille et la tension des cordes vocales.

Cette fréquence est en moyenne d'environ 125 Hz chez un homme adulte, 210 Hz chez les femmes adultes et plus de 300 Hz chez les enfants.

La kymographie en profondeur est une méthode d'imagerie permettant de visualiser les mouvements horizontaux et verticaux complexes des cordes vocales.
Les cordes vocales génèrent un son riche en harmoniques.

Les harmoniques sont produites par des collisions des cordes vocales avec elles-mêmes, par la recirculation d'une partie de l'air à travers la trachée, ou les deux.

Certains chanteurs peuvent isoler certaines de ces harmoniques d'une manière qui est perçue comme chantant dans plus d'une hauteur en même temps - une technique appelée chant diphonique ou chant de gorge comme dans la tradition du chant de gorge tuvan.


== Signification clinique ==



=== Lésions ===

La majorité des lésions des cordes vocales surviennent principalement dans la couverture des plis.

Étant donné que la lame basale fixe l'épithélium à la couche superficielle de la lamina propria avec des fibres d'ancrage, il s'agit d'un site de blessure courant.

Si une personne a un phonotraumatisme ou une hyperfonction vocale habituelle, également connue sous le nom de phonation pressée, les protéines de la lame basale peuvent se cisailler, provoquant des lésions des cordes vocales, généralement considérées comme des nodules ou des polypes, qui augmentent la masse et l'épaisseur de la couverture.

L'épithélium épidermoïde de la glotte antérieure est également un site fréquent de cancer du larynx causé par le tabagisme.


=== Œdème de Reinke ===

Une pathologie de la voix appelée œdème de Reinke, gonflement dû à une accumulation anormale de liquide, survient dans la lamina propria superficielle ou espace de Reinke.

Cela fait apparaître la muqueuse des cordes vocales souple avec un mouvement excessif de la couverture qui a été décrite comme ressemblant à une chaussette lâche.

La plus grande masse des cordes vocales due à l'augmentation du liquide abaisse la fréquence fondamentale pendant la phonation.


=== Cicatrisation ===

La cicatrisation des plaies est un processus naturel de régénération des tissus dermiques et épidermiques impliquant une séquence d'événements biochimiques.

Ces événements sont complexes et peuvent être classés en trois étapes : inflammation, prolifération et remodelage tissulaire.

L'étude sur la cicatrisation des cordes vocales n'est pas aussi étendue que celle sur des modèles animaux en raison de la disponibilité limitée des cordes vocales humaines.

Les lésions des cordes vocales peuvent avoir un certain nombre de causes, notamment une surutilisation chronique, des traumatismes chimiques, thermiques et mécaniques tels que le tabagisme, le cancer du larynx et la chirurgie.

D'autres phénomènes pathologiques bénins comme les polypes, les nodules des cordes vocales et l'œdème introduiront également une phonation désordonnée. Toute lésion des cordes vocales humaines provoque un processus de cicatrisation caractérisé par un dépôt de collagène désorganisé et, éventuellement, la formation de tissu cicatriciel.

Verdolini et son groupe ont cherché à détecter et à décrire la réponse tissulaire aiguë d'un modèle de corde vocale de lapin blessé.

Ils ont quantifié l'expression de deux marqueurs biochimiques : l'interleukine 1 et la prostaglandine E2, qui sont associés à la cicatrisation aiguë des plaies.

Ils ont découvert que les sécrétions de ces médiateurs inflammatoires étaient significativement élevées lorsqu'elles étaient prélevées sur des cordes vocales blessées par rapport à des cordes vocales normales.

Ce résultat était cohérent avec leur étude précédente sur la fonction de l'IL-1 et de la PGE-2 dans la cicatrisation des plaies.

Une enquête sur le temps et l'ampleur de la réponse inflammatoire dans les cordes vocales peut être utile pour élucider les événements pathologiques ultérieurs dans les blessures des cordes vocales, ce qui est bon pour le clinicien pour développer des cibles thérapeutiques afin de minimiser la formation de cicatrices.

Dans la phase proliférative de la cicatrisation des cordes vocales, si la production d'acide hyaluronique et de collagène n'est pas équilibrée, ce qui signifie que le niveau d'acide hyaluronique est inférieur à la normale, la fibrose du collagène ne peut pas être régulée.

Par conséquent, la cicatrisation de type régénératif se transforme en formation de cicatrice.

La cicatrisation peut entraîner la déformation du bord des cordes vocales, la perturbation de la viscosité et de la rigidité des lipopolysaccharides.

Les patients souffrant de cicatrice des cordes vocales se plaignent d'un effort phonatoire accru, d'une fatigue vocale, d'un essoufflement et d'une dysphonie.

La cicatrice des cordes vocales est l'un des problèmes les plus difficiles pour les oto-rhino-laryngologistes car il est difficile d'être diagnostiqué au stade germinal et la nécessité de la fonction des cordes vocales est délicate.


== Terminologie ==

Les cordes vocales sont communément appelées cordes vocales, et moins communément volets vocaux ou bandes vocales.

Le terme cordes vocales a été inventé par l'anatomiste français Antoine Ferrein en 1741.

Dans son analogie avec le violon de la voix humaine, il a postulé que l'air en mouvement agissait comme un archet sur des cordes vocales.

L'orthographe alternative en anglais est les accords vocaux, peut-être en raison des connotations musicales ou de la confusion avec la définition géométrique du mot accord.

Alors que les deux orthographes ont des précédents historiques, l'orthographe américaine standard est les cordes.

Selon l'Oxford English Corpus, une base de données de textes du 21e siècle qui contient tout, des articles de revues universitaires aux écrits non édités et aux entrées de blog, les écrivains contemporains optent pour les accords non standard au lieu des cordes 49% du temps.

L'orthographe des cordes est également standard au Royaume-Uni et en Australie.
En phonétique, les cordes vocales sont préférées aux cordes vocales, au motif qu'elles sont plus précises et illustratives.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vocal_cords
