

VULVA


The vulva (plural: vulvas or vulvae; derived from Latin for wrapper or covering) consists of the external female sex organs. 

The vulva includes the mons pubis (or mons veneris), labia majora, labia minora, clitoris, vestibular bulbs, vulval vestibule, urinary meatus, the vaginal opening, hymen, and Bartholin's and Skene's vestibular glands. 

The urinary meatus is also included as it opens into the vulval vestibule. 

Other features of the vulva include the pudendal cleft, sebaceous glands, the urogenital triangle (anterior part of the perineum), and pubic hair. 

The vulva includes the entrance to the vagina, which leads to the uterus, and provides a double layer of protection for this by the folds of the outer and inner labia. 

Pelvic floor muscles support the structures of the vulva. 

Other muscles of the urogenital triangle also give support.
Blood supply to the vulva comes from the three pudendal arteries. 

The internal pudendal veins give drainage. 

Afferent lymph vessels carry lymph away from the vulva to the inguinal lymph nodes. 

The nerves that supply the vulva are the pudendal nerve, perineal nerve, ilioinguinal nerve and their branches. 

Blood and nerve supply to the vulva contribute to the stages of sexual arousal that are helpful in the reproduction process.
Following the development of the vulva, changes take place at birth, childhood, puberty, menopause and post-menopause. 

There is a great deal of variation in the appearance of the vulva, particularly in relation to the labia minora. 

The vulva can be affected by many disorders which may often result in irritation. 

Vulvovaginal health measures can prevent many of these. 

Other disorders include a number of infections and cancers. 

There are several vulval restorative surgeries known as genitoplasties, and some of these are also used as cosmetic surgery procedures.
Different cultures have held different views of the vulva. 

Some ancient religions and societies have worshipped the vulva and revered the female as a goddess. 

Major traditions in Hinduism continue this. 

In western societies, there has been a largely negative attitude typified by the medical terminology of pudenda membra, meaning parts to be ashamed of. 

There has been an artistic reaction to this in various attempts to bring about a more positive and natural outlook, such as work from British, American, and Japanese artists. 

While the vagina is a separate part of the anatomy, it has often been used synonymously with vulva.


== Structure ==


The main structures of the vulva are: the mons pubis, the labia majora and labia minora, the external parts of the clitoris – the clitoral hood and the glans, the urinary meatus, the vaginal opening and hymen, and Bartholin's and Skene's vestibular glands. 

Other features include the pudendal cleft, pubic hair, sebaceous glands, the vulval vestibule, and the urogenital triangle.


=== Mons pubis ===

The mons pubis is the soft mound of fatty tissue at the front of the vulva, in the pubic region covering the pubic bone. 

Mons pubis is Latin for "pubic mound" and is present in both sexes to act as a cushion during sexual intercourse, and is more pronounced in the female. 

The variant term mons veneris ('mound of Venus') is used specifically for females. 

The lower part of the mons pubis is divided by a fissure – the pudendal cleft – which separates the mons pubis into the labia majora. 

After puberty, the clitoral hood and the labia minora can protrude into the pudendal cleft in a variable degree. 

The mons and labia majora become covered in pubic hair at puberty.


=== Labia ===

The labia majora and the labia minora cover the vulval vestibule. 

The outer pair of folds, divided by the pudendal cleft, are the labia majora (New Latin for "larger lips"). 

They contain and protect the other structures of the vulva. 

The labia majora meet at the front at the mons pubis, and meet posteriorly at the urogenital triangle (the anterior part of the perineum) between the pudendal cleft and the anus. 

The labia minora are often pink or brownish black, relevant to the person's skin color.The grooves between the labia majora and labia minora are called the interlabial sulci, or interlabial folds. 

The labia minora (smaller lips) are the inner two soft folds, within the labia majora. 

They have more color than the labia majora and contain numerous sebaceous glands. 

They meet posteriorly at the frenulum of the labia minora, a fold of restrictive tissue. 

The labia minora meet again at the front of the vulva to form the clitoral hood, also known as the prepuce.The visible portion of the clitoris is the clitoral glans. 

Typically, this is roughly the size and shape of a pea, and can vary in size from about 6 mm to 25 mm. 

The size can also vary when it is erect. 

The clitoral glans contains as many nerve endings as the much larger homologous glans penis in the male, which makes it highly sensitive. 

The only known function of the clitoris is to focus sexual feelings. 

The clitoral hood is a protective fold of skin which varies in shape and size, and it may partially or completely cover the clitoris. 

The clitoris is the homologue of the penis, and the clitoral hood is the female equivalent of the male foreskin, and may be partially or completely hidden within the pudendal cleft.


=== Vestibule ===

The area between the labia minora where the vaginal opening and the urinary meatus are located is called the vulval vestibule, or vestibule of the vagina. 

The urinary meatus is below the clitoris and just in front of the vaginal opening which is near to the perineum. 

The term introitus is more technically correct than "opening", since the vagina is usually collapsed, with the opening closed. 

The introitus is sometimes partly covered by a membrane called the hymen. 

The hymen will usually rupture during the first episode of vigorous sex, and the blood produced by this rupture has been seen to signify virginity. 

However, the hymen may also rupture spontaneously during exercise or be stretched by normal activities such as the use of tampons and menstrual cups, or be so minor as to be unnoticeable, or be absent. 

In some rare cases, the hymen may completely cover the vaginal opening, requiring a surgical procedure called a hymenotomy. 

On either side of the back part of the vaginal opening are the two greater vestibular glands known as Bartholin's glands. 

These glands secrete mucus and a vaginal and vulval lubricant. 

They are homologous to the bulbourethral glands in the male. 

The lesser vestibular glands known as Skene's glands, are found on the anterior wall of the vagina. 

They are homologues of the male prostate gland and are also referred to as the female prostate.


=== Muscles ===

Pelvic floor muscles help to support the vulvar structures. 

The voluntary, pubococcygeus muscle, part of the levator ani muscle partially constricts the vaginal opening. 

Other muscles of the urogenital triangle support the vulvar area and they include the transverse perineal muscles, the bulbospongiosus, and the ischiocavernosus muscles. 

The bulbospongiosus muscle decreases the vaginal opening. 

Their contractions play a role in the vaginal contractions of orgasm by causing the vestibular bulbs to contract.


=== Blood, lymph and nerve supply ===

The tissues of the vulva are highly vascularised and blood supply is provided by the three pudendal arteries. 

Venous return is via the external and internal pudendal veins.
The organs and tissues of the vulva are drained by a chain of superficial inguinal lymph nodes located along the blood vessels.The ilioinguinal nerve originates from the first lumbar nerve and gives branches that include the anterior labial nerves which supply the skin of the mons pubis and the labia majora. 

The perineal nerve is one of the terminal branches of the pudendal nerve and this branches into the posterior labial nerves to supply the labia. 

The pudendal nerve branches include the dorsal nerve of clitoris which gives sensation to the clitoris. 

The clitoral glans is seen to be populated by a large number of small nerves, a number that decreases as the tissue changes towards the urethra. 

The density of nerves at the glans indicates that it is the center of heightened sensation. 

Cavernous nerves from the uterovaginal plexus supply the erectile tissue of the clitoris. 

These are joined underneath the pubic arch by the dorsal nerve of the clitoris.
The pudendal nerve enters the pelvis through the lesser sciatic foramen and continues medial to the internal pudendal artery. 

The point where the nerve circles the ischial spine is the location where a pudendal block of local anesthetic can be administered to inhibit sensation to the vulva. 

A number of smaller nerves split off from the pudendal nerve. 

The deep branch of the perineal nerve supplies the muscles of the perineum and a branch of this supplies the bulb of the vestibule.


=== Variations ===


There is a great deal of variation in the appearance of female genitals. 

Much of this variation lies in the significant differences in the size, shape, and color of the labia minora. 

Though called the smaller lips they can often be of considerable size and may protrude outside the vagina or labia majora. 

This variation has also been evidenced in a large display of 400 vulval casts called the Great Wall of Vagina created by Jamie McCartney to fill the lack of information of what a normal vulva looks like. 

The casts taken from a large and varied group of women showed clearly that there is much variation. 

Pubic hair also varies in its color, texture, and amount of curl.Researchers from the Elizabeth Garret Anderson Hospital, London, measured multiple genital dimensions of 50 women between the ages of 18 and 50, with a mean age of 35.6:


== Development ==



=== Prenatal development ===


In week three of the development of the embryo, mesenchyme cells from the primitive streak migrate around the cloacal membrane. 

Early in the fifth week the cells form two swellings called the cloacal folds. 

The cloacal folds meet in front of the cloacal membrane and form a raised area known as the genital tubercle. 

The urorectal septum fuses with the cloacal membrane to form the perineum. 

This division creates two areas one surrounded by the urethral folds and the other by the anal folds. 

These areas become the urogenital triangle and the anal triangle. 

The area between the vagina and the anus is known as the clinical perineum.At the same time a pair of swellings on either side of the urethral folds known as the genital swellings develop into the labioscrotal swellings. 

Sexual differentiation takes place, and at the end of week 6 in the female, hormones stimulate further development and the genital tubercle bends and forms the clitoris. 

The urethral folds form the labia minora and the labioscrotal swellings form the labia majora. 

At this time the sexes still cannot be distinguished. 

The appearance of the external genitalia is similar in male and female embryos until the twelfth week and even then is difficult to distinguish.The uterovaginal canal or genital canal, forms in the third month of the development of the urogenital system. 

The lower part of the canal is blocked off by a plate of tissue, the vaginal plate. 

This tissue develops and lengthens during the third to fifth months and the lower part of the vaginal canal is formed by a process of desquamation or cell shedding. 

The end of the vaginal canal is blocked off by an endodermal membrane which separates the opening from the vestibule. 

In the fifth month the membrane degenerates but leaves a remnant called the hymen.Organs in the male and female with a shared common ancestry are said to be homologous. 

The clitoral glans is homologous to the male glans penis, and the clitoral body and the clitoral crura are homologous to the corpora cavernosa of the penis. 

The labia majora is homologous to the scrotum; the clitoral hood is homologous to the foreskin, and the labia minora is homologous to the spongy urethra. 

The vestibular bulbs beneath the skin of the labia minora are homologous to the corpus spongiosum, the tissue of the penis surrounding the urethra, and to the bulb of the penis. 

Bartholin's glands are homologous to the bulbourethral glands in males.


=== Childhood ===

The newborn's vulva may be swollen or enlarged as a result of having been exposed, via the placenta, to her mother's increased levels of hormones. 

The labia majora are closed. 

These changes disappear over the first few months. 

During childhood before puberty, the lack of estrogen can cause the labia to become sticky and to ultimately join firmly together. 

This condition is known as labial fusion and is rarely found after puberty when oestrogen production has increased.


=== Puberty ===

Puberty is the onset of the ability to reproduce, and takes place over two to three years, producing a number of changes. 

The structures of the vulva become proportionately larger and may become more pronounced. 

Pubarche, the first appearance of pubic hair develops, firstly on the labia majora, and later spreads to the mons pubis, and sometimes to the inner thighs and perineum. 

Pubic hair is much coarser than other body hair, and is considered a secondary sex characteristic. 

Pubarche can occur independently of puberty. 

Premature pubarche may sometimes indicate a later metabolic-endocrine disorder seen at adolescence. 

The disorder sometimes known as a polyendocrine disorder is marked by elevated levels of androgen, insulin, and lipids, and may originate in the fetus. 

Instead of being seen as a normal variant it is proposed that premature pubarche may be seen as a marker for these later endocrine disorders.Apocrine sweat glands secrete sweat into the pubic hair follicles. 

This is broken down by bacteria on the skin and produces an odor, which some consider to act as an attractant sex pheromone. 

The labia minora may grow more prominent and undergo changes in color. 

At puberty the first monthly period known as menarche marks the onset of menstruation.
In prepubertal girls the skin of the vulva is thin and delicate, and its neutral pH makes it prone to irritation. 

The production of the female sex hormone estradiol (an estrogen) at puberty, causes the perineal skin to thicken by keratinising, and this reduces the risk of infection. 

Estrogen also causes the laying down of fat in the development of the secondary sex characteristics. 

This contributes to the maturation of the vulva with increases in the size of the mons pubis, and the labia majora and the enlargement of the labia minora.


=== Pregnancy ===

In pregnancy the vulva and vagina take on a bluish colouring due to venous congestion. 

This appears between the eighth and twelfth week and continues to darken as the pregnancy continues. 

Estrogen is produced in large quantities during pregnancy and this causes the external genitals to become enlarged. 

The vaginal opening and the vagina are also enlarged. 

After childbirth a vaginal discharge known as lochia is produced and continues for about ten days.


=== Menopause ===

During menopause, hormone levels decrease, which causes changes in the vulva known as vulvovaginal atrophy. 

The decreased estrogen affects the mons, the labia, and the vaginal opening and can cause pale, itchy, and sore skin. 

Other visible changes are a thinning of the pubic hair, a loss of fat from the labia majora, a thinning of the labia minora, and a narrowing of the vaginal opening. 

This condition has been renamed by some bodies as the genitourinary syndrome of menopause as a more comprehensive term.


== Function and physiology ==


The vulva has a major role to play in the reproductive system. 

It provides entry to, and protection for the uterus, and the right conditions in terms of warmth and moisture that aids in its sexual and reproductive functions. 

The external organs of the vulva are richly innervated and provide pleasure when properly stimulated. 

The mons pubis provides cushioning against the pubic bone during intercourse.A number of different secretions are associated with the vulva, including urine (from the urethral opening), sweat (from the apocrine glands), menses (leaving from the vagina), sebum (from the sebaceous glands), alkaline fluid (from the Bartholin's glands), mucus (from the Skene's glands), vaginal lubrication from the vaginal wall and smegma. 

Smegma is a white substance formed from a combination of dead cells, skin oils, moisture and naturally occurring bacteria, that forms in the genitalia. 

In females this thickened secretion collects around the clitoris and labial folds. 

It can cause discomfort during sexual activity as it can cause the clitoral glans to stick to the hood, and is easily removed by bathing. 

Aliphatic acids known as copulins are also secreted in the vagina. 

These are believed to act as pheromones. 

Their fatty acid composition, and consequently their odor changes in relation to the stages of the menstrual cycle.


=== Sexual arousal ===


The clitoris and the labia minora are both erogenous areas in the vulva. 

Local stimulation can involve the clitoris, vagina and other perineal regions. 

The clitoris is the human female's most sensitive erogenous zone and generally the primary anatomical source of human female sexual pleasure. 

Sexual stimulation of the clitoris (by a number of means) can result in widespread sexual arousal and, if maintained, can result in orgasm. 

Stimulation to orgasm is optimally achieved by a massaging sensation.Sexual arousal results in a number of physical changes in the vulva. 

During arousal vaginal lubrication increases. 

Vulva tissue is highly vascularised; arterioles dilate in response to sexual arousal and the smaller veins will compress after arousal, so that the clitoris and labia minora increase in size. 

Increased vasocongestion in the vagina causes it to swell, decreasing the size of the vaginal opening by about 30%. 

The clitoris becomes increasingly erect, and the glans moves towards the pubic bone, becoming concealed by the hood. 

The labia minora increase considerably in thickness. 

The labia minora sometimes change considerably in color, going from pink to red in lighter skinned women who have not borne a child, or red to dark red in those that have. 

Immediately prior to an orgasm, the clitoris becomes exceptionally engorged, causing the glans to appear to retract into the clitoral hood. 

Rhythmic muscle contractions occur in the outer third of the vagina, as well as the uterus and anus. 

Contractions become less intense and more randomly spaced as the orgasm continues. 

The number of contractions that accompany an orgasm vary depending on its intensity. 

An orgasm may be accompanied by female ejaculation, causing liquid from either the Skene's gland or bladder to be expelled through the urethra. 

The pooled blood begins to dissipate, although at a much slower rate if an orgasm has not occurred. 

The vagina and vaginal opening return to their normal relaxed state, and the rest of the vulva returns to its normal size, position and color.


=== Distance between vagina and clitoral glans ===

The distance of the frenula clitoridis at the clitoral glans from the urinary meatus located in the vaginal opening, the so-called CUMD (clitoral-urinary meatus distance), is measured.
In the 1920s, Marie Bonaparte conducted surveys among women to find out whether they get an orgasm during coitus. 

The causes of lack of sexual arousal were known to be aversion or psychological inhibitions. 

Among the test subjects, there were women who, with a man they loved and desired, "felt the greatest pleasure at certain tender touches", but were nevertheless not sufficiently aroused during coitus. 

Bonaparte examined the distance between the clitoris and the vagina in 200 women. 

In 69% of the women, the CUMD was 1.25 to 2.25 cm, most of whom experienced the sexual act as satisfying. 

In 10% of the women, the CUMD was 2.5 cm, 21% measured 2.75 to 3.5 cm. 

All the women with a large gap stated that they did not experience satisfying pleasure from penile penetration, although some were very sensitive to "precise stroking by the man".
Bonaparte concluded from this an anatomical causal connection between a large CUMD and "vaginal frigidity" explaining why only women with the clitoral glans close to the vagina (so that it is continuously touched by the penis) were able to experience "the highest sexual pleasure" during coitus.

		
		
		
		
		
A study by Carney Landis and colleagues in 1940 includes statements to this effect: "On the physical side orgasm capacity is related to clitoris-meatus distance." (Landis et al. 1940).In 2011, Kim Wallen and Elisabeth Lloyd reviewed Bonaparte's research and confirmed an inverse correlation between CUMD and orgasm through intercourse.
In methods taught since the 1970s by Betty Dodson, the sexual arousal of the woman during vaginal intercourse is to be ensured by the woman independently stimulating her vulva and clitoris continuously with her hands or possibly with a vibrator. 

According to Kim Wallen, the CUMD says nothing about a happy sex life, rather that a large gap gives couples an opportunity "to be a bit more inventive in how they have sex."


== Clinical significance ==



=== Irritation ===

Irritation and itching of the vulva is called pruritus vulvae. 

This can be a symptom of many disorders, some of which may be determined by a patch test. 

The most common cause of irritation is thrush, a fungal infection. 

Vulvovaginal health measures can help to prevent many disorders including thrush. 

Infections of the vagina such as vaginosis and of the uterus may produce vaginal discharge which can be an irritant when it comes into contact with the vulvar tissue. 

Inflammation as vaginitis, and vulvovaginitis can result from this causing irritation and pain. 

Ingrown hairs resulting from pubic hair shaving can cause folliculitis where the hair follicle becomes infected; or give rise to an inflammatory response known as pseudofolliculitis pubis. 

A less common cause of irritation is genital lichen planus another inflammatory disorder. 

A severe variant of this is vulvovaginal-gingival syndrome which can lead to narrowing of the vagina, or vulva destruction. 

Many types of infection and other diseases including some cancers may cause irritation.


=== Sexually transmitted infections ===


Vulvar organs and tissues can become affected by different infectious agents such as bacteria and viruses, or infested by parasites such as lice and mites. 

Over thirty types of pathogen can be sexually transmitted, and many of these affect the genitals. 

Most STIs do not produce symptoms or symptoms may be mild and not be indicative of an STI. 

The practice of safe sex can greatly reduce the risk of infection from many sexually transmitted pathogens. 

The use of condoms (either male or female condoms) is one of the most effective methods of protection.Bacterial infections include: chancroid – characterised by genital ulcers known as chancres; granuloma inguinale showing as inflammatory granulomas often described as nodules; syphilis –the primary stage classically presents with a single chancre, a firm, painless, non-itchy ulcer, but there may be multiple sores; and gonorrhea that very often presents no symptoms but can result in discharge.Viral infections include human papillomavirus infection (HPV) – this is the most common STI and has many types. 

Genital HPV can cause genital warts. 

There have been links made between HPV and vulvar cancer, though HPV most often causes cervical cancer. 

Genital herpes is mostly asymptomatic but can present with small blisters that break open into ulcers. 

HIV/AIDS is mostly transmitted through sexual activity, and the vulva in some cases can be affected by sores. 
A highly contagious viral infection is molluscum contagiosum which is transmissible on close contact and causes water warts.Parasitic infections include trichomoniasis, pediculosis pubis, and scabies. 

Trichomoniasis is transmitted by a parasitic protozoan and is the most common non-viral STI. 

Most cases are asymptomatic but may present symptoms of irritation and a discharge of unusual odor. 

Pediculosis pubis commonly called crabs, is a disease caused by the crab louse an ectoparasite. 

When the pubic hair is infested the irritation produced can be intense. 

Scabies, also known as the "seven year itch", is caused by another ectoparasite, the mite Sarcoptes scabiei, giving intense irritation.


=== Cancer ===


Malignancies can develop in the glabrous and hair-bearing parts of the vulva. 

Based on the cellular origin and histology, vulvar cancers are classified into squamous cell carcinomas, melanomas, basal cell carcinomas, adenocarcinomas, sarcomas and invasive extramammary Paget's disease. 

Squamous cell carcinomas represent the most common variant of vulvar cancers and account for approximately 75%. 

These are usually found in the labia particularly the labia majora. 

The second most common vulvar cancer is basal cell carcinoma, which rarely spreads to regional lymph nodes or distant organs. 

The third most common subtype is vulvar melanoma. 

Studies have shown that vulvar melanomas appear to have a different tumor biology and mutational characteristics compared to skin melanomas, which has a direct impact on the medical treatment of vulvar melanomas.Signs and symptoms of vulvar cancer can include: itching, or bleeding; skin changes including rashes, sores, lumps or ulcers, and changes in vulvar skin coloration. 

Pelvic pain might also occur especially during urinating and sex. 

However, a significant proportion remains asymptomatic in early disease stages, often delaying its diagnosis. 

As such, 32% of women with vulvar melanoma already have regional involvement or distant metastases at the time of diagnosis, which significantly impacts prognosis.Surgery (with or without removal of regional lymph nodes) is usually the primary treatment modality. 

Typically, a wide-local excision is performed, in which the tumor is excised including a safety-margin of healthy tissue to ensure its entire removal, which is confirmed by a pathologist. 

In more advanced disease, a (partial) vulvectomy may need to be performed in order to remove some or all of the vulva. 

Advanced-stage melanomas can be treated with checkpoint inhibitors.


=== Other ===

Labial fusion, also called labial adhesion, is the fusion of the labia minora. 

This affects a number of young girls and is not considered unduly problematic. 

The condition can usually be treated using creams, or it may right itself with the release of hormones at the onset of puberty.Vulvodynia is chronic pain in the vulvar region. 

There is no single identifiable cause. 

A subtype of this is vulvar vestibulitis but since this is not thought to be an inflammatory condition it is more usually referred to as vestibulodynia. 

Vulvar vestibulitis usually affects pre-menopausal women.A number of skin disorders such as lichen sclerosus, and lichen simplex chronicus can affect the vulva. 

Crohn's disease of the vulva is an uncommon form of metastatic Crohn's disease which manifests as a skin condition showing as hypertrophic lesions or vulvar abscesses. 

Papillary hidradenomas are nodules that can ulcerate and are mostly found on the skin of the labia or of the interlabial folds. 

Another more complex ulcerative condition is hidradenitis suppurativa which is characterised by painful cysts that can ulcerate, and recur, and can become chronic lasting for many years. 

Chronic cases can develop into squamous cell carcinomas. 

An asymptomatic skin disorder of the vulval vestibule is vestibular papillomatosis which is characterised by fine, pink projections from either the epithelium of the vulva or from the labia minora. 

Dermatoscopy can distinguish this condition from genital warts. 

A subtype of psoriasis, an autoimmune disease, is inverse psoriasis in which red patches can appear in the skin folds of the labia.


=== Childbirth ===

The vulvar region is at risk for trauma during childbirth.
During childbirth, the vagina and vulva must stretch to accommodate the baby's head (approximately 9.5 cm (3.7 in)). 

This can result in tears known as perineal tears in the vaginal opening, and other structures within the perineum. 

An episiotomy (a pre-emptive surgical cutting of the perineum) is sometimes performed to facilitate delivery and limit tearing. 

A tear takes longer to heal than an incision. 

Tears and incisions may be repaired using sutures that may be layered. 

Among the methods of hair removal evaluated for pre-surgeries, pubic hair shaving known as prepping, was seen to increase the risk of surgical site infections. 

No advantages have been demonstrated in the routine shaving of pubic hair prior to childbirth.


=== Surgery ===


Genitoplasties are plastic surgeries that can be carried out to repair, restore or alter vulvar tissues, particularly following damage caused by injury or cancer treatment. 

These procedures include vaginoplasty which can also be performed as a cosmetic surgery. 

Other cosmetic surgeries to change the appearance of external structures include labiaplasties. 

Some of these procedures, vaginoplasties and labiaplasties, are also carried out as sex reassignment surgeries.The use of cosmetic surgeries has been criticized by clinicians. 

The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists recommends that women be informed of the risks of these surgeries. 

They refer to the lack of data relevant to their safety and effectiveness and to the potential associated risks such as infection, altered sensation, dyspareunia, adhesions, and scarring. 

There is also a percentage of people seeking cosmetic surgery who may be suffering from body dysmorphic disorder and surgery in these cases can be counterproductive.


== Society and culture ==



=== Altering the female genitalia ===


In some cultural practices, particularly in the African Khoikhoi and Rwanda cultures, the labia minora are purposefully stretched by repeated pulling on them and sometimes by attaching weights. 

Labia stretching is a recognised, familial cultural practice in parts of Eastern and Southern Africa. 

This is a desired and encouraged practice by the women (starting at puberty) in order to promote better sexual satisfaction for both parties. 

The achieved extensions can hang down below the labia majora for up to seven inches.  Children in the African diaspora practise this too, so it occurs within immigrant communities in, for example, Britain, where a BBC report labelled it a hidden form of child abuse The girls are subject to familial and social pressure to conform.In some cultures, including modern Western culture, women have shaved or otherwise removed the hair from part or all of the vulva. 

When high-cut swimsuits became fashionable, women who wished to wear them would remove the hair on either side of their pubic triangles, to avoid exhibiting pubic hair. 

Other women prefer to retain their vulva hair. 

The removal of hair from the vulva is a fairly recent phenomenon in the United States, Canada, and Western Europe, usually in the form of bikini waxing or Brazilian waxing, but has been prevalent in many Eastern European and Middle Eastern cultures for centuries, usually due to the idea that it may be more hygienic, or originating in prostitution and pornography. 

Hair removal may include all, most, or some of the hair. 

French waxing leaves a small amount of hair on either side of the labia or a strip directly above and in line with the pudendal cleft called a landing strip. 

Islam teaching includes Muslim hygienical jurisprudence a practice of which is the removal of pubic hair.

Several forms of genital piercings can be made in the vulva, and include the Christina piercing, the Nefertiti piercing, the fourchette piercing, and labia piercings. 

Piercings are usually performed for aesthetic purposes, but some forms like the clitoral hood piercing might also enhance pleasure during sex. 

Though they are common in traditional cultures, intimate piercings are a fairly recent trend in Western society. 

Other forms of permanent modifications of the vulva for cultural, decorative or aesthetic reasons are genital tattoos or scarification (so-called "hanabira").
Female genital surgery includes laser resurfacing of the labia to remove wrinkles, labiaplasty (reducing the size of the labia) and vaginoplasty. 

In September 2007, the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) issued a committee opinion on these and other female genital surgeries, including "vaginal rejuvenation", "designer vaginoplasty", "revirgination", and "G-spot amplification". 

This opinion states that the safety of these procedures has not been documented. 

The ACOG and the ISSVD recommend that women seeking these surgeries need to be informed about the lack of data supporting these procedures and the potential associated risks such as infection, altered sensation, dyspareunia, adhesions, and scarring.With the growing popularity of female cosmetic genital surgeries, the practice increasingly draws criticism from an opposition movement of cyberfeminist activist groups and platforms, called the labia pride movement. 

The major point of contention is that heavy advertising for these procedures, in combination with a lack of public education, fosters body insecurities in women with larger labia in spite of the fact that there is normal and pronounced individual variation in the size of labia. 

The preference for smaller labia is a matter of a fashion fad and is without clinical or functional significance.The most prevalent form of non-consensual genital alteration is that of female genital mutilation. 

This mostly involves the partial or complete removal of genital organs. 

Female genital mutilation is carried out in thirty countries in Africa and Asia with more than 200 million girls being affected, and some women (as of 2018). 

Nearly all of the procedures are carried out on young girls. 

The practices are also carried out globally among migrants from these areas. 

Female genital mutilation is claimed to be mostly carried out for cultural traditional reasons.


=== Etymology ===


The word vulva is Latin for "womb". 

It derives from the 1540s in referring to the womb and female sexual organs, from the earlier volvere meaning to turn, roll or revolve, with further derivatives such as used in volvox, and volvulus (twisted bowel). 

The naming of the female (and male) genitals as pudenda membra, meaning parts to be ashamed of, dates from the mid-17th century. 

The naming influenced the general perception of the vulva and this is shown in depicted gynaecological procedures. 

The examiner shown in the Obstetrical examination dated 1822, is adopting the compromise procedure where the woman's genitals cannot be seen.


=== Terminology ===

In 2021, a study in the UK showed that few are able to label the structure of the vulva correctly.There are many sexual slang terms used for the vulva. 

Cunt, a medieval word for the vulva and once the standard term, has become a vulgarism, and in other uses one of the strongest offensive and abusive swearwords in English-speaking cultures. 

The word has been replaced in normal usage by a few euphemisms including pussy (vulgar slang) and fanny (UK) which used to be a common pet name. 

In the UK these terms have other non-sexual meanings that lend themselves to double entendres, such as pussy which is used as a term of endearment for a pet cat – pussy cat. 

In North American informal use the term pussy can also refer to a weak or effeminate man, and fanny is a term used for the buttocks. 

Other slang terms are muff, snatch, twat, and crotch. 

Vagina is often used as a synonym for vulva even though it is a separate part of the anatomy.


=== Religion and art ===


Some cultures have long celebrated and even worshipped the vulva. 

During the Uruk period (c. 4000–3100 BC), the ancient Sumerians regarded the vulva as sacred and a vast number of Sumerian poems praising the vulva of Inanna, the goddess of love, sex, and fertility, have survived. 

In Sumerian religion, the goddess Nin-imma is the divine personification of female genitalia. 

Vaginal fluid is always described in Sumerian texts as tasting "sweet" and, in a Sumerian bridal hymn, a young maiden rejoices that her vulva has grown hair. 

Clay models of vulvas were discovered in the temple of Inanna at Ashur.

Some major Hindu traditions such as Shaktism, a goddess-centred tradition, revere the vulva and vagina under the name yoni. 

The goddess as Devi is worshipped as the supreme deity. 

The yoni is a representation of the female deity and is found in many temples as a focus for prayer and offerings. 

It is also represented symbolically as a mudra in spiritual practices, including yoga.Sheela na gigs are figurative carvings of naked women displaying an exaggerated vulva. 

They are found in ancient and medieval European contexts. 

They are displayed on many churches, but their origin and significance is debatable. 

A main line of thinking is that they were used to ward off evil spirits. 

Another view is that the sheela na gig was a divine assistant in childbirth. 

Starr Goode explores the image and possible meanings of the Sheela na gig and Baubo images in particular, but writes also about the recurring image worldwide. 

Through hundreds of photographs, she demonstrates that the image of a female displaying her vulva is not specific to European religious art or architecture, but that similar images are found in the visual arts and in mythical narratives of goddesses and heroines parting their thighs to reveal what she calls, "sacred powers." Her theory is that "the image is so rooted in our psyches that it seems as if the icon is the original cosmological center of the human imagination."

L'Origine du monde ("Origin of the world") painted by Gustave Courbet in 1866 was an early Realist painting of a vulva that only became exhibited many years later. 

The painting was commissioned by Ottoman diplomat Halil Şerif Paşa. 

The woman used as the model for the painting was probably Halil's lover Constance Quéniaux. 

However another potential model is Marie-Anne Detourbay, who was also a lover of Halil Şerif Pasha.Japanese sculptor and manga artist Megumi Igarashi has focused much of her work on painting and modelling vulvas and vulva-themed works. 

She has used molds to create dioramas – three-dimensional models of her vulva with the hope of demystifying the female genitals.An art installation called The Dinner Party by feminist artist, Judy Chicago, portrays a symbolic history of famous women. 

The dinner plates each depict an elaborate vulval form and they are arranged in a triangular vulva shape. 

Another installation was made by British artist Jamie McCartney who used the casts of four hundred vulvas to create The Great Wall of Vagina in 2011. 

The vagina casts are life-size. 

Explanations written by the project's sexual health adviser accompany these. 

The purpose of the artist was to "address some of the stigmas and misconceptions that are commonplace".



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vulva
;;;ES;;;



VULVA


La vulva (plural: vulvas o vulvae; derivado del latín para envoltorio o cubierta) consiste en los órganos sexuales femeninos externos.

La vulva incluye el monte de Venus (o monte de Venus), los labios mayores, los labios menores, el clítoris, los bulbos vestibulares, el vestíbulo vulvar, el meato urinario, la abertura vaginal, el himen y las glándulas vestibulares de Bartholin y Skene.

El meato urinario también se incluye cuando se abre hacia el vestíbulo vulvar.

Otras características de la vulva incluyen la hendidura pudenda, las glándulas sebáceas, el triángulo urogenital (parte anterior del perineo) y el vello púbico.

La vulva incluye la entrada a la vagina, que conduce al útero, y proporciona una doble capa de protección para este por los pliegues de los labios mayores y menores.

Los músculos del piso pélvico sostienen las estructuras de la vulva.

Otros músculos del triángulo urogenital también brindan apoyo.
El suministro de sangre a la vulva proviene de las tres arterias pudenda.

Las venas pudendas internas dan drenaje.

Los vasos linfáticos aferentes llevan la linfa desde la vulva hasta los ganglios linfáticos inguinales.

Los nervios que inervan la vulva son el nervio pudendo, el nervio perineal, el nervio ilioinguinal y sus ramas.

El suministro de sangre y nervios a la vulva contribuye a las etapas de excitación sexual que son útiles en el proceso de reproducción.
Siguiendo el desarrollo de la vulva, se producen cambios en el nacimiento, la niñez, la pubertad, la menopausia y la posmenopausia.

Existe una gran variación en la apariencia de la vulva, particularmente en relación con los labios menores.

La vulva puede verse afectada por muchos trastornos que a menudo pueden provocar irritación.

Las medidas de salud vulvovaginal pueden prevenir muchos de estos.

Otros trastornos incluyen una serie de infecciones y cánceres.

Hay varias cirugías de restauración vulvar conocidas como genitoplastias, y algunas de ellas también se utilizan como procedimientos de cirugía estética.
Diferentes culturas han tenido diferentes puntos de vista de la vulva.

Algunas religiones y sociedades antiguas han adorado la vulva y reverenciado a la mujer como una diosa.

Las principales tradiciones del hinduismo continúan con esto.

En las sociedades occidentales, ha habido una actitud en gran parte negativa tipificada por la terminología médica de pudenda membra, que significa partes de las que avergonzarse.

Ha habido una reacción artística a esto en varios intentos de generar una perspectiva más positiva y natural, como el trabajo de artistas británicos, estadounidenses y japoneses.

Si bien la vagina es una parte separada de la anatomía, a menudo se ha utilizado como sinónimo de vulva.


== Estructura ==


Las estructuras principales de la vulva son: el monte de Venus, los labios mayores y los labios menores, las partes externas del clítoris: el capuchón del clítoris y el glande, el meato urinario, la abertura vaginal y el himen, y las glándulas vestibulares de Bartholin y Skene.

Otras características incluyen la hendidura pudenda, el vello púbico, las glándulas sebáceas, el vestíbulo vulvar y el triángulo urogenital.


=== Mons pubis ===

El monte de Venus es el montículo blando de tejido adiposo en la parte frontal de la vulva, en la región púbica que cubre el hueso púbico.

Mons pubis en latín significa "montículo púbico" y está presente en ambos sexos para actuar como un cojín durante las relaciones sexuales, y es más pronunciado en la mujer.

La variante del término mons veneris ('montículo de Venus') se usa específicamente para las mujeres.

La parte inferior del monte de Venus está dividida por una fisura, la hendidura pudenda, que separa el monte de Venus en los labios mayores.

Después de la pubertad, el capuchón del clítoris y los labios menores pueden sobresalir en la hendidura pudenda en un grado variable.

El monte de Venus y los labios mayores se cubren de vello púbico en la pubertad.


=== labios ===

Los labios mayores y los labios menores cubren el vestíbulo vulvar.

El par exterior de pliegues, dividido por la hendidura pudenda, son los labios mayores (nuevo latín para "labios más grandes").

Contienen y protegen las otras estructuras de la vulva.

Los labios mayores se encuentran al frente en el monte de Venus y posteriormente en el triángulo urogenital (la parte anterior del perineo) entre la hendidura pudenda y el ano.

Los labios menores a menudo son de color rosa o negro parduzco, según el color de la piel de la persona. Los surcos entre los labios mayores y los labios menores se denominan surcos interlabiales o pliegues interlabiales.

Los labios menores (labios más pequeños) son los dos pliegues suaves internos, dentro de los labios mayores.

Tienen más color que los labios mayores y contienen numerosas glándulas sebáceas.

Se encuentran posteriormente en el frenillo de los labios menores, un pliegue de tejido restrictivo.

Los labios menores se juntan nuevamente en la parte delantera de la vulva para formar el capuchón del clítoris, también conocido como prepucio. La porción visible del clítoris es el glande del clítoris.

Por lo general, tiene aproximadamente el tamaño y la forma de un guisante, y puede variar en tamaño desde aproximadamente 6 mm a 25 mm.

El tamaño también puede variar cuando está erecto.

El glande del clítoris contiene tantas terminaciones nerviosas como el glande del pene homólogo mucho más grande en el hombre, lo que lo hace muy sensible.

La única función conocida del clítoris es concentrar los sentimientos sexuales.

El capuchón del clítoris es un pliegue protector de piel que varía en forma y tamaño, y puede cubrir parcial o completamente el clítoris.

El clítoris es el homólogo del pene, y el capuchón del clítoris es el equivalente femenino del prepucio masculino, y puede estar total o parcialmente oculto dentro de la hendidura pudenda.


=== Vestíbulo ===

El área entre los labios menores donde se encuentran la abertura vaginal y el meato urinario se llama vestíbulo vulvar o vestíbulo de la vagina.

El meato urinario está debajo del clítoris y justo enfrente de la abertura vaginal que está cerca del perineo.

El término introito es técnicamente más correcto que "apertura", ya que la vagina suele estar colapsada, con la abertura cerrada.

El introito a veces está parcialmente cubierto por una membrana llamada himen.

El himen generalmente se romperá durante el primer episodio de sexo vigoroso, y se ha visto que la sangre producida por esta ruptura significa virginidad.

Sin embargo, el himen también puede romperse espontáneamente durante el ejercicio o estirarse por actividades normales como el uso de tampones y copas menstruales, o ser tan pequeño que no se nota, o estar ausente.

En algunos casos raros, el himen puede cubrir completamente la abertura vaginal, lo que requiere un procedimiento quirúrgico llamado himenotomía.

A ambos lados de la parte posterior de la abertura vaginal se encuentran las dos glándulas vestibulares mayores conocidas como glándulas de Bartolino.

Estas glándulas secretan mucosidad y un lubricante vaginal y vulvar.

Son homólogas a las glándulas bulbouretrales del varón.

Las glándulas vestibulares menores, conocidas como glándulas de Skene, se encuentran en la pared anterior de la vagina.

Son homólogos de la glándula prostática masculina y también se conocen como próstata femenina.


=== Músculos ===

Los músculos del piso pélvico ayudan a sostener las estructuras vulvares.

El músculo pubococcígeo voluntario, parte del músculo elevador del ano, contrae parcialmente la abertura vaginal.

Otros músculos del triángulo urogenital sostienen el área vulvar e incluyen los músculos perineales transversos, el bulboesponjoso y los músculos isquiocavernosos.

El músculo bulboesponjoso disminuye la apertura vaginal.

Sus contracciones juegan un papel en las contracciones vaginales del orgasmo al hacer que los bulbos vestibulares se contraigan.


=== Suministro de sangre, linfa y nervios ===

Los tejidos de la vulva están muy vascularizados y el suministro de sangre lo proporcionan las tres arterias pudenda.

El retorno venoso se realiza a través de las venas pudendas externa e interna.
Los órganos y tejidos de la vulva son drenados por una cadena de ganglios linfáticos inguinales superficiales ubicados a lo largo de los vasos sanguíneos. El nervio ilioinguinal se origina en el primer nervio lumbar y da ramas que incluyen los nervios labiales anteriores que inervan la piel del monte de Venus y los labios mayores.

El nervio perineal es una de las ramas terminales del nervio pudendo y este se ramifica en los nervios labiales posteriores para inervar los labios.

Las ramas del nervio pudendo incluyen el nervio dorsal del clítoris que da sensación al clítoris.

El glande del clítoris se ve poblado por un gran número de pequeños nervios, número que va disminuyendo a medida que el tejido cambia hacia la uretra.

La densidad de los nervios en el glande indica que es el centro de la sensación intensificada.

Los nervios cavernosos del plexo uterovaginal inervan el tejido eréctil del clítoris.

Estos están unidos por debajo del arco púbico por el nervio dorsal del clítoris.
El nervio pudendo entra en la pelvis a través del agujero ciático menor y continúa medial a la arteria pudenda interna.

El punto donde el nervio rodea la espina isquiática es el lugar donde se puede administrar un bloqueo pudendo de anestésico local para inhibir la sensación en la vulva.

Varios nervios más pequeños se separaron del nervio pudendo.

La rama profunda del nervio perineal inerva los músculos del perineo y una rama de este inerva el bulbo del vestíbulo.


=== Variaciones ===


Existe una gran variación en la apariencia de los genitales femeninos.

Gran parte de esta variación radica en las diferencias significativas en el tamaño, la forma y el color de los labios menores.

Aunque se les llama labios más pequeños, a menudo pueden tener un tamaño considerable y pueden sobresalir fuera de la vagina o los labios mayores.

Esta variación también se ha evidenciado en una gran exhibición de 400 moldes vulvares llamada Gran Muralla de la Vagina creada por Jamie McCartney para llenar la falta de información sobre el aspecto de una vulva normal.

Los moldes tomados de un grupo grande y variado de mujeres mostraron claramente que hay mucha variación.

El vello púbico también varía en color, textura y cantidad de rizos. Investigadores del Hospital Elizabeth Garret Anderson de Londres midieron múltiples dimensiones genitales de 50 mujeres de entre 18 y 50 años, con una edad media de 35,6:


== Desarrollo ==



=== Desarrollo prenatal ===


En la semana tres del desarrollo del embrión, las células mesenquimáticas de la línea primitiva migran alrededor de la membrana cloacal.

A principios de la quinta semana, las células forman dos hinchazones llamadas pliegues cloacales.

Los pliegues cloacales se encuentran frente a la membrana cloacal y forman un área elevada conocida como tubérculo genital.

El tabique urorrectal se fusiona con la membrana cloacal para formar el perineo.

Esta división crea dos áreas, una rodeada por los pliegues uretrales y la otra por los pliegues anales.

Estas áreas se convierten en el triángulo urogenital y el triángulo anal.

El área entre la vagina y el ano se conoce como perineo clínico. Al mismo tiempo, un par de hinchazones a cada lado de los pliegues uretrales conocidas como hinchazones genitales se convierten en hinchazones labioescrotales.

Tiene lugar la diferenciación sexual, y al final de la semana 6 en la hembra, las hormonas estimulan un mayor desarrollo y el tubérculo genital se dobla y forma el clítoris.

Los pliegues uretrales forman los labios menores y las protuberancias labioescrotales forman los labios mayores.

En este momento todavía no se pueden distinguir los sexos.

La apariencia de los genitales externos es similar en embriones masculinos y femeninos hasta la duodécima semana y aún así es difícil de distinguir. El canal uterovaginal o canal genital, se forma en el tercer mes de desarrollo del sistema urogenital.

La parte inferior del canal está bloqueada por una placa de tejido, la placa vaginal.

Este tejido se desarrolla y alarga durante el tercer al quinto mes y la parte inferior del canal vaginal se forma por un proceso de descamación o desprendimiento de células.

El final del canal vaginal está bloqueado por una membrana endodérmica que separa la abertura del vestíbulo.

En el quinto mes la membrana degenera pero deja un remanente llamado himen. Se dice que los órganos masculinos y femeninos con un ancestro común compartido son homólogos.

El glande del clítoris es homólogo al glande del pene masculino, y el cuerpo del clítoris y los pilares del clítoris son homólogos a los cuerpos cavernosos del pene.

Los labios mayores son homólogos al escroto; el capuchón del clítoris es homólogo al prepucio y los labios menores son homólogos a la uretra esponjosa.

Los bulbos vestibulares debajo de la piel de los labios menores son homólogos al cuerpo esponjoso, el tejido del pene que rodea la uretra y al bulbo del pene.

Las glándulas de Bartholin son homólogas a las glándulas bulbouretrales en los hombres.


=== Infancia ===

La vulva del recién nacido puede estar hinchada o agrandada como resultado de haber estado expuesta, a través de la placenta, a los niveles elevados de hormonas de su madre.

Los labios mayores están cerrados.

Estos cambios desaparecen durante los primeros meses.

Durante la niñez antes de la pubertad, la falta de estrógeno puede hacer que los labios se vuelvan pegajosos y finalmente se unan firmemente.

Esta condición se conoce como fusión labial y rara vez se encuentra después de la pubertad cuando la producción de estrógeno ha aumentado.


=== Pubertad ===

La pubertad es el inicio de la capacidad de reproducirse y tiene lugar durante dos o tres años, produciendo una serie de cambios.

Las estructuras de la vulva se vuelven proporcionalmente más grandes y pueden volverse más pronunciadas.

Pubarquia, la primera aparición de vello púbico se desarrolla, primero en los labios mayores y luego se extiende al monte de Venus y, a veces, a la parte interna de los muslos y el perineo.

El vello púbico es mucho más grueso que el resto del vello corporal y se considera una característica sexual secundaria.

La pubarquia puede ocurrir independientemente de la pubertad.

La pubarquia prematura a veces puede indicar un trastorno metabólico-endocrino posterior observado en la adolescencia.

El trastorno, a veces conocido como trastorno poliendocrino, se caracteriza por niveles elevados de andrógenos, insulina y lípidos, y puede originarse en el feto.

En lugar de verse como una variante normal, se propone que la pubarquia prematura puede verse como un marcador de estos trastornos endocrinos posteriores. Las glándulas sudoríparas apocrinas secretan sudor en los folículos pilosos púbicos.

Este es descompuesto por bacterias en la piel y produce un olor, que algunos consideran que actúa como una feromona sexual atrayente.

Los labios menores pueden volverse más prominentes y sufrir cambios de color.

En la pubertad, el primer período mensual conocido como menarquia marca el inicio de la menstruación.
En las niñas prepúberes la piel de la vulva es fina y delicada, y su pH neutro la hace propensa a la irritación.

La producción de la hormona sexual femenina estradiol (un estrógeno) en la pubertad hace que la piel perineal se espese por queratinización, y esto reduce el riesgo de infección.

El estrógeno también provoca la acumulación de grasa en el desarrollo de las características sexuales secundarias.

Esto contribuye a la maduración de la vulva con aumentos en el tamaño del monte de Venus, los labios mayores y el agrandamiento de los labios menores.


=== Embarazo ===

En el embarazo la vulva y la vagina adquieren una coloración azulada debido a la congestión venosa.

Esta aparece entre la octava y la duodécima semana y continúa oscureciéndose a medida que avanza el embarazo.

El estrógeno se produce en grandes cantidades durante el embarazo y esto hace que los genitales externos se agranden.

La abertura vaginal y la vagina también se agrandan.

Después del parto se produce una secreción vaginal conocida como loquios y continúa durante unos diez días.


=== Menopausia ===

Durante la menopausia, los niveles hormonales disminuyen, lo que provoca cambios en la vulva conocidos como atrofia vulvovaginal.

La disminución de estrógeno afecta el monte de Venus, los labios y la abertura vaginal y puede causar palidez, picazón y dolor en la piel.

Otros cambios visibles son adelgazamiento del vello púbico, pérdida de grasa de los labios mayores, adelgazamiento de los labios menores y estrechamiento de la abertura vaginal.

Esta condición ha sido renombrada por algunos organismos como el síndrome genitourinario de la menopausia como un término más completo.


== Función y fisiología ==


La vulva tiene un papel importante que desempeñar en el sistema reproductivo.

Brinda entrada y protección al útero, y las condiciones adecuadas en términos de calor y humedad que ayudan en sus funciones sexuales y reproductivas.

Los órganos externos de la vulva están ricamente inervados y brindan placer cuando se estimulan adecuadamente.

El monte de Venus proporciona amortiguación contra el hueso púbico durante el coito. Varias secreciones diferentes están asociadas con la vulva, incluida la orina (de la abertura de la uretra), el sudor (de las glándulas apocrinas), la menstruación (que sale de la vagina), el sebo ( de las glándulas sebáceas), líquido alcalino (de las glándulas de Bartolino), moco (de las glándulas de Skene), lubricación vaginal de la pared vaginal y esmegma.

El esmegma es una sustancia blanca formada por una combinación de células muertas, aceites de la piel, humedad y bacterias naturales que se forman en los genitales.

En las hembras, esta secreción espesa se acumula alrededor del clítoris y los pliegues labiales.

Puede causar molestias durante la actividad sexual, ya que puede hacer que el glande del clítoris se pegue al capuchón y se elimina fácilmente al bañarse.

Los ácidos alifáticos conocidos como copulinas también se secretan en la vagina.

Se cree que estos actúan como feromonas.

Su composición de ácidos grasos y, en consecuencia, su olor cambia en relación con las etapas del ciclo menstrual.


=== Excitación sexual ===


El clítoris y los labios menores son áreas erógenas en la vulva.

La estimulación local puede involucrar el clítoris, la vagina y otras regiones perineales.

El clítoris es la zona erógena más sensible de la mujer humana y, en general, la principal fuente anatómica del placer sexual femenino humano.

La estimulación sexual del clítoris (por varios medios) puede provocar una excitación sexual generalizada y, si se mantiene, puede provocar un orgasmo.

La estimulación al orgasmo se logra de manera óptima mediante una sensación de masaje. La excitación sexual produce una serie de cambios físicos en la vulva.

Durante la excitación aumenta la lubricación vaginal.

El tejido de la vulva está muy vascularizado; las arteriolas se dilatan en respuesta a la excitación sexual y las venas más pequeñas se comprimen después de la excitación, de modo que el clítoris y los labios menores aumentan de tamaño.

El aumento de la vasocongestión en la vagina hace que se hinche, lo que reduce el tamaño de la abertura vaginal en aproximadamente un 30 %.

El clítoris se vuelve cada vez más erecto y el glande se mueve hacia el hueso púbico, quedando oculto por la capucha.

Los labios menores aumentan considerablemente de grosor.

Los labios menores a veces cambian considerablemente de color, pasando de rosa a rojo en mujeres de piel más clara que no han tenido un hijo, o de rojo a rojo oscuro en aquellas que sí lo han tenido.

Inmediatamente antes de un orgasmo, el clítoris se hincha excepcionalmente, lo que hace que el glande parezca retraerse en el capuchón del clítoris.

Las contracciones musculares rítmicas se producen en el tercio exterior de la vagina, así como en el útero y el ano.

Las contracciones se vuelven menos intensas y más espaciadas al azar a medida que continúa el orgasmo.

El número de contracciones que acompañan a un orgasmo varían según su intensidad.

Un orgasmo puede ir acompañado de eyaculación femenina, lo que hace que el líquido de la glándula de Skene o la vejiga sea expulsado a través de la uretra.

La sangre acumulada comienza a disiparse, aunque a un ritmo mucho más lento si no se ha producido un orgasmo.

La vagina y la abertura vaginal vuelven a su estado relajado normal, y el resto de la vulva vuelve a su tamaño, posición y color normales.


=== Distancia entre la vagina y el glande del clítoris ===

Se mide la distancia entre el frenillo del clítoris en el glande del clítoris y el meato urinario situado en la abertura vaginal, la denominada CUMD (distancia del meato clítoris-urinario).
En la década de 1920, Marie Bonaparte realizó encuestas entre mujeres para averiguar si tenían un orgasmo durante el coito.

Se sabía que las causas de la falta de excitación sexual eran la aversión o las inhibiciones psicológicas.

Entre los sujetos de prueba, había mujeres que, con un hombre al que amaban y deseaban, "sentían el mayor placer con ciertos toques tiernos", pero que, sin embargo, no estaban lo suficientemente excitadas durante el coito.

Bonaparte examinó la distancia entre el clítoris y la vagina en 200 mujeres.

En el 69% de las mujeres, el CUMD fue de 1,25 a 2,25 cm, la mayoría de las cuales experimentó el acto sexual como satisfactorio.

En el 10% de las mujeres, el CUMD fue de 2,5 cm, el 21% midió de 2,75 a 3,5 cm.

Todas las mujeres con una brecha grande afirmaron que no experimentaron un placer satisfactorio con la penetración del pene, aunque algunas fueron muy sensibles a las "caricias precisas del hombre".
Bonaparte concluyó de esto una conexión causal anatómica entre un CUMD grande y la "frigidez vaginal", explicando por qué solo las mujeres con el glande del clítoris cerca de la vagina (de modo que el pene lo toca continuamente) pudieron experimentar "el mayor placer sexual". durante el coito.

 
 
 
 
 
Un estudio realizado por Carney Landis y sus colegas en 1940 incluye declaraciones en este sentido: "En el lado físico, la capacidad del orgasmo está relacionada con la distancia entre el clítoris y el meato". (Landis et al. 1940). En 2011, Kim Wallen y Elisabeth Lloyd revisaron la investigación de Bonaparte y confirmaron una correlación inversa entre CUMD y el orgasmo a través del coito.
En los métodos enseñados desde la década de 1970 por Betty Dodson, la excitación sexual de la mujer durante el coito vaginal debe estar asegurada por la mujer estimulando independientemente su vulva y clítoris continuamente con sus manos o posiblemente con un vibrador.

Según Kim Wallen, el CUMD no dice nada sobre una vida sexual feliz, sino que una gran brecha brinda a las parejas la oportunidad de "ser un poco más inventivos en la forma en que tienen relaciones sexuales".


== Importancia clínica ==



=== Irritación ===

La irritación y picazón de la vulva se llama prurito vulvar.

Esto puede ser un síntoma de muchos trastornos, algunos de los cuales pueden determinarse mediante una prueba de parche.

La causa más común de irritación es la candidiasis, una infección por hongos.

Las medidas de salud vulvovaginal pueden ayudar a prevenir muchos trastornos, incluida la candidiasis.

Las infecciones de la vagina como la vaginosis y del útero pueden producir flujo vaginal que puede ser irritante cuando entra en contacto con el tejido vulvar.

La inflamación como vaginitis y vulvovaginitis puede resultar de esto causando irritación y dolor.

Los vellos encarnados resultantes del afeitado del vello púbico pueden causar foliculitis donde el folículo piloso se infecta; o dar lugar a una respuesta inflamatoria conocida como pseudofoliculitis pubis.

Una causa menos común de irritación es el liquen plano genital, otro trastorno inflamatorio.

Una variante grave de esto es el síndrome vulvovaginal-gingival que puede provocar el estrechamiento de la vagina o la destrucción de la vulva.

Muchos tipos de infecciones y otras enfermedades, incluidos algunos tipos de cáncer, pueden causar irritación.


=== Infecciones de transmisión sexual ===


Los órganos y tejidos vulvares pueden verse afectados por diferentes agentes infecciosos como bacterias y virus, o infestados por parásitos como piojos y ácaros.

Se pueden transmitir sexualmente más de treinta tipos de patógenos, y muchos de ellos afectan los genitales.

La mayoría de las ITS no producen síntomas o los síntomas pueden ser leves y no ser indicativos de una ITS.

La práctica del sexo seguro puede reducir en gran medida el riesgo de infección por muchos patógenos de transmisión sexual.

El uso de condones (ya sean masculinos o femeninos) es uno de los métodos de protección más efectivos. Las infecciones bacterianas incluyen: chancroide, caracterizado por úlceras genitales conocidas como chancros; granuloma inguinal que se muestra como granulomas inflamatorios a menudo descritos como nódulos; sífilis: la etapa primaria clásicamente se presenta con un solo chancro, una úlcera firme, indolora y que no pica, pero puede haber múltiples llagas; y gonorrea que muy a menudo no presenta síntomas pero puede provocar secreción. Las infecciones virales incluyen la infección por el virus del papiloma humano (VPH), que es la ITS más común y tiene muchos tipos.

El VPH genital puede causar verrugas genitales.

Se han establecido vínculos entre el VPH y el cáncer de vulva, aunque el VPH con mayor frecuencia causa cáncer de cuello uterino.

El herpes genital es en su mayoría asintomático, pero puede presentarse con pequeñas ampollas que se abren en úlceras.

El VIH/SIDA se transmite principalmente a través de la actividad sexual y, en algunos casos, la vulva puede verse afectada por llagas.
Una infección viral altamente contagiosa es el molusco contagioso, que se transmite por contacto cercano y causa verrugas de agua. Las infecciones parasitarias incluyen tricomoniasis, pediculosis del pubis y sarna.

La tricomoniasis es transmitida por un protozoo parásito y es la ITS no viral más común.

La mayoría de los casos son asintomáticos pero pueden presentar síntomas de irritación y secreción de olor inusual.

La pediculosis del pubis, comúnmente llamada ladilla, es una enfermedad causada por el piojo de la jaiba, un ectoparásito.

Cuando el vello púbico está infestado la irritación que se produce puede ser intensa.

La sarna, también conocida como la "picazón de los siete años", es causada por otro ectoparásito, el ácaro Sarcoptes scabiei, que produce una intensa irritación.


=== Cáncer ===


Se pueden desarrollar tumores malignos en las partes glabras y pilosas de la vulva.

Según el origen celular y la histología, los cánceres de vulva se clasifican en carcinomas de células escamosas, melanomas, carcinomas de células basales, adenocarcinomas, sarcomas y enfermedad de Paget extramamaria invasiva.

Los carcinomas de células escamosas representan la variante más común de los cánceres de vulva y representan aproximadamente el 75 %.

Por lo general, se encuentran en los labios, particularmente en los labios mayores.

El segundo cáncer de vulva más común es el carcinoma de células basales, que rara vez se disemina a los ganglios linfáticos regionales oa órganos distantes.

El tercer subtipo más común es el melanoma vulvar.

Los estudios han demostrado que los melanomas vulvares parecen tener una biología tumoral y características mutacionales diferentes en comparación con los melanomas cutáneos, lo que tiene un impacto directo en el tratamiento médico de los melanomas vulvares. Los signos y síntomas del cáncer vulvar pueden incluir: picazón o sangrado; cambios en la piel que incluyen erupciones, llagas, bultos o úlceras, y cambios en la coloración de la piel de la vulva.

El dolor pélvico también puede ocurrir especialmente al orinar y al tener relaciones sexuales.

Sin embargo, una proporción significativa permanece asintomática en las primeras etapas de la enfermedad, lo que a menudo retrasa su diagnóstico.

Como tal, el 32 % de las mujeres con melanoma vulvar ya tienen afectación regional o metástasis a distancia en el momento del diagnóstico, lo que afecta significativamente el pronóstico. La cirugía (con o sin extirpación de los ganglios linfáticos regionales) suele ser la modalidad de tratamiento principal.

Por lo general, se realiza una escisión local amplia, en la que se extirpa el tumor incluyendo un margen de seguridad de tejido sano para garantizar su extirpación completa, lo que es confirmado por un patólogo.

En una enfermedad más avanzada, es posible que sea necesario realizar una vulvectomía (parcial) para extirpar parte o la totalidad de la vulva.

Los melanomas en etapa avanzada se pueden tratar con inhibidores de puntos de control.


=== Otro ===

La fusión labial, también llamada adhesión labial, es la fusión de los labios menores.

Esto afecta a varias niñas y no se considera excesivamente problemático.

Por lo general, la afección se puede tratar con cremas o se puede curar sola con la liberación de hormonas al comienzo de la pubertad. La vulvodinia es un dolor crónico en la región vulvar.

No hay una única causa identificable.

Un subtipo de esto es la vestibulitis vulvar, pero dado que no se cree que sea una afección inflamatoria, generalmente se la denomina vestibulodinia.

La vestibulitis vulvar generalmente afecta a las mujeres premenopáusicas. Varios trastornos de la piel, como el liquen escleroso y el liquen simple crónico, pueden afectar la vulva.

La enfermedad de Crohn de la vulva es una forma poco común de enfermedad de Crohn metastásica que se manifiesta como una afección de la piel que muestra lesiones hipertróficas o abscesos vulvares.

Los hidradenomas papilares son nódulos que pueden ulcerarse y se encuentran mayoritariamente en la piel de los labios o de los pliegues interlabiales.

Otra afección ulcerosa más compleja es la hidradenitis supurativa, que se caracteriza por quistes dolorosos que pueden ulcerarse y reaparecer, y pueden volverse crónicos y durar muchos años.

Los casos crónicos pueden convertirse en carcinomas de células escamosas.

Un trastorno cutáneo asintomático del vestíbulo vulvar es la papilomatosis vestibular, que se caracteriza por proyecciones rosadas finas del epitelio de la vulva o de los labios menores.

La dermatoscopia puede distinguir esta condición de las verrugas genitales.

Un subtipo de psoriasis, una enfermedad autoinmune, es la psoriasis inversa en la que pueden aparecer manchas rojas en los pliegues de la piel de los labios.


=== Parto ===

La región vulvar está en riesgo de trauma durante el parto.
Durante el parto, la vagina y la vulva deben estirarse para acomodar la cabeza del bebé (aproximadamente 9,5 cm (3,7 pulgadas)).

Esto puede provocar desgarros conocidos como desgarros perineales en la abertura vaginal y otras estructuras dentro del perineo.

A veces se realiza una episiotomía (un corte quirúrgico preventivo del perineo) para facilitar el parto y limitar el desgarro.

Un desgarro tarda más en sanar que una incisión.

Los desgarros y las incisiones se pueden reparar con suturas que se pueden colocar en capas.

Entre los métodos de depilación evaluados para las cirugías previas, se observó que el afeitado del vello púbico conocido como preparación aumenta el riesgo de infecciones en el sitio quirúrgico.

No se han demostrado ventajas en el afeitado rutinario del vello púbico previo al parto.


=== Cirugía ===


Las genitoplastias son cirugías plásticas que pueden llevarse a cabo para reparar, restaurar o alterar los tejidos de la vulva, especialmente después de un daño causado por una lesión o un tratamiento oncológico.

Estos procedimientos incluyen la vaginoplastia que también se puede realizar como una cirugía estética.

Otras cirugías estéticas para cambiar la apariencia de las estructuras externas incluyen las labioplastias.

Algunos de estos procedimientos, vaginoplastias y labioplastias, también se llevan a cabo como cirugías de reasignación de sexo. El uso de cirugías estéticas ha sido criticado por los médicos.

El Colegio Estadounidense de Obstetras y Ginecólogos recomienda que las mujeres estén informadas sobre los riesgos de estas cirugías.

Hacen referencia a la falta de datos relevantes sobre su seguridad y eficacia y a los posibles riesgos asociados, como infección, alteración de la sensibilidad, dispareunia, adherencias y cicatrización.

También hay un porcentaje de personas que buscan cirugía estética que pueden estar sufriendo de trastorno dismórfico corporal y la cirugía en estos casos puede ser contraproducente.


== Sociedad y cultura ==



=== Alterando los genitales femeninos ===


En algunas prácticas culturales, particularmente en las culturas africanas Khoikhoi y Ruanda, los labios menores se estiran intencionalmente tirando de ellos repetidamente y, a veces, colocando pesas.

El estiramiento de labios es una práctica cultural familiar reconocida en partes del este y sur de África.

Esta es una práctica deseada y fomentada por las mujeres (a partir de la pubertad) con el fin de promover una mejor satisfacción sexual para ambas partes.

Las extensiones logradas pueden colgar debajo de los labios mayores hasta siete pulgadas. Los niños de la diáspora africana también practican esto, por lo que ocurre dentro de las comunidades de inmigrantes en, por ejemplo, Gran Bretaña, donde un informe de la BBC lo calificó como una forma oculta de abuso infantil. Las niñas están sujetas a presiones familiares y sociales para conformarse. En algunas culturas, incluida la cultura occidental moderna, las mujeres se han afeitado o eliminado el vello de una parte o de la totalidad de la vulva.

Cuando los trajes de baño de corte alto se pusieron de moda, las mujeres que deseaban usarlos se quitaban el vello a ambos lados de sus triángulos púbicos para evitar exhibir vello púbico.

Otras mujeres prefieren conservar el vello de la vulva.

La eliminación del vello de la vulva es un fenómeno bastante reciente en los Estados Unidos, Canadá y Europa Occidental, generalmente en forma de depilación de bikini o depilación brasileña, pero ha prevalecido en muchas culturas de Europa del Este y Medio Oriente durante siglos, generalmente por la idea de que puede ser más higiénico, o con origen en la prostitución y la pornografía.

La depilación puede incluir todo, la mayoría o parte del cabello.

La depilación con cera francesa deja una pequeña cantidad de vello a cada lado de los labios o una tira directamente arriba y en línea con la hendidura pudenda llamada pista de aterrizaje.

La enseñanza del Islam incluye la jurisprudencia higiénica musulmana, cuya práctica es la eliminación del vello púbico.

Se pueden hacer varias formas de perforaciones genitales en la vulva, e incluyen la perforación de Christina, la perforación de Nefertiti, la perforación de horquilla y las perforaciones de los labios.

Las perforaciones generalmente se realizan con fines estéticos, pero algunas formas, como la perforación del capuchón del clítoris, también pueden aumentar el placer durante el sexo.

Aunque son comunes en las culturas tradicionales, los piercings íntimos son una tendencia bastante reciente en la sociedad occidental.

Otras formas de modificaciones permanentes de la vulva por motivos culturales, decorativos o estéticos son los tatuajes o escarificaciones genitales (los llamados "hanabira").
La cirugía genital femenina incluye el rejuvenecimiento con láser de los labios para eliminar las arrugas, la labioplastia (reducción del tamaño de los labios) y la vaginoplastia.

En septiembre de 2007, el Colegio Estadounidense de Obstetras y Ginecólogos (ACOG) emitió una opinión del comité sobre estas y otras cirugías genitales femeninas, que incluyen "rejuvenecimiento vaginal", "vaginoplastia de diseño", "revirginación" y "amplificación del punto G".

Esta opinión establece que la seguridad de estos procedimientos no ha sido documentada.

El ACOG y el ISSVD recomiendan que las mujeres que buscan estas cirugías estén informadas sobre la falta de datos que respalden estos procedimientos y los posibles riesgos asociados, como infección, sensibilidad alterada, dispareunia, adherencias y cicatrices. Con la creciente popularidad de los genitales cosméticos femeninos cirugías, la práctica atrae cada vez más críticas de un movimiento de oposición de grupos y plataformas activistas ciberfeministas, llamado el movimiento del orgullo de los labios.

El principal punto de discusión es que la publicidad intensa de estos procedimientos, en combinación con la falta de educación pública, fomenta las inseguridades corporales en mujeres con labios más grandes, a pesar de que existe una variación individual normal y pronunciada en el tamaño de los labios.

La preferencia por labios más pequeños es una moda pasajera y no tiene significado clínico ni funcional. La forma más prevalente de alteración genital no consentida es la mutilación genital femenina.

Esto implica principalmente la extirpación parcial o completa de los órganos genitales.

La mutilación genital femenina se lleva a cabo en treinta países de África y Asia con más de 200 millones de niñas afectadas y algunas mujeres (a partir de 2018).

Casi todos los procedimientos se llevan a cabo en niñas.

Las prácticas también se realizan a nivel mundial entre los migrantes de estas zonas.

Se afirma que la mutilación genital femenina se lleva a cabo principalmente por motivos culturales tradicionales.


=== Etimología ===


La palabra vulva en latín significa "matriz".

Deriva de la década de 1540 al referirse al útero y los órganos sexuales femeninos, del anterior volvere que significa girar, rodar o girar, con otros derivados como el usado en volvox y volvulus (intestino torcido).

La denominación de los genitales femeninos (y masculinos) como pudenda membra, que significa partes de las que avergonzarse, data de mediados del siglo XVII.

El nombre influyó en la percepción general de la vulva y esto se muestra en los procedimientos ginecológicos representados.

El examinador que se muestra en el examen obstétrico de 1822, está adoptando el procedimiento de compromiso donde los genitales de la mujer no se pueden ver.


=== Terminología ===

En 2021, un estudio en el Reino Unido mostró que pocos pueden etiquetar correctamente la estructura de la vulva. Hay muchos términos de jerga sexual que se usan para la vulva.

Cunt, una palabra medieval para la vulva y que alguna vez fue el término estándar, se ha convertido en un vulgarismo y, en otros usos, en una de las palabrotas ofensivas y abusivas más fuertes en las culturas de habla inglesa.

La palabra ha sido reemplazada en el uso normal por algunos eufemismos que incluyen coño (jerga vulgar) y fanny (Reino Unido), que solía ser un nombre de mascota común.

En el Reino Unido, estos términos tienen otros significados no sexuales que se prestan a dobles sentidos, como coño, que se usa como un término cariñoso para un gato mascota: minino.

En el uso informal norteamericano, el término coño también puede referirse a un hombre débil o afeminado, y fanny es un término que se usa para las nalgas.

Otros términos de la jerga son muff, snatch, twat y crotch.

La vagina se usa a menudo como sinónimo de vulva, aunque es una parte separada de la anatomía.


=== Religión y arte ===


Algunas culturas han celebrado e incluso adorado la vulva durante mucho tiempo.

Durante el período de Uruk (c. 4000-3100 a. C.), los antiguos sumerios consideraban la vulva como sagrada y ha sobrevivido una gran cantidad de poemas sumerios que alaban la vulva de Inanna, la diosa del amor, el sexo y la fertilidad.

En la religión sumeria, la diosa Nin-imma es la personificación divina de los genitales femeninos.

El fluido vaginal siempre se describe en los textos sumerios con un sabor "dulce" y, en un himno nupcial sumerio, una joven doncella se regocija porque le ha crecido pelo en la vulva.

Se descubrieron modelos de arcilla de vulvas en el templo de Inanna en Ashur.

Algunas tradiciones hindúes importantes, como el shaktismo, una tradición centrada en la diosa, veneran la vulva y la vagina con el nombre de yoni.

La diosa como Devi es adorada como la deidad suprema.

El yoni es una representación de la deidad femenina y se encuentra en muchos templos como centro de oración y ofrendas.

También se representa simbólicamente como un mudra en las prácticas espirituales, incluido el yoga. Las Sheela na gigs son tallas figurativas de mujeres desnudas que muestran una vulva exagerada.

Se encuentran en contextos europeos antiguos y medievales.

Se exhiben en muchas iglesias, pero su origen y significado son discutibles.

Una línea principal de pensamiento es que se usaron para alejar los malos espíritus.

Otra opinión es que la sheela na gig era una asistente divina en el parto.

Starr Goode explora la imagen y los posibles significados de las imágenes de Sheela na gig y Baubo en particular, pero también escribe sobre la imagen recurrente en todo el mundo.

A través de cientos de fotografías, demuestra que la imagen de una mujer mostrando su vulva no es específica del arte o la arquitectura religiosa europea, sino que se encuentran imágenes similares en las artes visuales y en las narrativas míticas de diosas y heroínas que se abren los muslos para revelar lo que ella llama "poderes sagrados". Su teoría es que "la imagen está tan arraigada en nuestra psique que parece como si el ícono fuera el centro cosmológico original de la imaginación humana".

L'Origine du monde ("Origen del mundo"), pintado por Gustave Courbet en 1866, fue una de las primeras pinturas realistas de una vulva que solo se exhibió muchos años después.

La pintura fue encargada por el diplomático otomano Halil Şerif Paşa.

La mujer utilizada como modelo para la pintura fue probablemente la amante de Halil, Constance Quéniaux.

Sin embargo, otra modelo potencial es Marie-Anne Detourbay, quien también fue amante de Halil Şerif Pasha. La escultora y artista de manga japonesa Megumi Igarashi ha centrado gran parte de su trabajo en pintar y modelar vulvas y obras con temas de vulvas.

Ha utilizado moldes para crear dioramas: modelos tridimensionales de su vulva con la esperanza de desmitificar los genitales femeninos. Una instalación de arte llamada The Dinner Party de la artista feminista Judy Chicago retrata una historia simbólica de mujeres famosas.

Cada uno de los platos de la cena representa una forma vulvar elaborada y están dispuestos en forma de vulva triangular.

Otra instalación fue realizada por el artista británico Jamie McCartney, quien usó moldes de cuatrocientas vulvas para crear The Great Wall of Vagina en 2011.

Los yesos vaginales son de tamaño natural.

Las explicaciones escritas por el asesor de salud sexual del proyecto acompañan a estos.

El propósito del artista era "abordar algunos de los estigmas y conceptos erróneos que son comunes".



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vulva

;;;PT;;;



VULVA


A vulva (plural: vulvas ou vulvae; derivado do latim para invólucro ou cobertura) consiste nos órgãos sexuais femininos externos.

A vulva inclui o mons pubis (ou mons veneris), lábios maiores, lábios menores, clitóris, bulbos vestibulares, vestíbulo vulvar, meato urinário, abertura vaginal, hímen e glândulas vestibulares de Bartholin e Skene.

O meato urinário também está incluído, pois se abre no vestíbulo vulvar.

Outras características da vulva incluem a fenda pudenda, as glândulas sebáceas, o triângulo urogenital (parte anterior do períneo) e os pelos pubianos.

A vulva inclui a entrada da vagina, que leva ao útero, e fornece uma dupla camada de proteção para isso pelas dobras dos lábios externos e internos.

Os músculos do assoalho pélvico sustentam as estruturas da vulva.

Outros músculos do triângulo urogenital também dão suporte.
O suprimento de sangue para a vulva vem das três artérias pudendas.

As veias pudendas internas fornecem drenagem.

Os vasos linfáticos aferentes transportam a linfa da vulva para os linfonodos inguinais.

Os nervos que suprem a vulva são o nervo pudendo, nervo perineal, nervo ilioinguinal e seus ramos.

O suprimento sanguíneo e nervoso para a vulva contribui para os estágios da excitação sexual que são úteis no processo de reprodução.
Acompanhando o desenvolvimento da vulva, ocorrem mudanças no nascimento, infância, puberdade, menopausa e pós-menopausa.

Há uma grande variação na aparência da vulva, particularmente em relação aos pequenos lábios.

A vulva pode ser afetada por muitos distúrbios que muitas vezes podem resultar em irritação.

Medidas de saúde vulvovaginal podem prevenir muitas delas.

Outros distúrbios incluem uma série de infecções e cânceres.

Existem várias cirurgias restauradoras vulvais conhecidas como genitoplastias, e algumas delas também são utilizadas como procedimentos de cirurgia estética.
Diferentes culturas têm visões diferentes da vulva.

Algumas religiões e sociedades antigas adoravam a vulva e reverenciavam a mulher como uma deusa.

As principais tradições do hinduísmo continuam assim.

Nas sociedades ocidentais, tem havido uma atitude amplamente negativa tipificada pela terminologia médica de pudenda membra, significando partes das quais se envergonhar.

Houve uma reação artística a isso em várias tentativas de trazer uma perspectiva mais positiva e natural, como o trabalho de artistas britânicos, americanos e japoneses.

Embora a vagina seja uma parte separada da anatomia, muitas vezes tem sido usada como sinônimo de vulva.


== Estrutura ==


As principais estruturas da vulva são: o monte do púbis, os lábios maiores e os pequenos lábios, as partes externas do clitóris – o capuz do clitóris e a glande, o meato urinário, a abertura vaginal e o hímen e as glândulas vestibulares de Bartholin e Skene.

Outras características incluem a fenda pudenda, pêlos pubianos, glândulas sebáceas, vestíbulo vulvar e o triângulo urogenital.


=== Mons pubis ===

O monte púbico é o monte macio de tecido adiposo na frente da vulva, na região púbica que cobre o osso púbico.

Mons pubis é latim para "monte púbico" e está presente em ambos os sexos para atuar como uma almofada durante a relação sexual, sendo mais pronunciado no sexo feminino.

O termo variante mons veneris ('monte de Vênus') é usado especificamente para mulheres.

A parte inferior do monte púbico é dividida por uma fissura – a fenda pudenda – que separa o monte púbico nos grandes lábios.

Após a puberdade, o capuz do clitóris e os pequenos lábios podem se projetar na fenda pudenda em grau variável.

O mons e os grandes lábios ficam cobertos de pêlos pubianos na puberdade.


=== Lábios ===

Os grandes lábios e os pequenos lábios cobrem o vestíbulo vulvar.

O par externo de dobras, dividido pela fenda pudenda, são os lábios maiores (novo latim para "lábios maiores").

Eles contêm e protegem as outras estruturas da vulva.

Os grandes lábios se encontram na frente no monte do púbis e posteriormente no triângulo urogenital (a parte anterior do períneo) entre a fenda pudenda e o ânus.

Os pequenos lábios são geralmente rosa ou preto acastanhado, relevantes para a cor da pele da pessoa. Os sulcos entre os lábios maiores e os pequenos lábios são chamados de sulcos interlabiais, ou pregas interlabiais.

Os lábios menores (lábios menores) são as duas dobras macias internas, dentro dos grandes lábios.

Eles têm mais cor do que os grandes lábios e contêm numerosas glândulas sebáceas.

Eles se encontram posteriormente no frênulo dos pequenos lábios, uma dobra de tecido restritivo.

Os pequenos lábios se encontram novamente na frente da vulva para formar o capuz do clitóris, também conhecido como prepúcio. A porção visível do clitóris é a glande do clitóris.

Normalmente, este é aproximadamente o tamanho e a forma de uma ervilha e pode variar em tamanho de cerca de 6 mm a 25 mm.

O tamanho também pode variar quando está ereto.

A glande do clitóris contém tantas terminações nervosas quanto a glande homóloga do pênis muito maior no homem, o que a torna altamente sensível.

A única função conhecida do clitóris é focalizar as sensações sexuais.

O capuz do clitóris é uma dobra protetora de pele que varia em forma e tamanho, podendo cobrir parcial ou totalmente o clitóris.

O clitóris é o homólogo do pênis, e o capuz do clitóris é o equivalente feminino do prepúcio masculino, e pode estar parcial ou completamente escondido dentro da fenda pudenda.


=== Vestíbulo ===

A área entre os pequenos lábios onde a abertura vaginal e o meato urinário estão localizados é chamada de vestíbulo vulvar ou vestíbulo da vagina.

O meato urinário está abaixo do clitóris e logo em frente à abertura vaginal que está próxima ao períneo.

O termo introito é tecnicamente mais correto do que "abertura", pois a vagina costuma estar colapsada, com a abertura fechada.

O intróito às vezes é parcialmente coberto por uma membrana chamada hímen.

O hímen geralmente se rompe durante o primeiro episódio de sexo vigoroso, e o sangue produzido por essa ruptura parece significar virgindade.

No entanto, o hímen também pode romper-se espontaneamente durante o exercício ou ser esticado por atividades normais, como o uso de tampões e copos menstruais, ou ser tão pequeno a ponto de ser imperceptível ou estar ausente.

Em alguns casos raros, o hímen pode cobrir completamente a abertura vaginal, exigindo um procedimento cirúrgico chamado himenotomia.

Em ambos os lados da parte posterior da abertura vaginal estão as duas glândulas vestibulares maiores conhecidas como glândulas de Bartholin.

Essas glândulas secretam muco e um lubrificante vaginal e vulvar.

São homólogas às glândulas bulbouretrais do homem.

As glândulas vestibulares menores, conhecidas como glândulas de Skene, são encontradas na parede anterior da vagina.

Eles são homólogos da próstata masculina e também são referidos como a próstata feminina.


=== Músculos ===

Os músculos do assoalho pélvico ajudam a sustentar as estruturas vulvares.

O músculo pubococcígeo voluntário, parte do músculo elevador do ânus, contrai parcialmente a abertura vaginal.

Outros músculos do triângulo urogenital sustentam a área vulvar e incluem os músculos transversos do períneo, o bulboesponjoso e os músculos isquiocavernosos.

O músculo bulboesponjoso diminui a abertura vaginal.

Suas contrações desempenham um papel nas contrações vaginais do orgasmo, fazendo com que os bulbos vestibulares se contraiam.


=== Sangue, linfa e suprimento nervoso ===

Os tecidos da vulva são altamente vascularizados e o suprimento sanguíneo é fornecido pelas três artérias pudendas.

O retorno venoso é feito pelas veias pudendas externas e internas.
Os órgãos e tecidos da vulva são drenados por uma cadeia de linfonodos inguinais superficiais localizados ao longo dos vasos sanguíneos. os grandes lábios.

O nervo perineal é um dos ramos terminais do nervo pudendo e este se ramifica nos nervos labiais posteriores para suprir os lábios.

Os ramos do nervo pudendo incluem o nervo dorsal do clitóris, que dá sensação ao clitóris.

A glande do clitóris é vista como povoada por um grande número de pequenos nervos, um número que diminui à medida que o tecido muda em direção à uretra.

A densidade dos nervos na glande indica que é o centro da sensação aumentada.

Os nervos cavernosos do plexo uterovaginal suprem o tecido erétil do clitóris.

Estes são unidos sob o arco púbico pelo nervo dorsal do clitóris.
O nervo pudendo entra na pelve através do forame isquiático menor e continua medialmente à artéria pudenda interna.

O ponto onde o nervo circunda a espinha isquiática é o local onde um bloqueio pudendo de anestésico local pode ser administrado para inibir a sensibilidade da vulva.

Vários nervos menores se separaram do nervo pudendo.

O ramo profundo do nervo perineal supre os músculos do períneo e um ramo deste supre o bulbo do vestíbulo.


=== Variações ===


Há uma grande variação na aparência dos órgãos genitais femininos.

Grande parte dessa variação está nas diferenças significativas no tamanho, forma e cor dos pequenos lábios.

Embora sejam chamados de lábios menores, eles geralmente podem ser de tamanho considerável e podem se projetar para fora da vagina ou dos grandes lábios.

Essa variação também foi evidenciada em uma grande exibição de 400 moldes vulvares chamada Grande Muralha da Vagina, criada por Jamie McCartney para preencher a falta de informação de como é uma vulva normal.

Os moldes tirados de um grupo grande e variado de mulheres mostraram claramente que há muita variação.

Os pelos pubianos também variam em cor, textura e quantidade de cachos. Pesquisadores do Elizabeth Garret Anderson Hospital, em Londres, mediram múltiplas dimensões genitais de 50 mulheres entre 18 e 50 anos, com média de idade de 35,6:


== Desenvolvimento ==



=== Desenvolvimento pré-natal ===


Na terceira semana do desenvolvimento do embrião, as células mesênquimas da linha primitiva migram ao redor da membrana cloacal.

No início da quinta semana, as células formam dois inchaços chamados dobras cloacais.

As pregas cloacais se encontram na frente da membrana cloacal e formam uma área elevada conhecida como tubérculo genital.

O septo urorretal se funde com a membrana cloacal para formar o períneo.

Essa divisão cria duas áreas, uma circundada pelas pregas uretrais e a outra pelas pregas anais.

Essas áreas se tornam o triângulo urogenital e o triângulo anal.

A área entre a vagina e o ânus é conhecida como o períneo clínico. Ao mesmo tempo, um par de inchaços em ambos os lados das dobras uretrais, conhecidos como inchaços genitais, desenvolvem-se nos inchaços labioescrotais.

A diferenciação sexual ocorre e, no final da 6ª semana na mulher, os hormônios estimulam o desenvolvimento e o tubérculo genital se dobra e forma o clitóris.

As pregas uretrais formam os pequenos lábios e as protuberâncias labioescrotais formam os grandes lábios.

Neste momento os sexos ainda não podem ser distinguidos.

A aparência da genitália externa é semelhante em embriões masculinos e femininos até a décima segunda semana e mesmo assim é difícil de distinguir. O canal uterovaginal ou canal genital, forma-se no terceiro mês de desenvolvimento do sistema urogenital.

A parte inferior do canal é bloqueada por uma placa de tecido, a placa vaginal.

Este tecido desenvolve-se e alonga-se durante o terceiro ao quinto mês e a parte inferior do canal vaginal é formada por um processo de descamação ou descamação celular.

A extremidade do canal vaginal é bloqueada por uma membrana endodérmica que separa a abertura do vestíbulo.

No quinto mês, a membrana degenera, mas deixa um remanescente chamado hímen. Diz-se que os órgãos do homem e da mulher com uma ancestralidade comum compartilhada são homólogos.

A glande do clitóris é homóloga à glande do pênis masculino, e o corpo do clitóris e os pilares do clitóris são homólogos aos corpos cavernosos do pênis.

Os grandes lábios são homólogos ao escroto; o capuz do clitóris é homólogo ao prepúcio, e os pequenos lábios são homólogos à uretra esponjosa.

Os bulbos vestibulares sob a pele dos pequenos lábios são homólogos ao corpo esponjoso, o tecido do pênis que envolve a uretra e ao bulbo do pênis.

As glândulas de Bartholin são homólogas às glândulas bulbouretrais nos homens.


=== Infância ===

A vulva do recém-nascido pode estar inchada ou aumentada como resultado de ter sido exposta, através da placenta, aos níveis aumentados de hormônios da mãe.

Os grandes lábios estão fechados.

Essas mudanças desaparecem nos primeiros meses.

Durante a infância antes da puberdade, a falta de estrogênio pode fazer com que os lábios se tornem pegajosos e, por fim, se unam firmemente.

Essa condição é conhecida como fusão labial e raramente é encontrada após a puberdade, quando a produção de estrogênio aumentou.


=== Puberdade ===

A puberdade é o início da capacidade de reprodução, e ocorre ao longo de dois a três anos, produzindo uma série de mudanças.

As estruturas da vulva tornam-se proporcionalmente maiores e podem tornar-se mais pronunciadas.

Pubarca, a primeira aparição de pêlos pubianos se desenvolve, primeiro nos grandes lábios, e depois se espalha para o monte púbico e, às vezes, para a parte interna das coxas e o períneo.

Os pêlos pubianos são muito mais grossos do que os outros pêlos do corpo e são considerados uma característica sexual secundária.

A pubarca pode ocorrer independentemente da puberdade.

A pubarca precoce pode, às vezes, indicar um distúrbio endócrino-metabólico tardio observado na adolescência.

O distúrbio às vezes conhecido como distúrbio poliendócrino é marcado por níveis elevados de andrógeno, insulina e lipídios e pode se originar no feto.

Em vez de ser vista como uma variante normal, propõe-se que a pubarca prematura pode ser vista como um marcador para esses distúrbios endócrinos posteriores. As glândulas sudoríparas apócrinas secretam suor nos folículos pilosos púbicos.

Isso é decomposto por bactérias na pele e produz um odor, que alguns consideram agir como um feromônio sexual atraente.

Os pequenos lábios podem ficar mais proeminentes e sofrer alterações de cor.

Na puberdade, o primeiro período mensal conhecido como menarca marca o início da menstruação.
Nas meninas pré-púberes, a pele da vulva é fina e delicada, e seu pH neutro a torna propensa a irritações.

A produção do hormônio sexual feminino estradiol (um estrogênio) na puberdade faz com que a pele perineal engrosse por queratinização, e isso reduz o risco de infecção.

O estrogênio também causa a deposição de gordura no desenvolvimento das características sexuais secundárias.

Isso contribui para a maturação da vulva com aumento do tamanho do monte púbico e dos grandes lábios e aumento dos pequenos lábios.


=== Gravidez ===

Na gravidez a vulva e a vagina assumem uma coloração azulada devido à congestão venosa.

Isso aparece entre a oitava e a décima segunda semana e continua a escurecer à medida que a gravidez continua.

O estrogênio é produzido em grandes quantidades durante a gravidez e isso faz com que os genitais externos aumentem.

A abertura vaginal e a vagina também estão aumentadas.

Após o parto, um corrimento vaginal conhecido como lóquios é produzido e continua por cerca de dez dias.


=== Menopausa ===

Durante a menopausa, os níveis hormonais diminuem, o que causa alterações na vulva conhecidas como atrofia vulvovaginal.

A diminuição do estrogênio afeta o mons, os lábios e a abertura vaginal e pode causar pele pálida, com coceira e dolorida.

Outras alterações visíveis são afinamento dos pelos pubianos, perda de gordura dos grandes lábios, afinamento dos pequenos lábios e estreitamento da abertura vaginal.

Esta condição foi renomeada por alguns órgãos como a síndrome geniturinária da menopausa como um termo mais abrangente.


== Função e fisiologia ==


A vulva tem um papel importante a desempenhar no sistema reprodutivo.

Ele fornece entrada e proteção para o útero e as condições certas em termos de calor e umidade que auxiliam em suas funções sexuais e reprodutivas.

Os órgãos externos da vulva são ricamente inervados e proporcionam prazer quando devidamente estimulados.

O monte do púbis fornece amortecimento contra o osso púbico durante a relação sexual. Várias secreções diferentes estão associadas à vulva, incluindo urina (da abertura uretral), suor (das glândulas apócrinas), menstruação (que sai da vagina), sebo. das glândulas sebáceas), fluido alcalino (das glândulas de Bartholin), muco (das glândulas de Skene), lubrificação vaginal da parede vaginal e esmegma.

Smegma é uma substância branca formada a partir de uma combinação de células mortas, óleos da pele, umidade e bactérias naturais, que se formam na genitália.

Nas mulheres, essa secreção espessada se acumula ao redor do clitóris e das pregas labiais.

Pode causar desconforto durante a atividade sexual, pois pode fazer com que a glande do clitóris grude no capuz e é facilmente removida pelo banho.

Os ácidos alifáticos conhecidos como copulinas também são secretados na vagina.

Estes são acreditados para agir como feromônios.

Sua composição de ácidos graxos e, consequentemente, seu odor se altera em relação às fases do ciclo menstrual.


=== excitação sexual ===


O clitóris e os pequenos lábios são áreas erógenas na vulva.

A estimulação local pode envolver o clitóris, a vagina e outras regiões perineais.

O clitóris é a zona erógena mais sensível da fêmea humana e geralmente a fonte anatômica primária do prazer sexual feminino humano.

A estimulação sexual do clitóris (por vários meios) pode resultar em excitação sexual generalizada e, se mantida, pode resultar em orgasmo.

A estimulação ao orgasmo é alcançada de forma ideal por uma sensação de massagem. A excitação sexual resulta em uma série de mudanças físicas na vulva.

Durante a excitação aumenta a lubrificação vaginal.

O tecido da vulva é altamente vascularizado; as arteríolas se dilatam em resposta à excitação sexual e as veias menores se comprimem após a excitação, de modo que o clitóris e os pequenos lábios aumentam de tamanho.

O aumento da vasocongestão na vagina faz com que ela inche, diminuindo o tamanho da abertura vaginal em cerca de 30%.

O clitóris fica cada vez mais ereto, e a glande se move em direção ao osso púbico, ficando oculta pelo capuz.

Os pequenos lábios aumentam consideravelmente em espessura.

Os pequenos lábios às vezes mudam consideravelmente de cor, passando de rosa a vermelho em mulheres de pele mais clara que não tiveram filhos, ou vermelho a vermelho escuro naquelas que tiveram.

Imediatamente antes de um orgasmo, o clitóris torna-se excepcionalmente ingurgitado, fazendo com que a glande pareça retrair-se para o capuz do clitóris.

As contrações musculares rítmicas ocorrem no terço externo da vagina, assim como no útero e no ânus.

As contrações tornam-se menos intensas e mais espaçadas aleatoriamente à medida que o orgasmo continua.

O número de contrações que acompanham um orgasmo varia dependendo de sua intensidade.

Um orgasmo pode ser acompanhado pela ejaculação feminina, fazendo com que o líquido da glândula de Skene ou da bexiga seja expelido pela uretra.

O sangue acumulado começa a se dissipar, embora em um ritmo muito mais lento se o orgasmo não tiver ocorrido.

A vagina e a abertura vaginal voltam ao seu estado normal de relaxamento, e o resto da vulva volta ao seu tamanho, posição e cor normais.


=== Distância entre a vagina e a glande do clitóris ===

A distância do frênulo do clitóris na glande do clitóris do meato urinário localizado na abertura vaginal, o chamado CUMD (distância clitoral-meato urinário), é medido.
Na década de 1920, Marie Bonaparte realizou pesquisas entre mulheres para descobrir se elas tinham orgasmo durante o coito.

As causas da falta de excitação sexual eram conhecidas como aversão ou inibições psicológicas.

Entre os sujeitos do teste, havia mulheres que, com um homem que amavam e desejavam, "sentiam o maior prazer em certos toques delicados", mas não eram suficientemente excitadas durante o coito.

Bonaparte examinou a distância entre o clitóris e a vagina em 200 mulheres.

Em 69% das mulheres, o CUMD foi de 1,25 a 2,25 cm, a maioria das quais experimentou o ato sexual como satisfatório.

Em 10% das mulheres, o CUMD foi de 2,5 cm, 21% mediu 2,75 a 3,5 cm.

Todas as mulheres com grande gap afirmaram não sentir prazer satisfatório com a penetração peniana, embora algumas fossem muito sensíveis a "carícias precisas do homem".
Bonaparte concluiu a partir disso uma conexão causal anatômica entre um grande CUMD e "frigidez vaginal", explicando por que apenas as mulheres com a glande do clitóris perto da vagina (de modo que é continuamente tocada pelo pênis) eram capazes de experimentar "o maior prazer sexual" durante o coito.

 
 
 
 
 
Um estudo de Carney Landis e colegas em 1940 inclui declarações nesse sentido: "No lado físico, a capacidade do orgasmo está relacionada à distância clitóris-meatus". (Landis et al. 1940). Em 2011, Kim Wallen e Elisabeth Lloyd revisaram a pesquisa de Bonaparte e confirmaram uma correlação inversa entre CUMD e orgasmo através da relação sexual.
Nos métodos ensinados desde a década de 1970 por Betty Dodson, a excitação sexual da mulher durante a relação vaginal deve ser assegurada pela mulher estimulando independentemente sua vulva e clitóris continuamente com as mãos ou possivelmente com um vibrador.

De acordo com Kim Wallen, o CUMD não diz nada sobre uma vida sexual feliz, mas sim que uma grande lacuna dá aos casais a oportunidade de "serem um pouco mais inventivos na forma como fazem sexo".


== Significado clínico ==



=== Irritação ===

Irritação e coceira da vulva é chamada de prurido vulvar.

Isso pode ser um sintoma de muitos distúrbios, alguns dos quais podem ser determinados por um teste de contato.

A causa mais comum de irritação é aftas, uma infecção fúngica.

As medidas de saúde vulvovaginal podem ajudar a prevenir muitos distúrbios, incluindo aftas.

Infecções da vagina, como vaginose e do útero, podem produzir corrimento vaginal que pode ser irritante quando entra em contato com o tecido vulvar.

Inflamação como vaginite e vulvovaginite pode resultar disso causando irritação e dor.

Os pêlos encravados resultantes da depilação dos pêlos pubianos podem causar foliculite onde o folículo piloso é infectado; ou dar origem a uma resposta inflamatória conhecida como pseudofoliculite púbica.

Uma causa menos comum de irritação é o líquen plano genital, outro distúrbio inflamatório.

Uma variante grave disso é a síndrome vulvovaginal-gengival, que pode levar ao estreitamento da vagina ou à destruição da vulva.

Muitos tipos de infecção e outras doenças, incluindo alguns tipos de câncer, podem causar irritação.


=== Infecções sexualmente transmissíveis ===


Órgãos e tecidos vulvares podem ser afetados por diferentes agentes infecciosos, como bactérias e vírus, ou infestados por parasitas, como piolhos e ácaros.

Mais de trinta tipos de patógenos podem ser transmitidos sexualmente, e muitos deles afetam os órgãos genitais.

A maioria das ISTs não produz sintomas ou os sintomas podem ser leves e não ser indicativos de uma IST.

A prática do sexo seguro pode reduzir muito o risco de infecção de muitos patógenos sexualmente transmissíveis.

O uso de preservativos (preservativo masculino ou feminino) é um dos métodos mais eficazes de proteção. As infecções bacterianas incluem: cancróide – caracterizado por úlceras genitais conhecidas como cancros; granuloma inguinal mostrando-se como granulomas inflamatórios frequentemente descritos como nódulos; sífilis – o estágio primário classicamente apresenta-se com um único cancro, uma úlcera firme, indolor, não pruriginosa, mas pode haver múltiplas feridas; e gonorreia que muitas vezes não apresenta sintomas, mas pode resultar em corrimento. As infecções virais incluem a infecção pelo papilomavírus humano (HPV) – esta é a IST mais comum e tem muitos tipos.

O HPV genital pode causar verrugas genitais.

Houve ligações feitas entre o HPV e o câncer vulvar, embora o HPV cause mais frequentemente o câncer do colo do útero.

O herpes genital é principalmente assintomático, mas pode se apresentar com pequenas bolhas que se abrem em úlceras.

O HIV/AIDS é transmitido principalmente através da atividade sexual, e a vulva em alguns casos pode ser afetada por feridas.
Uma infecção viral altamente contagiosa é o molusco contagioso, que é transmissível por contato próximo e causa verrugas aquáticas. As infecções parasitárias incluem tricomoníase, pediculose púbica e sarna.

A tricomoníase é transmitida por um protozoário parasita e é a IST não viral mais comum.

A maioria dos casos é assintomática, mas pode apresentar sintomas de irritação e secreção de odor incomum.

A pediculose púbica comumente chamada de caranguejos, é uma doença causada pelo piolho do caranguejo um ectoparasita.

Quando os pelos pubianos estão infestados, a irritação produzida pode ser intensa.

A sarna, também conhecida como “coceira dos sete anos”, é causada por outro ectoparasita, o ácaro Sarcoptes scabiei, causando intensa irritação.


=== Câncer ===


As doenças malignas podem se desenvolver nas partes glabras e com pelos da vulva.

Com base na origem celular e histologia, os cânceres vulvares são classificados em carcinomas de células escamosas, melanomas, carcinomas basocelulares, adenocarcinomas, sarcomas e doença de Paget extramamária invasiva.

Os carcinomas de células escamosas representam a variante mais comum dos cânceres vulvares e representam aproximadamente 75%.

Estes são geralmente encontrados nos lábios, particularmente nos grandes lábios.

O segundo câncer vulvar mais comum é o carcinoma basocelular, que raramente se espalha para linfonodos regionais ou órgãos distantes.

O terceiro subtipo mais comum é o melanoma vulvar.

Estudos mostraram que os melanomas vulvares parecem ter uma biologia tumoral e características mutacionais diferentes dos melanomas cutâneos, o que tem um impacto direto no tratamento médico dos melanomas vulvares. Os sinais e sintomas do câncer vulvar podem incluir: coceira ou sangramento; alterações na pele, incluindo erupções cutâneas, feridas, caroços ou úlceras e alterações na coloração da pele vulvar.

A dor pélvica também pode ocorrer especialmente durante a micção e o sexo.

No entanto, uma proporção significativa permanece assintomática nos estágios iniciais da doença, muitas vezes atrasando seu diagnóstico.

Assim, 32% das mulheres com melanoma vulvar já apresentam acometimento regional ou metástases à distância no momento do diagnóstico, o que impacta significativamente no prognóstico. A cirurgia (com ou sem remoção de linfonodos regionais) costuma ser a principal modalidade de tratamento.

Normalmente, é realizada uma excisão local ampla, na qual o tumor é excisado incluindo uma margem de segurança de tecido saudável para garantir sua remoção completa, o que é confirmado por um patologista.

Na doença mais avançada, pode ser necessário realizar uma vulvectomia (parcial) para remover parte ou toda a vulva.

Os melanomas em estágio avançado podem ser tratados com inibidores de checkpoint.


=== Outro ===

A fusão labial, também chamada de adesão labial, é a fusão dos pequenos lábios.

Isso afeta várias meninas e não é considerado indevidamente problemático.

A condição geralmente pode ser tratada com cremes, ou pode corrigir-se com a liberação de hormônios no início da puberdade. Vulvodinia é uma dor crônica na região vulvar.

Não há uma única causa identificável.

Um subtipo disso é a vestibulite vulvar, mas como não se acredita que seja uma condição inflamatória, é mais comumente chamada de vestibulodinia.

A vestibulite vulvar geralmente afeta mulheres na pré-menopausa. Vários distúrbios da pele, como líquen escleroso e líquen simples crônico, podem afetar a vulva.

A doença de Crohn da vulva é uma forma incomum de doença de Crohn metastática que se manifesta como uma condição da pele que se manifesta como lesões hipertróficas ou abscessos vulvares.

Os hidradenomas papilares são nódulos que podem ulcerar e são encontrados principalmente na pele dos lábios ou das pregas interlabiais.

Outra condição ulcerativa mais complexa é a hidradenite supurativa, caracterizada por cistos dolorosos que podem ulcerar e recorrer, e podem se tornar crônicos com duração de muitos anos.

Casos crônicos podem evoluir para carcinomas de células escamosas.

Um distúrbio cutâneo assintomático do vestíbulo vulvar é a papilomatose vestibular, caracterizada por projeções finas e rosadas do epitélio da vulva ou dos pequenos lábios.

A dermatoscopia pode distinguir essa condição das verrugas genitais.

Um subtipo de psoríase, uma doença autoimune, é a psoríase inversa na qual manchas vermelhas podem aparecer nas dobras cutâneas dos lábios.


=== Parto ===

A região vulvar está em risco de trauma durante o parto.
Durante o parto, a vagina e a vulva devem se esticar para acomodar a cabeça do bebê (aproximadamente 9,5 cm).

Isso pode resultar em lágrimas conhecidas como lágrimas perineais na abertura vaginal e outras estruturas dentro do períneo.

Uma episiotomia (um corte cirúrgico preventivo do períneo) às vezes é realizada para facilitar o parto e limitar o rasgo.

Uma lágrima demora mais para cicatrizar do que uma incisão.

Lágrimas e incisões podem ser reparadas usando suturas que podem ser em camadas.

Entre os métodos de depilação avaliados para pré-cirurgias, a depilação dos pelos pubianos, conhecida como preparação, mostrou aumentar o risco de infecções do sítio cirúrgico.

Nenhuma vantagem foi demonstrada no barbear rotineiro dos pelos pubianos antes do parto.


=== Cirurgia ===


Genitoplastias são cirurgias plásticas que podem ser realizadas para reparar, restaurar ou alterar os tecidos vulvares, principalmente após danos causados ​​por lesão ou tratamento de câncer.

Esses procedimentos incluem a vaginoplastia, que também pode ser realizada como cirurgia estética.

Outras cirurgias estéticas para alterar a aparência de estruturas externas incluem labioplastias.

Alguns desses procedimentos, vaginoplastias e labioplastias, também são realizados como cirurgias de mudança de sexo. O uso de cirurgias estéticas tem sido criticado pelos clínicos.

O Colégio Americano de Obstetras e Ginecologistas recomenda que as mulheres sejam informadas sobre os riscos dessas cirurgias.

Referem-se à falta de dados relevantes para sua segurança e eficácia e aos potenciais riscos associados, como infecção, sensação alterada, dispareunia, aderências e cicatrizes.

Há também uma porcentagem de pessoas que procuram cirurgia estética que podem estar sofrendo de transtorno dismórfico corporal e a cirurgia nesses casos pode ser contraproducente.


== Sociedade e cultura ==



=== Alterando a genitália feminina ===


Em algumas práticas culturais, particularmente nas culturas africanas Khoikhoi e Ruanda, os lábios menores são propositadamente esticados puxando-os repetidamente e, às vezes, prendendo pesos.

O alongamento dos lábios é uma prática cultural familiar reconhecida em partes da África Oriental e Austral.

Esta é uma prática desejada e incentivada pelas mulheres (a partir da puberdade) a fim de promover melhor satisfação sexual para ambas as partes.

As extensões alcançadas podem ficar abaixo dos grandes lábios por até sete polegadas. As crianças da diáspora africana também praticam isso, por isso ocorre em comunidades de imigrantes, por exemplo, na Grã-Bretanha, onde uma reportagem da BBC classificou isso como uma forma oculta de abuso infantil. incluindo a cultura ocidental moderna, as mulheres rasparam ou removeram o cabelo de parte ou de toda a vulva.

Quando os maiôs de corte alto se tornaram moda, as mulheres que desejavam usá-los removevam os pêlos de ambos os lados de seus triângulos púbicos, para evitar exibir pêlos pubianos.

Outras mulheres preferem manter o cabelo da vulva.

A remoção de pelos da vulva é um fenômeno bastante recente nos Estados Unidos, Canadá e Europa Ocidental, geralmente na forma de depilação de biquíni ou depilação brasileira, mas tem sido prevalente em muitas culturas do Leste Europeu e Oriente Médio por séculos, geralmente devido à ideia de que pode ser mais higiênico, ou originário da prostituição e da pornografia.

A depilação pode incluir todos, a maioria ou alguns dos pelos.

A depilação francesa deixa uma pequena quantidade de cabelo em ambos os lados dos lábios ou uma faixa diretamente acima e alinhada com a fenda pudenda chamada faixa de aterrissagem.

O ensino do Islã inclui a jurisprudência higiênica muçulmana, cuja prática é a remoção de pêlos pubianos.

Várias formas de piercings genitais podem ser feitas na vulva e incluem o piercing Christina, o piercing Nefertiti, o piercing fourchette e os piercings nos lábios.

Os piercings geralmente são realizados para fins estéticos, mas algumas formas, como o piercing no capuz do clitóris, também podem aumentar o prazer durante o sexo.

Embora sejam comuns nas culturas tradicionais, os piercings íntimos são uma tendência bastante recente na sociedade ocidental.

Outras formas de modificações permanentes da vulva por motivos culturais, decorativos ou estéticos são as tatuagens ou escarificações genitais (as chamadas "hanabira").
A cirurgia genital feminina inclui resurfacing a laser dos lábios para remover rugas, labioplastia (redução do tamanho dos lábios) e vaginoplastia.

Em setembro de 2007, o Colégio Americano de Obstetras e Ginecologistas (ACOG) emitiu um parecer do comitê sobre essas e outras cirurgias genitais femininas, incluindo "rejuvenescimento vaginal", "vaginoplastia de designer", "revirginação" e "amplificação do ponto G".

Este parecer afirma que a segurança destes procedimentos não foi documentada.

O ACOG e o ISSVD recomendam que as mulheres que procuram essas cirurgias sejam informadas sobre a falta de dados que comprovem esses procedimentos e os potenciais riscos associados, como infecção, sensação alterada, dispareunia, aderências e cicatrizes. cirurgias, a prática atrai cada vez mais críticas de um movimento de oposição de grupos e plataformas ativistas ciberfeministas, chamado de movimento do orgulho labia.

O grande ponto de discórdia é que a publicidade pesada para esses procedimentos, combinada com a falta de educação pública, promove inseguranças corporais em mulheres com lábios maiores, apesar de haver variação individual normal e pronunciada no tamanho dos lábios.

A preferência por pequenos lábios é uma moda passageira e sem significado clínico ou funcional. A forma mais prevalente de alteração genital não consensual é a mutilação genital feminina.

Isso envolve principalmente a remoção parcial ou completa dos órgãos genitais.

A mutilação genital feminina é realizada em trinta países da África e da Ásia, com mais de 200 milhões de meninas afetadas e algumas mulheres (a partir de 2018).

Quase todos os procedimentos são realizados em meninas.

As práticas também são realizadas globalmente entre os migrantes dessas áreas.

Alega-se que a mutilação genital feminina é realizada principalmente por razões culturais tradicionais.


=== Etimologia ===


A palavra vulva é latim para "ventre".

Deriva da década de 1540 ao se referir ao útero e aos órgãos sexuais femininos, do anterior volvere que significa girar, rolar ou girar, com outros derivados, como os usados ​​em volvox e volvulus (intestino torcido).

A nomeação dos genitais femininos (e masculinos) como pudenda membra, significando partes das quais se envergonhar, data de meados do século XVII.

A nomeação influenciou a percepção geral da vulva e isso é mostrado em procedimentos ginecológicos retratados.

O examinador mostrado no exame obstétrico datado de 1822, está adotando o procedimento de compromisso onde os genitais da mulher não podem ser vistos.


=== Terminologia ===

Em 2021, um estudo no Reino Unido mostrou que poucos são capazes de rotular a estrutura da vulva corretamente. Existem muitas gírias sexuais usadas para a vulva.

Cunt, uma palavra medieval para a vulva e outrora o termo padrão, tornou-se um vulgarismo, e em outros usa um dos mais fortes palavrões ofensivos e abusivos nas culturas de língua inglesa.

A palavra foi substituída no uso normal por alguns eufemismos, incluindo pussy (gíria vulgar) e fanny (Reino Unido), que costumava ser um nome de animal de estimação comum.

No Reino Unido, esses termos têm outros significados não sexuais que se prestam a duplos sentidos, como pussy, que é usado como um termo carinhoso para um gato de estimação – pussy cat.

No uso informal norte-americano, o termo buceta também pode se referir a um homem fraco ou efeminado, e fanny é um termo usado para as nádegas.

Outros termos de gíria são muff, snatch, twat e crotch.

Vagina é frequentemente usada como sinônimo de vulva, embora seja uma parte separada da anatomia.


=== Religião e arte ===


Algumas culturas há muito celebram e até veneram a vulva.

Durante o período Uruk (c. 4000–3100 aC), os antigos sumérios consideravam a vulva sagrada e um grande número de poemas sumérios elogiando a vulva de Inanna, a deusa do amor, sexo e fertilidade, sobreviveram.

Na religião suméria, a deusa Nin-imma é a personificação divina da genitália feminina.

O fluido vaginal é sempre descrito nos textos sumérios como tendo um sabor "doce" e, em um hino nupcial sumério, uma jovem donzela se alegra que sua vulva tenha crescido cabelo.

Modelos de barro de vulvas foram descobertos no templo de Inanna em Ashur.

Algumas das principais tradições hindus, como o Shaktismo, uma tradição centrada na deusa, reverenciam a vulva e a vagina sob o nome de yoni.

A deusa como Devi é adorada como a divindade suprema.

O yoni é uma representação da divindade feminina e é encontrado em muitos templos como foco de orações e oferendas.

Também é representado simbolicamente como um mudra em práticas espirituais, incluindo ioga. Sheela na gigs são esculturas figurativas de mulheres nuas exibindo uma vulva exagerada.

Eles são encontrados em contextos europeus antigos e medievais.

Eles são exibidos em muitas igrejas, mas sua origem e significado são discutíveis.

Uma linha de pensamento principal é que eles foram usados ​​para afastar os maus espíritos.

Outra visão é que a sheela na gig foi uma assistente divina no parto.

Starr Goode explora a imagem e os possíveis significados das imagens Sheela na gig e Baubo em particular, mas escreve também sobre a imagem recorrente em todo o mundo.

Através de centenas de fotografias, ela demonstra que a imagem de uma mulher exibindo sua vulva não é específica da arte ou arquitetura religiosa europeia, mas que imagens semelhantes são encontradas nas artes visuais e nas narrativas míticas de deusas e heroínas abrindo as coxas para revelar o que ela chama de "poderes sagrados". Sua teoria é que "a imagem está tão enraizada em nossa psique que parece que o ícone é o centro cosmológico original da imaginação humana".

L'Origine du monde ("Origem do mundo") pintado por Gustave Courbet em 1866 foi uma pintura realista inicial de uma vulva que só foi exibida muitos anos depois.

A pintura foi encomendada pelo diplomata otomano Halil Şerif Paşa.

A mulher usada como modelo para a pintura foi provavelmente a amante de Halil, Constance Quéniaux.

No entanto, outro modelo em potencial é Marie-Anne Detourbay, que também era amante de Halil Şerif Pasha. A escultora e artista de mangá japonesa Megumi Igarashi concentrou grande parte de seu trabalho na pintura e modelagem de vulvas e obras com temas de vulva.

Ela usou moldes para criar dioramas – modelos tridimensionais de sua vulva com a esperança de desmistificar os órgãos genitais femininos. Uma instalação de arte chamada The Dinner Party, da artista feminista Judy Chicago, retrata uma história simbólica de mulheres famosas.

Os pratos de jantar representam uma forma vulvar elaborada e estão dispostos em uma forma triangular de vulva.

Outra instalação foi feita pelo artista britânico Jamie McCartney, que usou os moldes de quatrocentas vulvas para criar A Grande Muralha da Vagina em 2011.

Os moldes vaginais são em tamanho natural.

As explicações escritas pelo conselheiro de saúde sexual do projeto acompanham-nas.

O objetivo do artista era "resolver alguns dos estigmas e equívocos que são comuns".



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vulva

;;;FR;;;



VULVE


La vulve (pluriel : vulvas ou vulves ; dérivé du latin pour envelopper ou recouvrir) se compose des organes sexuels externes de la femme.

La vulve comprend le mons pubis (ou mons veneris), les grandes lèvres, les petites lèvres, le clitoris, les bulbes vestibulaires, le vestibule vulvaire, le méat urinaire, l'orifice vaginal, l'hymen et les glandes vestibulaires de Bartholin et de Skene.

Le méat urinaire est également inclus car il débouche dans le vestibule vulvaire.

Les autres caractéristiques de la vulve comprennent la fente pudendale, les glandes sébacées, le triangle urogénital (partie antérieure du périnée) et les poils pubiens.

La vulve comprend l'entrée du vagin, qui mène à l'utérus, et fournit une double couche de protection pour celui-ci par les plis des lèvres externes et internes.

Les muscles du plancher pelvien soutiennent les structures de la vulve.

D'autres muscles du triangle urogénital apportent également un soutien.
L'approvisionnement en sang de la vulve provient des trois artères pudendales.

Les veines pudendales internes assurent le drainage.

Les vaisseaux lymphatiques afférents transportent la lymphe de la vulve vers les ganglions lymphatiques inguinaux.

Les nerfs qui irriguent la vulve sont le nerf pudendal, le nerf périnéal, le nerf ilio-inguinal et leurs branches.

L'apport sanguin et nerveux à la vulve contribue aux étapes de l'excitation sexuelle qui sont utiles dans le processus de reproduction.
Suite au développement de la vulve, des changements ont lieu à la naissance, l'enfance, la puberté, la ménopause et la post-ménopause.

Il existe une grande variation dans l'apparence de la vulve, en particulier en ce qui concerne les petites lèvres.

La vulve peut être affectée par de nombreux troubles qui peuvent souvent entraîner une irritation.

Les mesures de santé vulvo-vaginale peuvent en prévenir bon nombre.

D'autres troubles comprennent un certain nombre d'infections et de cancers.

Il existe plusieurs chirurgies réparatrices vulvaires appelées génitoplasties, et certaines d'entre elles sont également utilisées comme procédures de chirurgie esthétique.
Différentes cultures ont eu des points de vue différents sur la vulve.

Certaines religions et sociétés anciennes ont vénéré la vulve et vénéré la femme comme une déesse.

Les principales traditions de l'hindouisme continuent cela.

Dans les sociétés occidentales, il y a eu une attitude largement négative caractérisée par la terminologie médicale de pudenda membra, signifiant les parties dont il faut avoir honte.

Il y a eu une réaction artistique à cela dans diverses tentatives pour apporter une perspective plus positive et naturelle, comme le travail d'artistes britanniques, américains et japonais.

Bien que le vagin soit une partie distincte de l'anatomie, il a souvent été utilisé comme synonyme de vulve.


== Structure ==


Les principales structures de la vulve sont : le mons pubis, les grandes lèvres et les petites lèvres, les parties externes du clitoris - le capuchon clitoridien et le gland, le méat urinaire, l'orifice vaginal et l'hymen, et les glandes vestibulaires de Bartholin et de Skene.

Les autres caractéristiques comprennent la fente pudendale, les poils pubiens, les glandes sébacées, le vestibule vulvaire et le triangle urogénital.


=== Mons pubis ===

Le mons pubis est le monticule mou de tissu adipeux à l'avant de la vulve, dans la région pubienne recouvrant l'os pubien.

Mons pubis est le mot latin pour «monticule pubien» et est présent chez les deux sexes pour agir comme un coussin pendant les rapports sexuels, et est plus prononcé chez la femme.

Le terme variante mons veneris («monticule de Vénus») est utilisé spécifiquement pour les femmes.

La partie inférieure du mons pubis est divisée par une fissure - la fente pudendale - qui sépare le mons pubis des grandes lèvres.

Après la puberté, le capuchon clitoridien et les petites lèvres peuvent faire saillie dans la fente pudendale à un degré variable.

Le mons et les grandes lèvres se couvrent de poils pubiens à la puberté.


=== Lèvres ===

Les grandes lèvres et les petites lèvres recouvrent le vestibule vulvaire.

La paire externe de plis, divisée par la fente pudendale, sont les grandes lèvres (nouveau latin pour « grandes lèvres »).

Ils contiennent et protègent les autres structures de la vulve.

Les grandes lèvres se rejoignent à l'avant au niveau du mons pubis et se rejoignent en arrière au niveau du triangle urogénital (la partie antérieure du périnée) entre la fente pudendale et l'anus.

Les petites lèvres sont souvent roses ou noir brunâtre, correspondant à la couleur de la peau de la personne. Les rainures entre les grandes lèvres et les petites lèvres sont appelées sillons interlabiaux ou plis interlabiaux.

Les petites lèvres (petites lèvres) sont les deux plis souples intérieurs, à l'intérieur des grandes lèvres.

Elles sont plus colorées que les grandes lèvres et contiennent de nombreuses glandes sébacées.

Ils se rejoignent en arrière au niveau du frein des petites lèvres, un pli de tissu restrictif.

Les petites lèvres se rejoignent à l'avant de la vulve pour former le capuchon clitoridien, également appelé prépuce. La partie visible du clitoris est le gland clitoridien.

En règle générale, il s'agit à peu près de la taille et de la forme d'un pois, et sa taille peut varier d'environ 6 mm à 25 mm.

La taille peut également varier lorsqu'elle est en érection.

Le gland clitoridien contient autant de terminaisons nerveuses que le gland homologue beaucoup plus gros chez le mâle, ce qui le rend très sensible.

La seule fonction connue du clitoris est de focaliser les sensations sexuelles.

Le capuchon clitoridien est un pli protecteur de la peau qui varie en forme et en taille, et il peut recouvrir partiellement ou complètement le clitoris.

Le clitoris est l'homologue du pénis et le capuchon clitoridien est l'équivalent féminin du prépuce masculin et peut être partiellement ou complètement caché dans la fente pudendale.


=== Vestibule ===

La zone située entre les petites lèvres où se trouvent l'ouverture vaginale et le méat urinaire s'appelle le vestibule vulvaire ou vestibule du vagin.

Le méat urinaire se trouve sous le clitoris et juste devant l'ouverture vaginale qui est proche du périnée.

Le terme introitus est techniquement plus correct que "l'ouverture", puisque le vagin est généralement effondré, avec l'ouverture fermée.

L'orifice vaginal est parfois partiellement recouvert d'une membrane appelée hymen.

L'hymen se rompra généralement lors du premier épisode de relations sexuelles vigoureuses, et le sang produit par cette rupture a été considéré comme signifiant la virginité.

Cependant, l'hymen peut également se rompre spontanément pendant l'exercice ou être étiré par des activités normales telles que l'utilisation de tampons et de coupes menstruelles, ou être si mineur qu'il est imperceptible ou être absent.

Dans de rares cas, l'hymen peut recouvrir complètement l'ouverture vaginale, nécessitant une intervention chirurgicale appelée hyménotomie.

De chaque côté de la partie arrière de l'ouverture vaginale se trouvent les deux plus grandes glandes vestibulaires appelées glandes de Bartholin.

Ces glandes sécrètent du mucus et un lubrifiant vaginal et vulvaire.

Ils sont homologues aux glandes bulbo-urétrales chez le mâle.

Les glandes vestibulaires inférieures appelées glandes de Skene se trouvent sur la paroi antérieure du vagin.

Ce sont des homologues de la prostate masculine et sont également appelées prostate féminine.


=== Muscles ===

Les muscles du plancher pelvien aident à soutenir les structures vulvaires.

Le muscle volontaire pubococcygien, qui fait partie du muscle releveur de l'anus, resserre partiellement l'ouverture vaginale.

D'autres muscles du triangle urogénital soutiennent la région vulvaire et comprennent les muscles périnéaux transversaux, le bulbospongieux et les muscles ischiocavernosus.

Le muscle bulbospongieux diminue l'ouverture vaginale.

Leurs contractions jouent un rôle dans les contractions vaginales de l'orgasme en provoquant la contraction des bulbes vestibulaires.


=== Sang, lymphe et nerfs ===

Les tissus de la vulve sont très vascularisés et l'apport sanguin est assuré par les trois artères pudendales.

Le retour veineux se fait par les veines pudendales externes et internes.
Les organes et les tissus de la vulve sont drainés par une chaîne de ganglions lymphatiques inguinaux superficiels situés le long des vaisseaux sanguins. les grandes lèvres.

Le nerf périnéal est l'une des branches terminales du nerf pudendal et celui-ci se ramifie dans les nerfs labiaux postérieurs pour alimenter les lèvres.

Les branches du nerf pudendal comprennent le nerf dorsal du clitoris qui donne la sensation au clitoris.

On voit que le gland clitoridien est peuplé d'un grand nombre de petits nerfs, un nombre qui diminue à mesure que le tissu se déplace vers l'urètre.

La densité des nerfs au niveau du gland indique qu'il s'agit du centre d'une sensation accrue.

Les nerfs caverneux du plexus utéro-vaginal alimentent le tissu érectile du clitoris.

Ceux-ci sont reliés sous l'arc pubien par le nerf dorsal du clitoris.
Le nerf pudendal pénètre dans le bassin par le petit foramen sciatique et continue en dedans de l'artère pudendale interne.

Le point où le nerf entoure l'épine sciatique est l'endroit où un bloc pudendal d'anesthésique local peut être administré pour inhiber la sensation à la vulve.

Un certain nombre de nerfs plus petits se séparent du nerf pudendal.

La branche profonde du nerf périnéal alimente les muscles du périnée et une branche de celui-ci alimente le bulbe du vestibule.


=== Variantes ===


Il existe une grande variation dans l'apparence des organes génitaux féminins.

Une grande partie de cette variation réside dans les différences significatives dans la taille, la forme et la couleur des petites lèvres.

Bien qu'appelées les petites lèvres, elles peuvent souvent être de taille considérable et peuvent faire saillie à l'extérieur du vagin ou des grandes lèvres.

Cette variation a également été mise en évidence dans un grand écran de 400 moulages vulvaires appelé la Grande Muraille du Vagin créé par Jamie McCartney pour combler le manque d'informations sur ce à quoi ressemble une vulve normale.

Les moulages prélevés sur un groupe important et varié de femmes ont montré clairement qu'il y a beaucoup de variation.

Les poils pubiens varient également dans leur couleur, leur texture et leur quantité de boucles. Des chercheurs de l'hôpital Elizabeth Garret Anderson de Londres ont mesuré plusieurs dimensions génitales de 50 femmes âgées de 18 à 50 ans, avec un âge moyen de 35,6 :


== Développement ==



=== Développement prénatal ===


Au cours de la troisième semaine du développement de l'embryon, les cellules mésenchymateuses de la strie primitive migrent autour de la membrane cloacale.

Au début de la cinquième semaine, les cellules forment deux gonflements appelés plis cloacaux.

Les plis cloacaux se rejoignent devant la membrane cloacale et forment une zone surélevée connue sous le nom de tubercule génital.

Le septum urorectal fusionne avec la membrane cloacale pour former le périnée.

Cette division crée deux zones l'une entourée par les plis urétraux et l'autre par les plis anaux.

Ces zones deviennent le triangle urogénital et le triangle anal.

La zone située entre le vagin et l'anus est connue sous le nom de périnée clinique. En même temps, une paire de gonflements de chaque côté des plis urétraux connus sous le nom de gonflements génitaux se développe dans les gonflements labioscrotaux.

La différenciation sexuelle a lieu et à la fin de la semaine 6 chez la femelle, les hormones stimulent le développement ultérieur et le tubercule génital se plie et forme le clitoris.

Les plis urétraux forment les petites lèvres et les gonflements labioscrotaux forment les grandes lèvres.

A cette époque, les sexes ne peuvent toujours pas être distingués.

L'apparence des organes génitaux externes est similaire chez les embryons mâles et femelles jusqu'à la douzième semaine et même alors est difficile à distinguer. Le canal utéro-vaginal ou canal génital, se forme au cours du troisième mois du développement du système urogénital.

La partie inférieure du canal est obturée par une plaque de tissu, la plaque vaginale.

Ce tissu se développe et s'allonge au cours du troisième au cinquième mois et la partie inférieure du canal vaginal est formée par un processus de desquamation ou d'excrétion cellulaire.

L'extrémité du canal vaginal est bloquée par une membrane endodermique qui sépare l'ouverture du vestibule.

Au cinquième mois, la membrane dégénère mais laisse un vestige appelé l'hymen. Les organes chez l'homme et la femme ayant une ascendance commune partagée sont dits homologues.

Le gland clitoridien est homologue au gland du pénis masculin, et le corps clitoridien et les crus clitoridiennes sont homologues aux corps caverneux du pénis.

Les grandes lèvres sont homologues au scrotum ; le capuchon clitoridien est homologue au prépuce et les petites lèvres sont homologues à l'urètre spongieux.

Les bulbes vestibulaires sous la peau des petites lèvres sont homologues au corps spongieux, le tissu du pénis entourant l'urètre, et au bulbe du pénis.

Les glandes de Bartholin sont homologues aux glandes bulbo-urétrales chez les mâles.


=== Enfance ===

La vulve du nouveau-né peut être enflée ou hypertrophiée après avoir été exposée, via le placenta, aux niveaux accrus d'hormones de sa mère.

Les grandes lèvres sont fermées.

Ces changements disparaissent au cours des premiers mois.

Pendant l'enfance avant la puberté, le manque d'œstrogène peut rendre les lèvres collantes et finalement se joindre fermement.

Cette condition est connue sous le nom de fusion labiale et est rarement trouvée après la puberté lorsque la production d'œstrogène a augmenté.


=== Puberté ===

La puberté est le début de la capacité de se reproduire et se déroule sur deux à trois ans, produisant un certain nombre de changements.

Les structures de la vulve deviennent proportionnellement plus grandes et peuvent devenir plus prononcées.

Pubarche, la première apparition de poils pubiens se développe, d'abord sur les grandes lèvres, puis s'étend au mont du pubis, et parfois à l'intérieur des cuisses et au périnée.

Les poils pubiens sont beaucoup plus grossiers que les autres poils corporels et sont considérés comme une caractéristique sexuelle secondaire.

La pubarche peut survenir indépendamment de la puberté.

Une pubarche prématurée peut parfois indiquer un trouble métabolique-endocrinien ultérieur observé à l'adolescence.

Le trouble parfois connu sous le nom de trouble polyendocrinien est marqué par des niveaux élevés d'androgènes, d'insuline et de lipides, et peut provenir du fœtus.

Au lieu d'être considéré comme une variante normale, il est proposé que la pubarche prématurée puisse être considérée comme un marqueur de ces troubles endocriniens ultérieurs. Les glandes sudoripares apocrines sécrètent de la sueur dans les follicules pileux pubiens.

Ceci est décomposé par des bactéries sur la peau et produit une odeur, que certains considèrent comme agissant comme une phéromone sexuelle attractive.

Les petites lèvres peuvent devenir plus proéminentes et subir des changements de couleur.

À la puberté, la première période mensuelle connue sous le nom de ménarche marque le début des menstruations.
Chez les filles prépubères, la peau de la vulve est fine et délicate, et son pH neutre la rend sujette aux irritations.

La production de l'hormone sexuelle féminine estradiol (un œstrogène) à la puberté provoque un épaississement de la peau périnéale par kératinisation, ce qui réduit le risque d'infection.

L'œstrogène provoque également la formation de graisse dans le développement des caractères sexuels secondaires.

Cela contribue à la maturation de la vulve avec augmentation de la taille du mons pubis, des grandes lèvres et de l'élargissement des petites lèvres.


=== Grossesse ===

Pendant la grossesse, la vulve et le vagin prennent une coloration bleutée due à la congestion veineuse.

Cela apparaît entre la huitième et la douzième semaine et continue de s'assombrir au fur et à mesure que la grossesse se poursuit.

L'œstrogène est produit en grande quantité pendant la grossesse, ce qui entraîne une hypertrophie des organes génitaux externes.

L'ouverture vaginale et le vagin sont également agrandis.

Après l'accouchement, des pertes vaginales appelées lochies se produisent et persistent pendant une dizaine de jours.


=== Ménopause ===

Pendant la ménopause, les niveaux d'hormones diminuent, ce qui provoque des changements dans la vulve connus sous le nom d'atrophie vulvo-vaginale.

La diminution des œstrogènes affecte le mons, les lèvres et l'ouverture vaginale et peut provoquer une peau pâle, des démangeaisons et des douleurs.

D'autres changements visibles sont un amincissement des poils pubiens, une perte de graisse des grandes lèvres, un amincissement des petites lèvres et un rétrécissement de l'ouverture vaginale.

Cette condition a été renommée par certains organismes comme le syndrome génito-urinaire de la ménopause en tant que terme plus complet.


== Fonction et physiologie ==


La vulve a un rôle majeur à jouer dans le système reproducteur.

Il fournit l'entrée et la protection de l'utérus, ainsi que les bonnes conditions en termes de chaleur et d'humidité qui facilitent ses fonctions sexuelles et reproductives.

Les organes externes de la vulve sont richement innervés et procurent du plaisir lorsqu'ils sont correctement stimulés.

Le mons pubis fournit un rembourrage contre l'os pubien pendant les rapports sexuels. Un certain nombre de sécrétions différentes sont associées à la vulve, y compris l'urine (provenant de l'ouverture de l'urètre), la sueur (provenant des glandes apocrines), les règles (sortant du vagin), le sébum ( des glandes sébacées), liquide alcalin (des glandes de Bartholin), mucus (des glandes de Skene), lubrification vaginale de la paroi vaginale et smegma.

Le smegma est une substance blanche formée d'une combinaison de cellules mortes, d'huiles cutanées, d'humidité et de bactéries naturelles, qui se forme dans les organes génitaux.

Chez les femelles, cette sécrétion épaissie s'accumule autour du clitoris et des plis labiaux.

Il peut causer de l'inconfort pendant l'activité sexuelle car il peut faire coller le gland clitoridien au capuchon et s'enlève facilement par le bain.

Les acides aliphatiques connus sous le nom de copulines sont également sécrétés dans le vagin.

Ceux-ci sont censés agir comme des phéromones.

Leur composition en acides gras, et par conséquent leur odeur change en fonction des étapes du cycle menstruel.


=== Excitation sexuelle ===


Le clitoris et les petites lèvres sont des zones érogènes de la vulve.

La stimulation locale peut impliquer le clitoris, le vagin et d'autres régions périnéales.

Le clitoris est la zone érogène la plus sensible de la femme humaine et généralement la principale source anatomique du plaisir sexuel féminin.

La stimulation sexuelle du clitoris (par un certain nombre de moyens) peut entraîner une excitation sexuelle généralisée et, si elle est maintenue, peut entraîner un orgasme.

La stimulation de l'orgasme est obtenue de manière optimale par une sensation de massage. L'excitation sexuelle entraîne un certain nombre de changements physiques dans la vulve.

Pendant l'excitation, la lubrification vaginale augmente.

Le tissu vulvaire est fortement vascularisé ; les artérioles se dilatent en réponse à l'excitation sexuelle et les plus petites veines se compriment après l'excitation, de sorte que le clitoris et les petites lèvres augmentent de taille.

Une vasocongestion accrue dans le vagin le fait gonfler, diminuant la taille de l'ouverture vaginale d'environ 30 %.

Le clitoris devient de plus en plus dressé, et le gland se déplace vers l'os pubien, se dissimulant sous le capuchon.

Les petites lèvres augmentent considérablement en épaisseur.

Les petites lèvres changent parfois considérablement de couleur, passant du rose au rouge chez les femmes à la peau claire qui n'ont pas eu d'enfant, ou du rouge au rouge foncé chez celles qui en ont eu.

Immédiatement avant un orgasme, le clitoris devient exceptionnellement engorgé, ce qui fait que le gland semble se rétracter dans le capuchon clitoridien.

Des contractions musculaires rythmiques se produisent dans le tiers externe du vagin, ainsi que dans l'utérus et l'anus.

Les contractions deviennent moins intenses et plus espacées au hasard au fur et à mesure que l'orgasme se poursuit.

Le nombre de contractions qui accompagnent un orgasme varie en fonction de son intensité.

Un orgasme peut s'accompagner d'une éjaculation féminine, provoquant l'expulsion du liquide de la glande de Skene ou de la vessie par l'urètre.

Le sang mis en commun commence à se dissiper, bien qu'à un rythme beaucoup plus lent s'il n'y a pas eu d'orgasme.

Le vagin et l'ouverture vaginale retrouvent leur état détendu normal, et le reste de la vulve retrouve sa taille, sa position et sa couleur normales.


=== Distance entre le vagin et le gland clitoridien ===

La distance entre le clitoris de la frénule au niveau du gland clitoridien et le méat urinaire situé dans l'ouverture vaginale, appelée CUMD (distance clitoridien-méat urinaire), est mesurée.
Dans les années 1920, Marie Bonaparte mène des enquêtes auprès des femmes pour savoir si elles ont un orgasme lors du coït.

Les causes du manque d'excitation sexuelle étaient connues pour être l'aversion ou les inhibitions psychologiques.

Parmi les sujets de test, il y avait des femmes qui, avec un homme qu'elles aimaient et désiraient, "ressentaient le plus grand plaisir à certains attouchements tendres", mais n'étaient néanmoins pas suffisamment excitées pendant le coït.

Bonaparte a examiné la distance entre le clitoris et le vagin chez 200 femmes.

Chez 69% des femmes, le CUMD était de 1,25 à 2,25 cm, dont la plupart ont vécu l'acte sexuel comme satisfaisant.

Chez 10 % des femmes, le CUMD était de 2,5 cm, 21 % mesuraient de 2,75 à 3,5 cm.

Toutes les femmes avec un grand écart ont déclaré qu'elles n'avaient pas éprouvé de plaisir satisfaisant à la pénétration du pénis, bien que certaines aient été très sensibles à "l'effleurement précis par l'homme".
Bonaparte en a conclu un lien de causalité anatomique entre un gros CUMD et la « frigidité vaginale » expliquant pourquoi seules les femmes ayant le gland clitoridien proche du vagin (afin qu'il soit continuellement touché par le pénis) pouvaient éprouver « le plaisir sexuel le plus élevé » pendant le coït.

 
 
 
 
 
Une étude réalisée par Carney Landis et ses collègues en 1940 comprend des déclarations à cet effet : "Sur le plan physique, la capacité d'orgasme est liée à la distance clitoris-méat." (Landis et al. 1940)
Dans les méthodes enseignées depuis les années 1970 par Betty Dodson, l'excitation sexuelle de la femme lors des rapports vaginaux doit être assurée par la femme qui stimule indépendamment sa vulve et son clitoris en continu avec ses mains ou éventuellement avec un vibromasseur.

Selon Kim Wallen, le CUMD ne dit rien sur une vie sexuelle heureuse, plutôt qu'un grand écart donne aux couples la possibilité "d'être un peu plus inventifs dans la façon dont ils ont des relations sexuelles".


== Signification clinique ==



=== Irritation ===

L'irritation et les démangeaisons de la vulve sont appelées prurit vulvaire.

Cela peut être un symptôme de nombreux troubles, dont certains peuvent être déterminés par un test épicutané.

La cause la plus fréquente d'irritation est le muguet, une infection fongique.

Les mesures de santé vulvo-vaginale peuvent aider à prévenir de nombreux troubles dont le muguet.

Les infections du vagin telles que la vaginose et de l'utérus peuvent produire des pertes vaginales qui peuvent être irritantes lorsqu'elles entrent en contact avec le tissu vulvaire.

L'inflammation comme la vaginite et la vulvovaginite peuvent en résulter, provoquant une irritation et des douleurs.

Les poils incarnés résultant du rasage des poils pubiens peuvent provoquer une folliculite où le follicule pileux s'infecte; ou donner lieu à une réponse inflammatoire connue sous le nom de pseudofolliculite pubienne.

Une cause moins fréquente d'irritation est le lichen plan génital, un autre trouble inflammatoire.

Une variante grave de ce syndrome est le syndrome vulvo-vaginal-gingival qui peut entraîner un rétrécissement du vagin ou la destruction de la vulve.

De nombreux types d'infections et d'autres maladies, y compris certains cancers, peuvent provoquer une irritation.


=== Infections sexuellement transmissibles ===


Les organes et les tissus vulvaires peuvent être affectés par différents agents infectieux tels que les bactéries et les virus, ou infestés par des parasites tels que les poux et les acariens.

Plus de trente types d'agents pathogènes peuvent être transmis sexuellement, et nombre d'entre eux affectent les organes génitaux.

La plupart des ITS ne produisent pas de symptômes ou les symptômes peuvent être légers et ne pas être indicatifs d'une ITS.

La pratique de rapports sexuels protégés peut réduire considérablement le risque d'infection par de nombreux agents pathogènes sexuellement transmissibles.

L'utilisation de préservatifs (préservatifs masculins ou féminins) est l'une des méthodes de protection les plus efficaces. Les infections bactériennes comprennent : le chancre mou – caractérisé par des ulcères génitaux connus sous le nom de chancres ; granulome inguinal se présentant sous la forme de granulomes inflammatoires souvent décrits comme des nodules ; syphilis - le stade primaire se présente classiquement avec un seul chancre, un ulcère ferme, indolore et sans démangeaisons, mais il peut y avoir plusieurs plaies ; et la gonorrhée qui, très souvent, ne présente aucun symptôme mais peut entraîner un écoulement. Les infections virales comprennent l'infection par le virus du papillome humain (VPH) - c'est l'IST la plus courante et il en existe de nombreux types.

Le VPH génital peut causer des verrues génitales.

Des liens ont été établis entre le VPH et le cancer de la vulve, bien que le VPH cause le plus souvent le cancer du col de l'utérus.

L'herpès génital est généralement asymptomatique, mais peut se présenter sous la forme de petites cloques qui se transforment en ulcères.

Le VIH/SIDA est principalement transmis par l'activité sexuelle, et la vulve dans certains cas peut être affectée par des plaies.
Une infection virale hautement contagieuse est le molluscum contagiosum qui se transmet par contact étroit et provoque des verrues aquatiques. Les infections parasitaires comprennent la trichomonase, la pédiculose pubienne et la gale.

La trichomonase est transmise par un protozoaire parasite et est l'IST non virale la plus courante.

La plupart des cas sont asymptomatiques mais peuvent présenter des symptômes d'irritation et un écoulement d'odeur inhabituelle.

La pédiculose pubienne communément appelée crabes, est une maladie causée par le pou du crabe un ectoparasite.

Lorsque les poils pubiens sont infestés, l'irritation produite peut être intense.

La gale, également connue sous le nom de "démangeaison de sept ans", est causée par un autre ectoparasite, l'acarien Sarcoptes scabiei, qui provoque une irritation intense.


=== Cancer ===


Des tumeurs malignes peuvent se développer dans les parties glabres et poilues de la vulve.

Sur la base de l'origine cellulaire et de l'histologie, les cancers de la vulve sont classés en carcinomes épidermoïdes, mélanomes, carcinomes basocellulaires, adénocarcinomes, sarcomes et maladie de Paget extramammaire invasive.

Les carcinomes épidermoïdes représentent la variante la plus courante des cancers de la vulve et représentent environ 75 %.

Ceux-ci se trouvent généralement dans les lèvres, en particulier les grandes lèvres.

Le deuxième cancer de la vulve le plus courant est le carcinome basocellulaire, qui se propage rarement aux ganglions lymphatiques régionaux ou aux organes distants.

Le troisième sous-type le plus courant est le mélanome vulvaire.

Des études ont montré que les mélanomes vulvaires semblent avoir une biologie tumorale et des caractéristiques mutationnelles différentes de celles des mélanomes cutanés, ce qui a un impact direct sur le traitement médical des mélanomes vulvaires. Les signes et symptômes du cancer de la vulve peuvent inclure : des démangeaisons ou des saignements ; changements cutanés, y compris éruptions cutanées, plaies, bosses ou ulcères, et changements de la coloration de la peau vulvaire.

Des douleurs pelviennes peuvent également survenir, en particulier pendant la miction et les rapports sexuels.

Cependant, une proportion importante reste asymptomatique aux stades précoces de la maladie, ce qui retarde souvent son diagnostic.

Ainsi, 32 % des femmes atteintes d'un mélanome vulvaire présentent déjà une atteinte régionale ou des métastases à distance au moment du diagnostic, ce qui a un impact significatif sur le pronostic. La chirurgie (avec ou sans ablation des ganglions lymphatiques régionaux) est généralement la principale modalité de traitement.

En règle générale, une large excision locale est effectuée, dans laquelle la tumeur est excisée, y compris une marge de sécurité de tissu sain pour assurer son élimination complète, qui est confirmée par un pathologiste.

Dans une maladie plus avancée, une vulvectomie (partielle) peut être nécessaire afin d'enlever une partie ou la totalité de la vulve.

Les mélanomes à un stade avancé peuvent être traités avec des inhibiteurs de point de contrôle.


=== Autre ===

La fusion labiale, également appelée adhésion labiale, est la fusion des petites lèvres.

Cela affecte un certain nombre de jeunes filles et n'est pas considéré comme excessivement problématique.

La condition peut généralement être traitée à l'aide de crèmes, ou elle peut se redresser avec la libération d'hormones au début de la puberté. La vulvodynie est une douleur chronique dans la région vulvaire.

Il n'y a pas de cause unique identifiable.

Un sous-type de ceci est la vestibulite vulvaire, mais comme on ne pense pas qu'il s'agisse d'une affection inflammatoire, on l'appelle plus généralement vestibulodynie.

La vestibulite vulvaire affecte généralement les femmes pré-ménopausées. Un certain nombre de troubles cutanés tels que le lichen scléreux et le lichen simplex chronique peuvent affecter la vulve.

La maladie de Crohn de la vulve est une forme rare de maladie de Crohn métastatique qui se manifeste par une affection cutanée se manifestant par des lésions hypertrophiques ou des abcès vulvaires.

Les hidradénomes papillaires sont des nodules qui peuvent s'ulcérer et se trouvent le plus souvent sur la peau des lèvres ou des plis interlabiaux.

Une autre affection ulcéreuse plus complexe est l'hidrosadénite suppurée qui se caractérise par des kystes douloureux qui peuvent s'ulcérer, se reproduire et devenir chroniques pendant de nombreuses années.

Les cas chroniques peuvent évoluer en carcinomes épidermoïdes.

Une affection cutanée asymptomatique du vestibule vulvaire est la papillomatose vestibulaire qui se caractérise par de fines projections roses provenant soit de l'épithélium de la vulve, soit des petites lèvres.

La dermatoscopie peut distinguer cette condition des verrues génitales.

Un sous-type de psoriasis, une maladie auto-immune, est le psoriasis inversé dans lequel des plaques rouges peuvent apparaître dans les plis cutanés des lèvres.


=== Accouchement ===

La région vulvaire est à risque de traumatisme lors de l'accouchement.
Pendant l'accouchement, le vagin et la vulve doivent s'étirer pour accueillir la tête du bébé (environ 9,5 cm (3,7 po)).

Cela peut entraîner des déchirures connues sous le nom de déchirures périnéales dans l'ouverture vaginale et d'autres structures dans le périnée.

Une épisiotomie (coupe chirurgicale préventive du périnée) est parfois pratiquée pour faciliter l'accouchement et limiter les déchirures.

Une déchirure prend plus de temps à guérir qu'une incision.

Les déchirures et les incisions peuvent être réparées à l'aide de sutures qui peuvent être superposées.

Parmi les méthodes d'épilation évaluées pour les pré-chirurgies, le rasage des poils pubiens, connu sous le nom de préparation, s'est avéré augmenter le risque d'infections du site opératoire.

Aucun avantage n'a été démontré dans le rasage de routine des poils pubiens avant l'accouchement.


=== Chirurgie ===


Les génitoplasties sont des chirurgies plastiques qui peuvent être effectuées pour réparer, restaurer ou modifier les tissus vulvaires, en particulier à la suite de dommages causés par une blessure ou un traitement contre le cancer.

Ces procédures comprennent la vaginoplastie qui peut également être pratiquée en tant que chirurgie esthétique.

D'autres chirurgies esthétiques pour changer l'apparence des structures externes comprennent les labiaplasties.

Certaines de ces procédures, les vaginoplasties et les labiaplasties, sont également pratiquées en tant que chirurgies de changement de sexe. L'utilisation des chirurgies esthétiques a été critiquée par les cliniciens.

L'American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists recommande que les femmes soient informées des risques de ces chirurgies.

Ils font référence au manque de données relatives à leur innocuité et à leur efficacité et aux risques potentiels associés tels que l'infection, l'altération des sensations, la dyspareunie, les adhérences et les cicatrices.

Il existe également un pourcentage de personnes cherchant une chirurgie esthétique qui peuvent souffrir d'un trouble dysmorphique corporel et la chirurgie dans ces cas peut être contre-productive.


== Société et culture ==



=== Altération des organes génitaux féminins ===


Dans certaines pratiques culturelles, en particulier dans les cultures africaines Khoikhoi et rwandaise, les petites lèvres sont délibérément étirées en tirant dessus à plusieurs reprises et parfois en attachant des poids.

L'étirement des lèvres est une pratique culturelle familiale reconnue dans certaines parties de l'Afrique orientale et australe.

C'est une pratique souhaitée et encouragée par les femmes (dès la puberté) afin de favoriser une meilleure satisfaction sexuelle pour les deux parties.

Les extensions obtenues peuvent pendre sous les grandes lèvres jusqu'à sept pouces. Les enfants de la diaspora africaine pratiquent également cette pratique, de sorte que cela se produit au sein des communautés d'immigrants, par exemple en Grande-Bretagne, où un rapport de la BBC l'a qualifiée de forme cachée de maltraitance d'enfants. Les filles sont soumises à des pressions familiales et sociales pour se conformer. Dans certaines cultures, y compris la culture occidentale moderne, les femmes se sont rasées ou ont autrement épilé une partie ou la totalité de la vulve.

Lorsque les maillots de bain échancrés sont devenus à la mode, les femmes qui souhaitaient les porter enlevaient les poils de chaque côté de leurs triangles pubiens, pour éviter d'exposer des poils pubiens.

D'autres femmes préfèrent conserver leurs poils de vulve.

L'épilation de la vulve est un phénomène assez récent aux États-Unis, au Canada et en Europe occidentale, généralement sous la forme d'épilation du bikini ou de l'épilation brésilienne, mais elle est répandue dans de nombreuses cultures d'Europe de l'Est et du Moyen-Orient depuis des siècles, généralement en raison de l'idée qu'il peut être plus hygiénique, ou provenir de la prostitution et de la pornographie.

L'épilation peut inclure tous, la plupart ou une partie des poils.

L'épilation à la cire française laisse une petite quantité de poils de chaque côté des lèvres ou une bande directement au-dessus et en ligne avec la fente pudendale appelée piste d'atterrissage.

L'enseignement de l'islam comprend la jurisprudence hygiénique musulmane dont une pratique est l'épilation pubienne.

Plusieurs formes de piercings génitaux peuvent être pratiquées dans la vulve, notamment le piercing Christina, le piercing Nefertiti, le piercing à la fourchette et les piercings aux lèvres.

Les piercings sont généralement pratiqués à des fins esthétiques, mais certaines formes comme le piercing du capuchon clitoridien peuvent également améliorer le plaisir pendant les rapports sexuels.

Bien qu'ils soient courants dans les cultures traditionnelles, les piercings intimes sont une tendance assez récente dans la société occidentale.

D'autres formes de modifications permanentes de la vulve pour des raisons culturelles, décoratives ou esthétiques sont les tatouages ​​génitaux ou les scarifications (appelées "hanabira").
La chirurgie génitale féminine comprend le resurfaçage au laser des lèvres pour éliminer les rides, la labiaplastie (réduction de la taille des lèvres) et la vaginoplastie.

En septembre 2007, l'American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) a émis un avis de comité sur ces chirurgies génitales féminines et d'autres, y compris le « rajeunissement vaginal », la « vaginoplastie sur mesure », la « revirgination » et « l'amplification du point G ».

Cet avis indique que la sécurité de ces procédures n'a pas été documentée.

L'ACOG et l'ISSVD recommandent que les femmes souhaitant ces chirurgies soient informées du manque de données à l'appui de ces procédures et des risques potentiels associés tels que l'infection, l'altération des sensations, la dyspareunie, les adhérences et les cicatrices. chirurgies, la pratique attire de plus en plus les critiques d'un mouvement d'opposition de groupes et de plateformes militantes cyberféministes, appelé le mouvement de la fierté des lèvres.

Le principal point de discorde est qu'une forte publicité pour ces procédures, combinée à un manque d'éducation du public, favorise l'insécurité corporelle chez les femmes ayant de plus grandes lèvres malgré le fait qu'il existe une variation individuelle normale et prononcée de la taille des lèvres.

La préférence pour les petites lèvres est une question de mode et n'a aucune signification clinique ou fonctionnelle. La forme la plus répandue d'altération génitale non consensuelle est celle de la mutilation génitale féminine.

Cela implique principalement l'ablation partielle ou complète des organes génitaux.

Les mutilations génitales féminines sont pratiquées dans trente pays d'Afrique et d'Asie et touchent plus de 200 millions de filles et certaines femmes (en 2018).

La quasi-totalité des interventions sont réalisées sur des jeunes filles.

Les pratiques sont également menées à l'échelle mondiale parmi les migrants de ces zones.

On prétend que les mutilations génitales féminines sont principalement pratiquées pour des raisons culturelles traditionnelles.


=== Étymologie ===


Le mot vulve est latin pour "utérus".

Il dérive des années 1540 en se référant à l'utérus et aux organes sexuels féminins, du volvere antérieur signifiant tourner, rouler ou tourner, avec d'autres dérivés tels que ceux utilisés dans volvox et volvulus (intestin tordu).

La dénomination des organes génitaux féminins (et masculins) en tant que pudenda membra, ce qui signifie parties dont on a honte, date du milieu du XVIIe siècle.

La dénomination a influencé la perception générale de la vulve et cela se voit dans les procédures gynécologiques représentées.

L'examinateur montré dans l'examen obstétrical daté de 1822, adopte la procédure de compromis où les organes génitaux de la femme ne peuvent pas être vus.


=== Terminologie ===

En 2021, une étude au Royaume-Uni a montré que peu de gens sont capables d'étiqueter correctement la structure de la vulve. Il existe de nombreux termes d'argot sexuel utilisés pour la vulve.

Cunt , un mot médiéval pour la vulve et autrefois le terme standard, est devenu un vulgarisme et, dans d'autres cas, utilise l'un des jurons les plus offensants et abusifs des cultures anglophones.

Le mot a été remplacé dans l'usage normal par quelques euphémismes, notamment pussy (argot vulgaire) et fanny (Royaume-Uni), qui étaient autrefois un nom d'animal de compagnie courant.

Au Royaume-Uni, ces termes ont d'autres significations non sexuelles qui se prêtent à des doubles sens, comme la chatte qui est utilisée comme un terme affectueux pour un chat de compagnie - chat chatte.

Dans l'usage informel nord-américain, le terme chatte peut également désigner un homme faible ou efféminé, et fanny est un terme utilisé pour les fesses.

Les autres termes d'argot sont muff, snatch, twat et crotch.

Le vagin est souvent utilisé comme synonyme de vulve, même s'il s'agit d'une partie distincte de l'anatomie.


=== Religion et art ===


Certaines cultures ont longtemps célébré et même vénéré la vulve.

Pendant la période d'Uruk (vers 4000-3100 avant JC), les anciens Sumériens considéraient la vulve comme sacrée et un grand nombre de poèmes sumériens louant la vulve d'Inanna, la déesse de l'amour, du sexe et de la fertilité, ont survécu.

Dans la religion sumérienne, la déesse Nin-imma est la personnification divine des organes génitaux féminins.

Le fluide vaginal est toujours décrit dans les textes sumériens comme ayant un goût "doux" et, dans un hymne nuptial sumérien, une jeune fille se réjouit que sa vulve ait poussé des poils.

Des modèles en argile de vulves ont été découverts dans le temple d'Inanna à Ashur.

Certaines grandes traditions hindoues telles que le shaktisme, une tradition centrée sur la déesse, vénèrent la vulve et le vagin sous le nom de yoni.

La déesse en tant que Devi est vénérée comme la divinité suprême.

Le yoni est une représentation de la divinité féminine et se trouve dans de nombreux temples comme centre de prière et d'offrandes.

Il est également représenté symboliquement comme un mudra dans les pratiques spirituelles, y compris le yoga. Les concerts de Sheela na sont des sculptures figuratives de femmes nues affichant une vulve exagérée.

On les trouve dans des contextes européens antiques et médiévaux.

Ils sont affichés sur de nombreuses églises, mais leur origine et leur signification sont discutables.

Une ligne de pensée principale est qu'ils ont été utilisés pour éloigner les mauvais esprits.

Un autre point de vue est que le sheela na gig était un assistant divin à l'accouchement.

Starr Goode explore l'image et les significations possibles des images Sheela na gig et Baubo en particulier, mais écrit également sur l'image récurrente dans le monde entier.

À travers des centaines de photographies, elle démontre que l'image d'une femme exhibant sa vulve n'est pas spécifique à l'art religieux ou à l'architecture européenne, mais que des images similaires se retrouvent dans les arts visuels et dans les récits mythiques de déesses et d'héroïnes écartant les cuisses pour révéler ce elle appelle, "pouvoirs sacrés". Sa théorie est que "l'image est tellement enracinée dans notre psychisme qu'il semble que l'icône soit le centre cosmologique originel de l'imagination humaine".

L'Origine du monde ("Origine du monde") peint par Gustave Courbet en 1866 était une première peinture réaliste d'une vulve qui n'a été exposée que de nombreuses années plus tard.

La peinture a été commandée par le diplomate ottoman Halil Şerif Paşa.

La femme utilisée comme modèle pour le tableau était probablement l'amante de Halil, Constance Quéniaux.

Cependant, un autre modèle potentiel est Marie-Anne Detourbay, qui était également une amoureuse de Halil Şerif Pacha. La sculptrice et mangaka japonaise Megumi Igarashi a concentré une grande partie de son travail sur la peinture et la modélisation de vulves et d'œuvres sur le thème de la vulve.

Elle a utilisé des moules pour créer des dioramas - des modèles tridimensionnels de sa vulve dans l'espoir de démystifier les organes génitaux féminins. Une installation artistique intitulée The Dinner Party de l'artiste féministe Judy Chicago dépeint une histoire symbolique de femmes célèbres.

Les assiettes à dîner représentent chacune une forme vulvaire élaborée et sont disposées en forme de vulve triangulaire.

Une autre installation a été réalisée par l'artiste britannique Jamie McCartney qui a utilisé les moulages de quatre cents vulves pour créer The Great Wall of Vagina en 2011.

Les moulages du vagin sont grandeur nature.

Des explications écrites par le conseiller en santé sexuelle du projet les accompagnent.

L'objectif de l'artiste était de "s'attaquer à certains des stigmates et des idées fausses qui sont monnaie courante".



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vulve
