

BONE


A bone is a rigid organ that constitutes part of the skeleton in most vertebrate animals. 

Bones protect the various other organs of the body, produce red and white blood cells, store minerals, provide structure and support for the body, and enable mobility. 

Bones come in a variety of shapes and sizes and have a complex internal and external structure. 

They are lightweight yet strong and hard, and serve multiple functions.
Bone tissue (osseous tissue), which is also called bone in the uncountable sense of that word, is hard tissue, a type of specialized connective tissue. 

It has a honeycomb-like matrix internally, which helps to give the bone rigidity. 

Bone tissue is made up of different types of bone cells. 

Osteoblasts and osteocytes are involved in the formation and mineralization of bone; osteoclasts are involved in the resorption of bone tissue. 

Modified (flattened) osteoblasts become the lining cells that form a protective layer on the bone surface. 

The mineralized matrix of bone tissue has an organic component of mainly collagen called ossein and an inorganic component of bone mineral made up of various salts. 

Bone tissue is mineralized tissue of two types, cortical bone and cancellous bone. 

Other types of tissue found in bones include bone marrow, endosteum, periosteum, nerves, blood vessels and cartilage.
In the human body at birth, there are approximately 300 bones present; many of these fuse together during development, leaving a total of 206 separate bones in the adult, not counting numerous small sesamoid bones. 

The largest bone in the body is the femur or thigh-bone, and the smallest is the stapes in the middle ear.
The Greek word for bone is ὀστέον ("osteon"), hence the many terms that use it as a prefix—such as osteopathy.


== Structure ==

Bone is not uniformly solid, but consists of a flexible matrix (about 30%) and bound minerals (about 70%) which are intricately woven and endlessly remodeled by a group of specialized bone cells. 

Their unique composition and design allows bones to be relatively hard and strong, while remaining lightweight.
Bone matrix is 90 to 95% composed of elastic collagen fibers, also known as ossein, and the remainder is ground substance. 

The elasticity of collagen improves fracture resistance. 

The matrix is hardened by the binding of inorganic mineral salt, calcium phosphate, in a chemical arrangement known as calcium hydroxylapatite. 

It is the bone mineralization that give bones rigidity.
Bone is actively constructed and remodeled throughout life by special bone cells known as osteoblasts and osteoclasts. 

Within any single bone, the tissue is woven into two main patterns, known as cortical and cancellous bone, and each with different appearance and characteristics.


=== Cortex ===


The hard outer layer of bones is composed of cortical bone, which is also called compact bone as it is much denser than cancellous bone. 

It forms the hard exterior (cortex) of bones. 

The cortical bone gives bone its smooth, white, and solid appearance, and accounts for 80% of the total bone mass of an adult human skeleton. 

It facilitates bone's main functions—to support the whole body, to protect organs, to provide levers for movement, and to store and release chemical elements, mainly calcium. 

It consists of multiple microscopic columns, each called an osteon or Haversian system. 

Each column is multiple layers of osteoblasts and osteocytes around a central canal called the haversian canal. 

Volkmann's canals at right angles connect the osteons together. 

The columns are metabolically active, and as bone is reabsorbed and created the nature and location of the cells within the osteon will change. 

Cortical bone is covered by a periosteum on its outer surface, and an endosteum on its inner surface. 

The endosteum is the boundary between the cortical bone and the cancellous bone. 

The primary anatomical and functional unit of cortical bone is the osteon.


=== Trabecules ===


Cancellous bone, also called trabecular or spongy bone, is the internal tissue of the skeletal bone and is an open cell porous network. 

Cancellous bone has a higher surface-area-to-volume ratio than cortical bone and it is less dense. 

This makes it weaker and more flexible. 

The greater surface area also makes it suitable for metabolic activities such as the exchange of calcium ions. 

Cancellous bone is typically found at the ends of long bones, near joints and in the interior of vertebrae. 

Cancellous bone is highly vascular and often contains red bone marrow where hematopoiesis, the production of blood cells, occurs. 

The primary anatomical and functional unit of cancellous bone is the trabecula. 

The trabeculae are aligned towards the mechanical load distribution that a bone experiences within long bones such as the femur. 

As far as short bones are concerned, trabecular alignment has been studied in the vertebral pedicle. 

Thin formations of osteoblasts covered in endosteum create an irregular network of spaces, known as trabeculae. 

Within these spaces are bone marrow and hematopoietic stem cells that give rise to platelets, red blood cells and white blood cells. 

Trabecular marrow is composed of a network of rod- and plate-like elements that make the overall organ lighter and allow room for blood vessels and marrow. 

Trabecular bone accounts for the remaining 20% of total bone mass but has nearly ten times the surface area of compact bone.The words cancellous and trabecular refer to the tiny lattice-shaped units (trabeculae) that form the tissue. 

It was first illustrated accurately in the engravings of Crisóstomo Martinez.


=== Marrow ===

Bone marrow, also known as myeloid tissue in red bone marrow, can be found in almost any bone that holds cancellous tissue. 

In newborns, all such bones are filled exclusively with red marrow or hematopoietic marrow, but as the child ages the hematopoietic fraction decreases in quantity and the fatty/ yellow fraction called marrow adipose tissue (MAT) increases in quantity. 

In adults, red marrow is mostly found in the bone marrow of the femur, the ribs, the vertebrae and pelvic bones.


=== Cells ===


Bone is metabolically active tissue composed of several types of cells. 

These cells include osteoblasts, which are involved in the creation and mineralization of bone tissue, osteocytes, and osteoclasts, which are involved in the reabsorption of bone tissue. 

Osteoblasts and osteocytes are derived from osteoprogenitor cells, but osteoclasts are derived from the same cells that differentiate to form macrophages and monocytes. 

Within the marrow of the bone there are also hematopoietic stem cells. 

These cells give rise to other cells, including white blood cells, red blood cells, and platelets.


==== Osteoblast ====
 Osteoblasts are mononucleate bone-forming cells. 

They are located on the surface of osteon seams and make a protein mixture known as osteoid, which mineralizes to become bone. 

The osteoid seam is a narrow region of newly formed organic matrix, not yet mineralized, located on the surface of a bone. 

Osteoid is primarily composed of Type I collagen. 

Osteoblasts also manufacture hormones, such as prostaglandins, to act on the bone itself. 

The osteoblast creates and repairs new bone by actually building around itself. 

First, the osteoblast puts up collagen fibers. 

These collagen fibers are used as a framework for the osteoblasts' work. 

The osteoblast then deposits calcium phosphate which is hardened by hydroxide and bicarbonate ions. 

The brand-new bone created by the osteoblast is called osteoid. 

Once the osteoblast is finished working it is actually trapped inside the bone once it hardens. 

When the osteoblast becomes trapped, it becomes known as an osteocyte. 

Other osteoblasts remain on the top of the new bone and are used to protect the underlying bone, these become known as lining cells.


==== Osteocyte ====
Osteocytes are cells of mesenchymal origin and originate from osteoblasts that have migrated into and become trapped and surrounded by bone matrix that they themselves produced. 

The spaces the cell body of osteocytes occupy within the mineralized collagen type I matrix are known as lacunae, while the osteocyte cell processes occupy channels called canaliculi. 

The many processes of osteocytes reach out to meet osteoblasts, osteoclasts, bone lining cells, and other osteocytes probably for the purposes of communication. 

Osteocytes remain in contact with other osteocytes in the bone through gap junctions—coupled cell processes which pass through the canalicular channels.


==== Osteoclast ====
Osteoclasts are very large multinucleate cells that are responsible for the breakdown of bones by the process of bone resorption. 

New bone is then formed by the osteoblasts. 

Bone is constantly remodeled by the resorption of osteoclasts and created by osteoblasts. 

Osteoclasts are large cells with multiple nuclei located on bone surfaces in what are called Howship's lacunae (or resorption pits). 

These lacunae are the result of surrounding bone tissue that has been reabsorbed. 

Because the osteoclasts are derived from a monocyte stem-cell lineage, they are equipped with phagocytic-like mechanisms similar to circulating macrophages. 

Osteoclasts mature and/or migrate to discrete bone surfaces. 

Upon arrival, active enzymes, such as tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase, are secreted against the mineral substrate. 

The reabsorption of bone by osteoclasts also plays a role in calcium homeostasis.


=== Composition ===


Bones consist of living cells (osteoblasts and osteocytes) embedded in a mineralized organic matrix. 

The primary inorganic component of human bone is hydroxyapatite, the dominant bone mineral, having the nominal composition of Ca10(PO4)6(OH)2. 

The organic components of this matrix consist mainly of type I collagen—"organic" referring to materials produced as a result of the human body—and inorganic components, which alongside the dominant hydroxyapatite phase, include other compounds of calcium and phosphate including salts. 

Approximately 30% of the acellular component of bone consists of organic matter, while roughly 70% by mass is attributed to the inorganic phase. 

The collagen fibers give bone its tensile strength, and the interspersed crystals of hydroxyapatite give bone its compressive strength. 

These effects are synergistic. 

The exact composition of the matrix may be subject to change over time due to nutrition and biomineralization, with the ratio of calcium to phosphate varying between 1.3 and 2.0 (per weight), and trace minerals such as magnesium, sodium, potassium and carbonate also being found.Type I collagen composes 90–95% of the organic matrix, with remainder of the matrix being a homogenous liquid called ground substance consisting of proteoglycans such as hyaluronic acid and chondroitin sulfate, as well as non-collagenous proteins such as osteocalcin, osteopontin or bone sialoprotein. 

Collagen consists of strands of repeating units, which give bone tensile strength, and are arranged in an overlapping fashion that prevents shear stress. 

The function of ground substance is not fully known. 

Two types of bone can be identified microscopically according to the arrangement of collagen: woven and lamellar.

Woven bone (also known as fibrous bone), which is characterized by a haphazard organization of collagen fibers and is mechanically weak.
Lamellar bone, which has a regular parallel alignment of collagen into sheets ("lamellae") and is mechanically strong.
Woven bone is produced when osteoblasts produce osteoid rapidly, which occurs initially in all fetal bones, but is later replaced by more resilient lamellar bone. 

In adults woven bone is created after fractures or in Paget's disease. 

Woven bone is weaker, with a smaller number of randomly oriented collagen fibers, but forms quickly; it is for this appearance of the fibrous matrix that the bone is termed woven. 

It is soon replaced by lamellar bone, which is highly organized in concentric sheets with a much lower proportion of osteocytes to surrounding tissue. 

Lamellar bone, which makes its first appearance in humans in the fetus during the third trimester, is stronger and filled with many collagen fibers parallel to other fibers in the same layer (these parallel columns are called osteons). 

In cross-section, the fibers run in opposite directions in alternating layers, much like in plywood, assisting in the bone's ability to resist torsion forces. 

After a fracture, woven bone forms initially and is gradually replaced by lamellar bone during a process known as "bony substitution." Compared to woven bone, lamellar bone formation takes place more slowly. 

The orderly deposition of collagen fibers restricts the formation of osteoid to about 1 to 2 µm per day. 

Lamellar bone also requires a relatively flat surface to lay the collagen fibers in parallel or concentric layers.


==== Deposition ====
The extracellular matrix of bone is laid down by osteoblasts, which secrete both collagen and ground substance. 

These synthesise collagen within the cell and then secrete collagen fibrils. 

The collagen fibers rapidly polymerise to form collagen strands. 

At this stage, they are not yet mineralised, and are called "osteoid". 

Around the strands calcium and phosphate precipitate on the surface of these strands, within days to weeks becoming crystals of hydroxyapatite.In order to mineralise the bone, the osteoblasts secrete vesicles containing alkaline phosphatase. 

This cleaves the phosphate groups and acts as the foci for calcium and phosphate deposition. 

The vesicles then rupture and act as a centre for crystals to grow on. 

More particularly, bone mineral is formed from globular and plate structures.


== Types ==


There are five types of bones in the human body: long, short, flat, irregular, and sesamoid.
Long bones are characterized by a shaft, the diaphysis, that is much longer than its width; and by an epiphysis, a rounded head at each end of the shaft. 

They are made up mostly of compact bone, with lesser amounts of marrow, located within the medullary cavity, and areas of spongy, cancellous bone at the ends of the bones. 

Most bones of the limbs, including those of the fingers and toes, are long bones. 

The exceptions are the eight carpal bones of the wrist, the seven articulating tarsal bones of the ankle and the sesamoid bone of the kneecap. 

Long bones such as the clavicle, that have a differently shaped shaft or ends are also called modified long bones.
Short bones are roughly cube-shaped, and have only a thin layer of compact bone surrounding a spongy interior. 

The bones of the wrist and ankle are short bones.
Flat bones are thin and generally curved, with two parallel layers of compact bone sandwiching a layer of spongy bone. 

Most of the bones of the skull are flat bones, as is the sternum.
Sesamoid bones are bones embedded in tendons. 

Since they act to hold the tendon further away from the joint, the angle of the tendon is increased and thus the leverage of the muscle is increased. 

Examples of sesamoid bones are the patella and the pisiform.
Irregular bones do not fit into the above categories. 

They consist of thin layers of compact bone surrounding a spongy interior. 

As implied by the name, their shapes are irregular and complicated. 

Often this irregular shape is due to their many centers of ossification or because they contain bony sinuses. 

The bones of the spine, pelvis, and some bones of the skull are irregular bones. 

Examples include the ethmoid and sphenoid bones.


== Terminology ==


In the study of anatomy, anatomists use a number of anatomical terms to describe the appearance, shape and function of bones. 

Other anatomical terms are also used to describe the location of bones. 

Like other anatomical terms, many of these derive from Latin and Greek. 

Some anatomists still use Latin to refer to bones. 

The term "osseous", and the prefix "osteo-", referring to things related to bone, are still used commonly today.
Some examples of terms used to describe bones include the term "foramen" to describe a hole through which something passes, and a "canal" or "meatus" to describe a tunnel-like structure. 

A protrusion from a bone can be called a number of terms, including a "condyle", "crest", "spine", "eminence", "tubercle" or "tuberosity", depending on the protrusion's shape and location. 

In general, long bones are said to have a "head", "neck", and "body".
When two bones join together, they are said to "articulate". 

If the two bones have a fibrous connection and are relatively immobile, then the joint is called a "suture".


== Development ==


The formation of bone is called ossification. 

During the fetal stage of development this occurs by two processes: intramembranous ossification and endochondral ossification. 

Intramembranous ossification involves the formation of bone from connective tissue whereas endochondral ossification involves the formation of bone from cartilage.
Intramembranous ossification mainly occurs during formation of the flat bones of the skull but also the mandible, maxilla, and clavicles; the bone is formed from connective tissue such as mesenchyme tissue rather than from cartilage. 

The process includes: the development of the ossification center, calcification, trabeculae formation and the development of the periosteum.Endochondral ossification occurs in long bones and most other bones in the body; it involves the development of bone from cartilage. 

This process includes the development of a cartilage model, its growth and development, development of the primary and secondary ossification centers, and the formation of articular cartilage and the epiphyseal plates.Endochondral ossification begins with points in the cartilage called "primary ossification centers." They mostly appear during fetal development, though a few short bones begin their primary ossification after birth. 

They are responsible for the formation of the diaphyses of long bones, short bones and certain parts of irregular bones. 

Secondary ossification occurs after birth and forms the epiphyses of long bones and the extremities of irregular and flat bones. 

The diaphysis and both epiphyses of a long bone are separated by a growing zone of cartilage (the epiphyseal plate). 

At skeletal maturity (18 to 25 years of age), all of the cartilage is replaced by bone, fusing the diaphysis and both epiphyses together (epiphyseal closure). 

In the upper limbs, only the diaphyses of the long bones and scapula are ossified. 

The epiphyses, carpal bones, coracoid process, medial border of the scapula, and acromion are still cartilaginous.The following steps are followed in the conversion of cartilage to bone:

Zone of reserve cartilage. 

This region, farthest from the marrow cavity, consists of typical hyaline cartilage that as yet shows no sign of transforming into bone.
Zone of cell proliferation. 

A little closer to the marrow cavity, chondrocytes multiply and arrange themselves into longitudinal columns of flattened lacunae.
Zone of cell hypertrophy. 

Next, the chondrocytes cease to divide and begin to hypertrophy (enlarge), much like they do in the primary ossification center of the fetus. 

The walls of the matrix between lacunae become very thin.
Zone of calcification. 

Minerals are deposited in the matrix between the columns of lacunae and calcify the cartilage. 

These are not the permanent mineral deposits of bone, but only a temporary support for the cartilage that would otherwise soon be weakened by the breakdown of the enlarged lacunae.
Zone of bone deposition. 

Within each column, the walls between the lacunae break down and the chondrocytes die. 

This converts each column into a longitudinal channel, which is immediately invaded by blood vessels and marrow from the marrow cavity. 

Osteoblasts line up along the walls of these channels and begin depositing concentric lamellae of matrix, while osteoclasts dissolve the temporarily calcified cartilage.


== Functions ==

Bones have a variety of functions:


=== Mechanical ===


Bones serve a variety of mechanical functions. 

Together the bones in the body form the skeleton. 

They provide a frame to keep the body supported, and an attachment point for skeletal muscles, tendons, ligaments and joints, which function together to generate and transfer forces so that individual body parts or the whole body can be manipulated in three-dimensional space (the interaction between bone and muscle is studied in biomechanics).
Bones protect internal organs, such as the skull protecting the brain or the ribs protecting the heart and lungs. 

Because of the way that bone is formed, bone has a high compressive strength of about 170 MPa (1,700 kgf/cm2), poor tensile strength of 104–121 MPa, and a very low shear stress strength (51.6 MPa). 

This means that bone resists pushing (compressional) stress well, resist pulling (tensional) stress less well, but only poorly resists shear stress (such as due to torsional loads). 

While bone is essentially brittle, bone does have a significant degree of elasticity, contributed chiefly by collagen.
Mechanically, bones also have a special role in hearing. 

The ossicles are three small bones in the middle ear which are involved in sound transduction.


=== Synthetic ===

The cancellous part of bones contain bone marrow. 

Bone marrow produces blood cells in a process called hematopoiesis. 

Blood cells that are created in bone marrow include red blood cells, platelets and white blood cells. 

Progenitor cells such as the hematopoietic stem cell divide in a process called mitosis to produce precursor cells. 

These include precursors which eventually give rise to white blood cells, and erythroblasts which give rise to red blood cells. 

Unlike red and white blood cells, created by mitosis, platelets are shed from very large cells called megakaryocytes. 

This process of progressive differentiation occurs within the bone marrow. 

After the cells are matured, they enter the circulation. 

Every day, over 2.5 billion red blood cells and platelets, and 50–100 billion granulocytes are produced in this way.As well as creating cells, bone marrow is also one of the major sites where defective or aged red blood cells are destroyed.


=== Metabolic ===

Mineral storage – bones act as reserves of minerals important for the body, most notably calcium and phosphorus.Determined by the species, age, and the type of bone, bone cells make up to 15 percent of the bone. 

Growth factor storage—mineralized bone matrix stores important growth factors such as insulin-like growth factors, transforming growth factor, bone morphogenetic proteins and others.
Fat storage – marrow adipose tissue (MAT) acts as a storage reserve of fatty acids.
Acid-base balance – bone buffers the blood against excessive pH changes by absorbing or releasing alkaline salts.
Detoxification – bone tissues can also store heavy metals and other foreign elements, removing them from the blood and reducing their effects on other tissues. 

These can later be gradually released for excretion.
Endocrine organ – bone controls phosphate metabolism by releasing fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF-23), which acts on kidneys to reduce phosphate reabsorption. 

Bone cells also release a hormone called osteocalcin, which contributes to the regulation of blood sugar (glucose) and fat deposition. 

Osteocalcin increases both the insulin secretion and sensitivity, in addition to boosting the number of insulin-producing cells and reducing stores of fat.
Calcium balance – the process of bone resorption by the osteoclasts releases stored calcium into the systemic circulation and is an important process in regulating calcium balance. 

As bone formation actively fixes circulating calcium in its mineral form, removing it from the bloodstream, resorption actively unfixes it thereby increasing circulating calcium levels. 

These processes occur in tandem at site-specific locations.


== Remodeling ==


Bone is constantly being created and replaced in a process known as remodeling. 

This ongoing turnover of bone is a process of resorption followed by replacement of bone with little change in shape. 

This is accomplished through osteoblasts and osteoclasts. 

Cells are stimulated by a variety of signals, and together referred to as a remodeling unit. 

Approximately 10% of the skeletal mass of an adult is remodelled each year. 

The purpose of remodeling is to regulate calcium homeostasis, repair microdamaged bones from everyday stress, and to shape the skeleton during growth. 

Repeated stress, such as weight-bearing exercise or bone healing, results in the bone thickening at the points of maximum stress (Wolff's law). 

It has been hypothesized that this is a result of bone's piezoelectric properties, which cause bone to generate small electrical potentials under stress.The action of osteoblasts and osteoclasts are controlled by a number of chemical enzymes that either promote or inhibit the activity of the bone remodeling cells, controlling the rate at which bone is made, destroyed, or changed in shape. 

The cells also use paracrine signalling to control the activity of each other. 

For example, the rate at which osteoclasts resorb bone is inhibited by calcitonin and osteoprotegerin. 

Calcitonin is produced by parafollicular cells in the thyroid gland, and can bind to receptors on osteoclasts to directly inhibit osteoclast activity. 

Osteoprotegerin is secreted by osteoblasts and is able to bind RANK-L, inhibiting osteoclast stimulation.Osteoblasts can also be stimulated to increase bone mass through increased secretion of osteoid and by inhibiting the ability of osteoclasts to break down osseous tissue. 

Increased secretion of osteoid is stimulated by the secretion of growth hormone by the pituitary, thyroid hormone and the sex hormones (estrogens and androgens). 

These hormones also promote increased secretion of osteoprotegerin. 

Osteoblasts can also be induced to secrete a number of cytokines that promote reabsorption of bone by stimulating osteoclast activity and differentiation from progenitor cells. 

Vitamin D, parathyroid hormone and stimulation from osteocytes induce osteoblasts to increase secretion of RANK-ligand and interleukin 6, which cytokines then stimulate increased reabsorption of bone by osteoclasts. 

These same compounds also increase secretion of macrophage colony-stimulating factor by osteoblasts, which promotes the differentiation of progenitor cells into osteoclasts, and decrease secretion of osteoprotegerin.


== Volume ==

Bone volume is determined by the rates of bone formation and bone resorption. 

Recent research has suggested that certain growth factors may work to locally alter bone formation by increasing osteoblast activity. 

Numerous bone-derived growth factors have been isolated and classified via bone cultures. 

These factors include insulin-like growth factors I and II, transforming growth factor-beta, fibroblast growth factor, platelet-derived growth factor, and bone morphogenetic proteins. 

Evidence suggests that bone cells produce growth factors for extracellular storage in the bone matrix. 

The release of these growth factors from the bone matrix could cause the proliferation of osteoblast precursors. 

Essentially, bone growth factors may act as potential determinants of local bone formation. 

Research has suggested that cancellous bone volume in postmenopausal osteoporosis may be determined by the relationship between the total bone forming surface and the percent of surface resorption.


== Clinical significance ==


A number of diseases can affect bone, including arthritis, fractures, infections, osteoporosis and tumors. 

Conditions relating to bone can be managed by a variety of doctors, including rheumatologists for joints, and orthopedic surgeons, who may conduct surgery to fix broken bones. 

Other doctors, such as rehabilitation specialists may be involved in recovery, radiologists in interpreting the findings on imaging, and pathologists in investigating the cause of the disease, and family doctors may play a role in preventing complications of bone disease such as osteoporosis.
When a doctor sees a patient, a history and exam will be taken. 

Bones are then often imaged, called radiography. 

This might include ultrasound X-ray, CT scan, MRI scan and other imaging such as a Bone scan, which may be used to investigate cancer. 

Other tests such as a blood test for autoimmune markers may be taken, or a synovial fluid aspirate may be taken.


=== Fractures ===


In normal bone, fractures occur when there is significant force applied or repetitive trauma over a long time. 

Fractures can also occur when a bone is weakened, such as with osteoporosis, or when there is a structural problem, such as when the bone remodels excessively (such as Paget's disease) or is the site of the growth of cancer. 

Common fractures include wrist fractures and hip fractures, associated with osteoporosis, vertebral fractures associated with high-energy trauma and cancer, and fractures of long-bones. 

Not all fractures are painful. 

When serious, depending on the fractures type and location, complications may include flail chest, compartment syndromes or fat embolism.
Compound fractures involve the bone's penetration through the skin. 

Some complex fractures can be treated by the use of bone grafting procedures that replace missing bone portions.
Fractures and their underlying causes can be investigated by X-rays, CT scans and MRIs. 

Fractures are described by their location and shape, and several classification systems exist, depending on the location of the fracture. 

A common long bone fracture in children is a Salter–Harris fracture. 

When fractures are managed, pain relief is often given, and the fractured area is often immobilised. 

This is to promote bone healing. 

In addition, surgical measures such as internal fixation may be used. 

Because of the immobilisation, people with fractures are often advised to undergo rehabilitation.


=== Tumors ===


There are several types of tumor that can affect bone; examples of benign bone tumors include osteoma, osteoid osteoma, osteochondroma, osteoblastoma, enchondroma, giant-cell tumor of bone, and aneurysmal bone cyst.


=== Cancer ===


Cancer can arise in bone tissue, and bones are also a common site for other cancers to spread (metastasise) to. 

Cancers that arise in bone are called "primary" cancers, although such cancers are rare. 

Metastases within bone are "secondary" cancers, with the most common being breast cancer, lung cancer, prostate cancer, thyroid cancer, and kidney cancer. 

Secondary cancers that affect bone can either destroy bone (called a "lytic" cancer) or create bone (a "sclerotic" cancer). 

Cancers of the bone marrow inside the bone can also affect bone tissue, examples including leukemia and multiple myeloma. 

Bone may also be affected by cancers in other parts of the body. 

Cancers in other parts of the body may release parathyroid hormone or parathyroid hormone-related peptide. 

This increases bone reabsorption, and can lead to bone fractures.
Bone tissue that is destroyed or altered as a result of cancers is distorted, weakened, and more prone to fracture. 

This may lead to compression of the spinal cord, destruction of the marrow resulting in bruising, bleeding and immunosuppression, and is one cause of bone pain. 

If the cancer is metastatic, then there might be other symptoms depending on the site of the original cancer. 

Some bone cancers can also be felt.
Cancers of the bone are managed according to their type, their stage, prognosis, and what symptoms they cause. 

Many primary cancers of bone are treated with radiotherapy. 

Cancers of bone marrow may be treated with chemotherapy, and other forms of targeted therapy such as immunotherapy may be used. 

Palliative care, which focuses on maximising a person's quality of life, may play a role in management, particularly if the likelihood of survival within five years is poor.


=== Other painful conditions ===

Osteomyelitis is inflammation of the bone or bone marrow due to bacterial infection.
Osteomalacia is a painful softening of adult bone caused by severe vitamin D deficiency.
Osteogenesis imperfecta
Osteochondritis dissecans
Ankylosing spondylitis
Skeletal fluorosis is a bone disease caused by an excessive accumulation of fluoride in the bones. 

In advanced cases, skeletal fluorosis damages bones and joints and is painful.


=== Osteoporosis ===


Osteoporosis is a disease of bone where there is reduced bone mineral density, increasing the likelihood of fractures. 

Osteoporosis is defined in women by the World Health Organization as a bone mineral density of 2.5 standard deviations below peak bone mass, relative to the age and sex-matched average. 

This density is measured using dual energy X-ray absorptiometry (DEXA), with the term "established osteoporosis" including the presence of a fragility fracture. 

Osteoporosis is most common in women after menopause, when it is called "postmenopausal osteoporosis", but may develop in men and premenopausal women in the presence of particular hormonal disorders and other chronic diseases or as a result of smoking and medications, specifically glucocorticoids. 

Osteoporosis usually has no symptoms until a fracture occurs. 

For this reason, DEXA scans are often done in people with one or more risk factors, who have developed osteoporosis and are at risk of fracture.One of the most important risk factors for osteoporosis is advanced age. 

Accumulation of oxidative DNA damage in osteoblastic and osteoclastic cells appears to be a key factor in age-related osteoporosis.Osteoporosis treatment includes advice to stop smoking, decrease alcohol consumption, exercise regularly, and have a healthy diet. 

Calcium and trace mineral supplements may also be advised, as may Vitamin D. 

When medication is used, it may include bisphosphonates, Strontium ranelate, and hormone replacement therapy.


=== Osteopathic medicine ===


Osteopathic medicine is a school of medical thought originally developed based on the idea of the link between the musculoskeletal system and overall health, but now very similar to mainstream medicine. 

As of 2012, over 77,000 physicians in the United States are trained in osteopathic medical schools.


== Osteology ==


The study of bones and teeth is referred to as osteology. 

It is frequently used in anthropology, archeology and forensic science for a variety of tasks. 

This can include determining the nutritional, health, age or injury status of the individual the bones were taken from. 

Preparing fleshed bones for these types of studies can involve the process of maceration.
Typically anthropologists and archeologists study bone tools made by Homo sapiens and Homo neanderthalensis. 

Bones can serve a number of uses such as projectile points or artistic pigments, and can also be made from external bones such as antlers.


== Other animals ==


Bird skeletons are very lightweight. 

Their bones are smaller and thinner, to aid flight. 

Among mammals, bats come closest to birds in terms of bone density, suggesting that small dense bones are a flight adaptation. 

Many bird bones have little marrow due to them being hollow.A bird's beak is primarily made of bone as projections of the mandibles which are covered in keratin.
Some bones, primarily formed separately in subcutaneous tissues, include headgears (such as bony core of horns, antlers, ossicones), osteoderm, and os penis/ os clitoris. 

A deer's antlers are composed of bone which is an unusual example of bone being outside the skin of the animal once the velvet is shed.The extinct predatory fish Dunkleosteus had sharp edges of hard exposed bone along its jaws.The proportion of cortical bone that is 80% in the human skeleton may be much lower in other animals, especially in marine mammals and marine turtles, or in various Mesozoic marine reptiles, such as ichthyosaurs, among others. 

This proportion can vary quickly in evolution; it often increases in early stages of returns to an aquatic lifestyle, as seen in early whales and pinnipeds, among others. 

It subsequently decreases in pelagic taxa, which typically acquire spongy bone, but aquatic taxa that live in shallow water can retain very thick, pachyostotic, osteosclerotic, or pachyosteosclerotic bones, especially if they move slowly, like sea cows. 

In some cases, even marine taxa that had acquired spongy bone can revert to thicker, compact bones if they become adapted to live in shallow water, or in hypersaline (denser) water.Many animals, particularly herbivores, practice osteophagy—the eating of bones. 

This is presumably carried out in order to replenish lacking phosphate.
Many bone diseases that affect humans also affect other vertebrates—an example of one disorder is skeletal fluorosis.


== Society and culture ==


Bones from slaughtered animals have a number of uses. 

In prehistoric times, they have been used for making bone tools. 

They have further been used in bone carving, already important in prehistoric art, and also in modern time as crafting materials for buttons, beads, handles, bobbins, calculation aids, head nuts, dice, poker chips, pick-up sticks, arrows, scrimshaw, ornaments, etc.
Bone glue can be made by prolonged boiling of ground or cracked bones, followed by filtering and evaporation to thicken the resulting fluid. 

Historically once important, bone glue and other animal glues today have only a few specialized uses, such as in antiques restoration. 

Essentially the same process, with further refinement, thickening and drying, is used to make gelatin.
Broth is made by simmering several ingredients for a long time, traditionally including bones.
Bone char, a porous, black, granular material primarily used for filtration and also as a black pigment, is produced by charring mammal bones.
Oracle bone script was a writing system used in Ancient China based on inscriptions in bones. 

Its name originates from oracle bones, which were mainly ox clavicle. 

The Ancient Chinese (mainly in the Shang dynasty), would write their questions on the oracle bone, and burn the bone, and where the bone cracked would be the answer for the questions.
To point the bone at someone is considered bad luck in some cultures, such as Australian aborigines, such as by the Kurdaitcha.
The wishbones of fowl have been used for divination, and are still customarily used in a tradition to determine which one of two people pulling on either prong of the bone may make a wish.
Various cultures throughout history have adopted the custom of shaping an infant's head by the practice of artificial cranial deformation. 

A widely practised custom in China was that of foot binding to limit the normal growth of the foot.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bone
;;;ES;;;



HUESO


Un hueso es un órgano rígido que constituye parte del esqueleto en la mayoría de los animales vertebrados.

Los huesos protegen los otros órganos del cuerpo, producen glóbulos rojos y blancos, almacenan minerales, brindan estructura y apoyo al cuerpo y permiten la movilidad.

Los huesos vienen en una variedad de formas y tamaños y tienen una estructura interna y externa compleja.

Son livianos pero fuertes y duros, y cumplen múltiples funciones.
El tejido óseo (tejido óseo), que también se denomina hueso en el sentido incontable de esa palabra, es un tejido duro, un tipo de tejido conectivo especializado.

Tiene una matriz en forma de panal internamente, lo que ayuda a dar rigidez al hueso.

El tejido óseo está formado por diferentes tipos de células óseas.

Los osteoblastos y los osteocitos están involucrados en la formación y mineralización del hueso; Los osteoclastos participan en la reabsorción del tejido óseo.

Los osteoblastos modificados (aplanados) se convierten en las células de revestimiento que forman una capa protectora en la superficie del hueso.

La matriz mineralizada del tejido óseo tiene un componente orgánico principalmente de colágeno llamado oseína y un componente inorgánico de mineral óseo formado por varias sales.

El tejido óseo es tejido mineralizado de dos tipos, hueso cortical y hueso esponjoso.

Otros tipos de tejido que se encuentran en los huesos incluyen la médula ósea, el endostio, el periostio, los nervios, los vasos sanguíneos y el cartílago.
En el cuerpo humano al nacer, hay aproximadamente 300 huesos presentes; muchos de estos se fusionan durante el desarrollo, dejando un total de 206 huesos separados en el adulto, sin contar numerosos huesos sesamoideos pequeños.

El hueso más grande del cuerpo es el fémur o fémur, y el más pequeño es el estribo en el oído medio.
La palabra griega para hueso es ὀστέον ("osteon"), de ahí los muchos términos que la usan como prefijo, como osteopatía.


== Estructura ==

El hueso no es uniformemente sólido, sino que consta de una matriz flexible (alrededor del 30 %) y minerales unidos (alrededor del 70 %) que están intrincadamente entretejidos y remodelados sin cesar por un grupo de células óseas especializadas.

Su composición y diseño únicos permiten que los huesos sean relativamente duros y fuertes, sin dejar de ser livianos.
La matriz ósea está compuesta en un 90 a 95 % por fibras elásticas de colágeno, también conocidas como oseína, y el resto es sustancia fundamental.

La elasticidad del colágeno mejora la resistencia a la fractura.

La matriz se endurece por la unión de una sal mineral inorgánica, fosfato de calcio, en un arreglo químico conocido como hidroxiapatita de calcio.

Es la mineralización ósea la que da rigidez a los huesos.
El hueso se construye y remodela activamente a lo largo de la vida mediante células óseas especiales conocidas como osteoblastos y osteoclastos.

Dentro de cualquier hueso individual, el tejido se entreteje en dos patrones principales, conocidos como hueso cortical y esponjoso, y cada uno con apariencia y características diferentes.


=== Corteza ===


La capa exterior dura de los huesos está compuesta de hueso cortical, que también se denomina hueso compacto, ya que es mucho más denso que el hueso esponjoso.

Forma el exterior duro (corteza) de los huesos.

El hueso cortical le da al hueso su apariencia lisa, blanca y sólida, y representa el 80% de la masa ósea total de un esqueleto humano adulto.

Facilita las funciones principales de los huesos: sostener todo el cuerpo, proteger los órganos, proporcionar palancas para el movimiento y almacenar y liberar elementos químicos, principalmente calcio.

Consiste en múltiples columnas microscópicas, cada una llamada osteón o sistema haversiano.

Cada columna es múltiples capas de osteoblastos y osteocitos alrededor de un canal central llamado canal haversiano.

Los canales de Volkmann en ángulo recto conectan los osteones entre sí.

Las columnas son metabólicamente activas y, a medida que el hueso se reabsorbe y se crea, cambiará la naturaleza y la ubicación de las células dentro de la osteona.

El hueso cortical está cubierto por un periostio en su superficie externa y un endostio en su superficie interna.

El endostio es el límite entre el hueso cortical y el hueso esponjoso.

La unidad anatómica y funcional primaria del hueso cortical es el osteón.


=== Trabéculas ===


El hueso esponjoso, también llamado hueso trabecular o esponjoso, es el tejido interno del hueso esquelético y es una red porosa de células abiertas.

El hueso esponjoso tiene una mayor relación superficie-volumen que el hueso cortical y es menos denso.

Esto lo hace más débil y más flexible.

La mayor superficie también lo hace adecuado para actividades metabólicas como el intercambio de iones de calcio.

El hueso esponjoso se encuentra típicamente en los extremos de los huesos largos, cerca de las articulaciones y en el interior de las vértebras.

El hueso esponjoso es muy vascularizado y, a menudo, contiene médula ósea roja donde se produce la hematopoyesis, la producción de células sanguíneas.

La unidad anatómica y funcional primaria del hueso esponjoso es la trabécula.

Las trabéculas están alineadas hacia la distribución de carga mecánica que experimenta un hueso dentro de huesos largos como el fémur.

En cuanto a los huesos cortos, se ha estudiado la alineación trabecular en el pedículo vertebral.

Formaciones delgadas de osteoblastos cubiertos de endostio crean una red irregular de espacios, conocidos como trabéculas.

Dentro de estos espacios se encuentran la médula ósea y las células madre hematopoyéticas que dan lugar a plaquetas, glóbulos rojos y glóbulos blancos.

La médula trabecular está compuesta por una red de elementos similares a barras y placas que hacen que el órgano en general sea más liviano y deja espacio para los vasos sanguíneos y la médula.

El hueso trabecular representa el 20 % restante de la masa ósea total, pero tiene casi diez veces el área superficial del hueso compacto. Las palabras esponjoso y trabecular se refieren a las diminutas unidades en forma de red (trabéculas) que forman el tejido.

Primero se ilustró con precisión en los grabados de Crisóstomo Martínez.


=== Tuétano ===

La médula ósea, también conocida como tejido mieloide en la médula ósea roja, se puede encontrar en casi cualquier hueso que contenga tejido esponjoso.

En los recién nacidos, todos estos huesos están llenos exclusivamente de médula roja o médula hematopoyética, pero a medida que el niño envejece, la fracción hematopoyética disminuye en cantidad y la fracción grasa/amarilla llamada tejido adiposo de la médula (MAT) aumenta en cantidad.

En los adultos, la médula roja se encuentra principalmente en la médula ósea del fémur, las costillas, las vértebras y los huesos pélvicos.


=== Células ===


El hueso es un tejido metabólicamente activo compuesto por varios tipos de células.

Estas células incluyen osteoblastos, que participan en la creación y mineralización de tejido óseo, osteocitos y osteoclastos, que participan en la reabsorción de tejido óseo.

Los osteoblastos y los osteocitos se derivan de las células osteoprogenitoras, pero los osteoclastos se derivan de las mismas células que se diferencian para formar macrófagos y monocitos.

Dentro de la médula del hueso también hay células madre hematopoyéticas.

Estas células dan lugar a otras células, incluidos los glóbulos blancos, los glóbulos rojos y las plaquetas.


==== Osteoblasto ====
Los osteoblastos son células formadoras de hueso mononucleadas.

Están ubicados en la superficie de las costuras de osteones y forman una mezcla de proteínas conocida como osteoide, que se mineraliza para convertirse en hueso.

La costura osteoide es una región estrecha de matriz orgánica recién formada, aún no mineralizada, ubicada en la superficie de un hueso.

El osteoide se compone principalmente de colágeno tipo I.

Los osteoblastos también fabrican hormonas, como las prostaglandinas, para actuar sobre el hueso mismo.

El osteoblasto crea y repara hueso nuevo al construirse alrededor de sí mismo.

Primero, el osteoblasto acumula fibras de colágeno.

Estas fibras de colágeno se utilizan como marco para el trabajo de los osteoblastos.

Luego, el osteoblasto deposita fosfato de calcio que se endurece con iones de hidróxido y bicarbonato.

El hueso nuevo creado por el osteoblasto se llama osteoide.

Una vez que el osteoblasto termina de funcionar, queda atrapado dentro del hueso una vez que se endurece.

Cuando el osteoblasto queda atrapado, se lo conoce como osteocito.

Otros osteoblastos permanecen en la parte superior del hueso nuevo y se usan para proteger el hueso subyacente, estos se conocen como células de revestimiento.


==== Osteocito ====
Los osteocitos son células de origen mesenquimatoso y se originan a partir de osteoblastos que han migrado y han quedado atrapados y rodeados por matriz ósea que ellos mismos produjeron.

Los espacios que ocupa el cuerpo celular de los osteocitos dentro de la matriz de colágeno tipo I mineralizado se conocen como lagunas, mientras que los procesos celulares de los osteocitos ocupan canales llamados canalículos.

Los muchos procesos de los osteocitos se extienden para encontrarse con osteoblastos, osteoclastos, células de revestimiento óseo y otros osteocitos, probablemente con fines de comunicación.

Los osteocitos permanecen en contacto con otros osteocitos en el hueso a través de uniones gap, procesos celulares acoplados que pasan a través de los canales canaliculares.


==== Osteoclasto ====
Los osteoclastos son células multinucleadas muy grandes que son responsables de la descomposición de los huesos mediante el proceso de reabsorción ósea.

Luego, los osteoblastos forman hueso nuevo.

El hueso se remodela constantemente por la reabsorción de los osteoclastos y es creado por los osteoblastos.

Los osteoclastos son células grandes con múltiples núcleos ubicadas en las superficies óseas en lo que se denominan lagunas de Howship (o pozos de reabsorción).

Estas lagunas son el resultado de la reabsorción del tejido óseo circundante.

Debido a que los osteoclastos se derivan de un linaje de células madre de monocitos, están equipados con mecanismos de tipo fagocítico similares a los macrófagos circulantes.

Los osteoclastos maduran y/o migran a superficies óseas discretas.

Al llegar, se secretan enzimas activas, como la fosfatasa ácida resistente al tartrato, contra el sustrato mineral.

La reabsorción del hueso por los osteoclastos también juega un papel en la homeostasis del calcio.


=== Composición ===


Los huesos están formados por células vivas (osteoblastos y osteocitos) incrustadas en una matriz orgánica mineralizada.

El principal componente inorgánico del hueso humano es la hidroxiapatita, el mineral óseo dominante, que tiene la composición nominal de Ca10(PO4)6(OH)2.

Los componentes orgánicos de esta matriz consisten principalmente en colágeno tipo I, "orgánico" se refiere a materiales producidos como resultado del cuerpo humano, y componentes inorgánicos, que junto con la fase dominante de hidroxiapatita, incluyen otros compuestos de calcio y fosfato, incluidas las sales.

Aproximadamente el 30% del componente acelular del hueso consiste en materia orgánica, mientras que aproximadamente el 70% en masa se atribuye a la fase inorgánica.

Las fibras de colágeno le dan al hueso su resistencia a la tracción, y los cristales intercalados de hidroxiapatita le dan al hueso su resistencia a la compresión.

Estos efectos son sinérgicos.

La composición exacta de la matriz puede estar sujeta a cambios con el tiempo debido a la nutrición y la biomineralización, con una proporción de calcio a fosfato que varía entre 1,3 y 2,0 (por peso), y minerales traza como magnesio, sodio, potasio y carbonato también son encontrado. El colágeno tipo I compone el 90-95% de la matriz orgánica, y el resto de la matriz es un líquido homogéneo llamado sustancia fundamental que consta de proteoglicanos como el ácido hialurónico y el sulfato de condroitina, así como proteínas no colágenas como la osteocalcina, osteopontina o sialoproteína ósea.

El colágeno consta de hebras de unidades repetitivas, que dan resistencia a la tracción del hueso, y están dispuestas de manera superpuesta para evitar la tensión de cizallamiento.

La función de la sustancia fundamental no se conoce completamente.

Microscópicamente se pueden identificar dos tipos de hueso según la disposición del colágeno: tejido y lamelar.

Hueso tejido (también conocido como hueso fibroso), que se caracteriza por una organización irregular de las fibras de colágeno y es mecánicamente débil.
Hueso lamelar, que tiene una alineación paralela regular de colágeno en láminas ("laminillas") y es mecánicamente fuerte.
El hueso tejido se produce cuando los osteoblastos producen osteoide rápidamente, lo que ocurre inicialmente en todos los huesos fetales, pero luego se reemplaza por hueso laminar más resistente.

En los adultos, el hueso entretejido se crea después de fracturas o en la enfermedad de Paget.

El hueso tejido es más débil, con un número menor de fibras de colágeno orientadas al azar, pero se forma rápidamente; es por esta apariencia de la matriz fibrosa que el hueso se denomina tejido.

Pronto es reemplazado por hueso lamelar, que está muy organizado en láminas concéntricas con una proporción mucho menor de osteocitos en el tejido circundante.

El hueso lamelar, que hace su primera aparición en humanos en el feto durante el tercer trimestre, es más fuerte y está lleno de muchas fibras de colágeno paralelas a otras fibras en la misma capa (estas columnas paralelas se denominan osteones).

En la sección transversal, las fibras corren en direcciones opuestas en capas alternas, como en la madera contrachapada, ayudando a la capacidad del hueso para resistir las fuerzas de torsión.

Después de una fractura, inicialmente se forma hueso entretejido y se reemplaza gradualmente por hueso lamelar durante un proceso conocido como "sustitución ósea". En comparación con el hueso tejido, la formación de hueso lamelar se produce más lentamente.

La deposición ordenada de fibras de colágeno restringe la formación de osteoide a alrededor de 1 a 2 µm por día.

El hueso lamelar también requiere una superficie relativamente plana para colocar las fibras de colágeno en capas paralelas o concéntricas.


==== Deposición ====
La matriz extracelular del hueso la establecen los osteoblastos, que secretan tanto colágeno como sustancia fundamental.

Estos sintetizan colágeno dentro de la célula y luego secretan fibrillas de colágeno.

Las fibras de colágeno se polimerizan rápidamente para formar hebras de colágeno.

En esta etapa, aún no están mineralizados y se denominan "osteoideos".

Alrededor de las hebras, el calcio y el fosfato se precipitan en la superficie de estas hebras, convirtiéndose en días o semanas en cristales de hidroxiapatita. Para mineralizar el hueso, los osteoblastos secretan vesículas que contienen fosfatasa alcalina.

Esto escinde los grupos fosfato y actúa como foco para la deposición de calcio y fosfato.

Luego, las vesículas se rompen y actúan como un centro para que crezcan los cristales.

Más particularmente, el mineral óseo se forma a partir de estructuras globulares y de placas.


== Tipos ==


Hay cinco tipos de huesos en el cuerpo humano: largos, cortos, planos, irregulares y sesamoideos.
Los huesos largos se caracterizan por un eje, la diáfisis, que es mucho más largo que ancho; y por una epífisis, una cabeza redondeada en cada extremo del eje.

Se componen principalmente de hueso compacto, con menor cantidad de médula, ubicado dentro de la cavidad medular, y áreas de hueso esponjoso y esponjoso en los extremos de los huesos.

La mayoría de los huesos de las extremidades, incluidos los de los dedos de las manos y los pies, son huesos largos.

Las excepciones son los ocho huesos carpianos de la muñeca, los siete huesos articulares del tarso del tobillo y el hueso sesamoideo de la rótula.

Los huesos largos como la clavícula, que tienen un eje o extremos de forma diferente, también se denominan huesos largos modificados.
Los huesos cortos tienen una forma aproximada de cubo y solo tienen una capa delgada de hueso compacto que rodea un interior esponjoso.

Los huesos de la muñeca y el tobillo son huesos cortos.
Los huesos planos son delgados y generalmente curvos, con dos capas paralelas de hueso compacto intercaladas con una capa de hueso esponjoso.

La mayoría de los huesos del cráneo son huesos planos, al igual que el esternón.
Los huesos sesamoideos son huesos incrustados en los tendones.

Dado que actúan para mantener el tendón más alejado de la articulación, el ángulo del tendón aumenta y, por lo tanto, aumenta la fuerza de palanca del músculo.

Ejemplos de huesos sesamoideos son la rótula y el pisiforme.
Los huesos irregulares no encajan en las categorías anteriores.

Consisten en capas delgadas de hueso compacto que rodean un interior esponjoso.

Como su nombre lo indica, sus formas son irregulares y complicadas.

A menudo, esta forma irregular se debe a sus muchos centros de osificación oa que contienen senos óseos.

Los huesos de la columna vertebral, la pelvis y algunos huesos del cráneo son huesos irregulares.

Los ejemplos incluyen los huesos etmoides y esfenoides.


== Terminología ==


En el estudio de la anatomía, los anatomistas utilizan una serie de términos anatómicos para describir la apariencia, forma y función de los huesos.

También se utilizan otros términos anatómicos para describir la ubicación de los huesos.

Al igual que otros términos anatómicos, muchos de estos derivan del latín y el griego.

Algunos anatomistas todavía usan el latín para referirse a los huesos.

El término "óseo" y el prefijo "osteo-", que se refiere a cosas relacionadas con el hueso, todavía se usan comúnmente en la actualidad.
Algunos ejemplos de términos utilizados para describir huesos incluyen el término "foramen" para describir un orificio a través del cual pasa algo, y un "canal" o "meatus" para describir una estructura similar a un túnel.

Una protuberancia de un hueso puede denominarse una serie de términos, incluidos "cóndilo", "cresta", "columna vertebral", "eminencia", "tubérculo" o "tuberosidad", según la forma y la ubicación de la protuberancia.

En general, se dice que los huesos largos tienen "cabeza", "cuello" y "cuerpo".
Cuando dos huesos se unen, se dice que se "articulan".

Si los dos huesos tienen una conexión fibrosa y son relativamente inmóviles, entonces la articulación se denomina "sutura".


== Desarrollo ==


La formación de hueso se llama osificación.

Durante la etapa fetal de desarrollo esto ocurre por dos procesos: osificación intramembranosa y osificación endocondral.

La osificación intramembranosa implica la formación de hueso a partir del tejido conectivo, mientras que la osificación endocondral implica la formación de hueso a partir del cartílago.
La osificación intramembranosa se produce principalmente durante la formación de los huesos planos del cráneo, pero también de la mandíbula, el maxilar y las clavículas; el hueso se forma a partir de tejido conjuntivo, como el tejido mesenquimático, en lugar de cartílago.

El proceso incluye: el desarrollo del centro de osificación, la calcificación, la formación de trabéculas y el desarrollo del periostio. La osificación endocondral ocurre en los huesos largos y en la mayoría de los demás huesos del cuerpo; implica el desarrollo del hueso a partir del cartílago.

Este proceso incluye el desarrollo de un modelo de cartílago, su crecimiento y desarrollo, el desarrollo de los centros de osificación primarios y secundarios, y la formación del cartílago articular y las placas epifisarias. La osificación endocondral comienza con puntos en el cartílago llamados "centros de osificación primarios". Aparecen principalmente durante el desarrollo fetal, aunque algunos huesos cortos comienzan su osificación primaria después del nacimiento.

Son responsables de la formación de las diáfisis de huesos largos, huesos cortos y ciertas partes de huesos irregulares.

La osificación secundaria ocurre después del nacimiento y forma las epífisis de los huesos largos y las extremidades de los huesos irregulares y planos.

La diáfisis y ambas epífisis de un hueso largo están separadas por una zona de crecimiento de cartílago (la placa epifisaria).

En la madurez esquelética (18 a 25 años de edad), todo el cartílago es reemplazado por hueso, fusionando la diáfisis y ambas epífisis (cierre epifisario).

En los miembros superiores sólo se osifican las diáfisis de los huesos largos y la escápula.

Las epífisis, los huesos del carpo, la apófisis coracoides, el borde medial de la escápula y el acromion siguen siendo cartilaginosos. Se siguen los siguientes pasos en la conversión del cartílago en hueso:

Zona de cartílago de reserva.

Esta región, la más alejada de la cavidad medular, consta de cartílago hialino típico que aún no muestra signos de transformarse en hueso.
Zona de proliferación celular.

Un poco más cerca de la cavidad de la médula, los condrocitos se multiplican y se organizan en columnas longitudinales de lagunas aplanadas.
Zona de hipertrofia celular.

A continuación, los condrocitos dejan de dividirse y comienzan a hipertrofiarse (aumentarse), como lo hacen en el centro de osificación primario del feto.

Las paredes de la matriz entre las lagunas se vuelven muy delgadas.
Zona de calcificación.

Los minerales se depositan en la matriz entre las columnas de lagunas y calcifican el cartílago.

Estos no son los depósitos minerales permanentes del hueso, sino solo un soporte temporal para el cartílago que, de otro modo, pronto se debilitaría por la ruptura de las lagunas agrandadas.
Zona de depósito óseo.

Dentro de cada columna, las paredes entre las lagunas se rompen y los condrocitos mueren.

Esto convierte cada columna en un canal longitudinal, que es inmediatamente invadido por vasos sanguíneos y médula desde la cavidad medular.

Los osteoblastos se alinean a lo largo de las paredes de estos canales y comienzan a depositar láminas concéntricas de matriz, mientras que los osteoclastos disuelven el cartílago temporalmente calcificado.


== Funciones ==

Los huesos tienen una variedad de funciones:


=== Mecánica ===


Los huesos cumplen una variedad de funciones mecánicas.

Juntos, los huesos del cuerpo forman el esqueleto.

Proporcionan un marco para mantener el cuerpo apoyado y un punto de unión para los músculos esqueléticos, tendones, ligamentos y articulaciones, que funcionan juntos para generar y transferir fuerzas para que las partes individuales del cuerpo o el cuerpo completo puedan manipularse en un espacio tridimensional ( la interacción entre hueso y músculo se estudia en biomecánica).
Los huesos protegen los órganos internos, como el cráneo que protege el cerebro o las costillas que protegen el corazón y los pulmones.

Debido a la forma en que se forma el hueso, el hueso tiene una alta resistencia a la compresión de alrededor de 170 MPa (1700 kgf/cm2), poca resistencia a la tracción de 104 a 121 MPa y una resistencia a la tensión de cizallamiento muy baja (51,6 MPa).

Esto significa que el hueso resiste bien la tensión de empuje (compresión), resiste menos la tensión de tracción (tensión), pero solo resiste mal la tensión de cizallamiento (como la debida a las cargas de torsión).

Mientras que el hueso es esencialmente frágil, el hueso tiene un grado significativo de elasticidad, aportado principalmente por el colágeno.
Mecánicamente, los huesos también tienen un papel especial en la audición.

Los huesecillos son tres pequeños huesos en el oído medio que están involucrados en la transducción del sonido.


=== sintético ===

La parte esponjosa de los huesos contiene médula ósea.

La médula ósea produce células sanguíneas en un proceso llamado hematopoyesis.

Las células sanguíneas que se crean en la médula ósea incluyen glóbulos rojos, plaquetas y glóbulos blancos.

Las células progenitoras, como las células madre hematopoyéticas, se dividen en un proceso llamado mitosis para producir células precursoras.

Estos incluyen precursores que eventualmente dan lugar a glóbulos blancos y eritroblastos que dan lugar a glóbulos rojos.

A diferencia de los glóbulos rojos y blancos, creados por mitosis, las plaquetas se desprenden de células muy grandes llamadas megacariocitos.

Este proceso de diferenciación progresiva ocurre dentro de la médula ósea.

Una vez que las células maduran, ingresan a la circulación.

Todos los días, se producen de esta manera más de 2500 millones de glóbulos rojos y plaquetas, y de 50 a 100 mil millones de granulocitos. Además de crear células, la médula ósea también es uno de los sitios principales donde se destruyen los glóbulos rojos defectuosos o envejecidos.


=== Metabólico ===

Almacenamiento de minerales: los huesos actúan como reservas de minerales importantes para el cuerpo, sobre todo calcio y fósforo. Según la especie, la edad y el tipo de hueso, las células óseas constituyen hasta el 15 por ciento del hueso.

Almacenamiento de factor de crecimiento: la matriz ósea mineralizada almacena factores de crecimiento importantes, como factores de crecimiento similares a la insulina, factor de crecimiento transformante, proteínas morfogenéticas óseas y otros.
Almacenamiento de grasa: el tejido adiposo de la médula (MAT) actúa como una reserva de almacenamiento de ácidos grasos.
Equilibrio ácido-base: el hueso amortigua la sangre contra los cambios excesivos de pH al absorber o liberar sales alcalinas.
Desintoxicación: los tejidos óseos también pueden almacenar metales pesados ​​y otros elementos extraños, eliminándolos de la sangre y reduciendo sus efectos en otros tejidos.

Posteriormente, estos pueden liberarse gradualmente para su excreción.
Órgano endocrino: el hueso controla el metabolismo del fosfato mediante la liberación del factor de crecimiento de fibroblastos 23 (FGF-23), que actúa sobre los riñones para reducir la reabsorción de fosfato.

Las células óseas también liberan una hormona llamada osteocalcina, que contribuye a la regulación del azúcar en la sangre (glucosa) y la deposición de grasa.

La osteocalcina aumenta tanto la secreción como la sensibilidad a la insulina, además de potenciar el número de células productoras de insulina y reducir los depósitos de grasa.
Equilibrio de calcio: el proceso de reabsorción ósea por parte de los osteoclastos libera calcio almacenado en la circulación sistémica y es un proceso importante en la regulación del equilibrio de calcio.

A medida que la formación ósea fija activamente el calcio circulante en su forma mineral, eliminándolo del torrente sanguíneo, la reabsorción lo desfija activamente, aumentando así los niveles de calcio circulante.

Estos procesos ocurren en tándem en ubicaciones específicas del sitio.


== Remodelación ==


El hueso se crea y reemplaza constantemente en un proceso conocido como remodelación.

Este recambio continuo de hueso es un proceso de reabsorción seguido de reemplazo de hueso con pocos cambios en la forma.

Esto se logra a través de osteoblastos y osteoclastos.

Las células son estimuladas por una variedad de señales y, en conjunto, se denominan una unidad de remodelación.

Aproximadamente el 10% de la masa esquelética de un adulto se remodela cada año.

El propósito de la remodelación es regular la homeostasis del calcio, reparar los huesos dañados por el estrés diario y dar forma al esqueleto durante el crecimiento.

El estrés repetido, como el ejercicio con pesas o la curación de los huesos, provoca el engrosamiento del hueso en los puntos de máxima tensión (ley de Wolff).

Se ha planteado la hipótesis de que esto es el resultado de las propiedades piezoeléctricas del hueso, que hacen que el hueso genere pequeños potenciales eléctricos bajo estrés. La acción de los osteoblastos y los osteoclastos está controlada por una serie de enzimas químicas que promueven o inhiben la actividad de remodelación ósea. células, controlando la velocidad a la que se produce, destruye o cambia de forma el hueso.

Las células también usan señalización paracrina para controlar la actividad de cada una.

Por ejemplo, la calcitonina y la osteoprotegerina inhiben la velocidad a la que los osteoclastos reabsorben el hueso.

La calcitonina es producida por las células parafoliculares de la glándula tiroides y puede unirse a los receptores de los osteoclastos para inhibir directamente la actividad de los osteoclastos.

La osteoprotegerina es secretada por los osteoblastos y puede unirse a RANK-L, lo que inhibe la estimulación de los osteoclastos. Los osteoblastos también pueden estimularse para aumentar la masa ósea a través del aumento de la secreción de osteoide y al inhibir la capacidad de los osteoclastos para descomponer el tejido óseo.

El aumento de la secreción de osteoide es estimulado por la secreción de la hormona del crecimiento por la hipófisis, la hormona tiroidea y las hormonas sexuales (estrógenos y andrógenos).

Estas hormonas también promueven una mayor secreción de osteoprotegerina.

También se puede inducir a los osteoblastos para que secreten una serie de citoquinas que promueven la reabsorción del hueso al estimular la actividad de los osteoclastos y la diferenciación de las células progenitoras.

La vitamina D, la hormona paratiroidea y la estimulación de los osteocitos inducen a los osteoblastos a aumentar la secreción de ligando RANK e interleucina 6, cuyas citoquinas luego estimulan una mayor reabsorción del hueso por parte de los osteoclastos.

Estos mismos compuestos también aumentan la secreción del factor estimulante de colonias de macrófagos por parte de los osteoblastos, lo que promueve la diferenciación de las células progenitoras en osteoclastos y disminuye la secreción de osteoprotegerina.


== Volumen ==

El volumen óseo está determinado por las tasas de formación y reabsorción ósea.

Investigaciones recientes han sugerido que ciertos factores de crecimiento pueden funcionar para alterar localmente la formación ósea al aumentar la actividad de los osteoblastos.

Se han aislado y clasificado numerosos factores de crecimiento derivados del hueso mediante cultivos óseos.

Estos factores incluyen factores de crecimiento similares a la insulina I y II, factor de crecimiento transformante beta, factor de crecimiento de fibroblastos, factor de crecimiento derivado de plaquetas y proteínas morfogenéticas óseas.

La evidencia sugiere que las células óseas producen factores de crecimiento para el almacenamiento extracelular en la matriz ósea.

La liberación de estos factores de crecimiento desde la matriz ósea podría provocar la proliferación de precursores de osteoblastos.

Esencialmente, los factores de crecimiento óseo pueden actuar como determinantes potenciales de la formación ósea local.

La investigación ha sugerido que el volumen de hueso esponjoso en la osteoporosis posmenopáusica puede estar determinado por la relación entre la superficie total de formación de hueso y el porcentaje de reabsorción de la superficie.


== Importancia clínica ==


Varias enfermedades pueden afectar los huesos, como la artritis, las fracturas, las infecciones, la osteoporosis y los tumores.

Las condiciones relacionadas con los huesos pueden ser manejadas por una variedad de médicos, incluidos reumatólogos de articulaciones y cirujanos ortopédicos, quienes pueden realizar cirugías para reparar huesos rotos.

Otros médicos, como los especialistas en rehabilitación, pueden participar en la recuperación, los radiólogos en la interpretación de los resultados de las imágenes y los patólogos en la investigación de la causa de la enfermedad, y los médicos de familia pueden desempeñar un papel en la prevención de complicaciones de enfermedades óseas como la osteoporosis.
Cuando un médico ve a un paciente, se le hará un historial y un examen.

Luego, a menudo se toman imágenes de los huesos, lo que se denomina radiografía.

Esto podría incluir ultrasonido, rayos X, tomografía computarizada, resonancia magnética y otras imágenes, como una gammagrafía ósea, que pueden usarse para investigar el cáncer.

Se pueden realizar otras pruebas, como un análisis de sangre para marcadores autoinmunes, o se puede tomar una aspiración de líquido sinovial.


=== Fracturas ===


En el hueso normal, las fracturas ocurren cuando se aplica una fuerza significativa o un trauma repetitivo durante un tiempo prolongado.

Las fracturas también pueden ocurrir cuando un hueso está debilitado, como en la osteoporosis, o cuando hay un problema estructural, como cuando el hueso se remodela excesivamente (como la enfermedad de Paget) o es el sitio del crecimiento del cáncer.

Las fracturas comunes incluyen fracturas de muñeca y fracturas de cadera, asociadas con osteoporosis, fracturas vertebrales asociadas con traumatismos de alta energía y cáncer, y fracturas de huesos largos.

No todas las fracturas son dolorosas.

Cuando es grave, según el tipo de fractura y la ubicación, las complicaciones pueden incluir tórax inestable, síndromes compartimentales o embolia grasa.
Las fracturas compuestas implican la penetración del hueso a través de la piel.

Algunas fracturas complejas se pueden tratar mediante el uso de procedimientos de injerto óseo que reemplazan las porciones de hueso que faltan.
Las fracturas y sus causas subyacentes pueden investigarse mediante radiografías, tomografías computarizadas y resonancias magnéticas.

Las fracturas se describen por su ubicación y forma, y ​​existen varios sistemas de clasificación, según la ubicación de la fractura.

Una fractura común de huesos largos en niños es una fractura de Salter-Harris.

Cuando se tratan las fracturas, a menudo se proporciona alivio del dolor y, a menudo, se inmoviliza el área fracturada.

Esto es para promover la curación de los huesos.

Además, se pueden utilizar medidas quirúrgicas como la fijación interna.

Debido a la inmovilización, a menudo se aconseja a las personas con fracturas que se sometan a rehabilitación.


=== Tumores ===


Hay varios tipos de tumores que pueden afectar el hueso; los ejemplos de tumores óseos benignos incluyen osteoma, osteoma osteoide, osteocondroma, osteoblastoma, encondroma, tumor óseo de células gigantes y quiste óseo aneurismático.


=== Cáncer ===


El cáncer puede surgir en el tejido óseo, y los huesos también son un sitio común para que otros cánceres se propaguen (hagan metástasis).

Los cánceres que surgen en los huesos se denominan cánceres "primarios", aunque estos cánceres son raros.

Las metástasis dentro del hueso son cánceres "secundarios", siendo los más comunes el cáncer de mama, el cáncer de pulmón, el cáncer de próstata, el cáncer de tiroides y el cáncer de riñón.

Los cánceres secundarios que afectan los huesos pueden destruir el hueso (llamado cáncer "lítico") o crear hueso (un cáncer "esclerótico").

Los cánceres de la médula ósea dentro del hueso también pueden afectar el tejido óseo, por ejemplo, la leucemia y el mieloma múltiple.

Los huesos también pueden verse afectados por cánceres en otras partes del cuerpo.

Los cánceres en otras partes del cuerpo pueden liberar hormona paratiroidea o péptido relacionado con la hormona paratiroidea.

Esto aumenta la reabsorción ósea y puede provocar fracturas óseas.
El tejido óseo destruido o alterado como resultado de los cánceres está distorsionado, debilitado y es más propenso a las fracturas.

Esto puede provocar la compresión de la médula espinal, la destrucción de la médula que produce hematomas, hemorragias e inmunosupresión, y es una de las causas del dolor óseo.

Si el cáncer es metastásico, es posible que haya otros síntomas según el sitio del cáncer original.

Algunos cánceres de hueso también se pueden palpar.
Los cánceres de hueso se manejan de acuerdo con su tipo, etapa, pronóstico y los síntomas que causan.

Muchos cánceres primarios de hueso se tratan con radioterapia.

Los cánceres de médula ósea se pueden tratar con quimioterapia y se pueden usar otras formas de terapia dirigida, como la inmunoterapia.

Los cuidados paliativos, que se centran en maximizar la calidad de vida de una persona, pueden desempeñar un papel en el tratamiento, especialmente si la probabilidad de supervivencia dentro de los cinco años es baja.


=== Otras condiciones dolorosas ===

La osteomielitis es la inflamación del hueso o de la médula ósea debido a una infección bacteriana.
La osteomalacia es un reblandecimiento doloroso del hueso adulto causado por una deficiencia severa de vitamina D.
Osteogénesis imperfecta
Osteocondritis disecante
Espondiloartritis anquilosante
La fluorosis esquelética es una enfermedad de los huesos causada por una acumulación excesiva de flúor en los huesos.

En casos avanzados, la fluorosis esquelética daña los huesos y las articulaciones y es dolorosa.


=== Osteoporosis ===


La osteoporosis es una enfermedad de los huesos en la que se reduce la densidad mineral ósea, lo que aumenta la probabilidad de fracturas.

La osteoporosis se define en las mujeres por la Organización Mundial de la Salud como una densidad mineral ósea de 2,5 desviaciones estándar por debajo de la masa ósea máxima, en relación con el promedio correspondiente a la edad y el sexo.

Esta densidad se mide mediante absorciometría de rayos X de energía dual (DEXA), con el término "osteoporosis establecida" que incluye la presencia de una fractura por fragilidad.

La osteoporosis es más común en mujeres después de la menopausia, cuando se denomina "osteoporosis posmenopáusica", pero puede desarrollarse en hombres y mujeres premenopáusicas en presencia de trastornos hormonales particulares y otras enfermedades crónicas o como resultado del tabaquismo y medicamentos, específicamente glucocorticoides.

La osteoporosis generalmente no presenta síntomas hasta que se produce una fractura.

Por esta razón, las exploraciones DEXA a menudo se realizan en personas con uno o más factores de riesgo, que han desarrollado osteoporosis y tienen riesgo de fractura. Uno de los factores de riesgo más importantes para la osteoporosis es la edad avanzada.

La acumulación de daño oxidativo del ADN en las células osteoblásticas y osteoclásticas parece ser un factor clave en la osteoporosis relacionada con la edad. El tratamiento de la osteoporosis incluye consejos para dejar de fumar, disminuir el consumo de alcohol, hacer ejercicio regularmente y tener una dieta saludable.

También se pueden recomendar suplementos de calcio y minerales traza, al igual que la vitamina D.

Cuando se usan medicamentos, pueden incluir bisfosfonatos, ranelato de estroncio y terapia de reemplazo hormonal.


=== Medicina osteopática ===


La medicina osteopática es una escuela de pensamiento médico desarrollada originalmente en base a la idea del vínculo entre el sistema musculoesquelético y la salud en general, pero ahora muy similar a la medicina convencional.

A partir de 2012, más de 77 000 médicos en los Estados Unidos están capacitados en escuelas de medicina osteopática.


== Osteología ==


El estudio de los huesos y los dientes se conoce como osteología.

Se utiliza con frecuencia en antropología, arqueología y ciencia forense para una variedad de tareas.

Esto puede incluir la determinación del estado nutricional, de salud, de edad o de lesiones de la persona de la que se extrajeron los huesos.

La preparación de huesos carnosos para este tipo de estudios puede implicar el proceso de maceración.
Por lo general, los antropólogos y los arqueólogos estudian las herramientas de hueso fabricadas por el Homo sapiens y el Homo neanderthalensis.

Los huesos pueden tener una serie de usos, como puntas de proyectil o pigmentos artísticos, y también pueden estar hechos de huesos externos, como astas.


== Otros animales ==


Los esqueletos de aves son muy ligeros.

Sus huesos son más pequeños y delgados para facilitar el vuelo.

Entre los mamíferos, los murciélagos se acercan más a las aves en términos de densidad ósea, lo que sugiere que los huesos pequeños y densos son una adaptación al vuelo.

Muchos huesos de aves tienen poca médula debido a que son huecos. El pico de un pájaro está hecho principalmente de hueso como proyecciones de las mandíbulas que están cubiertas de queratina.
Algunos huesos, formados principalmente por separado en los tejidos subcutáneos, incluyen cascos (como el núcleo óseo de los cuernos, las astas, los osicones), el osteodermo y el os del pene/os del clítoris.

Las astas de un ciervo están compuestas de hueso, que es un ejemplo inusual de que el hueso está fuera de la piel del animal una vez que se muda el terciopelo. El pez depredador extinto Dunkleosteus tenía bordes afilados de hueso duro expuesto a lo largo de sus mandíbulas. La proporción de hueso cortical que es El 80% en el esqueleto humano puede ser mucho menor en otros animales, especialmente en mamíferos marinos y tortugas marinas, o en varios reptiles marinos del Mesozoico, como los ictiosaurios, entre otros.

Esta proporción puede variar rápidamente en la evolución; a menudo aumenta en las primeras etapas de retorno a un estilo de vida acuático, como se ve en las primeras ballenas y pinnípedos, entre otros.

Posteriormente, disminuye en los taxones pelágicos, que normalmente adquieren huesos esponjosos, pero los taxones acuáticos que viven en aguas poco profundas pueden retener huesos muy gruesos, paquiostóticos, osteoescleróticos o paquiosteoescleróticos, especialmente si se mueven lentamente, como las vacas marinas.

En algunos casos, incluso los taxones marinos que habían adquirido huesos esponjosos pueden volver a tener huesos más gruesos y compactos si se adaptan a vivir en aguas poco profundas o en aguas hipersalinas (más densas). Muchos animales, en particular los herbívoros, practican la osteofagia: comer huesos. .

Presumiblemente, esto se lleva a cabo para reponer la falta de fosfato.
Muchas enfermedades óseas que afectan a los humanos también afectan a otros vertebrados; un ejemplo de un trastorno es la fluorosis esquelética.


== Sociedad y cultura ==


Los huesos de animales sacrificados tienen varios usos.

En tiempos prehistóricos, se han utilizado para fabricar herramientas de hueso.

Además, se han utilizado en el tallado de huesos, ya importantes en el arte prehistórico, y también en la época moderna como materiales de elaboración para botones, cuentas, mangos, bobinas, ayudas de cálculo, tuercas de cabeza, dados, fichas de póquer, palos de recogida, flechas, scrimshaw, adornos, etc.
El pegamento para huesos se puede hacer hirviendo durante mucho tiempo huesos triturados o partidos, seguido de filtrado y evaporación para espesar el líquido resultante.

Históricamente, una vez importante, el pegamento para huesos y otros pegamentos de animales hoy en día tienen solo unos pocos usos especializados, como en la restauración de antigüedades.

Esencialmente, el mismo proceso, con mayor refinamiento, espesamiento y secado, se usa para hacer gelatina.
El caldo se hace hirviendo a fuego lento varios ingredientes durante mucho tiempo, tradicionalmente incluyendo huesos.
El carbonizado de huesos, un material granular negro y poroso que se utiliza principalmente para la filtración y también como pigmento negro, se produce carbonizando los huesos de los mamíferos.
La escritura de huesos de Oracle era un sistema de escritura utilizado en la antigua China basado en inscripciones en huesos.

Su nombre se origina en los huesos del oráculo, que eran principalmente clavícula de buey.

Los antiguos chinos (principalmente en la dinastía Shang), escribían sus preguntas en el hueso del oráculo y quemaban el hueso, y donde el hueso se rompía sería la respuesta a las preguntas.
Señalar con el hueso a alguien se considera mala suerte en algunas culturas, como los aborígenes australianos, como los Kurdaitcha.
Los huesos de los deseos de las aves se han utilizado para la adivinación y todavía se usan habitualmente en una tradición para determinar cuál de las dos personas que tiran de cualquiera de los dientes del hueso puede pedir un deseo.
Varias culturas a lo largo de la historia han adoptado la costumbre de dar forma a la cabeza de un bebé mediante la práctica de la deformación craneal artificial.

Una costumbre muy practicada en China era vendarse los pies para limitar el crecimiento normal del pie.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hueso

;;;PT;;;



OSSO


Um osso é um órgão rígido que constitui parte do esqueleto na maioria dos animais vertebrados.

Os ossos protegem os vários outros órgãos do corpo, produzem glóbulos vermelhos e brancos, armazenam minerais, fornecem estrutura e suporte para o corpo e permitem a mobilidade.

Os ossos vêm em uma variedade de formas e tamanhos e têm uma estrutura interna e externa complexa.

Eles são leves, mas fortes e duros, e servem a várias funções.
O tecido ósseo (tecido ósseo), que também é chamado de osso no sentido incontável da palavra, é tecido duro, um tipo de tecido conjuntivo especializado.

Possui uma matriz em forma de favo de mel internamente, o que ajuda a dar rigidez ao osso.

O tecido ósseo é composto por diferentes tipos de células ósseas.

Osteoblastos e osteócitos estão envolvidos na formação e mineralização do osso; os osteoclastos estão envolvidos na reabsorção do tecido ósseo.

Os osteoblastos modificados (achatados) tornam-se as células de revestimento que formam uma camada protetora na superfície óssea.

A matriz mineralizada do tecido ósseo tem um componente orgânico principalmente de colágeno chamado osseína e um componente inorgânico de mineral ósseo composto por vários sais.

O tecido ósseo é um tecido mineralizado de dois tipos, osso cortical e osso esponjoso.

Outros tipos de tecido encontrados nos ossos incluem medula óssea, endósteo, periósteo, nervos, vasos sanguíneos e cartilagem.
No corpo humano ao nascimento, existem aproximadamente 300 ossos presentes; muitos deles se fundem durante o desenvolvimento, deixando um total de 206 ossos separados no adulto, sem contar os numerosos pequenos ossos sesamoides.

O maior osso do corpo é o fêmur ou fêmur, e o menor é o estribo no ouvido médio.
A palavra grega para osso é ὀστέον ("osteon"), daí os muitos termos que o usam como prefixo - como osteopatia.


== Estrutura ==

O osso não é uniformemente sólido, mas consiste em uma matriz flexível (cerca de 30%) e minerais ligados (cerca de 70%) que são intricadamente tecidos e infinitamente remodelados por um grupo de células ósseas especializadas.

Sua composição e design exclusivos permitem que os ossos sejam relativamente duros e fortes, mantendo-se leves.
A matriz óssea é 90 a 95% composta por fibras elásticas de colágeno, também conhecidas como osseína, e o restante é substância fundamental.

A elasticidade do colágeno melhora a resistência à fratura.

A matriz é endurecida pela ligação do sal mineral inorgânico, fosfato de cálcio, em um arranjo químico conhecido como hidroxiapatita de cálcio.

É a mineralização óssea que dá rigidez aos ossos.
O osso é ativamente construído e remodelado ao longo da vida por células ósseas especiais conhecidas como osteoblastos e osteoclastos.

Dentro de qualquer osso, o tecido é tecido em dois padrões principais, conhecidos como osso cortical e esponjoso, e cada um com aparência e características diferentes.


=== Cortex ===


A camada externa dura dos ossos é composta de osso cortical, que também é chamado de osso compacto, pois é muito mais denso que o osso esponjoso.

Forma o exterior duro (córtex) dos ossos.

O osso cortical dá ao osso sua aparência lisa, branca e sólida e é responsável por 80% da massa óssea total de um esqueleto humano adulto.

Facilita as principais funções do osso - sustentar todo o corpo, proteger os órgãos, fornecer alavancas para o movimento e armazenar e liberar elementos químicos, principalmente cálcio.

Consiste em várias colunas microscópicas, cada uma chamada de ósteon ou sistema de Havers.

Cada coluna é composta por múltiplas camadas de osteoblastos e osteócitos ao redor de um canal central chamado canal de Havers.

Os canais de Volkmann em ângulos retos conectam os ósteons entre si.

As colunas são metabolicamente ativas e, à medida que o osso é reabsorvido e criado, a natureza e a localização das células dentro do ósteon mudam.

O osso cortical é coberto por um periósteo em sua superfície externa e um endósteo em sua superfície interna.

O endósteo é o limite entre o osso cortical e o osso esponjoso.

A unidade anatômica e funcional primária do osso cortical é o ósteon.


=== Trabéculas ===


O osso esponjoso, também chamado de osso trabecular ou esponjoso, é o tecido interno do osso esquelético e é uma rede porosa de células abertas.

O osso esponjoso tem uma relação superfície-volume maior do que o osso cortical e é menos denso.

Isso o torna mais fraco e mais flexível.

A maior área de superfície também o torna adequado para atividades metabólicas, como a troca de íons de cálcio.

O osso esponjoso é normalmente encontrado nas extremidades dos ossos longos, perto das articulações e no interior das vértebras.

O osso esponjoso é altamente vascularizado e muitas vezes contém medula óssea vermelha, onde ocorre a hematopoiese, a produção de células sanguíneas.

A unidade anatômica e funcional primária do osso esponjoso é a trabécula.

As trabéculas estão alinhadas em direção à distribuição de carga mecânica que um osso experimenta dentro de ossos longos, como o fêmur.

No que diz respeito aos ossos curtos, o alinhamento trabecular tem sido estudado no pedículo vertebral.

As finas formações de osteoblastos recobertos de endósteo criam uma rede irregular de espaços, conhecida como trabéculas.

Dentro desses espaços estão a medula óssea e as células-tronco hematopoiéticas que dão origem às plaquetas, glóbulos vermelhos e glóbulos brancos.

A medula trabecular é composta por uma rede de elementos semelhantes a bastonetes e placas que tornam o órgão geral mais leve e permitem espaço para vasos sanguíneos e medula.

O osso trabecular representa os 20% restantes da massa óssea total, mas tem quase dez vezes a área de superfície do osso compacto. As palavras esponjoso e trabecular referem-se às pequenas unidades em forma de treliça (trabéculas) que formam o tecido.

Foi ilustrado pela primeira vez com precisão nas gravuras de Crisóstomo Martinez.


=== Medula ===

A medula óssea, também conhecida como tecido mielóide na medula óssea vermelha, pode ser encontrada em quase qualquer osso que contenha tecido esponjoso.

Nos recém-nascidos, todos esses ossos são preenchidos exclusivamente com medula vermelha ou medula hematopoiética, mas à medida que a criança envelhece a fração hematopoiética diminui em quantidade e a fração gordurosa/amarela chamada tecido adiposo da medula (MAT) aumenta em quantidade.

Em adultos, a medula vermelha é encontrada principalmente na medula óssea do fêmur, nas costelas, nas vértebras e nos ossos pélvicos.


=== Células ===


O osso é um tecido metabolicamente ativo composto por vários tipos de células.

Essas células incluem osteoblastos, que estão envolvidos na criação e mineralização do tecido ósseo, osteócitos e osteoclastos, que estão envolvidos na reabsorção do tecido ósseo.

Osteoblastos e osteócitos são derivados de células osteoprogenitoras, mas os osteoclastos são derivados das mesmas células que se diferenciam para formar macrófagos e monócitos.

Dentro da medula óssea também existem células-tronco hematopoiéticas.

Essas células dão origem a outras células, incluindo glóbulos brancos, glóbulos vermelhos e plaquetas.


==== Osteoblasto ====
Os osteoblastos são células mononucleadas formadoras de osso.

Eles estão localizados na superfície das costuras de osteon e fazem uma mistura de proteínas conhecida como osteóide, que se mineraliza para se tornar osso.

A costura osteóide é uma região estreita de matriz orgânica recém-formada, ainda não mineralizada, localizada na superfície de um osso.

O osteóide é composto principalmente de colágeno tipo I.

Os osteoblastos também fabricam hormônios, como as prostaglandinas, para atuar no próprio osso.

O osteoblasto cria e repara um novo osso construindo em torno de si mesmo.

Primeiro, o osteoblasto produz fibras de colágeno.

Essas fibras de colágeno são usadas como estrutura para o trabalho dos osteoblastos.

O osteoblasto então deposita fosfato de cálcio que é endurecido por íons hidróxido e bicarbonato.

O osso novinho em folha criado pelo osteoblasto é chamado osteóide.

Uma vez que o osteoblasto termina de funcionar, ele fica preso dentro do osso quando endurece.

Quando o osteoblasto fica preso, passa a ser conhecido como osteócito.

Outros osteoblastos permanecem no topo do novo osso e são usados ​​para proteger o osso subjacente, tornando-se conhecidos como células de revestimento.


==== Osteócito ====
Os osteócitos são células de origem mesenquimal e se originam de osteoblastos que migraram e ficaram presos e cercados pela matriz óssea que eles próprios produziram.

Os espaços que o corpo celular dos osteócitos ocupam dentro da matriz de colágeno mineralizado tipo I são conhecidos como lacunas, enquanto os processos celulares dos osteócitos ocupam canais chamados canalículos.

Os muitos processos dos osteócitos alcançam osteoblastos, osteoclastos, células de revestimento ósseo e outros osteócitos, provavelmente para fins de comunicação.

Os osteócitos permanecem em contato com outros osteócitos no osso por meio de junções comunicantes – processos celulares acoplados que passam pelos canais canaliculares.


==== Osteoclasto ====
Os osteoclastos são células multinucleadas muito grandes que são responsáveis ​​pela quebra dos ossos pelo processo de reabsorção óssea.

Novo osso é então formado pelos osteoblastos.

O osso é constantemente remodelado pela reabsorção dos osteoclastos e criado pelos osteoblastos.

Os osteoclastos são células grandes com múltiplos núcleos localizados nas superfícies ósseas nas chamadas lacunas de Howship (ou poços de reabsorção).

Essas lacunas são o resultado do tecido ósseo circundante que foi reabsorvido.

Como os osteoclastos são derivados de uma linhagem de células-tronco de monócitos, eles são equipados com mecanismos fagocitários semelhantes aos macrófagos circulantes.

Os osteoclastos amadurecem e/ou migram para superfícies ósseas discretas.

Na chegada, enzimas ativas, como a fosfatase ácida resistente ao tartarato, são secretadas contra o substrato mineral.

A reabsorção do osso pelos osteoclastos também desempenha um papel na homeostase do cálcio.


=== Composição ===


Os ossos consistem em células vivas (osteoblastos e osteócitos) embebidas em uma matriz orgânica mineralizada.

O componente inorgânico primário do osso humano é a hidroxiapatita, o mineral ósseo dominante, tendo a composição nominal de Ca10(PO4)6(OH)2.

Os componentes orgânicos desta matriz consistem principalmente em colágeno tipo I - "orgânico" referindo-se a materiais produzidos como resultado do corpo humano - e componentes inorgânicos, que ao lado da fase dominante de hidroxiapatita, incluem outros compostos de cálcio e fosfato, incluindo sais.

Aproximadamente 30% do componente acelular do osso consiste em matéria orgânica, enquanto cerca de 70% em massa é atribuído à fase inorgânica.

As fibras de colágeno conferem ao osso sua resistência à tração, e os cristais de hidroxiapatita intercalados conferem ao osso sua resistência à compressão.

Esses efeitos são sinérgicos.

A composição exata da matriz pode estar sujeita a alterações ao longo do tempo devido à nutrição e biomineralização, com a proporção de cálcio para fosfato variando entre 1,3 e 2,0 (por peso), e oligoelementos como magnésio, sódio, potássio e carbonato também sendo encontrado. O colágeno tipo I compõe 90-95% da matriz orgânica, com o restante da matriz sendo um líquido homogêneo chamado substância fundamental que consiste em proteoglicanos, como ácido hialurônico e sulfato de condroitina, bem como proteínas não colágenas, como osteocalcina, osteopontina ou sialoproteína óssea.

O colágeno consiste em fios de unidades repetidas, que conferem resistência à tração do osso, e são dispostos de forma sobreposta que evita o estresse de cisalhamento.

A função da substância fundamental não é totalmente conhecida.

Dois tipos de osso podem ser identificados microscopicamente de acordo com a disposição do colágeno: tecido e lamelar.

Osso tecido (também conhecido como osso fibroso), que é caracterizado por uma organização aleatória das fibras de colágeno e é mecanicamente fraco.
Osso lamelar, que tem um alinhamento paralelo regular de colágeno em folhas ("lamelas") e é mecanicamente forte.
O osso tecido é produzido quando os osteoblastos produzem osteóide rapidamente, o que ocorre inicialmente em todos os ossos fetais, mas posteriormente é substituído por osso lamelar mais resistente.

Em adultos, o osso tecido é criado após fraturas ou na doença de Paget.

O osso tecido é mais fraco, com um número menor de fibras de colágeno orientadas aleatoriamente, mas se forma rapidamente; é por essa aparência da matriz fibrosa que o osso é denominado tecido.

Ele logo é substituído por osso lamelar, que é altamente organizado em folhas concêntricas com uma proporção muito menor de osteócitos para o tecido circundante.

O osso lamelar, que faz sua primeira aparição em humanos no feto durante o terceiro trimestre, é mais forte e preenchido com muitas fibras de colágeno paralelas a outras fibras na mesma camada (essas colunas paralelas são chamadas de ósteons).

Na seção transversal, as fibras correm em direções opostas em camadas alternadas, assim como no compensado, auxiliando na capacidade do osso de resistir às forças de torção.

Após uma fratura, o tecido ósseo se forma inicialmente e é gradualmente substituído por osso lamelar durante um processo conhecido como "substituição óssea". Comparado ao osso tecido, a formação do osso lamelar ocorre mais lentamente.

A deposição ordenada de fibras de colágeno restringe a formação de osteóide a cerca de 1 a 2 µm por dia.

O osso lamelar também requer uma superfície relativamente plana para colocar as fibras de colágeno em camadas paralelas ou concêntricas.


==== Deposição ====
A matriz extracelular do osso é depositada por osteoblastos, que secretam colágeno e substância fundamental.

Estes sintetizam colágeno dentro da célula e então secretam fibrilas de colágeno.

As fibras de colágeno polimerizam rapidamente para formar filamentos de colágeno.

Nesta fase, eles ainda não estão mineralizados, e são chamados de "osteóides".

Ao redor das fitas, cálcio e fosfato precipitam na superfície dessas fitas, em dias ou semanas tornando-se cristais de hidroxiapatita. Para mineralizar o osso, os osteoblastos secretam vesículas contendo fosfatase alcalina.

Isso cliva os grupos fosfato e atua como foco para a deposição de cálcio e fosfato.

As vesículas então se rompem e agem como um centro para o crescimento dos cristais.

Mais particularmente, o mineral ósseo é formado a partir de estruturas globulares e de placas.


== Tipos ==


Existem cinco tipos de ossos no corpo humano: longos, curtos, planos, irregulares e sesamoides.
Os ossos longos são caracterizados por uma diáfise, que é muito mais longa que sua largura; e por uma epífise, uma cabeça arredondada em cada extremidade do eixo.

Eles são compostos principalmente de osso compacto, com menor quantidade de medula, localizados dentro da cavidade medular, e áreas de osso esponjoso e esponjoso nas extremidades dos ossos.

A maioria dos ossos dos membros, incluindo os dos dedos das mãos e dos pés, são ossos longos.

As exceções são os oito ossos do carpo do punho, os sete ossos do tarso articulados do tornozelo e o osso sesamoide da rótula.

Ossos longos, como a clavícula, que têm um eixo ou extremidades de formato diferente, também são chamados de ossos longos modificados.
Os ossos curtos são aproximadamente em forma de cubo e têm apenas uma fina camada de osso compacto em torno de um interior esponjoso.

Os ossos do pulso e do tornozelo são ossos curtos.
Os ossos chatos são finos e geralmente curvos, com duas camadas paralelas de osso compacto ensanduichando uma camada de osso esponjoso.

A maioria dos ossos do crânio são ossos chatos, assim como o esterno.
Ossos sesamoides são ossos embutidos em tendões.

Uma vez que eles agem para manter o tendão mais longe da articulação, o ângulo do tendão é aumentado e, assim, a alavanca do músculo é aumentada.

Exemplos de ossos sesamoides são a patela e o pisiforme.
Ossos irregulares não se enquadram nas categorias acima.

Eles consistem em finas camadas de osso compacto envolvendo um interior esponjoso.

Como está implícito no nome, suas formas são irregulares e complicadas.

Muitas vezes, esta forma irregular é devido aos seus muitos centros de ossificação ou porque contêm seios ósseos.

Os ossos da coluna, pelve e alguns ossos do crânio são irregulares.

Exemplos incluem os ossos etmóide e esfenóide.


== Terminologia ==


No estudo da anatomia, os anatomistas usam vários termos anatômicos para descrever a aparência, a forma e a função dos ossos.

Outros termos anatômicos também são usados ​​para descrever a localização dos ossos.

Como outros termos anatômicos, muitos deles derivam do latim e do grego.

Alguns anatomistas ainda usam o latim para se referir a ossos.

O termo "ósseo" e o prefixo "osteo-", referindo-se a coisas relacionadas ao osso, ainda são usados ​​comumente hoje.
Alguns exemplos de termos usados ​​para descrever ossos incluem o termo "forame" para descrever um buraco através do qual algo passa e um "canal" ou "meatus" para descrever uma estrutura semelhante a um túnel.

Uma saliência de um osso pode ser chamada de vários termos, incluindo "côndilo", "crista", "espinha", "eminência", "tuberculo" ou "tuberosidade", dependendo da forma e localização da saliência.

Em geral, diz-se que os ossos longos têm "cabeça", "pescoço" e "corpo".
Quando dois ossos se unem, diz-se que eles "articulam".

Se os dois ossos têm uma conexão fibrosa e são relativamente imóveis, a articulação é chamada de "sutura".


== Desenvolvimento ==


A formação do osso é chamada de ossificação.

Durante o estágio de desenvolvimento fetal isso ocorre por dois processos: ossificação intramembranosa e ossificação endocondral.

A ossificação intramembranosa envolve a formação de osso a partir do tecido conjuntivo, enquanto a ossificação endocondral envolve a formação de osso a partir da cartilagem.
A ossificação intramembranosa ocorre principalmente durante a formação dos ossos chatos do crânio, mas também da mandíbula, maxila e clavículas; o osso é formado a partir de tecido conjuntivo, como o tecido mesênquima, em vez de cartilagem.

O processo inclui: o desenvolvimento do centro de ossificação, calcificação, formação de trabéculas e desenvolvimento do periósteo. A ossificação endocondral ocorre nos ossos longos e na maioria dos outros ossos do corpo; envolve o desenvolvimento do osso da cartilagem.

Este processo inclui o desenvolvimento de um modelo de cartilagem, seu crescimento e desenvolvimento, desenvolvimento dos centros de ossificação primários e secundários e a formação da cartilagem articular e das placas epifisárias. A ossificação endocondral começa com pontos na cartilagem chamados "centros de ossificação primários". Eles aparecem principalmente durante o desenvolvimento fetal, embora alguns ossos curtos comecem sua ossificação primária após o nascimento.

São responsáveis ​​pela formação das diáfises dos ossos longos, dos ossos curtos e de certas partes dos ossos irregulares.

A ossificação secundária ocorre após o nascimento e forma as epífises dos ossos longos e as extremidades dos ossos irregulares e planos.

A diáfise e ambas as epífises de um osso longo são separadas por uma zona crescente de cartilagem (a placa epifisária).

Na maturidade esquelética (18 a 25 anos), toda a cartilagem é substituída por osso, fundindo a diáfise e ambas as epífises (fechamento epifisário).

Nos membros superiores, apenas as diáfises dos ossos longos e da escápula estão ossificadas.

As epífises, ossos do carpo, processo coracóide, borda medial da escápula e acrômio ainda são cartilaginosos. Os seguintes passos são seguidos na conversão da cartilagem em osso:

Zona de cartilagem de reserva.

Essa região, mais distante da cavidade medular, é constituída por uma típica cartilagem hialina que ainda não mostra sinais de se transformar em osso.
Zona de proliferação celular.

Um pouco mais perto da cavidade medular, os condrócitos se multiplicam e se organizam em colunas longitudinais de lacunas achatadas.
Zona de hipertrofia celular.

Em seguida, os condrócitos param de se dividir e começam a hipertrofiar (aumentar), assim como fazem no centro de ossificação primário do feto.

As paredes da matriz entre as lacunas tornam-se muito finas.
Zona de calcificação.

Os minerais são depositados na matriz entre as colunas de lacunas e calcificam a cartilagem.

Estes não são os depósitos minerais permanentes do osso, mas apenas um suporte temporário para a cartilagem que, de outra forma, logo seria enfraquecida pela ruptura das lacunas aumentadas.
Zona de deposição óssea.

Dentro de cada coluna, as paredes entre as lacunas se rompem e os condrócitos morrem.

Isso converte cada coluna em um canal longitudinal, que é imediatamente invadido por vasos sanguíneos e medula da cavidade medular.

Os osteoblastos se alinham ao longo das paredes desses canais e começam a depositar lamelas concêntricas de matriz, enquanto os osteoclastos dissolvem a cartilagem temporariamente calcificada.


== Funções ==

Os ossos têm uma variedade de funções:


=== Mecânica ===


Os ossos servem a uma variedade de funções mecânicas.

Juntos, os ossos do corpo formam o esqueleto.

Eles fornecem uma estrutura para manter o corpo apoiado e um ponto de fixação para músculos esqueléticos, tendões, ligamentos e articulações, que funcionam juntos para gerar e transferir forças para que partes individuais do corpo ou todo o corpo possam ser manipulados no espaço tridimensional. a interação entre osso e músculo é estudada em biomecânica).
Os ossos protegem os órgãos internos, como o crânio protegendo o cérebro ou as costelas protegendo o coração e os pulmões.

Devido à forma como o osso é formado, o osso tem uma alta resistência à compressão de cerca de 170 MPa (1.700 kgf/cm2), baixa resistência à tração de 104-121 MPa e uma resistência à tensão de cisalhamento muito baixa (51,6 MPa).

Isso significa que o osso resiste bem ao estresse de empurrão (compressivo), resiste menos ao estresse de tração (tensional), mas resiste apenas mal ao estresse de cisalhamento (como devido a cargas de torção).

Enquanto o osso é essencialmente frágil, o osso tem um grau significativo de elasticidade, contribuído principalmente pelo colágeno.
Mecanicamente, os ossos também têm um papel especial na audição.

Os ossículos são três pequenos ossos no ouvido médio que estão envolvidos na transdução do som.


=== Sintético ===

A parte esponjosa dos ossos contém medula óssea.

A medula óssea produz células sanguíneas em um processo chamado hematopoiese.

As células do sangue que são criadas na medula óssea incluem glóbulos vermelhos, plaquetas e glóbulos brancos.

As células progenitoras, como as células-tronco hematopoiéticas, se dividem em um processo chamado mitose para produzir células precursoras.

Estes incluem precursores que eventualmente dão origem a glóbulos brancos e eritroblastos que dão origem a glóbulos vermelhos.

Ao contrário dos glóbulos vermelhos e brancos, criados por mitose, as plaquetas são eliminadas de células muito grandes chamadas megacariócitos.

Este processo de diferenciação progressiva ocorre dentro da medula óssea.

Depois que as células estão maduras, elas entram na circulação.

Todos os dias, mais de 2,5 bilhões de glóbulos vermelhos e plaquetas e 50 a 100 bilhões de granulócitos são produzidos dessa maneira. Além de criar células, a medula óssea também é um dos principais locais onde os glóbulos vermelhos defeituosos ou envelhecidos são destruídos.


=== Metabólico ===

Armazenamento de minerais – os ossos atuam como reservas de minerais importantes para o corpo, principalmente cálcio e fósforo. Determinadas pela espécie, idade e tipo de osso, as células ósseas constituem até 15 por cento do osso.

Armazenamento do fator de crescimento – a matriz óssea mineralizada armazena importantes fatores de crescimento, como fatores de crescimento semelhantes à insulina, fator de crescimento transformador, proteínas morfogenéticas ósseas e outros.
Armazenamento de gordura – o tecido adiposo da medula (MAT) atua como uma reserva de armazenamento de ácidos graxos.
Equilíbrio ácido-base – o osso protege o sangue contra mudanças excessivas de pH, absorvendo ou liberando sais alcalinos.
Desintoxicação – os tecidos ósseos também podem armazenar metais pesados ​​e outros elementos estranhos, removendo-os do sangue e reduzindo seus efeitos em outros tecidos.

Estes podem mais tarde ser liberados gradualmente para excreção.
Órgão endócrino – osso controla o metabolismo do fosfato ao liberar o fator de crescimento de fibroblastos 23 (FGF-23), que atua nos rins para reduzir a reabsorção de fosfato.

As células ósseas também liberam um hormônio chamado osteocalcina, que contribui para a regulação do açúcar no sangue (glicose) e a deposição de gordura.

A osteocalcina aumenta a secreção e a sensibilidade à insulina, além de aumentar o número de células produtoras de insulina e reduzir os estoques de gordura.
Balanço de cálcio – o processo de reabsorção óssea pelos osteoclastos libera cálcio armazenado na circulação sistêmica e é um processo importante na regulação do balanço de cálcio.

À medida que a formação óssea fixa ativamente o cálcio circulante em sua forma mineral, removendo-o da corrente sanguínea, a reabsorção o desfixa ativamente, aumentando assim os níveis circulantes de cálcio.

Esses processos ocorrem em conjunto em locais específicos do local.


== Reforma ==


O osso está constantemente sendo criado e substituído em um processo conhecido como remodelação.

Esta renovação contínua do osso é um processo de reabsorção seguido de substituição do osso com pouca mudança na forma.

Isto é realizado através de osteoblastos e osteoclastos.

As células são estimuladas por uma variedade de sinais e, juntas, são chamadas de unidade de remodelação.

Aproximadamente 10% da massa esquelética de um adulto é remodelada a cada ano.

O objetivo da remodelação é regular a homeostase do cálcio, reparar os ossos microdanificados do estresse diário e moldar o esqueleto durante o crescimento.

O estresse repetido, como exercícios de sustentação de peso ou cicatrização óssea, resulta no espessamento do osso nos pontos de estresse máximo (lei de Wolff).

Supõe-se que isso seja resultado das propriedades piezoelétricas do osso, que fazem com que o osso gere pequenos potenciais elétricos sob estresse. A ação dos osteoblastos e osteoclastos é controlada por uma série de enzimas químicas que promovem ou inibem a atividade da remodelação óssea células, controlando a taxa na qual o osso é produzido, destruído ou alterado de forma.

As células também usam sinalização parácrina para controlar a atividade umas das outras.

Por exemplo, a taxa na qual os osteoclastos reabsorvem o osso é inibida pela calcitonina e osteoprotegerina.

A calcitonina é produzida por células parafoliculares na glândula tireoide e pode se ligar a receptores nos osteoclastos para inibir diretamente a atividade dos osteoclastos.

A osteoprotegerina é secretada pelos osteoblastos e é capaz de se ligar ao RANK-L, inibindo a estimulação dos osteoclastos. Os osteoblastos também podem ser estimulados para aumentar a massa óssea através do aumento da secreção de osteóide e pela inibição da capacidade dos osteoclastos de quebrar o tecido ósseo.

O aumento da secreção de osteóide é estimulado pela secreção do hormônio do crescimento pela hipófise, hormônio tireoidiano e hormônios sexuais (estrogênios e andrógenos).

Esses hormônios também promovem o aumento da secreção de osteoprotegerina.

Os osteoblastos também podem ser induzidos a secretar várias citocinas que promovem a reabsorção do osso, estimulando a atividade dos osteoclastos e a diferenciação das células progenitoras.

A vitamina D, o hormônio da paratireóide e a estimulação dos osteócitos induzem os osteoblastos a aumentar a secreção do ligante RANK e da interleucina 6, cujas citocinas estimulam o aumento da reabsorção óssea pelos osteoclastos.

Esses mesmos compostos também aumentam a secreção do fator estimulador de colônias de macrófagos pelos osteoblastos, o que promove a diferenciação das células progenitoras em osteoclastos, e diminui a secreção de osteoprotegerina.


== Volume ==

O volume ósseo é determinado pelas taxas de formação óssea e reabsorção óssea.

Pesquisas recentes sugeriram que certos fatores de crescimento podem funcionar para alterar localmente a formação óssea, aumentando a atividade dos osteoblastos.

Numerosos fatores de crescimento derivados do osso foram isolados e classificados por meio de culturas ósseas.

Esses fatores incluem fatores de crescimento semelhantes à insulina I e II, fator de crescimento transformador beta, fator de crescimento de fibroblastos, fator de crescimento derivado de plaquetas e proteínas morfogenéticas ósseas.

Evidências sugerem que as células ósseas produzem fatores de crescimento para armazenamento extracelular na matriz óssea.

A liberação desses fatores de crescimento da matriz óssea pode causar a proliferação de precursores de osteoblastos.

Essencialmente, os fatores de crescimento ósseo podem atuar como potenciais determinantes da formação óssea local.

Pesquisas sugerem que o volume do osso esponjoso na osteoporose pós-menopausa pode ser determinado pela relação entre a superfície total de formação do osso e a porcentagem de reabsorção da superfície.


== Significado clínico ==


Várias doenças podem afetar os ossos, incluindo artrite, fraturas, infecções, osteoporose e tumores.

As condições relacionadas ao osso podem ser tratadas por uma variedade de médicos, incluindo reumatologistas para articulações e cirurgiões ortopédicos, que podem realizar cirurgias para corrigir ossos quebrados.

Outros médicos, como especialistas em reabilitação, podem estar envolvidos na recuperação, radiologistas na interpretação dos achados na imagem e patologistas na investigação da causa da doença, e médicos de família podem desempenhar um papel na prevenção de complicações de doenças ósseas, como a osteoporose.
Quando um médico vê um paciente, uma história e um exame serão feitos.

Os ossos são então frequentemente visualizados, chamados de radiografia.

Isso pode incluir raios-X de ultra-som, tomografia computadorizada, ressonância magnética e outras imagens, como uma cintilografia óssea, que pode ser usada para investigar o câncer.

Outros exames, como um exame de sangue para marcadores autoimunes, podem ser realizados ou um aspirado de líquido sinovial pode ser realizado.


=== Fraturas ===


No osso normal, as fraturas ocorrem quando há aplicação de força significativa ou trauma repetitivo por um longo período de tempo.

As fraturas também podem ocorrer quando um osso está enfraquecido, como na osteoporose, ou quando há um problema estrutural, como quando o osso se remodela excessivamente (como a doença de Paget) ou é o local de crescimento do câncer.

Fraturas comuns incluem fraturas de punho e fraturas de quadril, associadas à osteoporose, fraturas vertebrais associadas a trauma de alta energia e câncer e fraturas de ossos longos.

Nem todas as fraturas são dolorosas.

Quando graves, dependendo do tipo e localização das fraturas, as complicações podem incluir tórax instável, síndromes compartimentais ou embolia gordurosa.
As fraturas compostas envolvem a penetração do osso através da pele.

Algumas fraturas complexas podem ser tratadas com procedimentos de enxerto ósseo que substituem porções ósseas ausentes.
Fraturas e suas causas subjacentes podem ser investigadas por raios-X, tomografia computadorizada e ressonância magnética.

As fraturas são descritas por sua localização e forma, e existem vários sistemas de classificação, dependendo da localização da fratura.

Uma fratura de osso longo comum em crianças é uma fratura de Salter-Harris.

Quando as fraturas são tratadas, o alívio da dor geralmente é administrado e a área fraturada é frequentemente imobilizada.

Isso é para promover a cicatrização óssea.

Além disso, medidas cirúrgicas como fixação interna podem ser utilizadas.

Por causa da imobilização, muitas vezes as pessoas com fraturas são aconselhadas a se submeterem à reabilitação.


=== Tumores ===


Existem vários tipos de tumor que podem afetar o osso; exemplos de tumores ósseos benignos incluem osteoma, osteoma osteóide, osteocondroma, osteoblastoma, encondroma, tumor ósseo de células gigantes e cisto ósseo aneurismático.


=== Câncer ===


O câncer pode surgir no tecido ósseo, e os ossos também são um local comum para outros cânceres se espalharem (metástases).

Os cânceres que surgem no osso são chamados de cânceres "primários", embora sejam raros.

Metástases dentro do osso são cânceres "secundários", sendo os mais comuns câncer de mama, câncer de pulmão, câncer de próstata, câncer de tireóide e câncer de rim.

Os cânceres secundários que afetam o osso podem destruir o osso (chamado de câncer "lítico") ou criar osso (um câncer "esclerótico").

Os cânceres da medula óssea dentro do osso também podem afetar o tecido ósseo, como leucemia e mieloma múltiplo.

O osso também pode ser afetado por câncer em outras partes do corpo.

Cânceres em outras partes do corpo podem liberar hormônio da paratireóide ou peptídeo relacionado ao hormônio da paratireóide.

Isso aumenta a reabsorção óssea e pode levar a fraturas ósseas.
O tecido ósseo que é destruído ou alterado como resultado de câncer é distorcido, enfraquecido e mais propenso a fraturas.

Isso pode levar à compressão da medula espinhal, destruição da medula, resultando em hematomas, sangramento e imunossupressão, e é uma causa de dor óssea.

Se o câncer for metastático, pode haver outros sintomas, dependendo do local do câncer original.

Alguns cânceres ósseos também podem ser sentidos.
Os cânceres ósseos são tratados de acordo com seu tipo, estágio, prognóstico e sintomas que causam.

Muitos cânceres ósseos primários são tratados com radioterapia.

Os cânceres de medula óssea podem ser tratados com quimioterapia e outras formas de terapia direcionada, como a imunoterapia, podem ser usadas.

Os cuidados paliativos, que se concentram em maximizar a qualidade de vida de uma pessoa, podem desempenhar um papel no gerenciamento, principalmente se a probabilidade de sobrevivência em cinco anos for baixa.


=== Outras condições dolorosas ===

A osteomielite é a inflamação do osso ou da medula óssea devido a uma infecção bacteriana.
A osteomalacia é um amolecimento doloroso do osso adulto causado por deficiência grave de vitamina D.
Osteogênese imperfeita
Osteocondrite dissecante
Espondilite anquilosante
A fluorose esquelética é uma doença óssea causada pelo acúmulo excessivo de flúor nos ossos.

Em casos avançados, a fluorose esquelética danifica ossos e articulações e é dolorosa.


=== Osteoporose ===


A osteoporose é uma doença do osso onde há redução da densidade mineral óssea, aumentando a probabilidade de fraturas.

A osteoporose é definida em mulheres pela Organização Mundial de Saúde como uma densidade mineral óssea de 2,5 desvios-padrão abaixo do pico de massa óssea, em relação à média de idade e sexo.

Essa densidade é medida usando absorciometria de raios X de dupla energia (DEXA), com o termo "osteoporose estabelecida" incluindo a presença de uma fratura por fragilidade.

A osteoporose é mais comum em mulheres após a menopausa, quando é chamada de "osteoporose pós-menopausa", mas pode se desenvolver em homens e mulheres na pré-menopausa na presença de distúrbios hormonais específicos e outras doenças crônicas ou como resultado do tabagismo e medicamentos, especificamente glicocorticóides.

A osteoporose geralmente não apresenta sintomas até que ocorra uma fratura.

Por esse motivo, os exames DEXA geralmente são feitos em pessoas com um ou mais fatores de risco, que desenvolveram osteoporose e estão em risco de fratura. Um dos fatores de risco mais importantes para a osteoporose é a idade avançada.

O acúmulo de dano oxidativo ao DNA em células osteoblásticas e osteoclásticas parece ser um fator chave na osteoporose relacionada à idade. O tratamento da osteoporose inclui conselhos para parar de fumar, diminuir o consumo de álcool, praticar exercícios regularmente e ter uma dieta saudável.

Suplementos de cálcio e minerais também podem ser aconselhados, assim como a vitamina D.

Quando a medicação é usada, pode incluir bisfosfonatos, ranelato de estrôncio e terapia de reposição hormonal.


=== Medicina Osteopática ===


A medicina osteopática é uma escola de pensamento médico originalmente desenvolvida com base na ideia da ligação entre o sistema musculoesquelético e a saúde geral, mas agora muito semelhante à medicina convencional.

A partir de 2012, mais de 77.000 médicos nos Estados Unidos são treinados em escolas de medicina osteopática.


== Osteologia ==


O estudo dos ossos e dentes é conhecido como osteologia.

É frequentemente usado em antropologia, arqueologia e ciência forense para uma variedade de tarefas.

Isso pode incluir a determinação do estado nutricional, de saúde, idade ou lesão do indivíduo do qual os ossos foram retirados.

A preparação de ossos de carne para esses tipos de estudos pode envolver o processo de maceração.
Normalmente, antropólogos e arqueólogos estudam ferramentas ósseas feitas por Homo sapiens e Homo neanderthalensis.

Os ossos podem servir a vários usos, como pontas de projéteis ou pigmentos artísticos, e também podem ser feitos de ossos externos, como chifres.


== Outros animais ==


Esqueletos de pássaros são muito leves.

Seus ossos são menores e mais finos, para ajudar no vôo.

Entre os mamíferos, os morcegos são os que mais se aproximam das aves em termos de densidade óssea, sugerindo que pequenos ossos densos são uma adaptação do voo.

Muitos ossos de pássaros têm pouca medula devido ao fato de serem ocos. O bico de um pássaro é feito principalmente de osso como projeções das mandíbulas que são cobertas de queratina.
Alguns ossos, formados principalmente separadamente em tecidos subcutâneos, incluem aparelhos de cabeça (como núcleo ósseo de chifres, galhadas, ossicones), osteoderme e os penis/os clitoris.

Os chifres de um cervo são compostos de osso que é um exemplo incomum de osso estar fora da pele do animal uma vez que o veludo é derramado. O extinto peixe predador Dunkleosteus tinha bordas afiadas de osso duro exposto ao longo de suas mandíbulas. A proporção de osso cortical que é 80% no esqueleto humano pode ser muito menor em outros animais, especialmente em mamíferos marinhos e tartarugas marinhas, ou em vários répteis marinhos mesozóicos, como ictiossauros, entre outros.

Essa proporção pode variar rapidamente na evolução; muitas vezes aumenta nos estágios iniciais de retorno a um estilo de vida aquático, como visto nas primeiras baleias e pinípedes, entre outros.

Subsequentemente, diminui em táxons pelágicos, que normalmente adquirem osso esponjoso, mas táxons aquáticos que vivem em águas rasas podem reter ossos muito espessos, paquiostóticos, osteoscleróticos ou paquiosteoscleróticos, especialmente se se moverem lentamente, como vacas marinhas.

Em alguns casos, mesmo táxons marinhos que adquiriram osso esponjoso podem reverter para ossos mais espessos e compactos se se adaptarem a viver em águas rasas ou em águas hipersalinas (mais densas). .

Isso é presumivelmente realizado para reabastecer a falta de fosfato.
Muitas doenças ósseas que afetam os humanos também afetam outros vertebrados – um exemplo de um distúrbio é a fluorose esquelética.


== Sociedade e cultura ==


Ossos de animais abatidos têm vários usos.

Nos tempos pré-históricos, eles foram usados ​​para fazer ferramentas de osso.

Eles também foram usados ​​na escultura de ossos, já importantes na arte pré-histórica, e também nos tempos modernos como materiais de artesanato para botões, contas, alças, bobinas, auxiliares de cálculo, porcas de cabeça, dados, fichas de pôquer, varetas, flechas, scrimshaw, ornamentos, etc.
A cola de osso pode ser feita por fervura prolongada de ossos moídos ou rachados, seguida de filtragem e evaporação para engrossar o fluido resultante.

Historicamente, uma vez importante, a cola de osso e outras colas de animais hoje têm apenas alguns usos especializados, como na restauração de antiguidades.

Essencialmente, o mesmo processo, com mais refinamento, espessamento e secagem, é usado para fazer gelatina.
O caldo é feito fervendo vários ingredientes por um longo tempo, tradicionalmente incluindo ossos.
A carbonização óssea, um material granular poroso, preto, usado principalmente para filtração e também como pigmento preto, é produzida pela carbonização de ossos de mamíferos.
Oracle bone script era um sistema de escrita usado na China Antiga baseado em inscrições em ossos.

Seu nome tem origem em ossos de oráculos, que eram principalmente clavículas de boi.

Os antigos chineses (principalmente na dinastia Shang), escreveriam suas perguntas no osso do oráculo, e queimariam o osso, e onde o osso rachasse seria a resposta para as perguntas.
Apontar o osso para alguém é considerado azar em algumas culturas, como os aborígenes australianos, como os Kurdaitcha.
Os ossos da sorte de ave têm sido usados ​​para adivinhação, e ainda são costumeiramente usados ​​em uma tradição para determinar qual das duas pessoas que puxam uma das pontas do osso pode fazer um desejo.
Várias culturas ao longo da história adotaram o costume de moldar a cabeça de uma criança pela prática de deformação craniana artificial.

Um costume amplamente praticado na China era o de amarrar os pés para limitar o crescimento normal do pé.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bone

;;;FR;;;



OS


Un os est un organe rigide qui fait partie du squelette de la plupart des animaux vertébrés.

Les os protègent les divers autres organes du corps, produisent des globules rouges et blancs, stockent des minéraux, fournissent une structure et un soutien au corps et permettent la mobilité.

Les os se présentent sous une variété de formes et de tailles et ont une structure interne et externe complexe.

Ils sont légers mais solides et durs, et remplissent de multiples fonctions.
Le tissu osseux (tissu osseux), également appelé os au sens indénombrable de ce mot, est un tissu dur, un type de tissu conjonctif spécialisé.

Il a une matrice en forme de nid d'abeille à l'intérieur, ce qui contribue à donner de la rigidité à l'os.

Le tissu osseux est constitué de différents types de cellules osseuses.

Les ostéoblastes et les ostéocytes sont impliqués dans la formation et la minéralisation de l'os ; les ostéoclastes sont impliqués dans la résorption du tissu osseux.

Les ostéoblastes modifiés (aplatis) deviennent les cellules de revêtement qui forment une couche protectrice à la surface de l'os.

La matrice minéralisée du tissu osseux a un composant organique composé principalement de collagène appelé osséine et un composant inorganique de minéral osseux composé de divers sels.

Le tissu osseux est un tissu minéralisé de deux types, l'os cortical et l'os spongieux.

D'autres types de tissus présents dans les os comprennent la moelle osseuse, l'endoste, le périoste, les nerfs, les vaisseaux sanguins et le cartilage.
Dans le corps humain à la naissance, il y a environ 300 os présents ; beaucoup d'entre eux fusionnent au cours du développement, laissant un total de 206 os séparés chez l'adulte, sans compter les nombreux petits os sésamoïdes.

Le plus gros os du corps est le fémur ou le fémur, et le plus petit est l'étrier de l'oreille moyenne.
Le mot grec pour os est ὀστέον ("osteon"), d'où les nombreux termes qui l'utilisent comme préfixe, comme l'ostéopathie.


== Structure ==

L'os n'est pas uniformément solide, mais se compose d'une matrice flexible (environ 30%) et de minéraux liés (environ 70%) qui sont tissés de manière complexe et remodelés à l'infini par un groupe de cellules osseuses spécialisées.

Leur composition et leur conception uniques permettent aux os d'être relativement durs et solides, tout en restant légers.
La matrice osseuse est composée à 90 à 95 % de fibres élastiques de collagène, également appelées osséine, et le reste est de la substance fondamentale.

L'élasticité du collagène améliore la résistance aux fractures.

La matrice est durcie par la liaison d'un sel minéral inorganique, le phosphate de calcium, dans un arrangement chimique connu sous le nom d'hydroxylapatite de calcium.

C'est la minéralisation osseuse qui donne la rigidité des os.
L'os est activement construit et remodelé tout au long de la vie par des cellules osseuses spéciales appelées ostéoblastes et ostéoclastes.

Dans n'importe quel os, le tissu est tissé en deux motifs principaux, connus sous le nom d'os cortical et spongieux, et chacun avec une apparence et des caractéristiques différentes.


=== Cortex ===


La couche externe dure des os est composée d'os cortical, également appelé os compact car il est beaucoup plus dense que l'os spongieux.

Il forme l'extérieur dur (cortex) des os.

L'os cortical donne à l'os son aspect lisse, blanc et solide et représente 80 % de la masse osseuse totale d'un squelette humain adulte.

Il facilite les fonctions principales de l'os : soutenir l'ensemble du corps, protéger les organes, fournir des leviers de mouvement, stocker et libérer des éléments chimiques, principalement du calcium.

Il se compose de plusieurs colonnes microscopiques, chacune appelée ostéon ou système haversien.

Chaque colonne est constituée de plusieurs couches d'ostéoblastes et d'ostéocytes autour d'un canal central appelé canal haversien.

Les canaux de Volkmann à angle droit relient les ostéons entre eux.

Les colonnes sont métaboliquement actives et, à mesure que l'os est réabsorbé et créé, la nature et l'emplacement des cellules dans l'ostéon changent.

L'os cortical est recouvert d'un périoste sur sa face externe et d'un endosteum sur sa face interne.

L'endosteum est la limite entre l'os cortical et l'os spongieux.

La principale unité anatomique et fonctionnelle de l'os cortical est l'ostéon.


=== Trabécules ===


L'os spongieux, également appelé os trabéculaire ou spongieux, est le tissu interne de l'os squelettique et est un réseau poreux à cellules ouvertes.

L'os spongieux a un rapport surface/volume plus élevé que l'os cortical et il est moins dense.

Cela le rend plus faible et plus flexible.

La plus grande surface le rend également adapté aux activités métaboliques telles que l'échange d'ions calcium.

L'os spongieux se trouve généralement aux extrémités des os longs, près des articulations et à l'intérieur des vertèbres.

L'os spongieux est très vascularisé et contient souvent de la moelle osseuse rouge où se produit l'hématopoïèse, la production de cellules sanguines.

La principale unité anatomique et fonctionnelle de l'os spongieux est la trabécule.

Les trabécules sont alignées sur la répartition de la charge mécanique qu'un os subit dans les os longs tels que le fémur.

En ce qui concerne les os courts, l'alignement trabéculaire a été étudié dans le pédicule vertébral.

De fines formations d'ostéoblastes recouvertes d'endosteum créent un réseau irrégulier d'espaces, appelés trabécules.

Dans ces espaces se trouvent la moelle osseuse et les cellules souches hématopoïétiques qui donnent naissance aux plaquettes, aux globules rouges et aux globules blancs.

La moelle trabéculaire est composée d'un réseau d'éléments en forme de bâtonnets et de plaques qui allègent l'ensemble de l'organe et laissent de la place aux vaisseaux sanguins et à la moelle.

L'os trabéculaire représente les 20 % restants de la masse osseuse totale, mais a près de dix fois la surface de l'os compact. Les mots spongieux et trabéculaire font référence aux minuscules unités en forme de treillis (trabécules) qui forment le tissu.

Il a d'abord été illustré avec précision dans les gravures de Crisóstomo Martinez.


=== Moelle ===

La moelle osseuse, également connue sous le nom de tissu myéloïde dans la moelle osseuse rouge, peut être trouvée dans presque tous les os contenant du tissu spongieux.

Chez les nouveau-nés, tous ces os sont remplis exclusivement de moelle rouge ou de moelle hématopoïétique, mais à mesure que l'enfant vieillit, la fraction hématopoïétique diminue en quantité et la fraction grasse/jaune appelée tissu adipeux de la moelle (MAT) augmente en quantité.

Chez l'adulte, la moelle rouge se trouve principalement dans la moelle osseuse du fémur, des côtes, des vertèbres et des os du bassin.


=== Cellules ===


L'os est un tissu métaboliquement actif composé de plusieurs types de cellules.

Ces cellules comprennent les ostéoblastes, qui sont impliqués dans la création et la minéralisation du tissu osseux, les ostéocytes et les ostéoclastes, qui sont impliqués dans la réabsorption du tissu osseux.

Les ostéoblastes et les ostéocytes sont dérivés de cellules ostéoprogénitrices, mais les ostéoclastes sont dérivés des mêmes cellules qui se différencient pour former des macrophages et des monocytes.

Dans la moelle osseuse, il y a aussi des cellules souches hématopoïétiques.

Ces cellules donnent naissance à d'autres cellules, notamment les globules blancs, les globules rouges et les plaquettes.


==== Ostéoblaste ====
Les ostéoblastes sont des cellules mononucléées formant des os.

Ils sont situés à la surface des coutures d'ostéon et forment un mélange de protéines appelé ostéoïde, qui se minéralise pour devenir de l'os.

La couture ostéoïde est une région étroite de matrice organique nouvellement formée, non encore minéralisée, située à la surface d'un os.

Osteoid est principalement composé de collagène de type I.

Les ostéoblastes fabriquent également des hormones, telles que les prostaglandines, pour agir sur l'os lui-même.

L'ostéoblaste crée et répare un nouvel os en se construisant autour de lui-même.

Tout d'abord, l'ostéoblaste met en place des fibres de collagène.

Ces fibres de collagène servent de charpente au travail des ostéoblastes.

L'ostéoblaste dépose alors du phosphate de calcium qui est durci par les ions hydroxyde et bicarbonate.

L'os tout neuf créé par l'ostéoblaste est appelé ostéoïde.

Une fois que l'ostéoblaste a fini de fonctionner, il est en fait emprisonné à l'intérieur de l'os une fois qu'il a durci.

Lorsque l'ostéoblaste est piégé, il devient connu sous le nom d'ostéocyte.

D'autres ostéoblastes restent sur le dessus du nouvel os et sont utilisés pour protéger l'os sous-jacent, ceux-ci sont connus sous le nom de cellules de revêtement.


==== Ostéocyte ====
Les ostéocytes sont des cellules d'origine mésenchymateuse et proviennent d'ostéoblastes qui ont migré et se sont retrouvés piégés et entourés par la matrice osseuse qu'ils ont eux-mêmes produite.

Les espaces occupés par le corps cellulaire des ostéocytes dans la matrice de collagène minéralisé de type I sont appelés lacunes, tandis que les processus cellulaires des ostéocytes occupent des canaux appelés canalicules.

Les nombreux processus des ostéocytes s'étendent pour rencontrer les ostéoblastes, les ostéoclastes, les cellules de la muqueuse osseuse et d'autres ostéocytes probablement à des fins de communication.

Les ostéocytes restent en contact avec d'autres ostéocytes dans l'os par le biais de jonctions lacunaires - des processus cellulaires couplés qui traversent les canaux canaliculaires.


==== Ostéoclaste ====
Les ostéoclastes sont de très grosses cellules multinucléées responsables de la dégradation des os par le processus de résorption osseuse.

L'os nouveau est alors formé par les ostéoblastes.

L'os est constamment remodelé par la résorption des ostéoclastes et créé par les ostéoblastes.

Les ostéoclastes sont de grandes cellules avec plusieurs noyaux situés sur les surfaces osseuses dans ce qu'on appelle les lacunes de Howship (ou fosses de résorption).

Ces lacunes sont le résultat du tissu osseux environnant qui a été réabsorbé.

Parce que les ostéoclastes sont dérivés d'une lignée de cellules souches monocytes, ils sont équipés de mécanismes de type phagocytaire similaires aux macrophages circulants.

Les ostéoclastes mûrissent et/ou migrent vers des surfaces osseuses discrètes.

Dès leur arrivée, des enzymes actives, telles que la phosphatase acide tartrate-résistante, sont sécrétées contre le substrat minéral.

La réabsorption de l'os par les ostéoclastes joue également un rôle dans l'homéostasie du calcium.


=== Composition ===


Les os sont constitués de cellules vivantes (ostéoblastes et ostéocytes) enchâssées dans une matrice organique minéralisée.

Le principal composant inorganique de l'os humain est l'hydroxyapatite, le minéral osseux dominant, ayant la composition nominale de Ca10(PO4)6(OH)2.

Les composants organiques de cette matrice sont principalement constitués de collagène de type I - «organique» faisant référence aux matériaux produits par le corps humain - et de composants inorganiques, qui, aux côtés de la phase dominante d'hydroxyapatite, comprennent d'autres composés de calcium et de phosphate, y compris des sels.

Environ 30 % du composant acellulaire de l'os est constitué de matière organique, tandis qu'environ 70 % en masse sont attribués à la phase inorganique.

Les fibres de collagène confèrent à l'os sa résistance à la traction et les cristaux intercalés d'hydroxyapatite confèrent à l'os sa résistance à la compression.

Ces effets sont synergiques.

La composition exacte de la matrice peut être sujette à changement au fil du temps en raison de la nutrition et de la biominéralisation, le rapport du calcium au phosphate variant entre 1,3 et 2,0 (par poids), et des oligo-éléments tels que le magnésium, le sodium, le potassium et le carbonate étant également Le collagène de type I compose 90 à 95 % de la matrice organique, le reste de la matrice étant un liquide homogène appelé substance fondamentale constituée de protéoglycanes tels que l'acide hyaluronique et le sulfate de chondroïtine, ainsi que de protéines non collagènes telles que l'ostéocalcine, l'ostéopontine ou la sialoprotéine osseuse.

Le collagène est constitué de brins d'unités répétitives, qui confèrent à l'os une résistance à la traction, et sont disposés de manière à se chevaucher pour éviter les contraintes de cisaillement.

La fonction de la substance fondamentale n'est pas entièrement connue.

Deux types d'os peuvent être identifiés au microscope selon la disposition du collagène : tissé et lamellaire.

Os tissé (également appelé os fibreux), caractérisé par une organisation désordonnée des fibres de collagène et mécaniquement faible.
Os lamellaire , qui a un alignement parallèle régulier de collagène en feuilles («lamelles») et est mécaniquement résistant.
L'os tissé est produit lorsque les ostéoblastes produisent rapidement un ostéoïde, qui se produit initialement dans tous les os fœtaux, mais est ensuite remplacé par un os lamellaire plus résistant.

Chez les adultes, l'os tissé est créé après des fractures ou dans la maladie de Paget.

L'os tissé est plus faible, avec un plus petit nombre de fibres de collagène orientées au hasard, mais se forme rapidement; c'est pour cet aspect de la matrice fibreuse que l'os est dit tissé.

Il est rapidement remplacé par l'os lamellaire, qui est fortement organisé en feuillets concentriques avec une proportion beaucoup plus faible d'ostéocytes par rapport aux tissus environnants.

L'os lamellaire, qui fait sa première apparition chez l'homme chez le fœtus au cours du troisième trimestre, est plus solide et rempli de nombreuses fibres de collagène parallèles aux autres fibres de la même couche (ces colonnes parallèles sont appelées ostéons).

En coupe transversale, les fibres s'étendent dans des directions opposées en couches alternées, un peu comme dans le contreplaqué, contribuant à la capacité de l'os à résister aux forces de torsion.

Après une fracture, l'os tissé se forme initialement et est progressivement remplacé par de l'os lamellaire au cours d'un processus connu sous le nom de "substitution osseuse". Par rapport à l'os tissé, la formation d'os lamellaire se déroule plus lentement.

Le dépôt ordonné de fibres de collagène limite la formation d'ostéoïde à environ 1 à 2 µm par jour.

L'os lamellaire nécessite également une surface relativement plane pour déposer les fibres de collagène en couches parallèles ou concentriques.


==== Dépôt ====
La matrice extracellulaire de l'os est fixée par les ostéoblastes, qui sécrètent à la fois du collagène et de la substance fondamentale.

Ceux-ci synthétisent le collagène dans la cellule puis sécrètent des fibrilles de collagène.

Les fibres de collagène polymérisent rapidement pour former des brins de collagène.

A ce stade, ils ne sont pas encore minéralisés, et sont appelés « ostéoïdes ».

Autour des brins, du calcium et du phosphate se précipitent à la surface de ces brins, devenant en quelques jours à quelques semaines des cristaux d'hydroxyapatite. Afin de minéraliser l'os, les ostéoblastes sécrètent des vésicules contenant de la phosphatase alcaline.

Cela clive les groupes phosphate et agit comme foyer de dépôt de calcium et de phosphate.

Les vésicules se rompent alors et agissent comme un centre pour la croissance des cristaux.

Plus particulièrement, le minéral osseux est formé de structures globulaires et en plaques.


== Genre ==


Il existe cinq types d'os dans le corps humain : longs, courts, plats, irréguliers et sésamoïdes.
Les os longs sont caractérisés par une tige, la diaphyse, beaucoup plus longue que large ; et par une épiphyse, une tête arrondie à chaque extrémité de l'arbre.

Ils sont constitués principalement d'os compact, avec de moindres quantités de moelle, situées dans la cavité médullaire, et des zones d'os spongieux et spongieux aux extrémités des os.

La plupart des os des membres, y compris ceux des doigts et des orteils, sont des os longs.

Les exceptions sont les huit os du carpe du poignet, les sept os du tarse articulés de la cheville et l'os sésamoïde de la rotule.

Les os longs tels que la clavicule, qui ont une tige ou des extrémités de forme différente, sont également appelés os longs modifiés.
Les os courts ont à peu près la forme d'un cube et n'ont qu'une fine couche d'os compact entourant un intérieur spongieux.

Les os du poignet et de la cheville sont des os courts.
Les os plats sont minces et généralement incurvés, avec deux couches parallèles d'os compact prenant en sandwich une couche d'os spongieux.

La plupart des os du crâne sont des os plats, tout comme le sternum.
Les os sésamoïdes sont des os enchâssés dans les tendons.

Puisqu'ils agissent pour maintenir le tendon plus loin de l'articulation, l'angle du tendon est augmenté et donc l'effet de levier du muscle est augmenté.

Des exemples d'os sésamoïdes sont la rotule et le pisiforme.
Les os irréguliers ne rentrent pas dans les catégories ci-dessus.

Ils sont constitués de fines couches d'os compact entourant un intérieur spongieux.

Comme son nom l'indique, leurs formes sont irrégulières et compliquées.

Souvent cette forme irrégulière est due à leurs nombreux centres d'ossification ou parce qu'ils contiennent des sinus osseux.

Les os de la colonne vertébrale, du bassin et certains os du crâne sont des os irréguliers.

Les exemples incluent les os ethmoïde et sphénoïde.


== Terminologie ==


Dans l'étude de l'anatomie, les anatomistes utilisent un certain nombre de termes anatomiques pour décrire l'apparence, la forme et la fonction des os.

D'autres termes anatomiques sont également utilisés pour décrire l'emplacement des os.

Comme d'autres termes anatomiques, beaucoup d'entre eux dérivent du latin et du grec.

Certains anatomistes utilisent encore le latin pour désigner les os.

Le terme « osseux » et le préfixe « ostéo- », faisant référence à des choses liées à l'os, sont encore couramment utilisés aujourd'hui.
Quelques exemples de termes utilisés pour décrire les os incluent le terme «foramen» pour décrire un trou à travers lequel quelque chose passe, et un «canal» ou «méat» pour décrire une structure en forme de tunnel.

Une saillie d'un os peut être appelée un certain nombre de termes, y compris un «condyle», «crête», «colonne vertébrale», «éminence», «tubercule» ou «tubérosité», selon la forme et l'emplacement de la saillie.

En général, on dit que les os longs ont une "tête", un "cou" et un "corps".
Lorsque deux os se rejoignent, on dit qu'ils « s'articulent ».

Si les deux os ont une connexion fibreuse et sont relativement immobiles, l'articulation est appelée "suture".


== Développement ==


La formation de l'os s'appelle l'ossification.

Au cours du stade de développement fœtal, cela se produit par deux processus : l'ossification intramembraneuse et l'ossification endochondrale.

L'ossification intramembraneuse implique la formation d'os à partir de tissu conjonctif, tandis que l'ossification endochondrale implique la formation d'os à partir de cartilage.
L'ossification intramembraneuse se produit principalement lors de la formation des os plats du crâne mais aussi de la mandibule, du maxillaire et des clavicules ; l'os est formé de tissu conjonctif tel que le tissu mésenchymateux plutôt que de cartilage.

Le processus comprend : le développement du centre d'ossification, la calcification, la formation de trabécules et le développement du périoste. L'ossification endochondrale se produit dans les os longs et la plupart des autres os du corps ; il implique le développement de l'os à partir du cartilage.

Ce processus comprend le développement d'un modèle de cartilage, sa croissance et son développement, le développement des centres d'ossification primaires et secondaires et la formation du cartilage articulaire et des plaques épiphysaires. L'ossification endochondrale commence par des points dans le cartilage appelés "centres d'ossification primaires". Ils apparaissent principalement au cours du développement fœtal, bien que quelques os courts commencent leur ossification primaire après la naissance.

Ils sont responsables de la formation des diaphyses des os longs, des os courts et de certaines parties des os irréguliers.

L'ossification secondaire se produit après la naissance et forme les épiphyses des os longs et les extrémités des os irréguliers et plats.

La diaphyse et les deux épiphyses d'un os long sont séparées par une zone de cartilage en croissance (la plaque épiphysaire).

À la maturité squelettique (18 à 25 ans), tout le cartilage est remplacé par de l'os, fusionnant la diaphyse et les deux épiphyses (fermeture épiphysaire).

Aux membres supérieurs, seules les diaphyses des os longs et de l'omoplate sont ossifiées.

Les épiphyses, les os du carpe, le processus coracoïde, le bord médial de l'omoplate et l'acromion sont toujours cartilagineux. Les étapes suivantes sont suivies dans la conversion du cartilage en os :

Zone de cartilage de réserve.

Cette région, la plus éloignée de la cavité médullaire, est constituée de cartilage hyalin typique qui ne montre encore aucun signe de transformation en os.
Zone de prolifération cellulaire.

Un peu plus près de la cavité médullaire, les chondrocytes se multiplient et s'organisent en colonnes longitudinales de lacunes aplaties.
Zone d'hypertrophie cellulaire.

Ensuite, les chondrocytes cessent de se diviser et commencent à s'hypertrophier (agrandir), un peu comme ils le font dans le centre d'ossification primaire du fœtus.

Les parois de la matrice entre les lacunes deviennent très minces.
Zone de calcification.

Les minéraux se déposent dans la matrice entre les colonnes de lacunes et calcifient le cartilage.

Ce ne sont pas les dépôts minéraux permanents de l'os, mais seulement un support temporaire pour le cartilage qui autrement serait bientôt affaibli par la rupture des lacunes agrandies.
Zone de dépôt osseux.

Dans chaque colonne, les parois entre les lacunes se décomposent et les chondrocytes meurent.

Cela convertit chaque colonne en un canal longitudinal, qui est immédiatement envahi par les vaisseaux sanguins et la moelle de la cavité médullaire.

Les ostéoblastes s'alignent le long des parois de ces canaux et commencent à déposer des lamelles concentriques de matrice, tandis que les ostéoclastes dissolvent le cartilage temporairement calcifié.


== Fonctions ==

Les os ont diverses fonctions :


=== Mécanique ===


Les os remplissent diverses fonctions mécaniques.

Ensemble, les os du corps forment le squelette.

Ils fournissent un cadre pour maintenir le corps soutenu et un point d'attache pour les muscles squelettiques, les tendons, les ligaments et les articulations, qui fonctionnent ensemble pour générer et transférer des forces afin que des parties individuelles du corps ou le corps entier puissent être manipulés dans un espace tridimensionnel ( l'interaction entre l'os et le muscle est étudiée en biomécanique).
Les os protègent les organes internes, comme le crâne protégeant le cerveau ou les côtes protégeant le cœur et les poumons.

En raison de la façon dont l'os est formé, l'os a une résistance à la compression élevée d'environ 170 MPa (1 700 kgf/cm2), une faible résistance à la traction de 104 à 121 MPa et une très faible résistance au cisaillement (51,6 MPa).

Cela signifie que l'os résiste bien aux contraintes de poussée (compression), résiste moins bien aux contraintes de traction (tension), mais ne résiste que mal aux contraintes de cisaillement (telles que celles dues aux charges de torsion).

Alors que l'os est essentiellement cassant, l'os a un degré significatif d'élasticité, principalement dû au collagène.
Mécaniquement, les os ont également un rôle particulier dans l'audition.

Les osselets sont trois petits os de l'oreille moyenne impliqués dans la transduction du son.


=== Synthétique ===

La partie spongieuse des os contient de la moelle osseuse.

La moelle osseuse produit des cellules sanguines dans un processus appelé hématopoïèse.

Les cellules sanguines créées dans la moelle osseuse comprennent les globules rouges, les plaquettes et les globules blancs.

Les cellules progénitrices telles que les cellules souches hématopoïétiques se divisent dans un processus appelé mitose pour produire des cellules précurseurs.

Ceux-ci comprennent des précurseurs qui finissent par donner naissance à des globules blancs et des érythroblastes qui donnent naissance à des globules rouges.

Contrairement aux globules rouges et blancs, créés par la mitose, les plaquettes sont excrétées par de très grosses cellules appelées mégacaryocytes.

Ce processus de différenciation progressive se produit dans la moelle osseuse.

Une fois les cellules mûries, elles entrent dans la circulation.

Chaque jour, plus de 2,5 milliards de globules rouges et de plaquettes, et 50 à 100 milliards de granulocytes sont produits de cette manière. En plus de créer des cellules, la moelle osseuse est également l'un des principaux sites de destruction des globules rouges défectueux ou âgés.


=== Métabolique ===

Stockage de minéraux - les os agissent comme des réserves de minéraux importants pour le corps, notamment le calcium et le phosphore. Déterminées par l'espèce, l'âge et le type d'os, les cellules osseuses représentent jusqu'à 15 % de l'os.

Stockage des facteurs de croissance - la matrice osseuse minéralisée stocke des facteurs de croissance importants tels que les facteurs de croissance analogues à l'insuline, le facteur de croissance transformant, les protéines morphogénétiques osseuses et autres.
Stockage des graisses - le tissu adipeux de la moelle (MAT) agit comme une réserve de stockage des acides gras.
Équilibre acido-basique - l'os protège le sang contre les changements de pH excessifs en absorbant ou en libérant des sels alcalins.
Détoxification - les tissus osseux peuvent également stocker des métaux lourds et d'autres éléments étrangers, les éliminant du sang et réduisant leurs effets sur les autres tissus.

Ceux-ci peuvent ensuite être progressivement libérés pour être excrétés.
Organe endocrinien - l'os contrôle le métabolisme du phosphate en libérant le facteur de croissance des fibroblastes 23 (FGF-23), qui agit sur les reins pour réduire la réabsorption du phosphate.

Les cellules osseuses libèrent également une hormone appelée ostéocalcine, qui contribue à la régulation de la glycémie (glucose) et du dépôt de graisse.

L'ostéocalcine augmente à la fois la sécrétion et la sensibilité de l'insuline, en plus d'augmenter le nombre de cellules productrices d'insuline et de réduire les réserves de graisse.
Équilibre calcique - le processus de résorption osseuse par les ostéoclastes libère le calcium stocké dans la circulation systémique et constitue un processus important dans la régulation de l'équilibre calcique.

Comme la formation osseuse fixe activement le calcium circulant sous sa forme minérale, le retirant de la circulation sanguine, la résorption le défixe activement, augmentant ainsi les niveaux de calcium circulant.

Ces processus se produisent en tandem à des emplacements spécifiques au site.


== Remodelage ==


L'os est constamment créé et remplacé dans un processus connu sous le nom de remodelage.

Ce renouvellement continu de l'os est un processus de résorption suivi d'un remplacement de l'os avec peu de changement de forme.

Ceci est accompli par les ostéoblastes et les ostéoclastes.

Les cellules sont stimulées par une variété de signaux, et ensemble appelées une unité de remodelage.

Environ 10% de la masse squelettique d'un adulte est remodelée chaque année.

Le remodelage a pour but de réguler l'homéostasie du calcium, de réparer les os micro-endommagés par le stress quotidien et de façonner le squelette pendant la croissance.

Des contraintes répétées, telles que des exercices avec mise en charge ou une cicatrisation osseuse, entraînent un épaississement de l'os aux points de contrainte maximale (loi de Wolff).

Il a été émis l'hypothèse que cela est le résultat des propriétés piézoélectriques de l'os, qui amènent l'os à générer de petits potentiels électriques sous contrainte. L'action des ostéoblastes et des ostéoclastes est contrôlée par un certain nombre d'enzymes chimiques qui favorisent ou inhibent l'activité du remodelage osseux. cellules, contrôlant la vitesse à laquelle l'os est fabriqué, détruit ou changé de forme.

Les cellules utilisent également la signalisation paracrine pour contrôler l'activité de l'autre.

Par exemple, la vitesse à laquelle les ostéoclastes résorbent l'os est inhibée par la calcitonine et l'ostéoprotégérine.

La calcitonine est produite par les cellules parafolliculaires de la glande thyroïde et peut se lier aux récepteurs des ostéoclastes pour inhiber directement l'activité des ostéoclastes.

L'ostéoprotégérine est sécrétée par les ostéoblastes et est capable de se lier au RANK-L, inhibant la stimulation des ostéoclastes. Les ostéoblastes peuvent également être stimulés pour augmenter la masse osseuse en augmentant la sécrétion d'ostéoïde et en inhibant la capacité des ostéoclastes à décomposer le tissu osseux.

L'augmentation de la sécrétion d'ostéoïde est stimulée par la sécrétion d'hormone de croissance par l'hypophyse, l'hormone thyroïdienne et les hormones sexuelles (œstrogènes et androgènes).

Ces hormones favorisent également une sécrétion accrue d'ostéoprotégérine.

Les ostéoblastes peuvent également être amenés à sécréter un certain nombre de cytokines qui favorisent la réabsorption de l'os en stimulant l'activité des ostéoclastes et leur différenciation à partir des cellules progénitrices.

La vitamine D, l'hormone parathyroïdienne et la stimulation des ostéocytes incitent les ostéoblastes à augmenter la sécrétion de RANK-ligand et d'interleukine 6, ces cytokines stimulant alors une réabsorption accrue de l'os par les ostéoclastes.

Ces mêmes composés augmentent également la sécrétion du facteur de stimulation des colonies de macrophages par les ostéoblastes, ce qui favorise la différenciation des cellules progénitrices en ostéoclastes, et diminue la sécrétion d'ostéoprotégérine.


== Volume ==

Le volume osseux est déterminé par les taux de formation osseuse et de résorption osseuse.

Des recherches récentes ont suggéré que certains facteurs de croissance pourraient modifier localement la formation osseuse en augmentant l'activité des ostéoblastes.

De nombreux facteurs de croissance dérivés de l'os ont été isolés et classés via des cultures osseuses.

Ces facteurs comprennent les facteurs de croissance analogues à l'insuline I et II, le facteur de croissance transformant bêta, le facteur de croissance des fibroblastes, le facteur de croissance dérivé des plaquettes et les protéines morphogénétiques osseuses.

Les preuves suggèrent que les cellules osseuses produisent des facteurs de croissance pour le stockage extracellulaire dans la matrice osseuse.

La libération de ces facteurs de croissance à partir de la matrice osseuse pourrait entraîner la prolifération de précurseurs d'ostéoblastes.

Essentiellement, les facteurs de croissance osseuse peuvent agir comme des déterminants potentiels de la formation osseuse locale.

La recherche a suggéré que le volume d'os spongieux dans l'ostéoporose post-ménopausique peut être déterminé par la relation entre la surface totale de formation osseuse et le pourcentage de résorption de surface.


== Signification clinique ==


Un certain nombre de maladies peuvent affecter les os, notamment l'arthrite, les fractures, les infections, l'ostéoporose et les tumeurs.

Les conditions liées aux os peuvent être prises en charge par divers médecins, y compris les rhumatologues pour les articulations et les chirurgiens orthopédistes, qui peuvent effectuer une intervention chirurgicale pour réparer les os cassés.

D'autres médecins, tels que des spécialistes en réadaptation peuvent être impliqués dans la récupération, des radiologues dans l'interprétation des résultats de l'imagerie et des pathologistes dans l'étude de la cause de la maladie, et les médecins de famille peuvent jouer un rôle dans la prévention des complications des maladies osseuses telles que l'ostéoporose.
Lorsqu'un médecin voit un patient, une anamnèse et un examen seront effectués.

Les os sont alors souvent imagés, appelés radiographies.

Cela peut inclure une échographie, une tomodensitométrie, une IRM et d'autres images telles qu'une scintigraphie osseuse, qui peuvent être utilisées pour enquêter sur le cancer.

D'autres tests tels qu'un test sanguin pour les marqueurs auto-immuns peuvent être effectués, ou une aspiration de liquide synovial peut être effectuée.


=== Fractures ===


Dans l'os normal, les fractures se produisent lorsqu'il y a une force importante appliquée ou un traumatisme répétitif sur une longue période.

Des fractures peuvent également survenir lorsqu'un os est affaibli, comme dans le cas de l'ostéoporose, ou lorsqu'il existe un problème structurel, comme lorsque l'os se remodèle excessivement (comme la maladie de Paget) ou est le site de la croissance d'un cancer.

Les fractures courantes comprennent les fractures du poignet et de la hanche, associées à l'ostéoporose, les fractures vertébrales associées à un traumatisme à haute énergie et au cancer, et les fractures des os longs.

Toutes les fractures ne sont pas douloureuses.

Lorsqu'elles sont graves, selon le type et l'emplacement des fractures, les complications peuvent inclure un fléau thoracique, des syndromes de loge ou une embolie graisseuse.
Les fractures composées impliquent la pénétration de l'os à travers la peau.

Certaines fractures complexes peuvent être traitées en utilisant des procédures de greffe osseuse qui remplacent les parties osseuses manquantes.
Les fractures et leurs causes sous-jacentes peuvent être étudiées par rayons X, tomodensitogrammes et IRM.

Les fractures sont décrites par leur emplacement et leur forme, et plusieurs systèmes de classification existent, selon l'emplacement de la fracture.

Une fracture des os longs courante chez les enfants est une fracture de Salter-Harris.

Lorsque les fractures sont gérées, un soulagement de la douleur est souvent administré et la zone fracturée est souvent immobilisée.

Il s'agit de favoriser la cicatrisation osseuse.

De plus, des mesures chirurgicales telles que la fixation interne peuvent être utilisées.

En raison de l'immobilisation, il est souvent conseillé aux personnes souffrant de fractures de suivre une rééducation.


=== Tumeurs ===


Il existe plusieurs types de tumeurs qui peuvent affecter les os ; des exemples de tumeurs osseuses bénignes comprennent l'ostéome, l'ostéome ostéoïde, l'ostéochondrome, l'ostéoblastome, l'enchondrome, la tumeur osseuse à cellules géantes et le kyste osseux anévrismal.


=== Cancer ===


Le cancer peut survenir dans le tissu osseux, et les os sont également un site commun de propagation (métastases) pour d'autres cancers.

Les cancers qui surviennent dans les os sont appelés cancers « primitifs », bien que ces cancers soient rares.

Les métastases osseuses sont des cancers « secondaires », les plus courants étant le cancer du sein, le cancer du poumon, le cancer de la prostate, le cancer de la thyroïde et le cancer du rein.

Les cancers secondaires qui affectent les os peuvent soit détruire l'os (appelé cancer « lytique »), soit créer de l'os (cancer « sclérotique »).

Les cancers de la moelle osseuse à l'intérieur de l'os peuvent également affecter le tissu osseux, par exemple la leucémie et le myélome multiple.

Les os peuvent également être affectés par des cancers dans d'autres parties du corps.

Les cancers dans d'autres parties du corps peuvent libérer de l'hormone parathyroïdienne ou un peptide lié à l'hormone parathyroïdienne.

Cela augmente la réabsorption osseuse et peut entraîner des fractures osseuses.
Le tissu osseux qui est détruit ou altéré à la suite de cancers est déformé, affaibli et plus sujet aux fractures.

Cela peut entraîner une compression de la moelle épinière, une destruction de la moelle entraînant des ecchymoses, des saignements et une immunosuppression, et est l'une des causes de la douleur osseuse.

Si le cancer est métastatique, il peut y avoir d'autres symptômes selon le site du cancer d'origine.

Certains cancers des os peuvent également se faire sentir.
Les cancers des os sont pris en charge en fonction de leur type, de leur stade, de leur pronostic et des symptômes qu'ils provoquent.

De nombreux cancers primitifs des os sont traités par radiothérapie.

Les cancers de la moelle osseuse peuvent être traités par chimiothérapie et d'autres formes de thérapie ciblée telles que l'immunothérapie peuvent être utilisées.

Les soins palliatifs, qui visent à maximiser la qualité de vie d'une personne, peuvent jouer un rôle dans la prise en charge, en particulier si la probabilité de survie dans les cinq ans est faible.


=== Autres affections douloureuses ===

L'ostéomyélite est une inflammation de l'os ou de la moelle osseuse due à une infection bactérienne.
L'ostéomalacie est un ramollissement douloureux des os chez l'adulte causé par une carence sévère en vitamine D.
Ostéogenèse imparfaite
Ostéochondrite disséquante
Spondylarthrite ankylosante
La fluorose squelettique est une maladie osseuse causée par une accumulation excessive de fluorure dans les os.

Dans les cas avancés, la fluorose squelettique endommage les os et les articulations et est douloureuse.


=== Ostéoporose ===


L'ostéoporose est une maladie osseuse caractérisée par une réduction de la densité minérale osseuse, ce qui augmente le risque de fractures.

L'ostéoporose est définie chez les femmes par l'Organisation mondiale de la santé comme une densité minérale osseuse de 2,5 écarts-types en dessous de la masse osseuse maximale, par rapport à la moyenne d'âge et de sexe.

Cette densité est mesurée par absorptiométrie biénergétique à rayons X (DEXA), le terme « ostéoporose établie » incluant la présence d'une fracture de fragilité.

L'ostéoporose est plus fréquente chez les femmes après la ménopause, lorsqu'elle est appelée "ostéoporose post-ménopausique", mais peut se développer chez les hommes et les femmes préménopausées en présence de troubles hormonaux particuliers et d'autres maladies chroniques ou à la suite du tabagisme et des médicaments, en particulier les glucocorticoïdes.

L'ostéoporose ne présente généralement aucun symptôme jusqu'à ce qu'une fracture se produise.

Pour cette raison, les examens DEXA sont souvent effectués chez des personnes présentant un ou plusieurs facteurs de risque, qui ont développé de l'ostéoporose et sont à risque de fracture. L'âge avancé est l'un des facteurs de risque les plus importants de l'ostéoporose.

L'accumulation de dommages oxydatifs à l'ADN dans les cellules ostéoblastiques et ostéoclastiques semble être un facteur clé de l'ostéoporose liée à l'âge. Le traitement de l'ostéoporose comprend des conseils pour arrêter de fumer, réduire la consommation d'alcool, faire de l'exercice régulièrement et avoir une alimentation saine.

Des suppléments de calcium et d'oligo-éléments peuvent également être conseillés, tout comme la vitamine D.

Lorsque des médicaments sont utilisés, ils peuvent inclure des bisphosphonates, du ranélate de strontium et une hormonothérapie substitutive.


=== Médecine Ostéopathique ===


La médecine ostéopathique est une école de pensée médicale développée à l'origine sur l'idée du lien entre le système musculo-squelettique et la santé globale, mais maintenant très similaire à la médecine traditionnelle.

En 2012, plus de 77 000 médecins aux États-Unis sont formés dans des écoles de médecine ostéopathique.


== Ostéologie ==


L'étude des os et des dents est appelée ostéologie.

Il est fréquemment utilisé en anthropologie, en archéologie et en médecine légale pour diverses tâches.

Cela peut inclure la détermination de l'état nutritionnel, de la santé, de l'âge ou de la blessure de la personne dont les os ont été prélevés.

La préparation d'os charnus pour ces types d'études peut impliquer le processus de macération.
Généralement, les anthropologues et les archéologues étudient les outils en os fabriqués par Homo sapiens et Homo neanderthalensis.

Les os peuvent servir à un certain nombre d'utilisations telles que des pointes de projectiles ou des pigments artistiques, et peuvent également être fabriqués à partir d'os externes tels que des bois.


== Autres animaux ==


Les squelettes d'oiseaux sont très légers.

Leurs os sont plus petits et plus fins, pour faciliter le vol.

Parmi les mammifères, les chauves-souris se rapprochent le plus des oiseaux en termes de densité osseuse, ce qui suggère que les petits os denses sont une adaptation au vol.

De nombreux os d'oiseaux ont peu de moelle car ils sont creux. Le bec d'un oiseau est principalement constitué d'os en tant que projections des mandibules qui sont recouvertes de kératine.
Certains os, principalement formés séparément dans les tissus sous-cutanés, comprennent les couvre-chefs (tels que le noyau osseux des cornes, les bois, les ossicones), l'ostéoderme et l'os du pénis/os du clitoris.

Les bois d'un cerf sont composés d'os, ce qui est un exemple inhabituel d'os se trouvant à l'extérieur de la peau de l'animal une fois le velours perdu. Le poisson prédateur éteint Dunkleosteus avait des arêtes vives d'os dur exposé le long de ses mâchoires. 80% dans le squelette humain peut être beaucoup plus faible chez d'autres animaux, en particulier chez les mammifères marins et les tortues marines, ou chez divers reptiles marins mésozoïques, tels que les ichtyosaures, entre autres.

Cette proportion peut varier rapidement au cours de l'évolution ; il augmente souvent aux premiers stades des retours à un mode de vie aquatique, comme on le voit chez les premières baleines et pinnipèdes, entre autres.

Il diminue ensuite dans les taxons pélagiques, qui acquièrent généralement des os spongieux, mais les taxons aquatiques qui vivent dans des eaux peu profondes peuvent conserver des os très épais, pachyostotiques, ostéoscléreux ou pachyostéoscléreux, surtout s'ils se déplacent lentement, comme les vaches marines.

Dans certains cas, même les taxons marins qui avaient acquis des os spongieux peuvent redevenir des os plus épais et compacts s'ils s'adaptent pour vivre dans des eaux peu profondes ou dans des eaux hypersalines (plus denses). De nombreux animaux, en particulier les herbivores, pratiquent l'ostéophagie - la consommation d'os .

Ceci est vraisemblablement effectué afin de reconstituer le manque de phosphate.
De nombreuses maladies osseuses qui affectent les humains affectent également d'autres vertébrés - un exemple d'un trouble est la fluorose squelettique.


== Société et culture ==


Les os d'animaux abattus ont plusieurs usages.

À l'époque préhistorique, ils ont été utilisés pour fabriquer des outils en os.

Ils ont en outre été utilisés dans la sculpture sur os, déjà importante dans l'art préhistorique, et aussi à l'époque moderne comme matériaux d'artisanat pour les boutons, les perles, les poignées, les bobines, les aides au calcul, les écrous à tête, les dés, les jetons de poker, les bâtons de ramassage, les flèches, scrimshaw, ornements, etc.
La colle osseuse peut être fabriquée par ébullition prolongée d'os broyés ou fissurés, suivie d'un filtrage et d'une évaporation pour épaissir le fluide résultant.

Historiquement autrefois importantes, la colle d'os et d'autres colles animales n'ont aujourd'hui que quelques utilisations spécialisées, comme dans la restauration d'antiquités.

Essentiellement le même processus, avec un raffinement, un épaississement et un séchage supplémentaires, est utilisé pour fabriquer de la gélatine.
Le bouillon est fabriqué en faisant mijoter plusieurs ingrédients pendant une longue période, y compris traditionnellement des os.
Le charbon osseux, un matériau poreux, noir et granuleux principalement utilisé pour la filtration et également comme pigment noir, est produit en carbonisant les os de mammifères.
Oracle bone script était un système d'écriture utilisé dans la Chine ancienne basé sur des inscriptions dans les os.

Son nom provient des os d'oracle, qui étaient principalement des clavicules de bœuf.

Les anciens chinois (principalement sous la dynastie Shang) écrivaient leurs questions sur l'os d'oracle et brûlaient l'os, et là où l'os fissuré serait la réponse aux questions.
Pointer l'os vers quelqu'un est considéré comme de la malchance dans certaines cultures, comme les aborigènes australiens, comme par les Kurdaitcha.
Les triangles de volaille ont été utilisés pour la divination et sont encore habituellement utilisés dans une tradition pour déterminer laquelle des deux personnes tirant sur l'une ou l'autre des dents de l'os peut faire un vœu.
Diverses cultures à travers l'histoire ont adopté la coutume de façonner la tête d'un nourrisson par la pratique de la déformation crânienne artificielle.

Une coutume largement pratiquée en Chine était celle du bandage des pieds pour limiter la croissance normale du pied.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bone
