

PELVIS


The pelvis (plural pelves or pelvises) is the lower part of the trunk, between the abdomen and the thighs (sometimes also called pelvic region), together with its embedded skeleton (sometimes also called bony pelvis, or pelvic skeleton).

The pelvic region of the trunk includes the bony pelvis, the pelvic cavity (the space enclosed by the bony pelvis), the pelvic floor, below the pelvic cavity, and the perineum, below the pelvic floor. 

The pelvic skeleton is formed in the area of the back, by the sacrum and the coccyx and anteriorly and to the left and right sides, by a pair of hip bones.

The two hip bones connect the spine with the lower limbs. 

They are attached to the sacrum posteriorly, connected to each other anteriorly, and joined with the two femurs at the hip joints. 

The gap enclosed by the bony pelvis, called the pelvic cavity, is the section of the body underneath the abdomen and mainly consists of the reproductive organs (sex organs) and the rectum, while the pelvic floor at the base of the cavity assists in supporting the organs of the abdomen.

In mammals, the bony pelvis has a gap in the middle, significantly larger in females than in males. 

Their young pass through this gap when they are born.


== Structure ==

The pelvic region of the trunk is the lower part of the trunk, between the abdomen and the thighs. 

It includes several structures: the bony pelvis, the pelvic cavity, the pelvic floor, and the perineum. 

The bony pelvis (pelvic skeleton) is the part of the skeleton embedded in the pelvic region of the trunk. 

It is subdivided into the pelvic girdle and the pelvic spine. 

The pelvic girdle is composed of the appendicular hip bones (ilium, ischium, and pubis) oriented in a ring, and connects the pelvic region of the spine to the lower limbs. 

The pelvic spine consists of the sacrum and coccyx.
the pelvic cavity, typically defined as a small part of the space enclosed by the bony pelvis, delimited by the pelvic brim above and the pelvic floor below; alternatively, the pelvic cavity is sometimes also defined as the whole space enclosed by the pelvic skeleton, subdivided into:
the greater (or false) pelvis, above the pelvic brim
the lesser (or true) pelvis, below the pelvic brim
the pelvic floor (or pelvic diaphragm), below the pelvic cavity
the perineum, below the pelvic floor


=== Pelvic bone ===


The pelvic skeleton is formed posteriorly (in the area of the back), by the sacrum and the coccyx and laterally and anteriorly (forward and to the sides), by a pair of hip bones. 

Each hip bone consists of 3 sections, ilium, ischium, and pubis. 

During childhood, these sections are separate bones, joined by the triradiate cartilage. 

During puberty, they fuse together to form a single bone.


=== Pelvic cavity ===


The pelvic cavity is a body cavity that is bounded by the bones of the pelvis and which primarily contains reproductive organs and the rectum.

A distinction is made between the lesser or true pelvis inferior to the terminal line, and the greater or false pelvis above it. 

The pelvic inlet or superior pelvic aperture, which leads into the lesser pelvis, is bordered by the promontory, the arcuate line of ilium, the iliopubic eminence, the pecten of the pubis, and the upper part of the pubic symphysis. 

The pelvic outlet or inferior pelvic aperture is the region between the subpubic angle or pubic arch, the ischial tuberosities and the coccyx.

Ligaments: obturator membrane, inguinal ligament (lacunar ligament, iliopectineal arch)Alternatively, the pelvis is divided into three planes: the inlet, midplane, and outlet.


=== Pelvic floor ===


The pelvic floor has two inherently conflicting functions: One is to close the pelvic and abdominal cavities and bear the load of the visceral organs; the other is to control the openings of the rectum and urogenital organs that pierce the pelvic floor and make it weaker. 

To achieve both these tasks, the pelvic floor is composed of several overlapping sheets of muscles and connective tissues.

The pelvic diaphragm is composed of the levator ani and the coccygeus muscle. 

These arise between the symphysis and the ischial spine and converge on the coccyx and the anococcygeal ligament which spans between the tip of the coccyx and the anal hiatus. 

This leaves a slit for the anal and urogenital openings. 

Because of the width of the genital aperture, which is wider in females, a second closing mechanism is required. 

The urogenital diaphragm consists mainly of the deep transverse perineal which arises from the inferior ischial and pubic rami and extends to the urogenital hiatus. 

The urogenital diaphragm is reinforced posteriorly by the superficial transverse perineal.

The external anal and urethral sphincters close the anus and the urethra. 

The former is surrounded by the bulbospongiosus which narrows the vaginal introitus in females and surrounds the corpus spongiosum in males. 

Ischiocavernosus squeezes blood into the corpus cavernosum penis and clitoridis.


=== Variation ===


Modern humans are to a large extent characterized by bipedal locomotion and large brains. 

Because the pelvis is vital to both locomotion and childbirth, natural selection has been confronted by two conflicting demands: 
    a wide birth canal and locomotion efficiency, a conflict referred to as the "obstetrical dilemma". 

The female pelvis, or gynecoid pelvis, has evolved to its maximum width for childbirth—a wider pelvis would make women unable to walk. 

In contrast, human male pelvises are not constrained by the need to give birth and therefore are more optimized for bipedal locomotion.

The principal differences between male and female true and false pelvis include:

The female pelvis is larger and broader than the male pelvis which is taller, narrower, and more compact.

The female inlet is larger and oval in shape, while the male sacral promontory projects further (i.e. the male inlet is more heart-shaped).

The sides of the male pelvis converge from the inlet to the outlet, whereas the sides of the female pelvis are wider apart.

The angle between the inferior pubic rami is acute (70 degrees) in men, but obtuse (90–100 degrees) in women. 

Accordingly, the angle is called subpubic angle in men and pubic arch in women. 

Additionally, the bones forming the angle/arch are more concave in females but straight in males.

The distance between the ischia bones is small in males, making the outlet narrow, but large in females, who have a relatively large outlet. 

The ischial spines and tuberosities are heavier and project farther into the pelvic cavity in males. 

The greater sciatic notch is wider in females.

The iliac crests are higher and more pronounced in males, making the male false pelvis deeper and more narrow than in females.

The male sacrum is long, narrow, more straight, and has a pronounced sacral promontory. 

The female sacrum is shorter, wider, more curved posteriorly, and has a less pronounced promontory.

The acetabula are wider apart in females than in males. 

In males, the acetabulum faces more laterally, while it faces more anteriorly in females. 

Consequently, when males walk the leg can move forwards and backwards in a single plane. 

In females, the leg must swing forward and inward, from where the pivoting head of the femur moves the leg back in another plane. 

This change in the angle of the femoral head gives the female gait its characteristic (i.e. swinging of hips).


== Development ==

Each side of the pelvis is formed as cartilage, which ossifies as three main bones which stay separate through childhood: ilium, ischium, pubis. 

At birth the whole of the hip joint (the acetabulum area and the top of the femur) is still made of cartilage (but there may be a small piece of bone in the great trochanter of the femur); this makes it difficult to detect congenital hip dislocation by X-raying.

"In terms of comparative anatomy the human scapula represents two bones that have become fused together; the (dorsal) scapula proper and the (ventral) coracoid. 

The epiphyseal line across the glenoid cavity is the line of fusion. 

They are the counterparts of the ilium and ischium of the pelvic girdle."

There is preliminary evidence that the pelvis continues to widen over the course of a lifetime.


== Functions ==

The skeleton of the pelvis is a basin-shaped ring of bones connecting the vertebral column to the femora.

Its primary functions are to bear the weight of the upper body when sitting and standing, transferring that weight from the axial skeleton to the lower appendicular skeleton when standing and walking, and providing attachments for and withstanding the forces of the powerful muscles of locomotion and posture. 

Compared to the shoulder girdle, the pelvic girdle is thus strong and rigid.Its secondary functions are to contain and protect the pelvic and abdominopelvic viscera (inferior parts of the urinary tracts, internal reproductive organs), providing attachment for external reproductive organs and associated muscles and membranes.


=== As a mechanical structure ===


The pelvic girdle consists of the two hip bones. 

The hip bones are connected to each other anteriorly at the pubic symphysis, and posteriorly to the sacrum at the sacroiliac joints to form the pelvic ring. 

The ring is very stable and allows very little mobility, a prerequisite for transmitting loads from the trunk to the lower limbs.

As a mechanical structure the pelvis may be thought of as four roughly triangular and twisted rings. 

Each superior ring is formed by the iliac bone; the anterior side stretches from the acetabulum up to the anterior superior iliac spine; the posterior side reaches from the top of the acetabulum to the sacroiliac joint; and the third side is formed by the palpable iliac crest. 

The lower ring, formed by the rami of the pubic and ischial bones, supports the acetabulum and is twisted 80–90 degrees in relation to the superior ring.

An alternative approach is to consider the pelvis part of an integrated mechanical system based on the tensegrity icosahedron as an infinite element. 

Such a system is able to withstand omnidirectional forces—ranging from weight-bearing to childbearing—and, as a low energy requiring system, is favoured by natural selection.

The pelvic inclination angle is the single most important element of the human body posture and is adjusted at the hips. 

It is also one of the rare things that can be measured at the assessment of the posture. 

A simple method of measurement was described by the British orthopedist Philip Willes and is performed by using an inclinometer.


=== As an anchor for muscles ===

The lumbosacral joint, between the sacrum and the last lumbar vertebra, has, like all vertebral joints, an intervertebral disc, anterior and posterior ligaments, ligamenta flava, interspinous and supraspinous ligaments, and synovial joints between the articular processes of the two bones. 

In addition to these ligaments the joint is strengthened by the iliolumbar and lateral lumbosacral ligaments. 

The iliolumbar ligament passes between the tip of the transverse process of the fifth lumbar vertebra and the posterior part of the iliac crest. 

The lateral lumbosacral ligament, partly continuous with the iliolumbar ligament, passes down from the lower border of the transverse process of the fifth vertebra to the ala of the sacrum. 

The movements possible in the lumbosacral joint are flexion and extension, a small amount of lateral flexion (from 7 degrees in childhood to 1 degree in adults), but no axial rotation. 

Between ages 2–13 the joint is responsible for as much as 75% (about 18 degrees) of flexion and extension in the lumbar spine. 

From age 35 the ligaments considerably limit the range of motions.

The three extracapsular ligaments of the hip joint—the iliofemoral, ischiofemoral, and pubofemoral ligaments—form a twisting mechanism encircling the neck of the femur. 

When sitting, with the hip joint flexed, these ligaments become lax permitting a high degree of mobility in the joint. 

When standing, with the hip joint extended, the ligaments get twisted around the femoral neck, pushing the head of the femur firmly into the Acetabulum, thus stabilizing the joint.

 The zona orbicularis assists in maintaining the contact in the joint by acting like a buttonhole on the femoral head. 

The intracapsular ligament, the ligamentum teres, transmits blood vessels that nourish the femoral head.


==== Junctions ====

The two hip bones are joined anteriorly at the pubic symphysis by a fibrous cartilage covered by a hyaline cartilage, the interpubic disk, within which a non-synovial cavity might be present. 

Two ligaments, the superior and inferior pubic ligaments, reinforce the symphysis.

Both sacroiliac joints, formed between the auricular surfaces of the sacrum and the two hip bones. are amphiarthroses, almost immobile joints enclosed by very taut joint capsules. 

This capsule is strengthened by the ventral, interosseous, and dorsal sacroiliac ligaments.

 The most important accessory ligaments of the sacroiliac joint are the sacrospinous and sacrotuberous ligaments which stabilize the hip bone on the sacrum and prevent the promonotory from tilting forward. 

Additionally, these two ligaments transform the greater and lesser sciatic notches into the greater and lesser foramina, a pair of important pelvic openings.

 The iliolumbar ligament is a strong ligament which connects the tip of the transverse process of the fifth lumbar vertebra to the posterior part of the inner lip of the iliac crest. 

It can be thought of as the lower border of the thoracolumbar fascia and is occasionally accompanied by a smaller ligamentous band passing between the fourth lumbar vertebra and the iliac crest. 

The lateral lumbosacral ligament is partly continuous with the iliolumbar ligament. 

It passes between the transverse process of the fifth vertebra to the ala of the sacrum where it intermingle with the anterior sacroiliac ligament.

The joint between the sacrum and the coccyx, the sacrococcygeal symphysis, is strengthened by a series of ligaments. 

The anterior sacrococcygeal ligament is an extension of the anterior longitudinal ligament (ALL) that run down the anterior side of the vertebral bodies. 

Its irregular fibers blend with the periosteum. 

The posterior sacrococcygeal ligament has a deep and a superficial part, the former is a flat band corresponding to the posterior longitudinal ligament (PLL) and the latter corresponds to the ligamenta flava. 

Several other ligaments complete the foramen of the last sacral nerve.


==== Shoulder and intrinsic back ====

The inferior parts of latissimus dorsi, one of the muscles of the upper limb, arises from the posterior third of the iliac crest. 

Its action on the shoulder joint are internal rotation, adduction, and retroversion. 

It also contributes to respiration (i.e. coughing). 

When the arm is adducted, latissimus dorsi can pull it backward and medially until the back of the hand covers the buttocks.

In a longitudinal osteofibrous canal on either side of the spine there is a group of muscles called the erector spinae which is subdivided into a lateral superficial and a medial deep tract. 

In the lateral tract, the iliocostalis lumborum and longissimus thoracis originates on the back of the sacrum and the posterior part of the iliac crest. 

Contracting these muscles bilaterally extends the spine and unilaterally contraction bends the spine to the same side. 

The medial tract has a "straight" (interspinales, intertransversarii, and spinalis) and an "oblique" (multifidus and semispinalis) component, both of which stretch between vertebral processes; the former acts similar to the muscles of the lateral tract, while the latter function unilaterally as spine extensors and bilaterally as spine rotators. 

In the medial tract, the multifidi originates on the sacrum.


==== Abdomen ====

The muscles of the abdominal wall are subdivided into a superficial and a deep group.
The superficial group is subdivided into a lateral and a medial group. 

In the medial superficial group, on both sides of the centre of the abdominal wall (the linea alba), the rectus abdominis stretches from the cartilages of ribs V-VII and the sternum down to the pubic crest. 

At the lower end of the rectus abdominis, the pyramidalis tenses the linea alba. 

The lateral superficial muscles, the transversus and external and internal oblique muscles, originate on the rib cage and on the pelvis (iliac crest and inguinal ligament) and are attached to the anterior and posterior layers of the sheath of the rectus.

Flexing the trunk (bending forward) is essentially a movement of the rectus muscles, while lateral flexion (bending sideways) is achieved by contracting the obliques together with the quadratus lumborum and intrinsic back muscles. 

Lateral rotation (rotating either the trunk or the pelvis sideways) is achieved by contracting the internal oblique on one side and the external oblique on the other. 

The transversus' main function is to produce abdominal pressure in order to constrict the abdominal cavity and pull the diaphragm upward.
There are two muscles in the deep or posterior group. 

Quadratus lumborum arises from the posterior part of the iliac crest and extends to the rib XII and lumbar vertebrae I–IV. 

It unilaterally bends the trunk to the side and bilaterally pulls the 12th rib down and assists in expiration. 

The iliopsoas consists of psoas major (and occasionally psoas minor) and iliacus, muscles with separate origins but a common insertion on the lesser trochanter of the femur. 

Of these, only iliacus is attached to the pelvis (the iliac fossa). 

However, psoas passes through the pelvis and because it acts on two joints, it is topographically classified as a posterior abdominal muscle but functionally as a hip muscle. 

Iliopsoas flexes and externally rotates the hip joints, while unilateral contraction bends the trunk laterally and bilateral contraction raises the trunk from the supine position.


==== Hip and thigh ====

The muscles of the hip are divided into a dorsal and a ventral group.
The dorsal hip muscles are either inserted into the region of the lesser trochanter (anterior or inner group) or the greater trochanter (posterior or outer group). 

Anteriorly, the psoas major (and occasionally psoas minor) originates along the spine between the rib cage and pelvis. 

The iliacus originates on the iliac fossa to join psoas at the iliopubic eminence to form the iliopsoas which is inserted into the lesser trochanter. 

The iliopsoas is the most powerful hip flexor.The posterior group includes the gluteus maximus, gluteus medius, and gluteus minimus. 

Maximus has a wide origin stretching from the posterior part of the iliac crest and along the sacrum and coccyx, and has two separate insertions: 
    a proximal which radiates into the iliotibial tract 
    and a distal which inserts into the gluteal tuberosity on the posterior side of the femoral shaft. 

It is primarily an extensor and lateral rotator of the hip joint, but, because of its bipartite insertion, it can both adduct and abduct the hip. 

Medius and minimus arise on the external surface of the ilium and are both inserted into the greater trochanter. 

Their anterior fibers are medial rotators and flexors while the posterior fibers are lateral rotators and extensors. 

The piriformis has its origin on the ventral side of the sacrum and is inserted on the greater trochanter. 

It abducts and laterally rotates the hip in the upright posture and assists in extension of the thigh.

The tensor fasciae latae arises on the anterior superior iliac spine and inserts into the iliotibial tract. 

It presses the head of the femur into the acetabulum and flexes, medially rotates, and abducts the hip.

The ventral hip muscles are important in the control of the body's balance. 

The internal and external obturator muscles together with the quadratus femoris are lateral rotators of the hip. 

Together they are stronger than the medial rotators and therefore the feet point outward in the normal position to achieve a better support. 

The obturators have their origins on either sides of the obturator foramen and are inserted into the trochanteric fossa on the femur. 

Quadratus arises on the ischial tuberosity and is inserted into the intertrochanteric crest. 

The superior and inferior gemelli, arising from the ischial spine and ischial tuberosity respectively, can be thought of as marginal heads of the obturator internus, and their main function is to assist this muscle.

The muscles of the thigh can be subdivided into adductors (medial group), extensors (anterior group), and flexors (posterior group). 

The extensors and flexors act on the knee joint, while the adductors mainly act on the hip joint.

The thigh adductors have their origins on the inferior ramus of the pubic bone and are, with the exception of gracilis, inserted along the femoral shaft. 

Together with sartorius and semitendinosus, gracilis reaches beyond the knee to their common insertion on the tibia.The anterior thigh muscles form the quadriceps which is inserted on the patella with a common tendon. 

Three of the four muscles have their origins on the femur, while rectus femoris arises from the anterior inferior iliac spine and is thus the only of the four acting on two joints.

The posterior thigh muscles have their origins on the inferior ischial ramus, with the exception of the short head of the biceps femoris. 

The semitendinosus and semimembranosus are inserted on the tibia on the medial side of the knee, while biceps femoris is inserted on the fibula, on the knee's lateral side.


=== In pregnancy and childbirth ===

In later stages of pregnancy the fetus's head aligns inside the pelvis. 

Also joints of bones soften due to the effect of pregnancy hormones. 

These factors may cause pelvic joint pain (symphysis pubis dysfunction or SPD). 

As the end of pregnancy approaches, the ligaments of the sacroiliac joint loosen, letting the pelvis outlet widen somewhat; this is easily noticeable in the cow.

During childbirth (unless by Cesarean section) the fetus passes through the maternal pelvic opening.


== Clinical significance ==

Hip fractures often affect the elderly and occur more often in females, and this is frequently due to osteoporosis. 

There are also different types of pelvic fracture often resulting from traffic accidents.

Pelvic pain generally, can affect anybody and has a variety of causes; endometriosis in women, bowel adhesions, irritable bowel syndrome, and interstitial cystitis.

There are many anatomical variations of the pelvis. 

In the female the pelvis can be of a much larger size than normal, known as a giant pelvis or pelvis justo major, or it can be much smaller, known as a reduced pelvis or pelvis justo minor. 

Other variations include an android pelvis the normal shape of the male pelvis, in women this shape can prove problematic in childbirth.


== History ==



=== Caldwell–Moloy classification ===

Throughout the 20th century pelvimetric measurements were made on pregnant women to determine whether a natural birth would be possible, a practice today limited to cases where a specific problem is suspected or following a caesarean delivery. 

William Edgar Caldwell and Howard Carmen Moloy studied collections of skeletal pelves and thousands of stereoscopic radiograms and finally recognized three types of female pelves plus the masculine type. 

In 1933 and 1934 they published their typology, including the Greek names since then frequently quoted in various handbooks: 
    Gynaecoid (gyne, woman), anthropoid (anthropos, human being), platypelloid (platys, flat), and android (aner, man).

The gynaecoid pelvis is the so-called normal female pelvis. 

Its inlet is either slightly oval, with a greater transverse diameter, or round. 

The interior walls are straight, the subpubic arch wide, the sacrum shows an average to backward inclination, and the greater sciatic notch is well rounded. 

Because this type is spacious and well proportioned there is little or no difficulty in the birth process. 

Caldwell and his co-workers found gynaecoid pelves in about 50 per cent of specimens.

The platypelloid pelvis has a transversally wide, flattened shape, is wide anteriorly, greater sciatic notches of male type, and has a short sacrum that curves inwards reducing the diameters of the lower pelvis. 

This is similar to the rachitic pelvis where the softened bones widen laterally because of the weight from the upper body resulting in a reduced anteroposterior diameter. 

Giving birth with this type of pelvis is associated with problems, such as transverse arrest. 

Less than 3 per cent of women have this pelvis type.

The android pelvis is a female pelvis with masculine features, including a wedge or heart shaped inlet caused by a prominent sacrum and a triangular anterior segment. 

The reduced pelvis outlet often causes problems during child birth. 

In 1939 Caldwell found this type in one third of white women and in one sixth of non-white women.

The anthropoid pelvis is characterized by an oval shape with a greater anteroposterior diameter. 

It has straight walls, a small subpubic arch, and large sacrosciatic notches. 

The sciatic spines are placed widely apart and the sacrum is usually straight resulting in deep non-obstructed pelvis. 

Caldwell found this type in one quarter of white women and almost half of non-white women.However, Caldwell and Moloy then complicated this simple fourfold scheme by dividing the pelvic inlet into posterior and anterior segments. 

They named a pelvis according to the anterior segment and affixed another type according to the character of the posterior segment (i.e. anthropoid-android) and ended up with no less than 14 morphologies. 

Notwithstanding the popularity of this simple classification, the pelvis is much more complicated than this as the pelvis can have different dimensions at various levels of the birth canal.

Caldwell and Moloy also classified the physique of women according to their types of pelves: the gynaecoid type has small shoulders, a small waist and wide hips; the android type looks square-shaped from behind; and the anthropoid type has wide shoulders and narrow hips. 

Lastly, in their article they described all non-gynaecoid or "mixed" types of pelves as "abnormal", a word which has stuck in the medical world even though at least 50 per cent of women have these "abnormal" pelves.

The classification of Caldwell and Moloy was influenced by earlier classifications attempting to define the ideal female pelvis, treating any deviations from this ideal as dysfunctions and the cause of obstructed labour. 

In the 19th century anthropologists and others saw an evolutionary scheme in these pelvic typologies, a scheme since then refuted by archaeology. 

Since the 1950s malnutrition is thought to be one of the chief factors affecting pelvic shape in the Third World even though there are at least some genetic component to variation in pelvic morphology.

Nowadays obstetric suitability of the female pelvis is assessed by ultrasound. 

The dimensions of the head of the fetus and of the birth canal are accurately measured and compared, and the feasibility of labor can be predicted.


== Other animals ==


The pelvic girdle was present in early vertebrates, and can be tracked back to the paired fins of fish that were some of the earliest chordates.

The shape of the pelvis, most notably the orientation of the iliac crests and shape and depth of the acetabula, reflects the style of locomotion and body mass of an animal. 

In bipedal mammals, the iliac crests are parallel to the vertically oriented sacroiliac joints, where in quadrupedal mammals they are parallel to the horizontally oriented sacroiliac joints. 

In heavy mammals, especially in quadrupeds, the pelvis tend to be more vertically oriented because this allows the pelvis to support greater weight without dislocating the sacroiliac joints or adding torsion to the vertebral column.

In ambulatory mammals the acetabula are shallow and open to allow a wider range of hip movements, including significant abduction, than in cursorial mammals. 

The lengths of the ilium and ischium and their angles relative to the acetabulum are functionally important as they determine the moment arms for the hip extensor muscles that provide momentum during locomotion.

In addition to this, the relatively wide shape (front to back) of the pelvis provides greater leverage for the gluteus medius and minimus. 

These muscles are responsible for hip abduction which plays an integral role in upright balance.


=== Primates ===

In primates, the pelvis consists of four parts - the left and the right hip bones which meet in the mid-line ventrally and are fixed to the sacrum dorsally and the coccyx. 

Each hip bone consists of three components, the ilium, the ischium, and the pubis, and at the time of sexual maturity these bones become fused together, though there is never any movement between them. 

In humans, the ventral joint of the pubic bones is closed.

Larger apes, such as Pongo (orangutans), Gorillas (gorillas), Australopithecus afarensis, and Pan troglodytes (chimpanzees), have longer three-pelvic planes with a maximum diameter in the sagittal plane.


=== Evolution ===

The present-day morphology of the pelvis is inherited from the pelvis of our quadrupedal ancestors. 

The most striking feature of evolution of the pelvis in primates is the widening and the shortening of the blade called the ilium. 

Because of the stresses involved in bipedal locomotion, the muscles of the thigh move the thigh forward and backward, providing the power for bi-pedal and quadrupedal locomotion.

The drying of the environment of East Africa in the period since the creation of the Red Sea and the African Rift Valley saw open woodlands replace the previous closed canopy forest. 

The apes in this environment were compelled to travel from one clump of trees to another across open country. 

This led to a number of complementary changes to the human pelvis. 

It is suggested that bipedalism was the result.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pelvis
;;;ES;;;



PELVIS


La pelvis (pelves o pelvises en plural) es la parte inferior del tronco, entre el abdomen y los muslos (a veces también llamada región pélvica), junto con su esqueleto incrustado (a veces también llamado pelvis ósea o esqueleto pélvico).

La región pélvica del tronco incluye la pelvis ósea, la cavidad pélvica (el espacio encerrado por la pelvis ósea), el piso pélvico, debajo de la cavidad pélvica, y el perineo, debajo del piso pélvico.

El esqueleto pélvico está formado en la zona de la espalda por el sacro y el cóccix y por delante y hacia los lados derecho e izquierdo por un par de huesos de la cadera.

Los dos huesos de la cadera conectan la columna con las extremidades inferiores.

Están unidos al sacro en la parte posterior, conectados entre sí en la parte anterior y unidos con los dos fémures en las articulaciones de la cadera.

El espacio encerrado por la pelvis ósea, llamado cavidad pélvica, es la sección del cuerpo debajo del abdomen y consiste principalmente en los órganos reproductivos (órganos sexuales) y el recto, mientras que el piso pélvico en la base de la cavidad ayuda a sostener los órganos del abdomen.

En los mamíferos, la pelvis ósea tiene un espacio en el medio, significativamente más grande en las hembras que en los machos.

Sus crías pasan por este hueco cuando nacen.


== Estructura ==

La región pélvica del tronco es la parte inferior del tronco, entre el abdomen y los muslos.

Incluye varias estructuras: la pelvis ósea, la cavidad pélvica, el piso pélvico y el perineo.

La pelvis ósea (esqueleto pélvico) es la parte del esqueleto incrustada en la región pélvica del tronco.

Se subdivide en cintura pélvica y columna pélvica.

La cintura pélvica está compuesta por los huesos apendiculares de la cadera (ilion, isquion y pubis) orientados en un anillo y conecta la región pélvica de la columna con las extremidades inferiores.

La columna pélvica está formada por el sacro y el cóccix.
la cavidad pélvica, típicamente definida como una pequeña parte del espacio encerrado por la pelvis ósea, delimitada por el borde pélvico arriba y el piso pélvico abajo; alternativamente, la cavidad pélvica a veces también se define como todo el espacio encerrado por el esqueleto pélvico, subdividido en:
la pelvis mayor (o falsa), por encima del borde pélvico
la pelvis menor (o verdadera), debajo del borde pélvico
el piso pélvico (o diafragma pélvico), debajo de la cavidad pélvica
el perineo, debajo del piso pélvico


=== Hueso pélvico ===


El esqueleto pélvico está formado posteriormente (en la zona de la espalda), por el sacro y el cóccix y lateral y anteriormente (hacia delante y hacia los lados), por un par de huesos de la cadera.

Cada hueso de la cadera consta de 3 secciones, ilion, isquion y pubis.

Durante la infancia, estas secciones son huesos separados, unidos por el cartílago trirradiado.

Durante la pubertad, se fusionan para formar un solo hueso.


=== Cavidad pélvica ===


La cavidad pélvica es una cavidad corporal limitada por los huesos de la pelvis y que contiene principalmente los órganos reproductores y el recto.

Se hace una distinción entre la pelvis menor o verdadera por debajo de la línea terminal y la pelvis mayor o falsa por encima de ella.

La entrada pélvica o abertura pélvica superior, que conduce a la pelvis menor, está bordeada por el promontorio, la línea arqueada del ilion, la eminencia iliopúbica, el pecten del pubis y la parte superior de la sínfisis púbica.

La salida pélvica o abertura pélvica inferior es la región entre el ángulo subpúbico o arco púbico, las tuberosidades isquiáticas y el cóccix.

Ligamentos: membrana obturatriz, ligamento inguinal (ligamento lacunar, arco iliopectíneo) Alternativamente, la pelvis se divide en tres planos: la entrada, el plano medio y la salida.


=== suelo pélvico ===


El suelo pélvico tiene dos funciones inherentemente conflictivas: una es cerrar las cavidades pélvica y abdominal y soportar la carga de los órganos viscerales; el otro es para controlar las aberturas del recto y los órganos urogenitales que perforan el suelo pélvico y lo debilitan.

Para lograr ambas tareas, el suelo pélvico se compone de varias láminas superpuestas de músculos y tejidos conectivos.

El diafragma pélvico está compuesto por el músculo elevador del ano y el músculo coccígeo.

Estos surgen entre la sínfisis y la espina isquiática y convergen en el cóccix y el ligamento anococcígeo que se extiende entre la punta del cóccix y el hiato anal.

Esto deja una hendidura para las aberturas anal y urogenital.

Debido a la anchura de la apertura genital, que es más ancha en las hembras, se requiere un segundo mecanismo de cierre.

El diafragma urogenital consiste principalmente en el perineal transverso profundo que surge de las ramas isquiática inferior y púbica y se extiende hasta el hiato urogenital.

El diafragma urogenital está reforzado posteriormente por el perineal transverso superficial.

Los esfínteres anal y uretral externos cierran el ano y la uretra.

El primero está rodeado por el bulboesponjoso que estrecha el introito vaginal en las mujeres y rodea el cuerpo esponjoso en los hombres.

Ischiocavernoso exprime la sangre en el cuerpo cavernoso del pene y el clítoris.


=== Variación ===


Los humanos modernos se caracterizan en gran medida por una locomoción bípeda y cerebros grandes.

Debido a que la pelvis es vital tanto para la locomoción como para el parto, la selección natural se ha enfrentado a dos demandas en conflicto:
un canal de parto amplio y eficiencia de locomoción, un conflicto denominado "dilema obstétrico".

La pelvis femenina, o pelvis ginecoide, ha evolucionado hasta su ancho máximo para el parto: una pelvis más ancha haría que las mujeres no pudieran caminar.

Por el contrario, las pelvis masculinas humanas no están limitadas por la necesidad de dar a luz y, por lo tanto, están más optimizadas para la locomoción bípeda.

Las principales diferencias entre la pelvis verdadera y falsa masculina y femenina incluyen:

La pelvis femenina es más grande y más ancha que la pelvis masculina, que es más alta, más estrecha y más compacta.

La entrada femenina es más grande y de forma ovalada, mientras que el promontorio sacro masculino se proyecta más (es decir, la entrada masculina tiene más forma de corazón).

Los lados de la pelvis masculina convergen desde la entrada hasta la salida, mientras que los lados de la pelvis femenina están más separados.

El ángulo entre las ramas púbicas inferiores es agudo (70 grados) en los hombres, pero obtuso (90 a 100 grados) en las mujeres.

En consecuencia, el ángulo se denomina ángulo subpúbico en hombres y arco púbico en mujeres.

Además, los huesos que forman el ángulo/arco son más cóncavos en las mujeres pero rectos en los hombres.

La distancia entre los isquiones es pequeña en los machos, lo que hace que la salida sea estrecha, pero grande en las hembras, que tienen una salida relativamente grande.

Las espinas isquiáticas y las tuberosidades son más pesadas y se proyectan más adentro de la cavidad pélvica en los machos.

La escotadura ciática mayor es más ancha en las mujeres.

Las crestas ilíacas son más altas y pronunciadas en los hombres, lo que hace que la pelvis masculina sea más profunda y estrecha que en las mujeres.

El sacro masculino es largo, estrecho, más recto y tiene un promontorio sacro pronunciado.

El sacro femenino es más corto, más ancho, más curvado hacia atrás y tiene un promontorio menos pronunciado.

Los acetábulos están más separados en las mujeres que en los hombres.

En los machos, el acetábulo mira más lateralmente, mientras que en las hembras lo hace más anteriormente.

En consecuencia, cuando los machos caminan, la pierna puede moverse hacia adelante y hacia atrás en un solo plano.

En las mujeres, la pierna debe balancearse hacia adelante y hacia adentro, desde donde la cabeza pivotante del fémur mueve la pierna hacia atrás en otro plano.

Este cambio en el ángulo de la cabeza femoral da a la marcha femenina su característica (es decir, balanceo de caderas).


== Desarrollo ==

Cada lado de la pelvis se forma como cartílago, que se osifica en tres huesos principales que permanecen separados durante la infancia: ilion, isquion y pubis.

Al nacer, toda la articulación de la cadera (el área del acetábulo y la parte superior del fémur) todavía está hecha de cartílago (pero puede haber un pequeño trozo de hueso en el gran trocánter del fémur); esto dificulta la detección de una luxación congénita de cadera mediante radiografías.

"En términos de anatomía comparativa, la escápula humana representa dos huesos que se han fusionado; la escápula (dorsal) propiamente dicha y la coracoides (ventral).

La línea epifisaria que atraviesa la cavidad glenoidea es la línea de fusión.

Son las contrapartes del ilion y el isquion de la cintura pélvica".

Existe evidencia preliminar de que la pelvis continúa ensanchándose a lo largo de la vida.


== Funciones ==

El esqueleto de la pelvis es un anillo de huesos en forma de cuenco que conecta la columna vertebral con los fémures.

Sus funciones principales son soportar el peso de la parte superior del cuerpo cuando está sentado y de pie, transfiriendo ese peso del esqueleto axial al esqueleto apendicular inferior cuando está de pie y caminando, y proporciona accesorios para resistir las fuerzas de los poderosos músculos de la locomoción y la postura. .

En comparación con la cintura escapular, la cintura pélvica es, por lo tanto, fuerte y rígida. Sus funciones secundarias son contener y proteger las vísceras pélvicas y abdominopélvicas (partes inferiores de las vías urinarias, órganos reproductivos internos), proporcionando conexión para los órganos reproductivos externos y los músculos asociados. y membranas.


=== Como estructura mecánica ===


La cintura pélvica está formada por los dos huesos de la cadera.

Los huesos de la cadera están conectados entre sí anteriormente en la sínfisis púbica y posteriormente al sacro en las articulaciones sacroilíacas para formar el anillo pélvico.

El anillo es muy estable y permite muy poca movilidad, requisito indispensable para transmitir las cargas del tronco a los miembros inferiores.

Como estructura mecánica, la pelvis puede considerarse como cuatro anillos torcidos y triangulares.

Cada anillo superior está formado por el hueso ilíaco; el lado anterior se extiende desde el acetábulo hasta la espina ilíaca anterosuperior; el lado posterior se extiende desde la parte superior del acetábulo hasta la articulación sacroilíaca; y el tercer lado está formado por la cresta ilíaca palpable.

El anillo inferior, formado por las ramas de los huesos púbico e isquiático, sostiene el acetábulo y está torcido 80 a 90 grados en relación con el anillo superior.

Un enfoque alternativo es considerar la pelvis como parte de un sistema mecánico integrado basado en el icosaedro de tensegridad como un elemento infinito.

Tal sistema es capaz de soportar fuerzas omnidireccionales, que van desde soportar peso hasta tener hijos, y, como un sistema que requiere poca energía, se ve favorecido por la selección natural.

El ángulo de inclinación pélvica es el elemento más importante de la postura del cuerpo humano y se ajusta en las caderas.

También es una de las cosas raras que se pueden medir en la evaluación de la postura.

El ortopedista británico Philip Willes describió un método simple de medición y se realiza mediante el uso de un inclinómetro.


=== Como ancla para los músculos ===

La articulación lumbosacra, entre el sacro y la última vértebra lumbar, tiene, como todas las articulaciones vertebrales, un disco intervertebral, ligamentos anterior y posterior, ligamentos amarillos, ligamentos interespinosos y supraespinosos, y articulaciones sinoviales entre las apófisis articulares de los dos huesos.

Además de estos ligamentos, la articulación se fortalece con los ligamentos iliolumbar y lumbosacro lateral.

El ligamento iliolumbar pasa entre la punta del proceso transverso de la quinta vértebra lumbar y la parte posterior de la cresta ilíaca.

El ligamento lumbosacro lateral, parcialmente continuo con el ligamento iliolumbar, desciende desde el borde inferior de la apófisis transversa de la quinta vértebra hasta el ala del sacro.

Los movimientos posibles en la articulación lumbosacra son flexión y extensión, una pequeña cantidad de flexión lateral (de 7 grados en la niñez a 1 grado en adultos), pero sin rotación axial.

Entre los 2 y los 13 años, la articulación es responsable de hasta el 75 % (alrededor de 18 grados) de la flexión y extensión de la columna lumbar.

A partir de los 35 años los ligamentos limitan considerablemente el rango de movimientos.

Los tres ligamentos extracapsulares de la articulación de la cadera, los ligamentos iliofemoral, isquiofemoral y pubofemoral, forman un mecanismo de torsión que rodea el cuello del fémur.

Al sentarse, con la articulación de la cadera flexionada, estos ligamentos se relajan permitiendo un alto grado de movilidad en la articulación.

Al estar de pie, con la articulación de la cadera extendida, los ligamentos se tuercen alrededor del cuello femoral, empujando la cabeza del fémur firmemente hacia el acetábulo, estabilizando así la articulación.

La zona orbicular ayuda a mantener el contacto en la articulación actuando como un ojal en la cabeza femoral.

El ligamento intracapsular, el ligamento redondo, transmite vasos sanguíneos que nutren la cabeza femoral.


==== Uniones ====

Los dos huesos de la cadera están unidos anteriormente en la sínfisis púbica por un cartílago fibroso cubierto por un cartílago hialino, el disco interpúbico, dentro del cual puede haber una cavidad no sinovial.

Dos ligamentos, los ligamentos púbicos superior e inferior, refuerzan la sínfisis.

Ambas articulaciones sacroilíacas, formadas entre las superficies auriculares del sacro y los dos huesos de la cadera. Son anfiartrosis, articulaciones casi inmóviles encerradas por cápsulas articulares muy tensas.

Esta cápsula está reforzada por los ligamentos sacroilíacos ventral, interóseo y dorsal.

Los ligamentos accesorios más importantes de la articulación sacroilíaca son los ligamentos sacroespinoso y sacrotuberoso que estabilizan el hueso de la cadera sobre el sacro y evitan que el promontorio se incline hacia adelante.

Además, estos dos ligamentos transforman las escotaduras ciáticas mayor y menor en los agujeros mayor y menor, un par de importantes aberturas pélvicas.

El ligamento iliolumbar es un ligamento fuerte que conecta la punta del proceso transverso de la quinta vértebra lumbar con la parte posterior del labio interno de la cresta ilíaca.

Puede considerarse como el borde inferior de la fascia toracolumbar y en ocasiones se acompaña de una banda ligamentosa más pequeña que pasa entre la cuarta vértebra lumbar y la cresta ilíaca.

El ligamento lumbosacro lateral se continúa parcialmente con el ligamento iliolumbar.

Pasa entre la apófisis transversa de la quinta vértebra hasta el ala del sacro donde se entremezcla con el ligamento sacroilíaco anterior.

La articulación entre el sacro y el cóccix, la sínfisis sacrococcígea, está reforzada por una serie de ligamentos.

El ligamento sacrococcígeo anterior es una extensión del ligamento longitudinal anterior (LLA) que corre por el lado anterior de los cuerpos vertebrales.

Sus fibras irregulares se mezclan con el periostio.

El ligamento sacrococcígeo posterior tiene una parte profunda y otra superficial, la primera es una banda plana que corresponde al ligamento longitudinal posterior (PLL) y la segunda corresponde a los ligamentos amarillos.

Varios otros ligamentos completan el agujero del último nervio sacro.


==== Hombro y espalda intrínseca ====

Las partes inferiores del dorsal ancho, uno de los músculos del miembro superior, surge del tercio posterior de la cresta ilíaca.

Sus acciones sobre la articulación del hombro son la rotación interna, la aducción y la retroversión.

También contribuye a la respiración (es decir, tos).

Cuando se aduce el brazo, el dorsal ancho puede tirar de él hacia atrás y medialmente hasta que el dorso de la mano cubra las nalgas.

En un canal osteofibroso longitudinal a cada lado de la columna hay un grupo de músculos llamados erectores de la columna que se subdivide en un tracto lateral superficial y uno medial profundo.

En el tracto lateral, el iliocostal lumbar y el longissimus thoracis se originan en la parte posterior del sacro y la parte posterior de la cresta ilíaca.

La contracción de estos músculos extiende la columna bilateralmente y la contracción unilateral dobla la columna hacia el mismo lado.

El tracto medial tiene un componente "recto" (interespinales, intertransversarios y espinales) y un componente "oblicuo" (multifidus y semispinalis), los cuales se extienden entre los procesos vertebrales; los primeros actúan de manera similar a los músculos del tracto lateral, mientras que los segundos funcionan unilateralmente como extensores de la columna y bilateralmente como rotadores de la columna.

En el tracto medial, el multífido se origina en el sacro.


==== Abdomen ====

Los músculos de la pared abdominal se subdividen en un grupo superficial y otro profundo.
El grupo superficial se subdivide en un grupo lateral y uno medial.

En el grupo superficial medial, a ambos lados del centro de la pared abdominal (la línea alba), el recto abdominal se extiende desde los cartílagos de las costillas V-VII y el esternón hasta la cresta púbica.

En el extremo inferior del recto abdominal, el piramidal tensa la línea alba.

Los músculos laterales superficiales, el transverso y los músculos oblicuos externo e interno, se originan en la caja torácica y en la pelvis (cresta ilíaca y ligamento inguinal) y se unen a las capas anterior y posterior de la vaina del recto.

La flexión del tronco (doblarse hacia adelante) es esencialmente un movimiento de los músculos rectos, mientras que la flexión lateral (doblarse hacia los lados) se logra contrayendo los oblicuos junto con el cuadrado lumbar y los músculos intrínsecos de la espalda.

La rotación lateral (girar el tronco o la pelvis hacia los lados) se logra contrayendo el oblicuo interno de un lado y el oblicuo externo del otro.

La función principal del transverso es producir presión abdominal para contraer la cavidad abdominal y tirar del diafragma hacia arriba.
Hay dos músculos en el grupo profundo o posterior.

El cuadrado lumbar surge de la parte posterior de la cresta ilíaca y se extiende hasta la costilla XII y las vértebras lumbares I-IV.

Dobla unilateralmente el tronco hacia un lado y tira hacia abajo de la 12ª costilla bilateralmente y ayuda en la espiración.

El iliopsoas consiste en el psoas mayor (y ocasionalmente el psoas menor) y el ilíaco, músculos con orígenes separados pero una inserción común en el trocánter menor del fémur.

De estos, solo el ilíaco está unido a la pelvis (la fosa ilíaca).

Sin embargo, el psoas pasa a través de la pelvis y debido a que actúa sobre dos articulaciones, topográficamente se clasifica como un músculo abdominal posterior pero funcionalmente como un músculo de la cadera.

El iliopsoas flexiona y rota externamente las articulaciones de la cadera, mientras que la contracción unilateral dobla el tronco lateralmente y la contracción bilateral eleva el tronco desde la posición supina.


==== Cadera y muslo ====

Los músculos de la cadera se dividen en un grupo dorsal y ventral.
Los músculos dorsales de la cadera se insertan en la región del trocánter menor (grupo anterior o interno) o en el trocánter mayor (grupo posterior o externo).

Anteriormente, el psoas mayor (y ocasionalmente el psoas menor) se origina a lo largo de la columna entre la caja torácica y la pelvis.

El ilíaco se origina en la fosa ilíaca para unirse al psoas en la eminencia iliopúbica para formar el psoas ilíaco que se inserta en el trocánter menor.

El iliopsoas es el flexor de la cadera más poderoso. El grupo posterior incluye el glúteo mayor, el glúteo medio y el glúteo menor.

Maximus tiene un origen amplio que se extiende desde la parte posterior de la cresta ilíaca y a lo largo del sacro y el cóccix, y tiene dos inserciones separadas:
una proximal que se irradia hacia el tracto iliotibial
y una distal que se inserta en la tuberosidad glútea en el lado posterior de la diáfisis femoral.

Es principalmente un extensor y rotador lateral de la articulación de la cadera, pero, debido a su inserción bipartita, puede aducir y abducir la cadera.

El medio y el menor surgen en la superficie externa del ilion y ambos se insertan en el trocánter mayor.

Sus fibras anteriores son rotadores y flexores mediales, mientras que las fibras posteriores son rotadores y extensores laterales.

El piriforme tiene su origen en el lado ventral del sacro y se inserta en el trocánter mayor.

Abduce y rota lateralmente la cadera en la postura erguida y ayuda en la extensión del muslo.

El tensor de la fascia lata surge en la espina ilíaca anterosuperior y se inserta en el tracto iliotibial.

Presiona la cabeza del fémur contra el acetábulo y flexiona, rota medialmente y abduce la cadera.

Los músculos ventrales de la cadera son importantes en el control del equilibrio del cuerpo.

Los músculos obturadores internos y externos junto con el cuadrado femoral son rotadores laterales de la cadera.

Juntos son más fuertes que los rotadores mediales y por lo tanto los pies apuntan hacia afuera en la posición normal para lograr un mejor apoyo.

Los obturadores tienen su origen a ambos lados del agujero obturador y se insertan en la fosa trocantérica del fémur.

Quadratus surge en la tuberosidad isquiática y se inserta en la cresta intertrocantérea.

Los gemelos superior e inferior, que surgen de la espina isquiática y la tuberosidad isquiática respectivamente, pueden considerarse cabezas marginales del obturador interno y su función principal es ayudar a este músculo.

Los músculos del muslo se pueden subdividir en aductores (grupo medial), extensores (grupo anterior) y flexores (grupo posterior).

Los extensores y flexores actúan sobre la articulación de la rodilla, mientras que los aductores actúan principalmente sobre la articulación de la cadera.

Los aductores del muslo tienen su origen en la rama inferior del hueso púbico y, con la excepción del grácil, se insertan a lo largo de la diáfisis femoral.

Junto con el sartorio y el semitendinoso, el grácil se extiende más allá de la rodilla hasta su inserción común en la tibia. Los músculos anteriores del muslo forman el cuádriceps que se inserta en la rótula con un tendón común.

Tres de los cuatro músculos tienen su origen en el fémur, mientras que el recto femoral surge de la espina ilíaca anteroinferior y, por lo tanto, es el único de los cuatro que actúa sobre dos articulaciones.

Los músculos posteriores del muslo tienen su origen en la rama isquiática inferior, con la excepción de la cabeza corta del bíceps femoral.

El semitendinoso y el semimembranoso se insertan en la tibia en el lado medial de la rodilla, mientras que el bíceps femoral se inserta en el peroné, en el lado lateral de la rodilla.


=== En el embarazo y el parto ===

En etapas posteriores del embarazo, la cabeza del feto se alinea dentro de la pelvis.

También las articulaciones de los huesos se ablandan debido al efecto de las hormonas del embarazo.

Estos factores pueden causar dolor en las articulaciones pélvicas (disfunción de la sínfisis del pubis o SPD).

A medida que se acerca el final del embarazo, los ligamentos de la articulación sacroilíaca se aflojan, lo que permite que la salida de la pelvis se ensanche un poco; esto es fácilmente perceptible en la vaca.

Durante el parto (a menos que sea por cesárea) el feto pasa a través de la abertura pélvica materna.


== Importancia clínica ==

Las fracturas de cadera a menudo afectan a los ancianos y ocurren con mayor frecuencia en mujeres, y esto se debe con frecuencia a la osteoporosis.

También existen diferentes tipos de fracturas pélvicas que suelen ser consecuencia de accidentes de tráfico.

El dolor pélvico en general, puede afectar a cualquier persona y tiene una variedad de causas; endometriosis en mujeres, adherencias intestinales, síndrome del intestino irritable y cistitis intersticial.

Hay muchas variaciones anatómicas de la pelvis.

En la mujer la pelvis puede ser de un tamaño mucho mayor de lo normal, conocida como pelvis gigante o pelvis justa mayor, o puede ser mucho más pequeña, conocida como pelvis reducida o pelvis justa menor.

Otras variaciones incluyen una pelvis androide, la forma normal de la pelvis masculina, en las mujeres esta forma puede resultar problemática en el parto.


== Historia ==



=== Clasificación Caldwell-Moloy ===

A lo largo del siglo XX se realizaban mediciones pelvimétricas a mujeres embarazadas para determinar si era posible un parto natural, práctica que hoy se limita a casos en los que se sospecha un problema específico o tras un parto por cesárea.

William Edgar Caldwell y Howard Carmen Moloy estudiaron colecciones de pelvis esqueléticas y miles de radiografías estereoscópicas y finalmente reconocieron tres tipos de pelvis femenina más el tipo masculino.

En 1933 y 1934 publicaron su tipología, incluidos los nombres griegos que desde entonces se citan con frecuencia en varios manuales:
Ginecoide (gyne, mujer), antropoide (anthropos, ser humano), platypelloid (platys, plano) y androide (aner, hombre).

La pelvis ginecoide es la llamada pelvis femenina normal.

Su boca es ligeramente ovalada, con un diámetro transversal mayor, o redonda.

Las paredes interiores son rectas, el arco subpúbico ancho, el sacro muestra una inclinación media hacia atrás y la escotadura ciática mayor es bien redondeada.

Debido a que este tipo es espacioso y bien proporcionado, hay poca o ninguna dificultad en el proceso de nacimiento.

Caldwell y sus colaboradores encontraron pelvis ginecoides en aproximadamente el 50 por ciento de las muestras.

La pelvis platipelloide tiene una forma transversalmente ancha, aplanada, es ancha anteriormente, muescas ciáticas mayores de tipo masculino, y tiene un sacro corto que se curva hacia adentro reduciendo los diámetros de la pelvis inferior.

Esto es similar a la pelvis raquítica donde los huesos ablandados se ensanchan lateralmente debido al peso de la parte superior del cuerpo, lo que da como resultado un diámetro anteroposterior reducido.

Dar a luz con este tipo de pelvis se asocia con problemas, como la detención transversal.

Menos del 3 por ciento de las mujeres tienen este tipo de pelvis.

La pelvis androide es una pelvis femenina con características masculinas, que incluye una entrada en forma de cuña o de corazón causada por un sacro prominente y un segmento anterior triangular.

La salida de la pelvis reducida a menudo causa problemas durante el parto.

En 1939 Caldwell encontró este tipo en un tercio de las mujeres blancas y en una sexta parte de las mujeres no blancas.

La pelvis antropoide se caracteriza por una forma ovalada con un diámetro anteroposterior mayor.

Tiene paredes rectas, un pequeño arco subpúbico y grandes muescas sacrosciáticas.

Las espinas ciáticas se colocan muy separadas y el sacro suele ser recto, lo que da como resultado una pelvis profunda sin obstrucciones.

Caldwell encontró este tipo en una cuarta parte de las mujeres blancas y casi la mitad de las mujeres no blancas. Sin embargo, Caldwell y Moloy luego complicaron este simple esquema cuádruple al dividir la entrada pélvica en segmentos anterior y posterior.

Nombraron una pelvis de acuerdo con el segmento anterior y agregaron otro tipo de acuerdo con el carácter del segmento posterior (es decir, antropoide-androide) y terminaron con nada menos que 14 morfologías.

A pesar de la popularidad de esta clasificación simple, la pelvis es mucho más complicada que esto, ya que la pelvis puede tener diferentes dimensiones en varios niveles del canal de parto.

Caldwell y Moloy también clasificaron el físico de las mujeres según sus tipos de pelvis: el tipo ginecoide tiene hombros pequeños, cintura pequeña y caderas anchas; el tipo de androide parece cuadrado desde atrás; y el tipo antropoide tiene hombros anchos y caderas estrechas.

Por último, en su artículo describieron todos los tipos de pelvis no ginecoides o "mixtas" como "anormales", una palabra que se ha quedado en el mundo médico a pesar de que al menos el 50 por ciento de las mujeres tienen estas pelvis "anormales".

La clasificación de Caldwell y Moloy estuvo influenciada por clasificaciones anteriores que intentaban definir la pelvis femenina ideal, tratando cualquier desviación de este ideal como disfunciones y la causa del parto obstruido.

En el siglo XIX, los antropólogos y otros vieron un esquema evolutivo en estas tipologías pélvicas, un esquema desde entonces refutado por la arqueología.

Desde la década de 1950, se cree que la desnutrición es uno de los principales factores que afectan la forma pélvica en el Tercer Mundo, aunque existe al menos algún componente genético en la variación de la morfología pélvica.

Hoy en día la idoneidad obstétrica de la pelvis femenina se evalúa mediante ecografía.

Las dimensiones de la cabeza del feto y del canal de parto se miden y comparan con precisión, y se puede predecir la viabilidad del trabajo de parto.


== Otros animales ==


La cintura pélvica estaba presente en los primeros vertebrados y se puede rastrear hasta las aletas emparejadas de los peces que fueron algunos de los primeros cordados.

La forma de la pelvis, sobre todo la orientación de las crestas ilíacas y la forma y profundidad de los acetábulos, refleja el estilo de locomoción y la masa corporal de un animal.

En los mamíferos bípedos, las crestas ilíacas son paralelas a las articulaciones sacroilíacas orientadas verticalmente, mientras que en los mamíferos cuadrúpedos son paralelas a las articulaciones sacroilíacas orientadas horizontalmente.

En los mamíferos pesados, especialmente en los cuadrúpedos, la pelvis tiende a estar más orientada verticalmente porque esto permite que la pelvis soporte un mayor peso sin dislocar las articulaciones sacroilíacas o agregar torsión a la columna vertebral.

En los mamíferos ambulatorios, el acetábulo es poco profundo y abierto para permitir una gama más amplia de movimientos de la cadera, incluida una abducción significativa, que en los mamíferos cursoriales.

Las longitudes del ilion y el isquion y sus ángulos en relación con el acetábulo son importantes desde el punto de vista funcional, ya que determinan los brazos de palanca de los músculos extensores de la cadera que proporcionan impulso durante la locomoción.

Además de esto, la forma relativamente ancha (del frente hacia atrás) de la pelvis proporciona una mayor palanca para el glúteo medio y el glúteo menor.

Estos músculos son responsables de la abducción de la cadera, que juega un papel integral en el equilibrio erguido.


=== Primates ===

En los primates, la pelvis consta de cuatro partes: los huesos de la cadera izquierdo y derecho que se unen en la línea media ventralmente y se fijan dorsalmente al sacro y al cóccix.

Cada hueso de la cadera consta de tres componentes, el ilion, el isquion y el pubis, y en el momento de la madurez sexual estos huesos se fusionan, aunque nunca hay movimiento entre ellos.

En los humanos, la articulación ventral de los huesos púbicos está cerrada.

Los simios más grandes, como Pongo (orangutanes), gorilas (gorilas), Australopithecus afarensis y Pan troglodytes (chimpancés), tienen tres planos pélvicos más largos con un diámetro máximo en el plano sagital.


=== Evolución ===

La morfología actual de la pelvis se hereda de la pelvis de nuestros antepasados ​​cuadrúpedos.

La característica más llamativa de la evolución de la pelvis en los primates es el ensanchamiento y el acortamiento de la lámina llamada ilion.

Debido a las tensiones involucradas en la locomoción bípeda, los músculos del muslo mueven el muslo hacia adelante y hacia atrás, proporcionando la potencia para la locomoción bípeda y cuadrúpeda.

El secado del medio ambiente de África Oriental en el período transcurrido desde la creación del Mar Rojo y el Valle del Rift africano hizo que los bosques abiertos reemplazaran al bosque de dosel cerrado anterior.

Los simios en este entorno se vieron obligados a viajar de un grupo de árboles a otro a través de campo abierto.

Esto condujo a una serie de cambios complementarios en la pelvis humana.

Se sugiere que el bipedalismo fue el resultado.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pelvis

;;;PT;;;



PÉLVIS


A pelve (plural pelves ou pelvises) é a parte inferior do tronco, entre o abdômen e as coxas (às vezes também chamada de região pélvica), juntamente com seu esqueleto embutido (às vezes também chamado de pelve óssea ou esqueleto pélvico).

A região pélvica do tronco inclui a pelve óssea, a cavidade pélvica (o espaço delimitado pela pelve óssea), o assoalho pélvico, abaixo da cavidade pélvica, e o períneo, abaixo do assoalho pélvico.

O esqueleto pélvico é formado na região das costas, pelo sacro e pelo cóccix e anteriormente e para os lados esquerdo e direito, por um par de ossos do quadril.

Os dois ossos do quadril conectam a coluna com os membros inferiores.

Eles estão presos ao sacro posteriormente, conectados um ao outro anteriormente e unidos aos dois fêmures nas articulações do quadril.

O espaço delimitado pela pelve óssea, chamado de cavidade pélvica, é a seção do corpo abaixo do abdômen e consiste principalmente dos órgãos reprodutivos (órgãos sexuais) e do reto, enquanto o assoalho pélvico na base da cavidade auxilia na sustentação. os órgãos do abdome.

Nos mamíferos, a pelve óssea tem uma lacuna no meio, significativamente maior nas fêmeas do que nos machos.

Seus filhotes passam por essa lacuna quando nascem.


== Estrutura ==

A região pélvica do tronco é a parte inferior do tronco, entre o abdômen e as coxas.

Inclui várias estruturas: a pelve óssea, a cavidade pélvica, o assoalho pélvico e o períneo.

A pelve óssea (esqueleto pélvico) é a parte do esqueleto inserida na região pélvica do tronco.

É subdividida em cintura pélvica e coluna pélvica.

A cintura pélvica é composta pelos ossos apendiculares do quadril (ílio, ísquio e púbis) orientados em um anel, e conecta a região pélvica da coluna aos membros inferiores.

A coluna pélvica consiste no sacro e no cóccix.
a cavidade pélvica, tipicamente definida como uma pequena parte do espaço delimitado pela pelve óssea, delimitada pela borda pélvica acima e o assoalho pélvico abaixo; alternativamente, a cavidade pélvica às vezes também é definida como todo o espaço delimitado pelo esqueleto pélvico, subdividido em:
a pelve maior (ou falsa), acima da borda pélvica
a pelve menor (ou verdadeira), abaixo da borda pélvica
o assoalho pélvico (ou diafragma pélvico), abaixo da cavidade pélvica
o períneo, abaixo do assoalho pélvico


=== Osso pélvico ===


O esqueleto pélvico é formado posteriormente (na região das costas), pelo sacro e pelo cóccix e lateral e anteriormente (para frente e para os lados), por um par de ossos do quadril.

Cada osso do quadril consiste em 3 seções, ílio, ísquio e púbis.

Durante a infância, essas seções são ossos separados, unidos pela cartilagem trirradiada.

Durante a puberdade, eles se fundem para formar um único osso.


=== Cavidade pélvica ===


A cavidade pélvica é uma cavidade do corpo delimitada pelos ossos da pelve e que contém principalmente os órgãos reprodutivos e o reto.

É feita uma distinção entre a pelve menor ou verdadeira inferior à linha terminal e a pelve maior ou falsa acima dela.

A entrada pélvica ou abertura pélvica superior, que leva à pelve menor, é limitada pelo promontório, a linha arqueada do ílio, a eminência iliopúbica, o pecten do púbis e a parte superior da sínfise púbica.

A saída pélvica ou abertura pélvica inferior é a região entre o ângulo subpúbico ou arco púbico, as tuberosidades isquiáticas e o cóccix.

Ligamentos: membrana obturadora, ligamento inguinal (ligamento lacunar, arco iliopectíneo) Alternativamente, a pelve é dividida em três planos: a entrada, o plano médio e a saída.


=== Assoalho pélvico ===


O assoalho pélvico tem duas funções inerentemente conflitantes: uma é fechar as cavidades pélvica e abdominal e suportar a carga dos órgãos viscerais; a outra é controlar as aberturas do reto e dos órgãos urogenitais que perfuram o assoalho pélvico e o enfraquecem.

Para realizar essas duas tarefas, o assoalho pélvico é composto por várias camadas sobrepostas de músculos e tecidos conjuntivos.

O diafragma pélvico é composto pelo elevador do ânus e pelo músculo coccígeo.

Estes surgem entre a sínfise e a espinha isquiática e convergem no cóccix e no ligamento anococcígeo que se estende entre a ponta do cóccix e o hiato anal.

Isso deixa uma fenda para as aberturas anal e urogenital.

Devido à largura da abertura genital, que é mais larga nas mulheres, é necessário um segundo mecanismo de fechamento.

O diafragma urogenital consiste principalmente no períneo transverso profundo que se origina dos ramos isquiáticos e púbicos inferiores e se estende até o hiato urogenital.

O diafragma urogenital é reforçado posteriormente pelo períneo transverso superficial.

Os esfíncteres anal externo e uretral fecham o ânus e a uretra.

O primeiro é circundado pelo bulboesponjoso que estreita o intróito vaginal nas fêmeas e circunda o corpo esponjoso nos machos.

O isquiocavernoso espreme o sangue no corpo cavernoso do pênis e no clitóris.


=== Variação ===


Os humanos modernos são em grande parte caracterizados pela locomoção bípede e cérebros grandes.

Como a pelve é vital tanto para a locomoção quanto para o parto, a seleção natural foi confrontada por duas demandas conflitantes:
um amplo canal de parto e eficiência de locomoção, um conflito referido como o "dilema obstétrico".

A pélvis feminina, ou pélvis ginecóide, evoluiu para sua largura máxima para o parto – uma pélvis mais larga tornaria as mulheres incapazes de andar.

Em contraste, as pélvis masculinas humanas não são limitadas pela necessidade de dar à luz e, portanto, são mais otimizadas para a locomoção bípede.

As principais diferenças entre a pélvis verdadeira e falsa masculina e feminina incluem:

A pelve feminina é maior e mais larga que a pelve masculina, que é mais alta, mais estreita e mais compacta.

A entrada feminina é maior e de forma oval, enquanto o promontório sacral masculino se projeta mais (ou seja, a entrada masculina é mais em forma de coração).

Os lados da pelve masculina convergem da entrada para a saída, enquanto os lados da pelve feminina são mais afastados.

O ângulo entre os ramos púbicos inferiores é agudo (70 graus) nos homens, mas obtuso (90-100 graus) nas mulheres.

Assim, o ângulo é chamado de ângulo subpúbico nos homens e arco púbico nas mulheres.

Além disso, os ossos que formam o ângulo/arco são mais côncavos nas fêmeas, mas retos nos machos.

A distância entre os ossos do ísquio é pequena nos machos, tornando a saída estreita, mas grande nas mulheres, que têm uma saída relativamente grande.

As espinhas isquiáticas e as tuberosidades são mais pesadas e projetam-se mais para dentro da cavidade pélvica nos machos.

A incisura ciática maior é mais larga nas mulheres.

As cristas ilíacas são mais altas e mais pronunciadas nos homens, tornando a pelve falsa masculina mais profunda e estreita do que nas mulheres.

O sacro masculino é longo, estreito, mais reto e tem um promontório sacral pronunciado.

O sacro feminino é mais curto, mais largo, mais curvo posteriormente e tem um promontório menos pronunciado.

Os acetábulos são mais afastados nas fêmeas do que nos machos.

Nos homens, o acetábulo está voltado mais lateralmente, enquanto nas mulheres está voltado mais anteriormente.

Consequentemente, quando os machos andam a perna pode se mover para frente e para trás em um único plano.

Nas mulheres, a perna deve balançar para frente e para dentro, de onde a cabeça giratória do fêmur move a perna para trás em outro plano.

Essa mudança no ângulo da cabeça femoral dá à marcha feminina sua característica (ou seja, balanço dos quadris).


== Desenvolvimento ==

Cada lado da pelve é formado como cartilagem, que ossifica como três ossos principais que permanecem separados durante a infância: ílio, ísquio e púbis.

Ao nascimento, toda a articulação do quadril (a área do acetábulo e a parte superior do fêmur) ainda é feita de cartilagem (mas pode haver um pequeno pedaço de osso no grande trocanter do fêmur); isso torna difícil detectar a luxação congênita do quadril por raios-X.

"Em termos de anatomia comparada, a escápula humana representa dois ossos que se fundiram; a escápula (dorsal) propriamente dita e o coracóide (ventral).

A linha epifisária através da cavidade glenoidal é a linha de fusão.

Eles são as contrapartes do ílio e ísquio da cintura pélvica."

Há evidências preliminares de que a pelve continua a se alargar ao longo da vida.


== Funções ==

O esqueleto da pelve é um anel de ossos em forma de bacia que conecta a coluna vertebral aos fêmures.

Suas funções primárias são suportar o peso da parte superior do corpo quando sentado e em pé, transferindo esse peso do esqueleto axial para o esqueleto apendicular inferior quando em pé e andando, e fornecendo anexos e resistindo às forças dos poderosos músculos de locomoção e postura. .

Comparada à cintura escapular, a cintura pélvica é forte e rígida. Suas funções secundárias são conter e proteger as vísceras pélvicas e abdominopélvicas (partes inferiores do trato urinário, órgãos reprodutivos internos), proporcionando fixação para órgãos reprodutivos externos e músculos associados e membranas.


=== Como uma estrutura mecânica ===


A cintura pélvica consiste nos dois ossos do quadril.

Os ossos do quadril estão conectados um ao outro anteriormente na sínfise púbica e posteriormente ao sacro nas articulações sacroilíacas para formar o anel pélvico.

O anel é muito estável e permite pouca mobilidade, pré-requisito para a transmissão de cargas do tronco para os membros inferiores.

Como uma estrutura mecânica, a pelve pode ser pensada como quatro anéis aproximadamente triangulares e torcidos.

Cada anel superior é formado pelo osso ilíaco; a face anterior estende-se do acetábulo até a espinha ilíaca ântero-superior; o lado posterior vai do topo do acetábulo até a articulação sacroilíaca; e o terceiro lado é formado pela crista ilíaca palpável.

O anel inferior, formado pelos ramos dos ossos púbico e isquiático, sustenta o acetábulo e é torcido de 80 a 90 graus em relação ao anel superior.

Uma abordagem alternativa é considerar a pelve parte de um sistema mecânico integrado baseado no icosaedro de tensegridade como um elemento infinito.

Tal sistema é capaz de resistir a forças omnidirecionais – que vão desde o suporte de peso até a gravidez – e, como um sistema que requer pouca energia, é favorecido pela seleção natural.

O ângulo de inclinação pélvica é o elemento mais importante da postura do corpo humano e é ajustado nos quadris.

É também uma das raras coisas que podem ser medidas na avaliação da postura.

Um método simples de medição foi descrito pelo ortopedista britânico Philip Willes e é realizado por meio de um inclinômetro.


=== Como âncora para os músculos ===

A articulação lombossacral, entre o sacro e a última vértebra lombar, possui, como todas as articulações vertebrais, um disco intervertebral, ligamentos anterior e posterior, ligamento amarelo, ligamentos interespinhosos e supraespinhosos e articulações sinoviais entre os processos articulares dos dois ossos.

Além desses ligamentos, a articulação é reforçada pelos ligamentos iliolombar e lombossacral lateral.

O ligamento iliolombar passa entre a ponta do processo transverso da quinta vértebra lombar e a parte posterior da crista ilíaca.

O ligamento lombossacral lateral, parcialmente contínuo com o ligamento iliolombar, desce da borda inferior do processo transverso da quinta vértebra até a asa do sacro.

Os movimentos possíveis na articulação lombossacral são flexão e extensão, uma pequena quantidade de flexão lateral (de 7 graus na infância a 1 grau em adultos), mas nenhuma rotação axial.

Entre as idades de 2 a 13 anos, a articulação é responsável por até 75% (cerca de 18 graus) de flexão e extensão na coluna lombar.

A partir dos 35 anos, os ligamentos limitam consideravelmente a amplitude de movimentos.

Os três ligamentos extracapsulares da articulação do quadril – os ligamentos iliofemoral, isquiofemoral e pubofemoral – formam um mecanismo de torção que envolve o colo do fêmur.

Quando sentado, com a articulação do quadril flexionada, esses ligamentos tornam-se frouxos, permitindo um alto grau de mobilidade na articulação.

Quando em pé, com a articulação do quadril estendida, os ligamentos se torcem ao redor do colo do fêmur, empurrando a cabeça do fêmur firmemente para dentro do acetábulo, estabilizando a articulação.

A zona orbicular auxilia na manutenção do contato na articulação, agindo como uma casa de botão na cabeça femoral.

O ligamento intracapsular, o ligamento redondo, transmite vasos sanguíneos que nutrem a cabeça femoral.


==== Junções ====

Os dois ossos do quadril são unidos anteriormente na sínfise púbica por uma cartilagem fibrosa coberta por uma cartilagem hialina, o disco interpúbico, dentro do qual uma cavidade não sinovial pode estar presente.

Dois ligamentos, os ligamentos púbicos superior e inferior, reforçam a sínfise.

Ambas as articulações sacroilíacas, formadas entre as superfícies auriculares do sacro e os dois ossos do quadril. são anfiartroses, articulações quase imóveis envoltas por cápsulas articulares muito tensas.

Esta cápsula é reforçada pelos ligamentos sacroilíacos ventral, interósseo e dorsal.

Os ligamentos acessórios mais importantes da articulação sacroilíaca são os ligamentos sacroespinhal e sacrotuberal que estabilizam o osso do quadril no sacro e impedem que o promontório se incline para a frente.

Além disso, esses dois ligamentos transformam as incisuras ciáticas maior e menor nos forames maior e menor, um par de aberturas pélvicas importantes.

O ligamento iliolombar é um ligamento forte que conecta a ponta do processo transverso da quinta vértebra lombar à parte posterior do lábio interno da crista ilíaca.

Pode ser considerada a borda inferior da fáscia toracolombar e é ocasionalmente acompanhada por uma faixa ligamentar menor que passa entre a quarta vértebra lombar e a crista ilíaca.

O ligamento lombossacral lateral é parcialmente contínuo com o ligamento iliolombar.

Passa entre o processo transverso da quinta vértebra até a asa do sacro, onde se mistura com o ligamento sacroilíaco anterior.

A articulação entre o sacro e o cóccix, a sínfise sacrococcígea, é reforçada por uma série de ligamentos.

O ligamento sacrococcígeo anterior é uma extensão do ligamento longitudinal anterior (LLA) que percorre o lado anterior dos corpos vertebrais.

Suas fibras irregulares se misturam com o periósteo.

O ligamento sacrococcígeo posterior tem uma parte profunda e uma superficial, a primeira é uma faixa plana correspondente ao ligamento longitudinal posterior (LLP) e a última corresponde ao ligamento amarelo.

Vários outros ligamentos completam o forame do último nervo sacral.


==== Ombro e costas intrínsecas ====

As partes inferiores do grande dorsal, um dos músculos do membro superior, originam-se do terço posterior da crista ilíaca.

Suas ações na articulação do ombro são rotação interna, adução e retroversão.

Também contribui para a respiração (ou seja, tosse).

Quando o braço é aduzido, o grande dorsal pode puxá-lo para trás e medialmente até que o dorso da mão cubra as nádegas.

Em um canal osteofibroso longitudinal em ambos os lados da coluna existe um grupo de músculos chamado eretores da espinha que é subdividido em um trato superficial lateral e um trato profundo medial.

No trato lateral, o iliocostalis lumborum e longissimus thoracis originam-se na parte posterior do sacro e na parte posterior da crista ilíaca.

A contração desses músculos estende a coluna bilateralmente e a contração unilateral dobra a coluna para o mesmo lado.

O trato medial tem um componente "reto" (interespinales, intertransversarii e espinal) e um "oblíquo" (multífido e semiespinal), ambos se estendendo entre os processos vertebrais; os primeiros atuam de forma semelhante aos músculos do trato lateral, enquanto os segundos funcionam unilateralmente como extensores da coluna e bilateralmente como rotadores da coluna.

No trato medial, o multífido se origina no sacro.


==== Abdômen ====

Os músculos da parede abdominal são subdivididos em um grupo superficial e profundo.
O grupo superficial é subdividido em lateral e medial.

No grupo superficial medial, em ambos os lados do centro da parede abdominal (a linha alba), o reto abdominal se estende das cartilagens das costelas V-VII e do esterno até a crista púbica.

Na extremidade inferior do reto abdominal, o piramidal tensiona a linha alba.

Os músculos superficiais laterais, os músculos transverso e oblíquo externo e interno, originam-se na caixa torácica e na pelve (crista ilíaca e ligamento inguinal) e se fixam às camadas anterior e posterior da bainha do reto.

A flexão do tronco (inclinação para a frente) é essencialmente um movimento dos músculos retos, enquanto a flexão lateral (inclinação lateral) é alcançada pela contração dos oblíquos juntamente com o quadrado lombar e os músculos intrínsecos das costas.

A rotação lateral (girando o tronco ou a pelve lateralmente) é conseguida contraindo o oblíquo interno de um lado e o oblíquo externo do outro.

A principal função do transverso é produzir pressão abdominal para contrair a cavidade abdominal e puxar o diafragma para cima.
Existem dois músculos no grupo profundo ou posterior.

Quadratus lumborum origina-se da parte posterior da crista ilíaca e se estende até a costela XII e vértebras lombares I-IV.

Ele dobra unilateralmente o tronco para o lado e bilateralmente puxa a 12ª costela para baixo e auxilia na expiração.

O iliopsoas consiste em psoas maior (e ocasionalmente psoas menor) e ilíaco, músculos com origens separadas, mas uma inserção comum no trocanter menor do fêmur.

Destes, apenas o ilíaco está ligado à pelve (a fossa ilíaca).

No entanto, o psoas passa pela pelve e, por atuar em duas articulações, é topograficamente classificado como músculo abdominal posterior, mas funcionalmente como músculo do quadril.

O iliopsoas flexiona e gira externamente as articulações do quadril, enquanto a contração unilateral dobra o tronco lateralmente e a contração bilateral eleva o tronco da posição supina.


==== Quadril e coxa ====

Os músculos do quadril são divididos em um grupo dorsal e ventral.
Os músculos dorsais do quadril estão inseridos na região do trocânter menor (grupo anterior ou interno) ou do trocânter maior (grupo posterior ou externo).

Anteriormente, o psoas maior (e ocasionalmente o psoas menor) se origina ao longo da coluna entre a caixa torácica e a pelve.

O ilíaco origina-se na fossa ilíaca para se unir ao psoas na eminência iliopúbica para formar o iliopsoas que se insere no trocânter menor.

O iliopsoas é o flexor do quadril mais poderoso. O grupo posterior inclui o glúteo máximo, glúteo médio e glúteo mínimo.

Maximus tem uma origem ampla que se estende desde a parte posterior da crista ilíaca e ao longo do sacro e cóccix, e tem duas inserções separadas:
proximal que irradia para o trato iliotibial
e uma distal que se insere na tuberosidade glútea no lado posterior da diáfise femoral.

É principalmente um extensor e rotador lateral da articulação do quadril, mas, devido à sua inserção bipartida, pode tanto aduzir quanto abduzir o quadril.

O médio e o mínimo surgem na superfície externa do ílio e são ambos inseridos no trocânter maior.

Suas fibras anteriores são rotadores e flexores mediais, enquanto as fibras posteriores são rotadores e extensores laterais.

O piriforme tem sua origem na face ventral do sacro e se insere no trocânter maior.

Ele abduz e roda lateralmente o quadril na postura ereta e auxilia na extensão da coxa.

O tensor da fáscia lata se origina na espinha ilíaca ântero-superior e se insere no trato iliotibial.

Ele pressiona a cabeça do fêmur no acetábulo e flexiona, gira medialmente e abduz o quadril.

Os músculos ventrais do quadril são importantes no controle do equilíbrio do corpo.

Os músculos obturadores internos e externos juntamente com o quadrado femoral são rotadores laterais do quadril.

Juntos, eles são mais fortes que os rotadores mediais e, portanto, os pés apontam para fora na posição normal para obter um melhor suporte.

Os obturadores têm suas origens em ambos os lados do forame obturador e são inseridos na fossa trocantérica no fêmur.

Quadratus surge na tuberosidade isquiática e se insere na crista intertrocantérica.

Os gêmeos superior e inferior, oriundos da espinha isquiática e da tuberosidade isquiática respectivamente, podem ser pensados ​​como cabeças marginais do obturador interno, e sua principal função é auxiliar este músculo.

Os músculos da coxa podem ser subdivididos em adutores (grupo medial), extensores (grupo anterior) e flexores (grupo posterior).

Os extensores e flexores atuam na articulação do joelho, enquanto os adutores atuam principalmente na articulação do quadril.

Os adutores da coxa têm sua origem no ramo inferior do osso púbico e são inseridos, com exceção do grácil, ao longo da diáfise femoral.

Juntamente com o sartório e o semitendíneo, o grácil vai além do joelho até sua inserção comum na tíbia. Os músculos anteriores da coxa formam o quadríceps que se insere na patela com um tendão comum.

Três dos quatro músculos têm suas origens no fêmur, enquanto o reto femoral se origina da espinha ilíaca ântero-inferior e é, portanto, o único dos quatro que atua em duas articulações.

Os músculos posteriores da coxa têm sua origem no ramo isquiático inferior, com exceção da cabeça curta do bíceps femoral.

O semitendinoso e o semimembranoso são inseridos na tíbia na face medial do joelho, enquanto o bíceps femoral é inserido na fíbula, na face lateral do joelho.


=== Na gravidez e no parto ===

Nos estágios posteriores da gravidez, a cabeça do feto se alinha dentro da pelve.

Também as articulações dos ossos amolecem devido ao efeito dos hormônios da gravidez.

Esses fatores podem causar dor na articulação pélvica (disfunção da sínfise púbica ou SPD).

À medida que o final da gravidez se aproxima, os ligamentos da articulação sacroilíaca se afrouxam, deixando a saída da pelve um pouco alargada; isso é facilmente perceptível na vaca.

Durante o parto (a menos que por cesariana) o feto passa pela abertura pélvica materna.


== Significado clínico ==

As fraturas de quadril geralmente afetam os idosos e ocorrem mais frequentemente no sexo feminino, e isso geralmente ocorre devido à osteoporose.

Existem também diferentes tipos de fratura pélvica, muitas vezes resultantes de acidentes de trânsito.

A dor pélvica geralmente pode afetar qualquer pessoa e tem uma variedade de causas; endometriose em mulheres, aderências intestinais, síndrome do intestino irritável e cistite intersticial.

Existem muitas variações anatômicas da pelve.

Na mulher a pelve pode ser de tamanho muito maior que o normal, conhecida como pelve gigante ou pelve justo maior, ou pode ser bem menor, conhecida como pelve reduzida ou pelve justo menor.

Outras variações incluem uma pelve andróide a forma normal da pelve masculina, nas mulheres essa forma pode ser problemática no parto.


== História ==



=== Classificação Caldwell-Moloy ===

Ao longo do século XX, foram feitas medições pelvimétricas em gestantes para determinar se um parto natural seria possível, prática hoje limitada aos casos em que há suspeita de um problema específico ou após uma cesariana.

William Edgar Caldwell e Howard Carmen Moloy estudaram coleções de pelves esqueléticas e milhares de radiogramas estereoscópicos e finalmente reconheceram três tipos de pelves femininas mais o tipo masculino.

Em 1933 e 1934 eles publicaram sua tipologia, incluindo os nomes gregos desde então frequentemente citados em vários manuais:
Ginecóide (gine, mulher), antropóide (antropos, ser humano), platypelóide (platys, plano) e andróide (aner, homem).

A pelve ginecóide é a chamada pelve feminina normal.

Sua entrada é ligeiramente oval, com maior diâmetro transversal, ou redonda.

As paredes internas são retas, o arco subpúbico largo, o sacro apresenta inclinação média para trás e a incisura isquiática maior é bem arredondada.

Como esse tipo é espaçoso e bem proporcionado, há pouca ou nenhuma dificuldade no processo de nascimento.

Caldwell e seus colegas de trabalho encontraram pelves ginecoides em cerca de 50% dos espécimes.

A pelve platipeloide tem formato transversalmente largo e achatado, é larga anteriormente, incisuras ciáticas maiores do tipo masculino e tem um sacro curto que se curva para dentro reduzindo os diâmetros da pelve inferior.

Isso é semelhante à pelve raquítica, onde os ossos amolecidos se alargam lateralmente devido ao peso da parte superior do corpo, resultando em um diâmetro anteroposterior reduzido.

Dar à luz com esse tipo de pelve está associado a problemas, como parada transversal.

Menos de 3% das mulheres têm esse tipo de pelve.

A pelve androide é uma pelve feminina com características masculinas, incluindo uma entrada em forma de cunha ou coração causada por um sacro proeminente e um segmento anterior triangular.

A saída da pélvis reduzida muitas vezes causa problemas durante o parto.

Em 1939, Caldwell encontrou esse tipo em um terço das mulheres brancas e em um sexto das mulheres não brancas.

A pelve antropóide é caracterizada por uma forma oval com maior diâmetro anteroposterior.

Tem paredes retas, um pequeno arco subpúbico e grandes incisuras sacrociáticas.

As espinhas ciáticas são colocadas amplamente separadas e o sacro geralmente é reto, resultando em pelve profunda não obstruída.

Caldwell encontrou esse tipo em um quarto das mulheres brancas e quase metade das mulheres não brancas. No entanto, Caldwell e Moloy então complicaram esse esquema simples de quatro vezes dividindo a entrada pélvica em segmentos posterior e anterior.

Eles nomearam uma pelve de acordo com o segmento anterior e afixaram outro tipo de acordo com o caráter do segmento posterior (isto é, antropóide-androide) e terminaram com nada menos que 14 morfologias.

Apesar da popularidade dessa classificação simples, a pelve é muito mais complicada do que isso, pois a pelve pode ter dimensões diferentes em vários níveis do canal de parto.

Caldwell e Moloy também classificaram o físico das mulheres de acordo com seus tipos de pelves: o tipo ginecoide tem ombros pequenos, cintura fina e quadris largos; o tipo androide parece quadrado por trás; e o tipo antropoide tem ombros largos e quadris estreitos.

Por fim, em seu artigo, eles descreveram todos os tipos de pelves não ginecoides ou "mistos" como "anormais", uma palavra que ficou no mundo da medicina, embora pelo menos 50% das mulheres tenham essas pelves "anormais".

A classificação de Caldwell e Moloy foi influenciada por classificações anteriores que tentavam definir a pelve feminina ideal, tratando quaisquer desvios desse ideal como disfunções e a causa do trabalho de parto obstruído.

No século XIX, antropólogos e outros viram um esquema evolutivo nessas tipologias pélvicas, um esquema desde então refutado pela arqueologia.

Desde a década de 1950, a desnutrição é considerada um dos principais fatores que afetam a forma pélvica no Terceiro Mundo, embora haja pelo menos algum componente genético na variação da morfologia pélvica.

Atualmente, a adequação obstétrica da pelve feminina é avaliada por ultrassonografia.

As dimensões da cabeça do feto e do canal de parto são medidas e comparadas com precisão, e a viabilidade do trabalho de parto pode ser prevista.


== Outros animais ==


A cintura pélvica estava presente nos primeiros vertebrados e pode ser rastreada até as barbatanas emparelhadas de peixes que foram alguns dos primeiros cordados.

A forma da pelve, principalmente a orientação das cristas ilíacas e a forma e profundidade dos acetábulos, refletem o estilo de locomoção e a massa corporal de um animal.

Em mamíferos bípedes, as cristas ilíacas são paralelas às articulações sacroilíacas orientadas verticalmente, enquanto em mamíferos quadrúpedes são paralelas às articulações sacroilíacas orientadas horizontalmente.

Em mamíferos pesados, especialmente em quadrúpedes, a pelve tende a ser mais orientada verticalmente porque isso permite que a pelve suporte maior peso sem deslocar as articulações sacroilíacas ou adicionar torção à coluna vertebral.

Em mamíferos ambulatórios, os acetábulos são rasos e abertos para permitir uma ampla gama de movimentos do quadril, incluindo abdução significativa, do que em mamíferos cursoriais.

Os comprimentos do ílio e do ísquio e seus ângulos em relação ao acetábulo são funcionalmente importantes, pois determinam os braços de momento para os músculos extensores do quadril que fornecem impulso durante a locomoção.

Além disso, a forma relativamente larga (da frente para trás) da pelve proporciona maior alavancagem para o glúteo médio e mínimo.

Esses músculos são responsáveis ​​pela abdução do quadril, que desempenha um papel fundamental no equilíbrio ereto.


=== Primatas ===

Nos primatas, a pelve consiste em quatro partes - os ossos do quadril esquerdo e direito que se encontram na linha média ventralmente e são fixados ao sacro dorsalmente e ao cóccix.

Cada osso do quadril consiste em três componentes, o ílio, o ísquio e o púbis, e no momento da maturidade sexual esses ossos se fundem, embora nunca haja qualquer movimento entre eles.

Nos humanos, a articulação ventral dos ossos púbicos é fechada.

Macacos maiores, como Pongo (orangotangos), Gorillas (gorilas), Australopithecus afarensis e Pan troglodytes (chimpanzés), têm três planos pélvicos mais longos com um diâmetro máximo no plano sagital.


=== Evolução ===

A morfologia atual da pelve é herdada da pelve de nossos ancestrais quadrúpedes.

A característica mais marcante da evolução da pelve em primatas é o alargamento e o encurtamento da lâmina chamada ílio.

Por causa das tensões envolvidas na locomoção bípede, os músculos da coxa movem a coxa para frente e para trás, fornecendo força para a locomoção bípede e quadrúpede.

A secagem do ambiente da África Oriental no período desde a criação do Mar Vermelho e do Vale do Rift Africano viu florestas abertas substituir a floresta de dossel anterior fechada.

Os macacos neste ambiente foram obrigados a viajar de um grupo de árvores para outro em campo aberto.

Isso levou a uma série de mudanças complementares na pelve humana.

Sugere-se que o bipedismo foi o resultado.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pelvis

;;;FR;;;



BASSIN


Le bassin (pluriel bassins ou bassins) est la partie inférieure du tronc, entre l'abdomen et les cuisses (parfois aussi appelée région pelvienne), ainsi que son squelette intégré (parfois aussi appelé bassin osseux ou squelette pelvien).

La région pelvienne du tronc comprend le bassin osseux, la cavité pelvienne (l'espace délimité par le bassin osseux), le plancher pelvien, sous la cavité pelvienne, et le périnée, sous le plancher pelvien.

Le squelette pelvien est formé dans la région du dos, par le sacrum et le coccyx et en avant et sur les côtés gauche et droit, par une paire d'os coxaux.

Les deux os de la hanche relient la colonne vertébrale aux membres inférieurs.

Ils sont attachés au sacrum en arrière, reliés les uns aux autres en avant et reliés aux deux fémurs au niveau des articulations de la hanche.

L'espace délimité par le bassin osseux, appelé cavité pelvienne, est la section du corps sous l'abdomen et se compose principalement des organes reproducteurs (organes sexuels) et du rectum, tandis que le plancher pelvien à la base de la cavité aide à soutenir les organes de l'abdomen.

Chez les mammifères, le bassin osseux présente un espace au milieu, nettement plus grand chez les femelles que chez les mâles.

Leurs petits passent par cette lacune à leur naissance.


== Structure ==

La région pelvienne du tronc est la partie inférieure du tronc, entre l'abdomen et les cuisses.

Il comprend plusieurs structures : le bassin osseux, la cavité pelvienne, le plancher pelvien et le périnée.

Le bassin osseux (squelette pelvien) est la partie du squelette enchâssée dans la région pelvienne du tronc.

Il est subdivisé en ceinture pelvienne et colonne vertébrale pelvienne.

La ceinture pelvienne est composée des os coxaux appendiculaires (ilion, ischion et pubis) orientés en anneau, et relie la région pelvienne de la colonne vertébrale aux membres inférieurs.

La colonne vertébrale pelvienne comprend le sacrum et le coccyx.
la cavité pelvienne, typiquement définie comme une petite partie de l'espace délimité par le bassin osseux, délimitée par le bord pelvien au-dessus et le plancher pelvien en dessous ; alternativement, la cavité pelvienne est parfois également définie comme l'ensemble de l'espace délimité par le squelette pelvien, subdivisé en :
le grand (ou faux) bassin, au-dessus du bord pelvien
le petit (ou vrai) bassin, sous le bord pelvien
le plancher pelvien (ou diaphragme pelvien), sous la cavité pelvienne
le périnée, sous le plancher pelvien


=== Os pelvien ===


Le squelette pelvien est formé postérieurement (dans la région du dos), par le sacrum et le coccyx et latéralement et antérieurement (avant et sur les côtés), par une paire d'os coxaux.

Chaque os de la hanche se compose de 3 sections, ilion, ischion et pubis.

Pendant l'enfance, ces sections sont des os séparés, reliés par le cartilage triradié.

Pendant la puberté, ils fusionnent pour former un seul os.


=== Cavité pelvienne ===


La cavité pelvienne est une cavité corporelle délimitée par les os du bassin et qui contient principalement les organes reproducteurs et le rectum.

Une distinction est faite entre le petit ou vrai bassin inférieur à la ligne terminale et le grand ou faux bassin au-dessus.

L'entrée pelvienne ou ouverture pelvienne supérieure, qui mène au petit bassin, est bordée par le promontoire, la ligne arquée de l'ilium, l'éminence ilio-pubienne, le pecten du pubis et la partie supérieure de la symphyse pubienne.

La sortie pelvienne ou ouverture pelvienne inférieure est la région située entre l'angle sous-pubien ou l'arc pubien, les tubérosités ischiatiques et le coccyx.

Ligaments : membrane obturatrice, ligament inguinal (ligament lacunaire, arc ilio-pectiné) Alternativement, le bassin est divisé en trois plans : l'entrée, le plan médian et la sortie.


=== Plancher pelvien ===


Le plancher pelvien a deux fonctions intrinsèquement contradictoires : la première consiste à fermer les cavités pelvienne et abdominale et à supporter la charge des organes viscéraux ; l'autre est de contrôler les ouvertures du rectum et des organes urogénitaux qui traversent le plancher pelvien et le fragilisent.

Pour réaliser ces deux tâches, le plancher pelvien est composé de plusieurs couches de muscles et de tissus conjonctifs qui se chevauchent.

Le diaphragme pelvien est composé du muscle releveur de l'anus et du muscle coccygien.

Ceux-ci prennent naissance entre la symphyse et l'épine sciatique et convergent vers le coccyx et le ligament anococcygien qui s'étend entre la pointe du coccyx et le hiatus anal.

Cela laisse une fente pour les ouvertures anales et urogénitales.

En raison de la largeur de l'ouverture génitale, qui est plus large chez les femelles, un deuxième mécanisme de fermeture est nécessaire.

Le diaphragme urogénital est constitué principalement du périnée transverse profond qui naît des rameaux ischiatiques et pubiens inférieurs et s'étend jusqu'au hiatus urogénital.

Le diaphragme urogénital est renforcé en arrière par le périnéal transverse superficiel.

Les sphincters anaux et urétraux externes ferment l'anus et l'urètre.

Le premier est entouré par le bulbospongiosus qui rétrécit l'orifice vaginal chez les femelles et entoure le corps spongieux chez les mâles.

Ischiocavernosus presse le sang dans le corps caverneux du pénis et du clitoris.


=== Variante ===


Les humains modernes sont dans une large mesure caractérisés par une locomotion bipède et un gros cerveau.

Parce que le bassin est vital à la fois pour la locomotion et l'accouchement, la sélection naturelle a été confrontée à deux exigences contradictoires :
un large canal de naissance et une efficacité de locomotion, un conflit appelé le « dilemme obstétrical ».

Le bassin féminin, ou bassin gynécoïde, a évolué jusqu'à sa largeur maximale pour l'accouchement - un bassin plus large rendrait les femmes incapables de marcher.

En revanche, les bassins masculins humains ne sont pas contraints par la nécessité d'accoucher et sont donc plus optimisés pour la locomotion bipède.

Les principales différences entre le vrai et le faux bassin masculin et féminin comprennent :

Le bassin féminin est plus grand et plus large que le bassin masculin qui est plus haut, plus étroit et plus compact.

L'entrée femelle est plus grande et de forme ovale, tandis que le promontoire sacré mâle se projette plus loin (c'est-à-dire que l'entrée mâle est plus en forme de cœur).

Les côtés du bassin masculin convergent de l'entrée à la sortie, tandis que les côtés du bassin féminin sont plus larges.

L'angle entre les branches pubiennes inférieures est aigu (70 degrés) chez les hommes, mais obtus (90 à 100 degrés) chez les femmes.

En conséquence, l'angle est appelé angle sous-pubien chez les hommes et arc pubien chez les femmes.

De plus, les os formant l'angle/arc sont plus concaves chez les femelles mais droits chez les mâles.

La distance entre les os ischiatiques est petite chez les mâles, ce qui rend la sortie étroite, mais grande chez les femelles, qui ont une sortie relativement grande.

Les épines ischiatiques et les tubérosités sont plus lourdes et se projettent plus loin dans la cavité pelvienne chez les mâles.

La grande échancrure sciatique est plus large chez les femmes.

Les crêtes iliaques sont plus hautes et plus prononcées chez les hommes, ce qui rend le faux bassin masculin plus profond et plus étroit que chez les femmes.

Le sacrum masculin est long, étroit, plus droit et possède un promontoire sacré prononcé.

Le sacrum féminin est plus court, plus large, plus courbé vers l'arrière et possède un promontoire moins prononcé.

Les cotyles sont plus espacés chez les femmes que chez les hommes.

Chez les mâles, l'acétabulum fait face plus latéralement, alors qu'il fait face plus en avant chez les femelles.

Par conséquent, lorsque les mâles marchent, la jambe peut avancer et reculer dans un même plan.

Chez les femmes, la jambe doit se balancer vers l'avant et vers l'intérieur, d'où la tête pivotante du fémur ramène la jambe dans un autre plan.

Cette modification de l'angle de la tête fémorale donne à la démarche féminine sa caractéristique (c'est-à-dire le balancement des hanches).


== Développement ==

Chaque côté du bassin est formé de cartilage, qui s'ossifie en trois os principaux qui restent séparés pendant l'enfance : ilion, ischion, pubis.

A la naissance, l'ensemble de l'articulation de la hanche (cotyle et haut du fémur) est encore constitué de cartilage (mais il peut y avoir un petit morceau d'os dans le grand trochanter du fémur) ; cela rend difficile la détection de la luxation congénitale de la hanche par radiographie.

"En termes d'anatomie comparée, l'omoplate humaine représente deux os qui ont fusionné; l'omoplate (dorsale) proprement dite et la coracoïde (ventrale).

La ligne épiphysaire à travers la cavité glénoïdienne est la ligne de fusion.

Ce sont les pendants de l'ilium et de l'ischion de la ceinture pelvienne."

Il existe des preuves préliminaires que le bassin continue de s'élargir au cours d'une vie.


== Fonctions ==

Le squelette du bassin est un anneau osseux en forme de cuvette reliant la colonne vertébrale aux fémurs.

Ses principales fonctions sont de supporter le poids du haut du corps en position assise et debout, de transférer ce poids du squelette axial au squelette appendiculaire inférieur en position debout et en marchant, et de fournir des attaches pour et résister aux forces des puissants muscles de la locomotion et de la posture. .

Par rapport à la ceinture scapulaire, la ceinture pelvienne est donc solide et rigide. Ses fonctions secondaires sont de contenir et de protéger les viscères pelviens et abdominopelviens (parties inférieures des voies urinaires, organes reproducteurs internes), assurant la fixation des organes reproducteurs externes et des muscles associés. et membranes.


=== En tant que structure mécanique ===


La ceinture pelvienne est constituée des deux os de la hanche.

Les os de la hanche sont reliés les uns aux autres en avant au niveau de la symphyse pubienne et en arrière au sacrum au niveau des articulations sacro-iliaques pour former l'anneau pelvien.

L'anneau est très stable et permet très peu de mobilité, condition préalable à la transmission des efforts du tronc aux membres inférieurs.

En tant que structure mécanique, le bassin peut être considéré comme quatre anneaux grossièrement triangulaires et torsadés.

Chaque anneau supérieur est formé par l'os iliaque ; la face antérieure s'étend du cotyle jusqu'à l'épine iliaque antéro-supérieure ; la face postérieure s'étend du haut de l'acétabulum à l'articulation sacro-iliaque ; et le troisième côté est formé par la crête iliaque palpable.

L'anneau inférieur, formé par les branches des os pubien et ischiatique, soutient l'acétabulum et est tordu de 80 à 90 degrés par rapport à l'anneau supérieur.

Une approche alternative consiste à considérer la partie bassin d'un système mécanique intégré basé sur l'icosaèdre de tenségrité comme un élément infini.

Un tel système est capable de résister à des forces omnidirectionnelles - allant de la mise en charge à la procréation - et, en tant que système nécessitant peu d'énergie, est favorisé par la sélection naturelle.

L'angle d'inclinaison du bassin est l'élément le plus important de la posture du corps humain et est ajusté au niveau des hanches.

C'est aussi une des rares choses que l'on peut mesurer au niveau de l'évaluation de la posture.

Une méthode simple de mesure a été décrite par l'orthopédiste britannique Philip Willes et est réalisée à l'aide d'un inclinomètre.


=== Comme ancre pour les muscles ===

L'articulation lombo-sacrée, entre le sacrum et la dernière vertèbre lombaire, possède, comme toutes les articulations vertébrales, un disque intervertébral, des ligaments antérieur et postérieur, des ligaments flava, des ligaments interépineux et supra-épineux, et des articulations synoviales entre les processus articulaires des deux os.

En plus de ces ligaments, l'articulation est renforcée par les ligaments ilio-lombaire et lombo-sacré latéral.

Le ligament ilio-lombaire passe entre la pointe de l'apophyse transverse de la cinquième vertèbre lombaire et la partie postérieure de la crête iliaque.

Le ligament lombo-sacré latéral, partiellement continu avec le ligament ilio-lombaire, descend du bord inférieur de l'apophyse transverse de la cinquième vertèbre jusqu'à l'aile du sacrum.

Les mouvements possibles dans l'articulation lombo-sacrée sont la flexion et l'extension, une petite quantité de flexion latérale (de 7 degrés chez l'enfant à 1 degré chez l'adulte), mais pas de rotation axiale.

Entre 2 et 13 ans, l'articulation est responsable de 75 % (environ 18 degrés) de la flexion et de l'extension de la colonne lombaire.

A partir de 35 ans, les ligaments limitent considérablement l'amplitude des mouvements.

Les trois ligaments extracapsulaires de l'articulation de la hanche - les ligaments ilio-fémoral, ischiofémoral et pubo-fémoral - forment un mécanisme de torsion encerclant le col du fémur.

En position assise, avec l'articulation de la hanche fléchie, ces ligaments deviennent relâchés permettant une grande mobilité de l'articulation.

En position debout, avec l'articulation de la hanche en extension, les ligaments se tordent autour du col fémoral, poussant fermement la tête du fémur dans l'acétabulum, stabilisant ainsi l'articulation.

La zone orbiculaire aide à maintenir le contact dans l'articulation en agissant comme une boutonnière sur la tête fémorale.

Le ligament intracapsulaire, le ligamentum teres, transmet les vaisseaux sanguins qui nourrissent la tête fémorale.


==== Jonctions ====

Les deux os coxaux sont reliés en avant au niveau de la symphyse pubienne par un cartilage fibreux recouvert d'un cartilage hyalin, le disque interpubien, au sein duquel une cavité non synoviale peut être présente.

Deux ligaments, les ligaments pubiens supérieur et inférieur, renforcent la symphyse.

Les deux articulations sacro-iliaques, formées entre les surfaces auriculaires du sacrum et les deux os de la hanche. sont des amphiarthroses, articulations presque immobiles entourées de capsules articulaires très tendues.

Cette capsule est renforcée par les ligaments sacro-iliaques ventraux, interosseux et dorsaux.

Les ligaments accessoires les plus importants de l'articulation sacro-iliaque sont les ligaments sacro-épineux et sacro-tubéreux qui stabilisent l'os coxal sur le sacrum et empêchent le pronotaire de basculer vers l'avant.

De plus, ces deux ligaments transforment les grandes et petites encoches sciatiques en grands et petits foramens, une paire d'ouvertures pelviennes importantes.

Le ligament ilio-lombaire est un ligament solide qui relie la pointe de l'apophyse transverse de la cinquième vertèbre lombaire à la partie postérieure de la lèvre interne de la crête iliaque.

Il peut être considéré comme le bord inférieur du fascia thoraco-lombaire et est parfois accompagné d'une bande ligamentaire plus petite passant entre la quatrième vertèbre lombaire et la crête iliaque.

Le ligament lombo-sacré latéral est en partie continu avec le ligament ilio-lombaire.

Il passe entre l'apophyse transverse de la cinquième vertèbre et l'aile du sacrum où il se mêle au ligament sacro-iliaque antérieur.

L'articulation entre le sacrum et le coccyx, la symphyse sacro-coccygienne, est renforcée par une série de ligaments.

Le ligament sacro-coccygien antérieur est une extension du ligament longitudinal antérieur (LAL) qui descend le long de la face antérieure des corps vertébraux.

Ses fibres irrégulières se confondent avec le périoste.

Le ligament sacro-coccygien postérieur a une partie profonde et une partie superficielle, la première est une bande plate correspondant au ligament longitudinal postérieur (PLL) et la seconde correspond à la ligamenta flava.

Plusieurs autres ligaments complètent le foramen du dernier nerf sacré.


==== Épaule et dos intrinsèque ====

La partie inférieure du grand dorsal, l'un des muscles du membre supérieur, naît du tiers postérieur de la crête iliaque.

Son action sur l'articulation de l'épaule est la rotation interne, l'adduction et la rétroversion.

Il contribue également à la respiration (c'est-à-dire à la toux).

Lorsque le bras est en adduction, le grand dorsal peut le tirer vers l'arrière et médialement jusqu'à ce que le dos de la main recouvre les fesses.

Dans un canal ostéofibreux longitudinal de chaque côté de la colonne vertébrale, il y a un groupe de muscles appelés érecteurs spinaux qui est subdivisé en un tractus superficiel latéral et un tractus profond médial.

Dans le tractus latéral, l'iliocostalis lumborum et le longissimus thoracis prennent naissance à l'arrière du sacrum et à la partie postérieure de la crête iliaque.

La contraction bilatérale de ces muscles étend la colonne vertébrale et la contraction unilatérale plie la colonne vertébrale du même côté.

Le tractus médial a une composante «droite» (interspinales, intertransversarii et spinalis) et une composante «oblique» (multifidus et semispinalis), qui s'étendent toutes deux entre les processus vertébraux; le premier agit de manière similaire aux muscles du tractus latéral, tandis que le second fonctionne unilatéralement comme des extenseurs de la colonne vertébrale et bilatéralement comme des rotateurs de la colonne vertébrale.

Dans le tractus médial, le multifidi prend naissance sur le sacrum.


==== Ventre ====

Les muscles de la paroi abdominale sont subdivisés en un groupe superficiel et un groupe profond.
Le groupe superficiel est subdivisé en un groupe latéral et un groupe médial.

Dans le groupe superficiel médial, de part et d'autre du centre de la paroi abdominale (la linea alba), le rectus abdominis s'étend des cartilages des côtes V-VII et du sternum jusqu'à la crête pubienne.

A l'extrémité inférieure du rectus abdominis, le pyramidalis tend la linea alba.

Les muscles superficiels latéraux, transverses et obliques externes et internes, prennent naissance sur la cage thoracique et sur le bassin (crête iliaque et ligament inguinal) et s'attachent aux couches antérieure et postérieure de la gaine du droit.

La flexion du tronc (se pencher en avant) est essentiellement un mouvement des muscles droits, tandis que la flexion latérale (se pencher sur le côté) est obtenue en contractant les obliques avec le quadratus lumborum et les muscles intrinsèques du dos.

La rotation latérale (rotation latérale du tronc ou du bassin) est obtenue en contractant l'oblique interne d'un côté et l'oblique externe de l'autre.

La fonction principale du transverse est de produire une pression abdominale afin de resserrer la cavité abdominale et de tirer le diaphragme vers le haut.
Il y a deux muscles dans le groupe profond ou postérieur.

Le quadratus lumborum naît de la partie postérieure de la crête iliaque et s'étend jusqu'à la côte XII et aux vertèbres lombaires I–IV.

Il plie unilatéralement le tronc sur le côté et tire bilatéralement la 12e côte vers le bas et aide à l'expiration.

L'iliopsoas est constitué du grand psoas (et parfois du petit psoas) et de l'iliaque, des muscles aux origines distinctes mais ayant une insertion commune sur le petit trochanter du fémur.

Parmi ceux-ci, seul l'iliaque est attaché au bassin (la fosse iliaque).

Cependant, le psoas traverse le bassin et parce qu'il agit sur deux articulations, il est classé topographiquement comme un muscle abdominal postérieur mais fonctionnellement comme un muscle de la hanche.

L'iliopsoas fléchit et fait tourner les articulations de la hanche vers l'extérieur, tandis que la contraction unilatérale plie le tronc latéralement et la contraction bilatérale soulève le tronc de la position couchée.


==== Hanche et cuisse ====

Les muscles de la hanche sont divisés en un groupe dorsal et un groupe ventral.
Les muscles dorsaux de la hanche sont soit insérés dans la région du petit trochanter (groupe antérieur ou interne) ou du grand trochanter (groupe postérieur ou externe).

En avant, le psoas majeur (et parfois le psoas mineur) prend naissance le long de la colonne vertébrale entre la cage thoracique et le bassin.

L'iliaque prend naissance sur la fosse iliaque pour rejoindre le psoas au niveau de l'éminence ilio-pubienne pour former l'iliopsoas qui s'insère dans le petit trochanter.

L'iliopsoas est le fléchisseur de hanche le plus puissant. Le groupe postérieur comprend le grand fessier, le moyen fessier et le petit fessier.

Maximus a une large origine s'étendant de la partie postérieure de la crête iliaque et le long du sacrum et du coccyx, et a deux insertions distinctes :
un proximal qui rayonne dans le tractus ilio-tibial
et un distal qui s'insère dans la tubérosité fessière sur le côté postérieur de la diaphyse fémorale.

C'est principalement un extenseur et un rotateur latéral de l'articulation de la hanche, mais, en raison de son insertion bipartite, il peut à la fois adduire et abduire la hanche.

Le médius et le minimus apparaissent sur la surface externe de l'ilium et sont tous deux insérés dans le grand trochanter.

Leurs fibres antérieures sont des rotateurs et des fléchisseurs médiaux tandis que les fibres postérieures sont des rotateurs et des extenseurs latéraux.

Le piriforme a son origine sur la face ventrale du sacrum et s'insère sur le grand trochanter.

Il enlève et fait pivoter latéralement la hanche en position verticale et aide à l'extension de la cuisse.

Le tenseur du fascia lata prend naissance sur l'épine iliaque antéro-supérieure et s'insère dans le tractus ilio-tibial.

Il appuie la tête du fémur dans l'acétabulum et fléchit, tourne médialement et enlève la hanche.

Les muscles ventraux de la hanche sont importants dans le contrôle de l'équilibre du corps.

Les muscles obturateurs interne et externe ainsi que le carré fémoral sont des rotateurs latéraux de la hanche.

Ensemble, ils sont plus forts que les rotateurs médiaux et donc les pieds pointent vers l'extérieur dans la position normale pour obtenir un meilleur soutien.

Les obturateurs ont leurs origines de part et d'autre du foramen obturateur et sont insérés dans la fosse trochantérienne sur le fémur.

Quadratus naît sur la tubérosité ischiatique et s'insère dans la crête intertrochantérienne.

Les gemelles supérieure et inférieure, issues respectivement de l'épine ischiatique et de la tubérosité ischiatique, peuvent être considérées comme des têtes marginales de l'obturateur interne, et leur fonction principale est d'assister ce muscle.

Les muscles de la cuisse peuvent être subdivisés en adducteurs (groupe médian), extenseurs (groupe antérieur) et fléchisseurs (groupe postérieur).

Les extenseurs et les fléchisseurs agissent sur l'articulation du genou, tandis que les adducteurs agissent principalement sur l'articulation de la hanche.

Les adducteurs de la cuisse prennent naissance sur la branche inférieure de l'os pubien et sont, à l'exception du muscle gracile, insérés le long de la diaphyse fémorale.

Avec le couturier et le demi-tendineux, le gracilis s'étend au-delà du genou jusqu'à leur insertion commune sur le tibia. Les muscles antérieurs de la cuisse forment le quadriceps qui est inséré sur la rotule avec un tendon commun.

Trois des quatre muscles ont leurs origines sur le fémur, tandis que le rectus femoris provient de l'épine iliaque antéro-inférieure et est donc le seul des quatre agissant sur deux articulations.

Les muscles postérieurs de la cuisse trouvent leur origine sur la branche ischiatique inférieure, à l'exception du chef court du biceps fémoral.

Le semi-tendineux et le semi-membraneux sont insérés sur le tibia du côté médial du genou, tandis que le biceps fémoral est inséré sur le péroné, sur le côté latéral du genou.


=== Pendant la grossesse et l'accouchement ===

Aux derniers stades de la grossesse, la tête du fœtus s'aligne à l'intérieur du bassin.

Les articulations des os se ramollissent également sous l'effet des hormones de grossesse.

Ces facteurs peuvent provoquer des douleurs articulaires pelviennes (dysfonctionnement de la symphyse pubienne ou SPD).

À l'approche de la fin de la grossesse, les ligaments de l'articulation sacro-iliaque se relâchent, laissant la sortie du bassin s'élargir quelque peu ; ceci est facilement perceptible chez la vache.

Lors de l'accouchement (sauf par césarienne), le fœtus passe par l'ouverture pelvienne maternelle.


== Signification clinique ==

Les fractures de la hanche affectent souvent les personnes âgées et surviennent plus souvent chez les femmes, et cela est souvent dû à l'ostéoporose.

Il existe également différents types de fractures du bassin résultant souvent d'accidents de la circulation.

La douleur pelvienne en général peut toucher n'importe qui et a diverses causes; l'endométriose chez la femme, les adhérences intestinales, le syndrome du côlon irritable et la cystite interstitielle.

Il existe de nombreuses variantes anatomiques du bassin.

Chez la femme, le bassin peut être d'une taille beaucoup plus grande que la normale, connue sous le nom de bassin géant ou bassin justo major, ou il peut être beaucoup plus petit, connu sous le nom de bassin réduit ou bassin justo minor.

D'autres variantes incluent un bassin androïde la forme normale du bassin masculin, chez les femmes cette forme peut s'avérer problématique lors de l'accouchement.


== Historique ==



=== Classement Caldwell-Moloy ===

Tout au long du XXe siècle, des mesures pelvimétriques ont été effectuées sur les femmes enceintes pour déterminer si un accouchement naturel était possible, une pratique aujourd'hui limitée aux cas où un problème spécifique est suspecté ou à la suite d'un accouchement par césarienne.

William Edgar Caldwell et Howard Carmen Moloy ont étudié des collections de bassins squelettiques et des milliers de radiogrammes stéréoscopiques et ont finalement reconnu trois types de bassins féminins plus le type masculin.

En 1933 et 1934, ils publient leur typologie, incluant les noms grecs depuis lors fréquemment cités dans divers manuels :
Gynécoïde (gyne, femme), anthropoïde (anthropos, être humain), platypelloïde (platys, plat) et androïde (aner, homme).

Le bassin gynécoïde est le bassin féminin dit normal.

Son entrée est soit légèrement ovale, avec un plus grand diamètre transversal, soit ronde.

Les parois intérieures sont droites, l'arc sous-pubien large, le sacrum présente une inclinaison moyenne à arrière et la grande échancrure sciatique est bien arrondie.

Parce que ce type est spacieux et bien proportionné, il y a peu ou pas de difficulté dans le processus de naissance.

Caldwell et ses collègues ont trouvé des bassins gynécoïdes dans environ 50 % des spécimens.

Le bassin platypelloïde a une forme transversalement large et aplatie, est large vers l'avant, de plus grandes encoches sciatiques de type masculin et a un sacrum court qui se courbe vers l'intérieur réduisant les diamètres du bassin inférieur.

Ceci est similaire au bassin rachitique où les os ramollis s'élargissent latéralement en raison du poids du haut du corps entraînant une réduction du diamètre antéropostérieur.

Accoucher avec ce type de bassin est associé à des problèmes, comme l'arrêt transversal.

Moins de 3 % des femmes ont ce type de bassin.

Le bassin androïde est un bassin féminin avec des caractéristiques masculines, y compris une entrée en forme de coin ou de cœur causée par un sacrum proéminent et un segment antérieur triangulaire.

La sortie du bassin réduite provoque souvent des problèmes lors de l'accouchement.

En 1939, Caldwell a trouvé ce type chez un tiers des femmes blanches et chez un sixième des femmes non blanches.

Le bassin anthropoïde est caractérisé par une forme ovale avec un plus grand diamètre antéropostérieur.

Il a des parois droites, un petit arc sous-pubien et de grandes encoches sacrosciatiques.

Les épines sciatiques sont largement écartées et le sacrum est généralement droit, ce qui donne un bassin profond non obstrué.

Caldwell a trouvé ce type chez un quart des femmes blanches et près de la moitié des femmes non blanches. Cependant, Caldwell et Moloy ont ensuite compliqué ce schéma simple en quatre volets en divisant l'entrée pelvienne en segments postérieur et antérieur.

Ils nommèrent un bassin selon le segment antérieur et y apposèrent un autre type selon le caractère du segment postérieur (c'est-à-dire anthropoïde-androïde) et aboutirent à pas moins de 14 morphologies.

Malgré la popularité de cette classification simple, le bassin est beaucoup plus compliqué que cela car le bassin peut avoir des dimensions différentes à différents niveaux du canal de naissance.

Caldwell et Moloy ont également classé le physique des femmes selon leurs types de bassins : le type gynécoïde a de petites épaules, une petite taille et des hanches larges ; le type androïde a une forme carrée par derrière ; et le type anthropoïde a des épaules larges et des hanches étroites.

Enfin, dans leur article, elles qualifient d'"anormaux" tous les types de bassins non gynécoïdes ou "mixtes", un mot qui est resté dans le monde médical alors qu'au moins 50% des femmes ont ces bassins "anormaux".

La classification de Caldwell et Moloy a été influencée par des classifications antérieures tentant de définir le bassin féminin idéal, traitant tout écart par rapport à cet idéal comme des dysfonctionnements et la cause d'un travail dystocique.

Au XIXe siècle, les anthropologues et d'autres ont vu un schéma évolutif dans ces typologies pelviennes, schéma depuis lors réfuté par l'archéologie.

Depuis les années 1950, la malnutrition est considérée comme l'un des principaux facteurs affectant la forme pelvienne dans le tiers monde, même s'il existe au moins une composante génétique à la variation de la morphologie pelvienne.

De nos jours, l'aptitude obstétricale du bassin féminin est évaluée par échographie.

Les dimensions de la tête du fœtus et du canal de naissance sont mesurées et comparées avec précision, et la faisabilité du travail peut être prédite.


== Autres animaux ==


La ceinture pelvienne était présente chez les premiers vertébrés et peut être retracée jusqu'aux nageoires appariées des poissons qui étaient parmi les premiers accords.

La forme du bassin, notamment l'orientation des crêtes iliaques et la forme et la profondeur de l'acétabule, reflète le style de locomotion et la masse corporelle d'un animal.

Chez les mammifères bipèdes, les crêtes iliaques sont parallèles aux articulations sacro-iliaques orientées verticalement, alors que chez les mammifères quadrupèdes, elles sont parallèles aux articulations sacro-iliaques orientées horizontalement.

Chez les mammifères lourds, en particulier chez les quadrupèdes, le bassin a tendance à être orienté plus verticalement car cela permet au bassin de supporter un poids plus important sans disloquer les articulations sacro-iliaques ni ajouter de torsion à la colonne vertébrale.

Chez les mammifères ambulatoires, l'acétabula est peu profond et ouvert pour permettre une plus large gamme de mouvements de la hanche, y compris une abduction significative, que chez les mammifères curseurs.

Les longueurs de l'ilium et de l'ischion et leurs angles par rapport à l'acétabulum sont fonctionnellement importants car ils déterminent les bras de moment pour les muscles extenseurs de la hanche qui fournissent l'élan pendant la locomotion.

En plus de cela, la forme relativement large (d'avant en arrière) du bassin offre un plus grand effet de levier pour le moyen et le petit fessiers.

Ces muscles sont responsables de l'abduction de la hanche qui joue un rôle essentiel dans l'équilibre vertical.


=== Primates ===

Chez les primates, le bassin se compose de quatre parties - les os de la hanche gauche et droit qui se rejoignent sur la ligne médiane ventralement et sont fixés au sacrum dorsalement et au coccyx.

Chaque os de la hanche se compose de trois composants, l'ilium, l'ischion et le pubis, et au moment de la maturité sexuelle, ces os fusionnent, bien qu'il n'y ait jamais de mouvement entre eux.

Chez l'homme, l'articulation ventrale des os pubiens est fermée.

Les grands singes, tels que les Pongo (orangs-outans), les gorilles (gorilles), les Australopithecus afarensis et les Pan troglodytes (chimpanzés), ont des plans à trois bassins plus longs avec un diamètre maximal dans le plan sagittal.


=== Évolution ===

La morphologie actuelle du bassin est héritée du bassin de nos ancêtres quadrupèdes.

La caractéristique la plus frappante de l'évolution du bassin chez les primates est l'élargissement et le raccourcissement de la lame appelée ilium.

En raison des contraintes impliquées dans la locomotion bipède, les muscles de la cuisse déplacent la cuisse vers l'avant et vers l'arrière, fournissant la puissance nécessaire à la locomotion bipède et quadrupède.

L'assèchement de l'environnement de l'Afrique de l'Est dans la période qui a suivi la création de la mer Rouge et de la vallée du Rift africain a vu des forêts ouvertes remplacer l'ancienne forêt à canopée fermée.

Les singes de cet environnement étaient obligés de voyager d'un bouquet d'arbres à un autre à travers la campagne.

Cela a conduit à un certain nombre de modifications complémentaires du bassin humain.

Il est suggéré que la bipédie en était le résultat.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pelvis
