

BREAST


The breast is one of two prominences located on the upper ventral region of a primate's torso. 

Both females and males develop breasts from the same embryological tissues. 
In females, it serves as the mammary gland, which produces and secretes milk to feed infants. 

Subcutaneous fat covers and envelops a network of ducts that converge on the nipple, and these tissues give the breast its size and shape. 

At the ends of the ducts are lobules, or clusters of alveoli, where milk is produced and stored in response to hormonal signals. 

During pregnancy, the breast responds to a complex interaction of hormones, including estrogens, progesterone, and prolactin, that mediate the completion of its development, namely lobuloalveolar maturation, in preparation of lactation and breastfeeding.
Humans are the only animals with permanent breasts. 

At puberty, estrogens, in conjunction with growth hormone, cause permanent breast growth in female humans. 

This happens only to a much lesser extent in other primates—breast development in other primates generally only occurs with pregnancy. 

Along with their major function in providing nutrition for infants, female breasts have social and sexual characteristics. 

Breasts have been featured in ancient and modern sculpture, art, and photography. 

They can figure prominently in the perception of a woman's body and sexual attractiveness. 

A number of cultures associate breasts with sexuality and tend to regard bare breasts in public as immodest or indecent. 

Breasts, especially the nipples, are an erogenous zone.


== Etymology and terminology ==

The English word breast derives from the Old English word brēost ('breast, bosom') from Proto-Germanic *breustam (breast), from the Proto-Indo-European base bhreus– (to swell, to sprout). 

The breast spelling conforms to the Scottish and North English dialectal pronunciations. 

The Merriam-Webster Dictionary states that "Middle English brest, [comes] from Old English brēost; akin to Old High German brust..., Old Irish brú [belly], [and] Russian bryukho"; the first known usage of the term was before the 12th century.A large number of colloquial terms for breasts are used in English, ranging from fairly polite terms to vulgar or slang. 

Some vulgar slang expressions may be considered to be derogatory or sexist to women.


== Evolutionary development ==

Humans are the only mammals whose breasts become permanently enlarged after sexual maturity (known in humans as puberty). 

As of 2019, the reason for this evolutionary change was unknown. 

Several hypotheses have been put forward:
A link has been proposed to processes for synthesizing the endogenous steroid hormone precursor dehydroepiandrosterone which takes place in fat rich regions of the body like the buttocks and breasts. 

These contributed to human brain development and played a part in increasing brain size. 

Breast enlargement may for this purpose may have occurred as early as Homo ergaster (1.7-1.4 MYA). 

Other breast formation hypotheses may have then taken over as principal drivers.It has been suggested by zoologists Avishag and Amotz Zahavi that the size of the human breasts can be explained by the handicap theory of sexual dimorphism. 

This would see the explanation for larger breasts as them being an honest display of the women's health and ability to grow and carry them in her life. 

Prospective mates can then evaluate the genes of a potential mate for their ability to sustain her health even with the additional energy demanding burden she is carrying.The zoologist Desmond Morris describes a sociobiological approach in his popular science book The Naked Ape. 

He suggests, by making comparisons with the other primates, that breasts evolved to replace swelling buttocks as a sex signal, of ovulation. 

He notes how humans have, relatively speaking, large penises as well as large breasts. 

Furthermore, early humans adopted bipedalism and face-to-face coitus. 

He therefore suggested enlarged sexual signals helped maintain the bond between a mated male and female even though they performed different duties and therefore were separated for lengths of time.The study The Evolution of the Human Breast (2001) proposed that the rounded shape of a woman's breast evolved to prevent the sucking infant offspring from suffocating while feeding at the teat; that is, because of the human infant's small jaw, which did not project from the face to reach the nipple, he or she might block the nostrils against the mother's breast if it were of a flatter form (cf. common chimpanzee). 

Theoretically, as the human jaw receded into the face, the woman's body compensated with round breasts.Ashley Montague (1965) proposed that breasts came about as an adaptation for infant feeding for a different reason as early human ancestors adopted bipedalism and the loss of body hair. 

Human upright stance meant infants must be carried at the hip or shoulder instead of on the back as in the apes. 

This gives the infant less opportunity to find the nipple or the purchase to cling on to the mother's body hair. 

The mobility of the nipple on a large breast in most human females gives the infant more ability to find grasp it and feed.Other suggestions include simply that permanent breasts attracted mates, that "pendulous" breasts gave infants something to cling to, or that permanent breasts shared the function of a camel's hump, to store fat as an energy reserve.


== Anatomy ==


In women, the breasts overlie the pectoralis major muscles and extend on average from the level of the second rib to the level of the sixth rib in the front of the human rib cage; thus, the breasts cover much of the chest area and the chest walls. 

At the front of the chest, the breast tissue can extend from the clavicle (collarbone) to the middle of the sternum (breastbone). 

At the sides of the chest, the breast tissue can extend into the axilla (armpit), and can reach as far to the back as the latissimus dorsi muscle, extending from the lower back to the humerus bone (the bone of the upper arm). 

As a mammary gland, the breast is composed of differing layers of tissue, predominantly two types: adipose tissue; and glandular tissue, which affects the lactation functions of the breasts.: 115 Morphologically the breast is tear-shaped. 

The superficial tissue layer (superficial fascia) is separated from the skin by 0.5–2.5 cm of subcutaneous fat (adipose tissue). 

The suspensory Cooper's ligaments are fibrous-tissue prolongations that radiate from the superficial fascia to the skin envelope. 

The female adult breast contains 14–18 irregular lactiferous lobes that converge at the nipple. 

The 2.0–4.5 mm milk ducts are immediately surrounded with dense connective tissue that support the glands. 

Milk exits the breast through the nipple, which is surrounded by a pigmented area of skin called the areola. 

The size of the areola can vary widely among women. 

The areola contains modified sweat glands known as Montgomery's glands. 

These glands secrete oily fluid that lubricate and protect the nipple during breastfeeding. 

Volatile compounds in these secretions may also serve as an olfactory stimulus for the newborn's appetite.The dimensions and weight of the breast vary widely among women. 

A small-to-medium-sized breast weighs 500 grams (1.1 pounds) or less, and a large breast can weigh approximately 750 to 1,000 grams (1.7 to 2.2 pounds) or more. 

The tissue composition ratios of the breast also vary among women. 

Some women's breasts have a higher proportion of glandular tissue than of adipose or connective tissues. 

The fat-to-connective-tissue ratio determines the density or firmness of the breast. 

During a woman's life, her breasts change size, shape, and weight due to hormonal changes during puberty, the menstrual cycle, pregnancy, breastfeeding, and menopause.


=== Glandular structure ===

The breast is an apocrine gland that produces the milk used to feed an infant. 

The nipple of the breast is surrounded by the areola (nipple-areola complex). 

The areola has many sebaceous glands, and the skin color varies from pink to dark brown. 

The basic units of the breast are the terminal duct lobular units (TDLUs), which produce the fatty breast milk. 

They give the breast its offspring-feeding functions as a mammary gland. 

They are distributed throughout the body of the breast. 

Approximately two-thirds of the lactiferous tissue is within 30 mm of the base of the nipple. 

The terminal lactiferous ducts drain the milk from TDLUs into 4–18 lactiferous ducts, which drain to the nipple. 

The milk-glands-to-fat ratio is 2:1 in a lactating woman, and 1:1 in a non-lactating woman. 

In addition to the milk glands, the breast is also composed of connective tissues (collagen, elastin), white fat, and the suspensory Cooper's ligaments. 

Sensation in the breast is provided by the peripheral nervous system innervation by means of the front (anterior) and side (lateral) cutaneous branches of the fourth-, fifth-, and sixth intercostal nerves. 

The T-4 nerve (Thoracic spinal nerve 4), which innervates the dermatomic area, supplies sensation to the nipple-areola complex.


=== Lymphatic drainage ===

Approximately 75% of the lymph from the breast travels to the axillary lymph nodes on the same side of the body, whilst 25% of the lymph travels to the parasternal nodes (beside the sternum bone).: 116  A small amount of remaining lymph travels to the other breast and to the abdominal lymph nodes. 

The subareolar region has a lymphatic plexus known as the "subareolar plexus of Sappey". 

The axillary lymph nodes include the pectoral (chest), subscapular (under the scapula), and humeral (humerus-bone area) lymph-node groups, which drain to the central axillary lymph nodes and to the apical axillary lymph nodes. 

The lymphatic drainage of the breasts is especially relevant to oncology because breast cancer is common to the mammary gland, and cancer cells can metastasize (break away) from a tumour and be dispersed to other parts of the body by means of the lymphatic system.


=== Shape, texture, and support ===

The morphologic variations in the size, shape, volume, tissue density, pectoral locale, and spacing of the breasts determine their natural shape, appearance, and position on a woman's chest. 

Breast size and other characteristics do not predict the fat-to-milk-gland ratio or the potential for the woman to nurse an infant. 

The size and the shape of the breasts are influenced by normal-life hormonal changes (thelarche, menstruation, pregnancy, menopause) and medical conditions (e.g. virginal breast hypertrophy). 

The shape of the breasts is naturally determined by the support of the suspensory Cooper's ligaments, the underlying muscle and bone structures of the chest, and by the skin envelope. 

The suspensory ligaments sustain the breast from the clavicle (collarbone) and the clavico-pectoral fascia (collarbone and chest) by traversing and encompassing the fat and milk-gland tissues. 

The breast is positioned, affixed to, and supported upon the chest wall, while its shape is established and maintained by the skin envelope. 

In most women, one breast is slightly larger than the other. 

More obvious and persistent asymmetry in breast size occurs in up to 25% of women.While it is a common belief that breastfeeding causes breasts to sag, researchers have found that a woman's breasts sag due to four key factors: cigarette smoking, number of pregnancies, gravity, and weight loss or gain.The base of each breast is attached to the chest by the deep fascia over the pectoralis major muscles. 

The space between the breast and the pectoralis major muscle, called retromammary space, gives mobility to the breast. 
The chest (thoracic cavity) progressively slopes outwards from the thoracic inlet (atop the breastbone) and above to the lowest ribs that support the breasts. 

The inframammary fold, where the lower portion of the breast meets the chest, is an anatomic feature created by the adherence of the breast skin and the underlying connective tissues of the chest; the IMF is the lower-most extent of the anatomic breast. 

Normal breast tissue typically has a texture that feels nodular or granular, to an extent that varies considerably from woman to woman.


== Development ==


The breasts are principally composed of adipose, glandular, and connective tissues. 

Because these tissues have hormone receptors, their sizes and volumes fluctuate according to the hormonal changes particular to thelarche (sprouting of breasts), menstruation (egg production), pregnancy (reproduction), lactation (feeding of offspring), and menopause (end of menstruation).


=== Puberty ===


The morphological structure of the human breast is identical in males and females until puberty. 

For pubescent girls in thelarche (the breast-development stage), the female sex hormones (principally estrogens) in conjunction with growth hormone promote the sprouting, growth, and development of the breasts. 

During this time, the mammary glands grow in size and volume and begin resting on the chest. 

These development stages of secondary sex characteristics (breasts, pubic hair, etc.) are illustrated in the five-stage Tanner Scale.During thelarche the developing breasts are sometimes of unequal size, and usually the left breast is slightly larger. 

This condition of asymmetry is transitory and statistically normal in female physical and sexual development. 

Medical conditions can cause overdevelopment (e.g., virginal breast hypertrophy, macromastia) or underdevelopment (e.g., tuberous breast deformity, micromastia) in girls and women.
Approximately two years after the onset of puberty (a girl's first menstrual cycle), estrogen and growth hormone stimulate the development and growth of the glandular fat and suspensory tissues that compose the breast. 

This continues for approximately four years until the final shape of the breast (size, volume, density) is established at about the age of 21. 

Mammoplasia (breast enlargement) in girls begins at puberty, unlike all other primates in which breasts enlarge only during lactation.


=== Changes during the menstrual cycle ===

During the menstrual cycle, the breasts are enlarged by premenstrual water retention and temporary growth.


=== Pregnancy and breastfeeding ===

The breasts reach full maturity only when a woman's first pregnancy occurs. 

Changes to the breasts are among the first signs of pregnancy. 

The breasts become larger, the nipple-areola complex becomes larger and darker, the Montgomery's glands enlarge, and veins sometimes become more visible. 

Breast tenderness during pregnancy is common, especially during the first trimester. 

By mid-pregnancy, the breast is physiologically capable of lactation and some women can express colostrum, a form of breast milk.Pregnancy causes elevated levels of the hormone prolactin, which has a key role in the production of milk. 

However, milk production is blocked by the hormones progesterone and estrogen until after delivery, when progesterone and estrogen levels plummet.


=== Menopause ===

At menopause, breast atrophy occurs. 

The breasts can decrease in size when the levels of circulating estrogen decline. 

The adipose tissue and milk glands also begin to wither. 

The breasts can also become enlarged from adverse side effects of combined oral contraceptive pills. 

The size of the breasts can also increase and decrease in response to weight fluctuations. 

Physical changes to the breasts are often recorded in the stretch marks of the skin envelope; they can serve as historical indicators of the increments and the decrements of the size and volume of a woman's breasts throughout the course of her life.


== Breastfeeding ==


The primary function of the breasts, as mammary glands, is the nourishing of an infant with breast milk. 

Milk is produced in milk-secreting cells in the alveoli. 

When the breasts are stimulated by the suckling of her baby, the mother's brain secretes oxytocin. 

High levels of oxytocin trigger the contraction of muscle cells surrounding the alveoli, causing milk to flow along the ducts that connect the alveoli to the nipple.Full-term newborns have an instinct and a need to suck on a nipple, and breastfed babies nurse for both nutrition and for comfort. 

Breast milk provides all necessary nutrients for the first six months of life, and then remains an important source of nutrition, alongside solid foods, until at least one or two years of age.


== Clinical significance ==


The breast is susceptible to numerous benign and malignant conditions. 

The most frequent benign conditions are puerperal mastitis, fibrocystic breast changes and mastalgia.
Lactation unrelated to pregnancy is known as galactorrhea. 

It can be caused by certain drugs (such as antipsychotic medications), extreme physical stress, or endocrine disorders. 

Lactation in newborns is caused by hormones from the mother that crossed into the baby's bloodstream during pregnancy.


=== Breast cancer ===


Breast cancer is the most common cause of cancer death among women and it is one of the leading causes of death among women. 

Factors that appear to be implicated in decreasing the risk of breast cancer are regular breast examinations by health care professionals, regular mammograms, self-examination of breasts, healthy diet, and exercise to decrease excess body fat, and breastfeeding.


=== Male breasts ===

Both females and males develop breasts from the same embryological tissues. 

Normally, males produce lower levels of estrogens and higher levels of androgens, namely testosterone, which suppress the effects of estrogens in developing excessive breast tissue.
In boys and men, abnormal breast development is manifested as gynecomastia, the consequence of a biochemical imbalance between the normal levels of estrogen and testosterone in the male body. 

Around 70% of boys temporarily develop breast tissue during adolescence.
The condition usually resolves by itself within two years. 

When male lactation occurs, it is considered a symptom of a disorder of the pituitary gland.


=== Plastic surgery ===


Plastic surgery can be performed to augment or reduce the size of breasts, or reconstruct the breast in cases of deformative disease, such as breast cancer. 

Breast augmentation and breast lift (mastopexy) procedures are done only for cosmetic reasons, whereas breast reduction is sometimes medically indicated.
In cases where a woman's breasts are severely asymmetrical, surgery can be performed to either enlarge the smaller breast, reduce the size of the larger breast, or both.Breast augmentation surgery generally does not interfere with future ability to breastfeed. 

Breast reduction surgery more frequently leads to decreased sensation in the nipple-areola complex, and to low milk supply in women who choose to breastfeed. 

Implants can interfere with mammography (breast x-rays images).


== Society and culture ==



=== General ===

In Christian iconography, some works of art depict women with their breasts in their hands or on a platter, signifying that they died as a martyr by having their breasts severed; one example of this is Saint Agatha of Sicily.

Femen is a feminist activist group which uses topless protests as part of their campaigns against sex tourism religious institutions, sexism, and homophobia. 

Femen activists have been regularly detained by police in response to their protests.There is a long history of female breasts being used by comedians as a subject for comedy fodder (e.g., British comic Benny Hill's burlesque/slapstick routines).


=== Art history ===

In European pre-historic societies, sculptures of female figures with pronounced or highly exaggerated breasts were common. 

A typical example is the so-called Venus of Willendorf, one of many Paleolithic Venus figurines with ample hips and bosom. 

Artifacts such as bowls, rock carvings and sacred statues with breasts have been recorded from 15,000 BC up to late antiquity all across Europe, North Africa and the Middle East.
Many female deities representing love and fertility were associated with breasts and breast milk. 

Figures of the Phoenician goddess Astarte were represented as pillars studded with breasts. 

Isis, an Egyptian goddess who represented, among many other things, ideal motherhood, was often portrayed as suckling pharaohs, thereby confirming their divine status as rulers. 

Even certain male deities representing regeneration and fertility were occasionally depicted with breast-like appendices, such as the river god Hapy who was considered to be responsible for the annual overflowing of the Nile.
Female breasts were also prominent in Minoan art in the form of the famous Snake Goddess statuettes, and a few other pieces, though most female breasts are covered. 

In Ancient Greece there were several cults worshipping the "Kourotrophos", the suckling mother, represented by goddesses such as Gaia, Hera and Artemis. 

The worship of deities symbolized by the female breast in Greece became less common during the first millennium. 

The popular adoration of female goddesses decreased significantly during the rise of the Greek city states, a legacy which was passed on to the later Roman Empire.During the middle of the first millennium BC, Greek culture experienced a gradual change in the perception of female breasts. 

Women in art were covered in clothing from the neck down, including female goddesses like Athena, the patron of Athens who represented heroic endeavor. 

There were exceptions: Aphrodite, the goddess of love, was more frequently portrayed fully nude, though in postures that were intended to portray shyness or modesty, a portrayal that has been compared to modern pin ups by historian Marilyn Yalom. 

Although nude men were depicted standing upright, most depictions of female nudity in Greek art occurred "usually with drapery near at hand and with a forward-bending, self-protecting posture". 

A popular legend at the time was of the Amazons, a tribe of fierce female warriors who socialized with men only for procreation and even removed one breast to become better warriors (the idea being that the right breast would interfere with the operation of a bow and arrow). 

The legend was a popular motif in art during Greek and Roman antiquity and served as an antithetical cautionary tale.

		


=== Body image ===

Many women regard their breasts as important to their sexual attractiveness, as a sign of femininity that is important to their sense of self. 

A woman with smaller breasts may regard her breasts as less attractive.


=== Clothing ===


Because breasts are mostly fatty tissue, their shape can—within limits—be molded by clothing, such as foundation garments. 

Bras are commonly worn by about 90% of Western women, and are often worn for support. 

The social norm in most Western cultures is to cover breasts in public, though the extent of coverage varies depending on the social context. 

Some religions ascribe a special status to the female breast, either in formal teachings or through symbolism. 

Islam forbids free women from exposing their breasts in public.
Many cultures, including Western cultures in North America, associate breasts with sexuality and tend to regard bare breasts as immodest or indecent. 

In some cultures, like the Himba in northern Namibia, bare-breasted women are normal. 

In some African cultures, for example, the thigh is regarded as highly sexualised and never exposed in public, but breast exposure is not taboo. 

In a few Western countries and regions female toplessness at a beach is acceptable, although it may not be acceptable in the town center.Social attitudes and laws regarding breastfeeding in public vary widely. 

In many countries, breastfeeding in public is common, legally protected, and generally not regarded as an issue. 

However, even though the practice may be legal or socially accepted, some mothers may nevertheless be reluctant to expose a breast in public to breastfeed due to actual or potential objections by other people, negative comments, or harassment. 

It is estimated that around 63% of mothers across the world have publicly breast-fed. 

Bare-breasted women are legal and culturally acceptable at public beaches in Australia and much of Europe. 

Filmmaker Lina Esco made a film entitled Free the Nipple, which is about "...laws against female toplessness or restrictions on images of female, but not male, nipples", which Esco states is an example of sexism in society.


=== Sexual characteristic ===


In some cultures, breasts play a role in human sexual activity. 

In Western culture, breasts have a "...hallowed sexual status, arguably more fetishized than either sex's genitalia". 

Breasts and especially the nipples are among the various human erogenous zones. 

They are sensitive to the touch as they have many nerve endings; and it is common to press or massage them with hands or orally before or during sexual activity. 

During sexual arousal, breast size increases, venous patterns across the breasts become more visible, and nipples harden. 

Compared to other primates, human breasts are proportionately large throughout adult females' lives. 

Some writers have suggested that they may have evolved as a visual signal of sexual maturity and fertility.Many people regard bare female breasts to be aesthetically pleasing or erotic, and they can elicit heightened sexual desires in men in many cultures. 

In the ancient Indian work the Kama Sutra, light scratching of the breasts with nails and biting with teeth are considered erotic. 

Some people show a sexual interest in female breasts distinct from that of the person, which may be regarded as a breast fetish. 

A number of Western fashions include clothing which accentuate the breasts, such as the use of push-up bras and decollete (plunging neckline) gowns and blouses which show cleavage. 

While U.S. culture prefers breasts that are youthful and upright, some cultures venerate women with drooping breasts, indicating mothering and the wisdom of experience.Research conducted at the Victoria University of Wellington showed that breasts are often the first thing men look at, and for a longer time than other body parts. 

The writers of the study had initially speculated that the reason for this is due to endocrinology with larger breasts indicating higher levels of estrogen and a sign of greater fertility, but the researchers said that "Men may be looking more often at the breasts because they are simply aesthetically pleasing, regardless of the size."Some women report achieving an orgasm from nipple stimulation, but this is rare. 

Research suggests that the orgasms are genital orgasms, and may also be directly linked to "the genital area of the brain". 

In these cases, it seems that sensation from the nipples travels to the same part of the brain as sensations from the vagina, clitoris and cervix. 

Nipple stimulation may trigger uterine contractions, which then produce a sensation in the genital area of the brain.


=== Anthropomorphic geography ===


There are many mountains named after the breast because they resemble it in appearance and so are objects of religious and ancestral veneration as a fertility symbol and of well-being. 

In Asia, there was "Breast Mountain", which had a cave where the Buddhist monk Bodhidharma (Da Mo) spent much time in meditation. 

Other such breast mountains are Mount Elgon on the Uganda–Kenya border; Beinn Chìochan and the Maiden Paps in Scotland; the Bundok ng Susong Dalaga ('Maiden's breast mountains') in Talim Island, Philippines, the twin hills known as the Paps of Anu (Dá Chích Anann or 'the breasts of Anu'), near Killarney in Ireland; the 2,086 m high Tetica de Bacares or La Tetica in the Sierra de Los Filabres, Spain; Khao Nom Sao in Thailand, Cerro Las Tetas in Puerto Rico; and the Breasts of Aphrodite in Mykonos, among many others. 

In the United States, the Teton Range is named after the French word for 'nipple'.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Breast
;;;ES;;;



SENO


El seno es una de las dos prominencias ubicadas en la región ventral superior del torso de un primate.

Tanto las mujeres como los hombres desarrollan senos a partir de los mismos tejidos embriológicos.
En las hembras, sirve como glándula mamaria, que produce y secreta leche para alimentar a los bebés.

La grasa subcutánea cubre y envuelve una red de conductos que convergen en el pezón, y estos tejidos le dan a la mama su tamaño y forma.

En los extremos de los conductos hay lobulillos, o grupos de alvéolos, donde se produce y almacena la leche en respuesta a las señales hormonales.

Durante el embarazo, la mama responde a una interacción compleja de hormonas, incluidos los estrógenos, la progesterona y la prolactina, que median en la finalización de su desarrollo, a saber, la maduración lobuloalveolar, en preparación para la lactancia y el amamantamiento.
Los humanos son los únicos animales con senos permanentes.

En la pubertad, los estrógenos, junto con la hormona del crecimiento, provocan un crecimiento mamario permanente en las mujeres humanas.

Esto sucede solo en mucha menor medida en otros primates: el desarrollo de los senos en otros primates generalmente solo ocurre con el embarazo.

Junto con su función principal de proporcionar nutrición a los bebés, los senos femeninos tienen características sociales y sexuales.

Los senos han aparecido en la escultura, el arte y la fotografía antiguos y modernos.

Pueden ocupar un lugar destacado en la percepción del cuerpo de una mujer y su atractivo sexual.

Varias culturas asocian los senos con la sexualidad y tienden a considerar los senos desnudos en público como inmodestos o indecentes.

Los senos, especialmente los pezones, son una zona erógena.


== Etimología y terminología ==

La palabra inglesa breast deriva de la palabra inglesa antigua brēost ('pecho, seno') del protogermánico *breustam (pecho), de la base protoindoeuropea bhreus– (hincharse, brotar).

La ortografía de los senos se ajusta a las pronunciaciones dialectales escocesas e inglesas del norte.

El diccionario Merriam-Webster establece que "el inglés medio brest, [proviene] del inglés antiguo brēost; similar al alto alemán antiguo brust ..., el irlandés antiguo brú [barriga], [y] el ruso bryukho"; el primer uso conocido del término fue antes del siglo XII. En inglés se usa una gran cantidad de términos coloquiales para los senos, que van desde términos bastante educados hasta términos vulgares o de jerga.

Algunas expresiones de la jerga vulgar pueden considerarse despectivas o sexistas para las mujeres.


== Desarrollo evolutivo ==

Los humanos son los únicos mamíferos cuyos senos se agrandan permanentemente después de la madurez sexual (lo que en los humanos se conoce como pubertad).

A partir de 2019, se desconocía el motivo de este cambio evolutivo.

Se han planteado varias hipótesis:
Se ha propuesto un vínculo con los procesos para sintetizar el precursor de la hormona esteroide endógena dehidroepiandrosterona que tiene lugar en regiones ricas en grasa del cuerpo como las nalgas y los senos.

Estos contribuyeron al desarrollo del cerebro humano y desempeñaron un papel en el aumento del tamaño del cerebro.

El agrandamiento de los senos puede haber ocurrido con este propósito ya en Homo ergaster (1.7-1.4 MYA).

Es posible que otras hipótesis sobre la formación de los senos hayan asumido el papel de impulsores principales. Los zoólogos Avishag y Amotz Zahavi han sugerido que el tamaño de los senos humanos puede explicarse mediante la teoría de la discapacidad del dimorfismo sexual.

Esto vería la explicación de los senos más grandes como una muestra honesta de la salud y la capacidad de la mujer para crecer y llevarlos en su vida.

Las posibles parejas pueden entonces evaluar los genes de una pareja potencial para determinar su capacidad para mantener su salud incluso con la carga adicional que exige energía que lleva. El zoólogo Desmond Morris describe un enfoque sociobiológico en su popular libro de ciencia The Naked Ape.

Sugiere, al hacer comparaciones con otros primates, que los senos evolucionaron para reemplazar las nalgas hinchadas como señal sexual de ovulación.

Señala cómo los humanos tienen, en términos relativos, penes grandes y senos grandes.

Además, los primeros humanos adoptaron el bipedalismo y el coito cara a cara.

Por lo tanto, sugirió que las señales sexuales ampliadas ayudaban a mantener el vínculo entre un macho y una hembra emparejados, aunque realizaban tareas diferentes y, por lo tanto, estaban separados durante mucho tiempo. El estudio The Evolution of the Human Breast (2001) propuso que la forma redondeada del pecho de una mujer el pecho evolucionó para evitar que los bebés lactantes se asfixiaran mientras se alimentaban de la tetina; es decir, debido a la pequeña mandíbula del bebé humano, que no sobresalía de la cara para alcanzar el pezón, él o ella podrían bloquear las fosas nasales contra el pecho de la madre si tuviera una forma más plana (cf. chimpancé común).

Teóricamente, a medida que la mandíbula humana retrocedía hacia la cara, el cuerpo de la mujer lo compensaba con senos redondos. Ashley Montague (1965) propuso que los senos surgieron como una adaptación para la alimentación infantil por una razón diferente, ya que los primeros ancestros humanos adoptaron el bipedalismo y la pérdida del cuerpo. pelo.

La postura erguida humana significaba que los bebés debían ser llevados en la cadera o en el hombro en lugar de en la espalda como en los simios.

Esto le da al bebé menos oportunidad de encontrar el pezón o la compra para aferrarse al vello corporal de la madre.

La movilidad del pezón en un seno grande en la mayoría de las mujeres humanas le da al bebé más capacidad para agarrarlo y alimentarse. los senos compartían la función de la joroba de un camello, para almacenar grasa como reserva de energía.


== Anatomía ==


En las mujeres, los senos se superponen a los músculos pectorales mayores y se extienden en promedio desde el nivel de la segunda costilla hasta el nivel de la sexta costilla en el frente de la caja torácica humana; por lo tanto, los senos cubren gran parte del área del tórax y las paredes torácicas.

En la parte delantera del pecho, el tejido mamario puede extenderse desde la clavícula (clavícula) hasta la mitad del esternón (esternón).

A los lados del tórax, el tejido mamario puede extenderse hacia la axila (sobaco) y puede llegar hasta la espalda hasta el músculo dorsal ancho, extendiéndose desde la parte inferior de la espalda hasta el hueso del húmero (el hueso de la parte superior del brazo) .

Como glándula mamaria, la mama se compone de diferentes capas de tejido, predominantemente de dos tipos: tejido adiposo; y tejido glandular, que afecta las funciones de lactancia de las mamas.: 115 Morfológicamente la mama tiene forma de lágrima.

La capa de tejido superficial (fascia superficial) está separada de la piel por 0,5 a 2,5 cm de grasa subcutánea (tejido adiposo).

Los ligamentos suspensorios de Cooper son prolongaciones de tejido fibroso que se irradian desde la fascia superficial hasta la piel.

La mama adulta femenina contiene 14 a 18 lóbulos galactóforos irregulares que convergen en el pezón.

Los conductos galactóforos de 2,0 a 4,5 mm se rodean inmediatamente de tejido conjuntivo denso que sostiene las glándulas.

La leche sale del seno a través del pezón, que está rodeado por un área de piel pigmentada llamada areola.

El tamaño de la areola puede variar ampliamente entre las mujeres.

La areola contiene glándulas sudoríparas modificadas conocidas como glándulas de Montgomery.

Estas glándulas secretan un líquido aceitoso que lubrica y protege el pezón durante la lactancia.

Los compuestos volátiles en estas secreciones también pueden servir como un estímulo olfativo para el apetito del recién nacido. Las dimensiones y el peso del seno varían ampliamente entre las mujeres.

Un seno de tamaño pequeño a mediano pesa 500 gramos (1,1 libras) o menos, y un seno grande puede pesar aproximadamente de 750 a 1000 gramos (1,7 a 2,2 libras) o más.

Las proporciones de composición del tejido de la mama también varían entre las mujeres.

Los senos de algunas mujeres tienen una mayor proporción de tejido glandular que de tejido adiposo o conectivo.

La relación grasa-tejido conectivo determina la densidad o firmeza del seno.

Durante la vida de una mujer, sus senos cambian de tamaño, forma y peso debido a cambios hormonales durante la pubertad, el ciclo menstrual, el embarazo, la lactancia y la menopausia.


=== Estructura glandular ===

El seno es una glándula apocrina que produce la leche que se usa para alimentar a un bebé.

El pezón de la mama está rodeado por la areola (complejo areola-pezón).

La areola tiene muchas glándulas sebáceas y el color de la piel varía de rosa a marrón oscuro.

Las unidades básicas de la mama son las unidades lobulillares del conducto terminal (TDLU), que producen la leche materna grasa.

Le dan al seno sus funciones de alimentación de crías como una glándula mamaria.

Se distribuyen por todo el cuerpo de la mama.

Aproximadamente dos tercios del tejido galactóforo se encuentra dentro de los 30 mm de la base del pezón.

Los conductos galactóforos terminales drenan la leche de las TDLU hacia 4 a 18 conductos galactóforos, que drenan hacia el pezón.

La proporción de glándulas mamarias a grasa es de 2:1 en una mujer lactante y de 1:1 en una mujer no lactante.

Además de las glándulas mamarias, la mama también se compone de tejidos conectivos (colágeno, elastina), grasa blanca y los ligamentos suspensorios de Cooper.

La sensación en la mama es proporcionada por la inervación del sistema nervioso periférico por medio de las ramas cutáneas frontal (anterior) y lateral (lateral) de los nervios intercostales cuarto, quinto y sexto.

El nervio T-4 (nervio espinal torácico 4), que inerva el área dermatómica, proporciona sensibilidad al complejo areola-pezón.


=== Drenaje linfático ===

Aproximadamente el 75 % de la linfa de la mama viaja a los ganglios linfáticos axilares del mismo lado del cuerpo, mientras que el 25 % de la linfa viaja a los ganglios paraesternales (junto al hueso del esternón): 116 Una pequeña cantidad de la linfa restante viaja al otro seno ya los ganglios linfáticos abdominales.

La región subareolar tiene un plexo linfático conocido como "plexo subareolar de Sappey".

Los ganglios linfáticos axilares incluyen los grupos de ganglios linfáticos pectorales (pecho), subescapulares (debajo de la escápula) y humerales (área del húmero y el hueso), que drenan a los ganglios linfáticos axilares centrales y a los ganglios linfáticos axilares apicales.

El drenaje linfático de las mamas es especialmente relevante para la oncología porque el cáncer de mama es común a la glándula mamaria y las células cancerosas pueden hacer metástasis (desprenderse) de un tumor y dispersarse a otras partes del cuerpo por medio del sistema linfático.


=== Forma, textura y soporte ===

Las variaciones morfológicas en el tamaño, la forma, el volumen, la densidad del tejido, la localización pectoral y el espacio de las mamas determinan su forma, apariencia y posición naturales en el pecho de una mujer.

El tamaño de los senos y otras características no predicen la proporción de grasa a glándulas mamarias ni el potencial de la mujer para amamantar a un bebé.

El tamaño y la forma de los senos están influenciados por cambios hormonales de la vida normal (telarquia, menstruación, embarazo, menopausia) y condiciones médicas (p. ej., hipertrofia mamaria virginal).

La forma de los senos está naturalmente determinada por el soporte de los ligamentos suspensorios de Cooper, las estructuras óseas y musculares subyacentes del tórax y por la piel que lo envuelve.

Los ligamentos suspensorios sostienen la mama desde la clavícula (clavícula) y la fascia clavico-pectoral (clavícula y tórax) atravesando y abarcando los tejidos adiposo y de las glándulas mamarias.

La mama se coloca, fija y sostiene sobre la pared torácica, mientras que su forma se establece y mantiene por la piel que la envuelve.

En la mayoría de las mujeres, un seno es un poco más grande que el otro.

La asimetría más evidente y persistente en el tamaño de los senos ocurre en hasta el 25 % de las mujeres. Si bien es una creencia común que la lactancia materna hace que los senos se caigan, los investigadores han descubierto que los senos de una mujer se cuelgan debido a cuatro factores clave: fumar cigarrillos, número de embarazos , gravedad y pérdida o ganancia de peso. La base de cada seno está unida al tórax por la fascia profunda sobre los músculos pectorales mayores.

El espacio entre la mama y el músculo pectoral mayor, llamado espacio retromamaria, da movilidad a la mama.
El tórax (cavidad torácica) se inclina progresivamente hacia afuera desde la entrada torácica (encima del esternón) y por encima de las costillas inferiores que sostienen los senos.

El pliegue inframamario, donde la parte inferior del seno se encuentra con el tórax, es una característica anatómica creada por la adherencia de la piel del seno y los tejidos conectivos subyacentes del tórax; el IMF es la extensión más baja de la mama anatómica.

El tejido mamario normal normalmente tiene una textura que se siente nodular o granular, hasta un punto que varía considerablemente de una mujer a otra.


== Desarrollo ==


Los senos están compuestos principalmente de tejido adiposo, glandular y conectivo.

Debido a que estos tejidos tienen receptores de hormonas, sus tamaños y volúmenes fluctúan de acuerdo con los cambios hormonales particulares de la telarquia (crecimiento de los senos), la menstruación (producción de óvulos), el embarazo (reproducción), la lactancia (alimentación de las crías) y la menopausia (fin de la menstruación). ).


=== Pubertad ===


La estructura morfológica de la mama humana es idéntica en machos y hembras hasta la pubertad.

Para las niñas púberes en telarquia (la etapa de desarrollo de los senos), las hormonas sexuales femeninas (principalmente estrógenos) junto con la hormona del crecimiento promueven la germinación, el crecimiento y el desarrollo de los senos.

Durante este tiempo, las glándulas mamarias crecen en tamaño y volumen y comienzan a descansar sobre el pecho.

Estas etapas de desarrollo de las características sexuales secundarias (mamas, vello púbico, etc.) se ilustran en la escala de Tanner de cinco etapas.

Esta condición de asimetría es transitoria y estadísticamente normal en el desarrollo físico y sexual femenino.

Las condiciones médicas pueden causar sobredesarrollo (p. ej., hipertrofia mamaria virginal, macromastia) o subdesarrollo (p. ej., deformidad de la mama tuberosa, micromastia) en niñas y mujeres.
Aproximadamente dos años después del inicio de la pubertad (el primer ciclo menstrual de una niña), el estrógeno y la hormona del crecimiento estimulan el desarrollo y el crecimiento de la grasa glandular y los tejidos suspensorios que componen el seno.

Esto continúa durante aproximadamente cuatro años hasta que se establece la forma final del seno (tamaño, volumen, densidad) alrededor de los 21 años.

La mamoplasia (agrandamiento de los senos) en las niñas comienza en la pubertad, a diferencia de todos los demás primates en los que los senos aumentan de tamaño solo durante la lactancia.


=== Cambios durante el ciclo menstrual ===

Durante el ciclo menstrual, los senos se agrandan por la retención de agua premenstrual y el crecimiento temporal.


=== Embarazo y lactancia ===

Los senos alcanzan la madurez completa solo cuando ocurre el primer embarazo de una mujer.

Los cambios en los senos se encuentran entre los primeros signos de embarazo.

Los senos se vuelven más grandes, el complejo areola-pezón se vuelve más grande y más oscuro, las glándulas de Montgomery se agrandan y, a veces, las venas se vuelven más visibles.

La sensibilidad en los senos durante el embarazo es común, especialmente durante el primer trimestre.

A mediados del embarazo, el seno es fisiológicamente capaz de amamantar y algunas mujeres pueden extraer calostro, una forma de leche materna. El embarazo provoca niveles elevados de la hormona prolactina, que tiene un papel clave en la producción de leche.

Sin embargo, la producción de leche está bloqueada por las hormonas progesterona y estrógeno hasta después del parto, cuando los niveles de progesterona y estrógeno caen en picado.


=== Menopausia ===

En la menopausia, se produce la atrofia mamaria.

Los senos pueden disminuir de tamaño cuando disminuyen los niveles de estrógeno circulante.

El tejido adiposo y las glándulas mamarias también comienzan a marchitarse.

Los senos también pueden agrandarse debido a los efectos secundarios adversos de las píldoras anticonceptivas orales combinadas.

El tamaño de los senos también puede aumentar y disminuir en respuesta a las fluctuaciones de peso.

Los cambios físicos en los senos a menudo se registran en las estrías de la envoltura de la piel; pueden servir como indicadores históricos de los incrementos y disminuciones del tamaño y volumen de los senos de una mujer a lo largo de su vida.


== Lactancia materna ==


La función principal de los senos, como glándulas mamarias, es nutrir a un bebé con leche materna.

La leche se produce en las células secretoras de leche en los alvéolos.

Cuando los senos son estimulados por la succión de su bebé, el cerebro de la madre segrega oxitocina.

Los altos niveles de oxitocina desencadenan la contracción de las células musculares que rodean los alvéolos, lo que hace que la leche fluya a lo largo de los conductos que conectan los alvéolos con el pezón. tanto para la nutrición como para la comodidad.

La leche materna proporciona todos los nutrientes necesarios durante los primeros seis meses de vida y luego sigue siendo una fuente importante de nutrición, junto con los alimentos sólidos, hasta al menos uno o dos años de edad.


== Importancia clínica ==


La mama es susceptible a numerosas condiciones benignas y malignas.

Las condiciones benignas más frecuentes son la mastitis puerperal, los cambios fibroquísticos de las mamas y la mastalgia.
La lactancia no relacionada con el embarazo se conoce como galactorrea.

Puede ser causado por ciertos medicamentos (como los medicamentos antipsicóticos), estrés físico extremo o trastornos endocrinos.

La lactancia en los recién nacidos es causada por hormonas de la madre que cruzaron al torrente sanguíneo del bebé durante el embarazo.


=== Cáncer de mama ===


El cáncer de mama es la causa más común de muerte por cáncer entre las mujeres y es una de las principales causas de muerte entre las mujeres.

Los factores que parecen estar implicados en la disminución del riesgo de cáncer de seno son los exámenes regulares de los senos realizados por profesionales de la salud, las mamografías periódicas, el autoexamen de los senos, una dieta saludable y el ejercicio para disminuir el exceso de grasa corporal y la lactancia materna.


=== Pechos masculinos ===

Tanto las mujeres como los hombres desarrollan senos a partir de los mismos tejidos embriológicos.

Normalmente, los hombres producen niveles más bajos de estrógenos y niveles más altos de andrógenos, a saber, testosterona, que suprimen los efectos de los estrógenos en el desarrollo de tejido mamario excesivo.
En niños y hombres, el desarrollo mamario anormal se manifiesta como ginecomastia, la consecuencia de un desequilibrio bioquímico entre los niveles normales de estrógeno y testosterona en el cuerpo masculino.

Alrededor del 70% de los niños desarrollan tejido mamario temporalmente durante la adolescencia.
La condición generalmente se resuelve por sí sola dentro de dos años.

Cuando ocurre la lactancia masculina, se considera un síntoma de un trastorno de la glándula pituitaria.


=== Cirugía plástica ===


La cirugía plástica se puede realizar para aumentar o reducir el tamaño de los senos, o reconstruir el seno en casos de enfermedades deformantes, como el cáncer de seno.

Los procedimientos de aumento de senos y levantamiento de senos (mastopexia) se realizan solo por razones estéticas, mientras que la reducción de senos a veces está médicamente indicada.
En los casos en que los senos de una mujer son severamente asimétricos, se puede realizar una cirugía para agrandar el seno más pequeño, reducir el tamaño del seno más grande o ambos. La cirugía de aumento de senos generalmente no interfiere con la futura capacidad de amamantar.

La cirugía de reducción mamaria conduce con mayor frecuencia a una disminución de la sensibilidad en el complejo areola-pezón ya un bajo suministro de leche en las mujeres que eligen amamantar.

Los implantes pueden interferir con la mamografía (imágenes de rayos X del seno).


== Sociedad y cultura ==



=== Generalidades ===

En la iconografía cristiana, algunas obras de arte representan a mujeres con los senos en las manos o en un plato, lo que significa que murieron como mártires al cortarles los senos; un ejemplo de esto es Santa Águeda de Sicilia.

Femen es un grupo activista feminista que utiliza las protestas en topless como parte de sus campañas contra el turismo sexual, las instituciones religiosas, el sexismo y la homofobia.

Las activistas de Femen han sido detenidas regularmente por la policía en respuesta a sus protestas. Hay una larga historia de comediantes que utilizan los senos femeninos como tema de comedia (por ejemplo, las rutinas burlescas/bufonescas del cómico británico Benny Hill).


=== Historia del arte ===

En las sociedades prehistóricas europeas eran comunes las esculturas de figuras femeninas con senos pronunciados o muy exagerados.

Un ejemplo típico es la llamada Venus de Willendorf, una de las muchas figurillas de Venus paleolíticas con caderas y senos amplios.

Se han registrado artefactos como cuencos, grabados rupestres y estatuas sagradas con senos desde el 15.000 a. C. hasta la antigüedad tardía en toda Europa, el norte de África y Oriente Medio.
Muchas deidades femeninas que representan el amor y la fertilidad estaban asociadas con los senos y la leche materna.

Las figuras de la diosa fenicia Astarté se representaban como columnas tachonadas de pechos.

Isis, una diosa egipcia que representaba, entre muchas otras cosas, la maternidad ideal, a menudo se representaba como faraones lactantes, lo que confirmaba su estatus divino como gobernantes.

Incluso ciertas deidades masculinas que representaban la regeneración y la fertilidad se representaban ocasionalmente con apéndices en forma de senos, como el dios del río Hapy, a quien se consideraba responsable del desbordamiento anual del Nilo.
Los senos femeninos también fueron prominentes en el arte minoico en la forma de las famosas estatuillas de la Diosa Serpiente y algunas otras piezas, aunque la mayoría de los senos femeninos están cubiertos.

En la Antigua Grecia existían varios cultos que rendían culto a la "Kourotrophos", la madre lactante, representada por diosas como Gaia, Hera y Artemisa.

El culto a las deidades simbolizadas por el pecho femenino en Grecia se volvió menos común durante el primer milenio.

La adoración popular de las diosas femeninas disminuyó significativamente durante el surgimiento de las ciudades estado griegas, un legado que se transmitió al posterior Imperio Romano. A mediados del primer milenio antes de Cristo, la cultura griega experimentó un cambio gradual en la percepción de los senos femeninos. .

Las mujeres en el arte estaban cubiertas con ropa desde el cuello hacia abajo, incluidas diosas femeninas como Atenea, la patrona de Atenas que representaba el esfuerzo heroico.

Hubo excepciones: Afrodita, la diosa del amor, fue retratada con más frecuencia completamente desnuda, aunque en posturas que pretendían retratar la timidez o la modestia, una representación que la historiadora Marilyn Yalom ha comparado con las pin-ups modernas.

Aunque se representaba a hombres desnudos de pie, la mayoría de las representaciones de desnudez femenina en el arte griego ocurrían "generalmente con cortinas al alcance de la mano y con una postura de autoprotección inclinada hacia adelante".

Una leyenda popular en ese momento era la de las amazonas, una tribu de feroces guerreras que socializaban con los hombres solo para la procreación e incluso se quitaban un seno para convertirse en mejores guerreras (la idea era que el seno derecho interferiría con el funcionamiento de un arco y flecha).

La leyenda fue un motivo popular en el arte durante la antigüedad griega y romana y sirvió como un cuento de advertencia antitético.

 


=== Imagen del cuerpo ===

Muchas mujeres consideran que sus senos son importantes para su atractivo sexual, como un signo de feminidad que es importante para su sentido de identidad.

Una mujer con senos más pequeños puede considerar que sus senos son menos atractivos.


=== Ropa ===


Debido a que los senos son en su mayoría tejido adiposo, su forma puede, dentro de ciertos límites, ser moldeada por la ropa, como las prendas básicas.

Aproximadamente el 90% de las mujeres occidentales usan sujetadores y, a menudo, se usan como soporte.

La norma social en la mayoría de las culturas occidentales es cubrir los senos en público, aunque el grado de cobertura varía según el contexto social.

Algunas religiones atribuyen un estatus especial al seno femenino, ya sea en las enseñanzas formales o mediante el simbolismo.

El Islam prohíbe a las mujeres libres exponer sus senos en público.
Muchas culturas, incluidas las culturas occidentales de América del Norte, asocian los senos con la sexualidad y tienden a considerar los senos desnudos como inmodestos o indecentes.

En algunas culturas, como la Himba en el norte de Namibia, las mujeres con el pecho desnudo son normales.

En algunas culturas africanas, por ejemplo, el muslo se considera muy sexualizado y nunca se expone en público, pero la exposición de los senos no es un tabú.

En algunos países y regiones occidentales, la desnudez femenina en la playa es aceptable, aunque puede no serlo en el centro de la ciudad. Las actitudes sociales y las leyes con respecto a la lactancia materna en público varían ampliamente.

En muchos países, la lactancia materna en público es común, está legalmente protegida y generalmente no se considera un problema.

Sin embargo, a pesar de que la práctica puede ser legal o socialmente aceptada, algunas madres pueden ser reacias a exponer un seno en público para amamantar debido a objeciones reales o potenciales de otras personas, comentarios negativos o acoso.

Se estima que alrededor del 63% de las madres de todo el mundo han amamantado públicamente.

Las mujeres con los senos desnudos son legal y culturalmente aceptables en las playas públicas de Australia y gran parte de Europa.

La cineasta Lina Esco realizó una película titulada Free the Nipple , que trata sobre "... leyes contra el topless femenino o restricciones a las imágenes de pezones femeninos, pero no masculinos", que Esco afirma que es un ejemplo de sexismo en la sociedad.


=== Característica sexual ===


En algunas culturas, los senos juegan un papel en la actividad sexual humana.

En la cultura occidental, los senos tienen un "... estatus sexual sagrado, posiblemente más fetichizado que los genitales de cualquier sexo".

Los senos y especialmente los pezones se encuentran entre las diversas zonas erógenas humanas.

Son sensibles al tacto ya que tienen muchas terminaciones nerviosas; y es común presionarlos o masajearlos con las manos o por vía oral antes o durante la actividad sexual.

Durante la excitación sexual, el tamaño de los senos aumenta, los patrones venosos en los senos se vuelven más visibles y los pezones se endurecen.

En comparación con otros primates, los senos humanos son proporcionalmente grandes a lo largo de la vida de las hembras adultas.

Algunos escritores han sugerido que pueden haber evolucionado como una señal visual de madurez sexual y fertilidad. Muchas personas consideran que los senos femeninos desnudos son estéticamente agradables o eróticos, y pueden provocar mayores deseos sexuales en los hombres en muchas culturas.

En la antigua obra india Kama Sutra, rascarse los senos con uñas y morder con los dientes se considera erótico.

Algunas personas muestran un interés sexual en los senos femeninos distinto al de la persona, lo que puede considerarse un fetiche de los senos.

Varias modas occidentales incluyen ropa que acentúa los senos, como el uso de sujetadores push-up y vestidos y blusas con escote pronunciado que muestran escote.

Si bien la cultura estadounidense prefiere los senos juveniles y erguidos, algunas culturas veneran a las mujeres con senos caídos, lo que indica la maternidad y la sabiduría de la experiencia. Una investigación realizada en la Universidad Victoria de Wellington mostró que los senos suelen ser lo primero que miran los hombres, y por mucho tiempo. más tiempo que otras partes del cuerpo.

Los redactores del estudio inicialmente habían especulado que la razón de esto se debe a la endocrinología con senos más grandes que indican niveles más altos de estrógeno y un signo de mayor fertilidad, pero los investigadores dijeron que "los hombres pueden estar mirando los senos con más frecuencia porque son simplemente estéticamente agradable, independientemente del tamaño". Algunas mujeres informan haber logrado un orgasmo mediante la estimulación del pezón, pero esto es raro.

La investigación sugiere que los orgasmos son orgasmos genitales y también pueden estar directamente relacionados con "el área genital del cerebro".

En estos casos, parece que la sensación de los pezones viaja a la misma parte del cerebro que las sensaciones de la vagina, el clítoris y el cuello uterino.

La estimulación del pezón puede desencadenar contracciones uterinas, que luego producen una sensación en el área genital del cerebro.


=== Geografía antropomórfica ===


Hay muchas montañas que llevan el nombre del seno porque se asemejan a él en apariencia y por lo tanto son objetos de veneración religiosa y ancestral como símbolo de fertilidad y bienestar.

En Asia, estaba la "Montaña de los Senos", que tenía una cueva donde el monje budista Bodhidharma (Da Mo) pasaba mucho tiempo en meditación.

Otras montañas de pecho similares son el monte Elgon en la frontera entre Uganda y Kenia; Beinn Chìochan y los Maiden Paps en Escocia; el Bundok ng Susong Dalaga ('montañas del pecho de la doncella') en la isla de Talim, Filipinas, las colinas gemelas conocidas como Paps de Anu (Dá Chích Anann o 'los pechos de Anu'), cerca de Killarney en Irlanda; la Tetica de Bacares o La Tetica de 2.086 m de altura en la Sierra de Los Filabres, España; Khao Nom Sao en Tailandia, Cerro Las Tetas en Puerto Rico; y los Pechos de Afrodita en Mykonos, entre muchos otros.

En los Estados Unidos, Teton Range lleva el nombre de la palabra francesa para 'pezón'.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mama

;;;PT;;;



SEIOS


A mama é uma das duas proeminências localizadas na região ventral superior do tronco de um primata.

Tanto as fêmeas quanto os machos desenvolvem seios a partir dos mesmos tecidos embriológicos.
Nas fêmeas, serve como glândula mamária, que produz e secreta leite para alimentar os bebês.

A gordura subcutânea cobre e envolve uma rede de ductos que convergem para o mamilo, e esses tecidos dão à mama seu tamanho e forma.

Nas extremidades dos ductos estão os lóbulos, ou aglomerados de alvéolos, onde o leite é produzido e armazenado em resposta aos sinais hormonais.

Durante a gravidez, a mama responde a uma complexa interação de hormônios, incluindo estrogênios, progesterona e prolactina, que medeiam a conclusão do seu desenvolvimento, ou seja, a maturação lobuloalveolar, na preparação da lactação e amamentação.
Os humanos são os únicos animais com seios permanentes.

Na puberdade, os estrogênios, em conjunto com o hormônio do crescimento, causam o crescimento permanente da mama em humanos do sexo feminino.

Isso acontece apenas em muito menor grau em outros primatas – o desenvolvimento da mama em outros primatas geralmente ocorre apenas com a gravidez.

Juntamente com sua função principal de fornecer nutrição para os bebês, os seios femininos têm características sociais e sexuais.

Os seios foram apresentados na escultura, arte e fotografia antigas e modernas.

Eles podem figurar de forma proeminente na percepção do corpo e da atratividade sexual de uma mulher.

Várias culturas associam os seios à sexualidade e tendem a considerar os seios nus em público como imodestos ou indecentes.

Os seios, especialmente os mamilos, são uma zona erógena.


== Etimologia e terminologia ==

A palavra inglesa mama deriva da palavra inglesa antiga brēost ('peito, peito') do proto-germânico *breustam (peito), da base protoindo-europeia bhreus– (inchar, brotar).

A ortografia do peito está em conformidade com as pronúncias dialetais escocesas e do norte do inglês.

O Dicionário Merriam-Webster afirma que "inglês médio brest, [vem] do inglês antigo brēost; semelhante ao antigo alto alemão brust..., irlandês antigo brú [barriga], [e] russo bryukho"; o primeiro uso conhecido do termo foi antes do século 12. Um grande número de termos coloquiais para seios são usados ​​em inglês, variando de termos bastante polidos a vulgares ou gírias.

Algumas expressões de gírias vulgares podem ser consideradas depreciativas ou sexistas para as mulheres.


== Desenvolvimento evolutivo ==

Os humanos são os únicos mamíferos cujos seios ficam permanentemente aumentados após a maturidade sexual (conhecida em humanos como puberdade).

A partir de 2019, o motivo dessa mudança evolutiva era desconhecido.

Várias hipóteses foram levantadas:
Foi proposta uma ligação aos processos de síntese do precursor endógeno do hormônio esteróide desidroepiandrosterona, que ocorre em regiões ricas em gordura do corpo, como as nádegas e os seios.

Estes contribuíram para o desenvolvimento do cérebro humano e desempenharam um papel no aumento do tamanho do cérebro.

O aumento do peito pode, para este fim, ter ocorrido já no Homo ergaster (1,7-1,4 MYA).

Outras hipóteses de formação de seios podem ter assumido como principais impulsionadores. Foi sugerido pelos zoólogos Avishag e Amotz Zahavi que o tamanho dos seios humanos pode ser explicado pela teoria da deficiência do dimorfismo sexual.

Isso veria a explicação para seios maiores como uma demonstração honesta da saúde da mulher e da capacidade de cultivá-los e carregá-los em sua vida.

Companheiros em potencial podem então avaliar os genes de um parceiro em potencial quanto à sua capacidade de sustentar sua saúde, mesmo com a carga adicional de energia que ela carrega. O zoólogo Desmond Morris descreve uma abordagem sociobiológica em seu popular livro de ciência The Naked Ape.

Ele sugere, fazendo comparações com outros primatas, que os seios evoluíram para substituir as nádegas inchadas como um sinal sexual, de ovulação.

Ele observa como os humanos têm, relativamente falando, pênis grandes e seios grandes.

Além disso, os primeiros humanos adotaram o bipedismo e o coito face a face.

Ele, portanto, sugeriu que sinais sexuais aumentados ajudavam a manter o vínculo entre um macho e uma fêmea acasalados, embora desempenhassem funções diferentes e, portanto, estivessem separados por períodos de tempo. a mama evoluiu para evitar que a prole do bebê sugador sufocasse enquanto se alimentava no bico; isto é, por causa da pequena mandíbula do bebê humano, que não se projetava do rosto para alcançar o mamilo, ele poderia bloquear as narinas contra o seio da mãe se fosse de uma forma mais plana (cf. chimpanzé comum).

Teoricamente, à medida que a mandíbula humana recuava para o rosto, o corpo da mulher compensava com seios redondos. Ashley Montague (1965) propôs que os seios surgiram como uma adaptação para a alimentação infantil por uma razão diferente, pois os primeiros ancestrais humanos adotaram o bipedismo e a perda do corpo. cabelo.

A postura ereta humana significava que os bebês deveriam ser carregados no quadril ou no ombro, em vez de nas costas, como nos macacos.

Isso dá ao bebê menos oportunidade de encontrar o mamilo ou a compra para se agarrar aos pelos do corpo da mãe.

A mobilidade do mamilo em um seio grande na maioria das fêmeas humanas dá ao bebê mais habilidade para segurá-lo e se alimentar. os seios compartilhavam a função da corcova de um camelo, armazenar gordura como reserva de energia.


== Anatomia ==


Nas mulheres, os seios recobrem os músculos peitorais maiores e se estendem, em média, do nível da segunda costela até o nível da sexta costela na frente da caixa torácica humana; assim, as mamas cobrem grande parte da área torácica e das paredes torácicas.

Na frente do tórax, o tecido mamário pode se estender da clavícula (clavícula) até o meio do esterno (esterno).

Nas laterais do tórax, o tecido mamário pode se estender até a axila (axila) e pode chegar até as costas até o músculo grande dorsal, estendendo-se da parte inferior das costas até o osso úmero (o osso da parte superior do braço) .

Como glândula mamária, a mama é composta por diferentes camadas de tecido, predominantemente de dois tipos: tecido adiposo; e tecido glandular, que afeta as funções de lactação das mamas.: 115 Morfologicamente a mama é em forma de lágrima.

A camada de tecido superficial (fáscia superficial) é separada da pele por 0,5 a 2,5 cm de gordura subcutânea (tecido adiposo).

Os ligamentos suspensores de Cooper são prolongamentos de tecido fibroso que irradiam da fáscia superficial para o envelope da pele.

A mama adulta feminina contém 14-18 lobos lactíferos irregulares que convergem para o mamilo.

Os ductos de leite de 2,0 a 4,5 mm são imediatamente circundados por tecido conjuntivo denso que sustenta as glândulas.

O leite sai da mama através do mamilo, que é cercado por uma área pigmentada da pele chamada aréola.

O tamanho da aréola pode variar muito entre as mulheres.

A aréola contém glândulas sudoríparas modificadas conhecidas como glândulas de Montgomery.

Essas glândulas secretam fluido oleoso que lubrifica e protege o mamilo durante a amamentação.

Os compostos voláteis dessas secreções também podem servir como estímulo olfativo para o apetite do recém-nascido. As dimensões e o peso da mama variam muito entre as mulheres.

Uma mama de tamanho pequeno a médio pesa 500 gramas (1,1 libras) ou menos, e uma mama grande pode pesar aproximadamente 750 a 1.000 gramas (1,7 a 2,2 libras) ou mais.

As proporções de composição tecidual da mama também variam entre as mulheres.

As mamas de algumas mulheres têm maior proporção de tecido glandular do que de tecido adiposo ou conjuntivo.

A relação gordura-tecido conjuntivo determina a densidade ou firmeza da mama.

Durante a vida de uma mulher, seus seios mudam de tamanho, forma e peso devido a alterações hormonais durante a puberdade, ciclo menstrual, gravidez, amamentação e menopausa.


=== Estrutura glandular ===

A mama é uma glândula apócrina que produz o leite usado para alimentar uma criança.

O mamilo da mama é circundado pela aréola (complexo mamilo-aréola).

A aréola possui muitas glândulas sebáceas e a cor da pele varia do rosa ao marrom escuro.

As unidades básicas da mama são as unidades lobulares do ducto terminal (TDLUs), que produzem o leite materno gorduroso.

Eles dão ao seio suas funções de alimentação da prole como uma glândula mamária.

Eles são distribuídos por todo o corpo da mama.

Aproximadamente dois terços do tecido lactífero estão dentro de 30 mm da base do mamilo.

Os ductos lactíferos terminais drenam o leite dos TDLUs para 4 a 18 ductos lactíferos, que drenam para o mamilo.

A proporção de glândulas lácteas para gordura é de 2:1 em mulheres lactantes e 1:1 em mulheres não lactantes.

Além das glândulas lácteas, a mama também é composta por tecidos conjuntivos (colágeno, elastina), gordura branca e ligamentos suspensores de Cooper.

A sensação na mama é fornecida pela inervação do sistema nervoso periférico por meio dos ramos cutâneos frontal (anterior) e lateral (lateral) do quarto, quinto e sexto nervos intercostais.

O nervo T-4 (nervo espinhal torácico 4), que inerva a área dermátmica, fornece sensação ao complexo areolopapilar.


=== Drenagem linfática ===

Aproximadamente 75% da linfa da mama viaja para os linfonodos axilares do mesmo lado do corpo, enquanto 25% da linfa viaja para os linfonodos paraesternais (ao lado do osso do esterno).: 116 Uma pequena quantidade de linfa restante viaja para a outra mama e para os linfonodos abdominais.

A região subareolar possui um plexo linfático conhecido como "plexo subareolar de Sappey".

Os linfonodos axilares incluem os grupos de linfonodos peitorais (tórax), subescapulares (sob a escápula) e umerais (área do osso úmero), que drenam para os linfonodos axilares centrais e para os linfonodos axilares apicais.

A drenagem linfática das mamas é especialmente relevante para a oncologia porque o câncer de mama é comum à glândula mamária, e as células cancerígenas podem metastatizar (se separar) de um tumor e se dispersar para outras partes do corpo por meio do sistema linfático.


=== Forma, textura e suporte ===

As variações morfológicas no tamanho, forma, volume, densidade do tecido, localização peitoral e espaçamento das mamas determinam sua forma natural, aparência e posição no peito da mulher.

O tamanho da mama e outras características não predizem a relação gordura/glândula leite ou o potencial para a mulher amamentar um bebê.

O tamanho e a forma das mamas são influenciados por alterações hormonais da vida normal (telarca, menstruação, gravidez, menopausa) e condições médicas (por exemplo, hipertrofia da mama virginal).

A forma dos seios é naturalmente determinada pelo suporte dos ligamentos suspensores de Cooper, pelas estruturas musculares e ósseas subjacentes do tórax e pelo envelope da pele.

Os ligamentos suspensores sustentam a mama a partir da clavícula (clavícula) e da fáscia clavico-peitoral (clavícula e tórax) atravessando e englobando os tecidos adiposo e das glândulas lácteas.

A mama é posicionada, fixada e apoiada na parede torácica, enquanto sua forma é estabelecida e mantida pelo envelope de pele.

Na maioria das mulheres, um seio é ligeiramente maior que o outro.

A assimetria mais óbvia e persistente no tamanho dos seios ocorre em até 25% das mulheres. Embora seja uma crença comum que a amamentação faz com que os seios caiam, os pesquisadores descobriram que os seios de uma mulher caem devido a quatro fatores principais: tabagismo, número de gestações , gravidade e perda ou ganho de peso. A base de cada mama está ligada ao tórax pela fáscia profunda sobre os músculos peitorais maiores.

O espaço entre a mama e o músculo peitoral maior, denominado espaço retromamário, confere mobilidade à mama.
O tórax (cavidade torácica) se inclina progressivamente para fora da entrada torácica (no topo do esterno) e acima até as costelas mais baixas que sustentam os seios.

O sulco inframamário, onde a porção inferior da mama encontra o tórax, é uma característica anatômica criada pela aderência da pele da mama e dos tecidos conjuntivos subjacentes do tórax; o IMF é a extensão mais inferior da mama anatômica.

O tecido mamário normal normalmente tem uma textura que parece nodular ou granular, em uma extensão que varia consideravelmente de mulher para mulher.


== Desenvolvimento ==


As mamas são compostas principalmente de tecido adiposo, glandular e conjuntivo.

Como esses tecidos possuem receptores hormonais, seus tamanhos e volumes flutuam de acordo com as alterações hormonais específicas da telarca (brotamento das mamas), menstruação (produção de óvulos), gravidez (reprodução), lactação (alimentação da prole) e menopausa (fim da menstruação). ).


=== Puberdade ===


A estrutura morfológica da mama humana é idêntica em machos e fêmeas até a puberdade.

Para meninas púberes na telarca (estágio de desenvolvimento da mama), os hormônios sexuais femininos (principalmente estrogênios) em conjunto com o hormônio do crescimento promovem o surgimento, o crescimento e o desenvolvimento dos seios.

Durante esse período, as glândulas mamárias crescem em tamanho e volume e começam a descansar no peito.

Esses estágios de desenvolvimento das características sexuais secundárias (seios, pêlos pubianos, etc.) são ilustrados na Escala de Tanner de cinco estágios.

Essa condição de assimetria é transitória e estatisticamente normal no desenvolvimento físico e sexual feminino.

As condições médicas podem causar superdesenvolvimento (por exemplo, hipertrofia da mama virginal, macromastia) ou subdesenvolvimento (por exemplo, deformidade da mama tuberosa, micromastia) em meninas e mulheres.
Aproximadamente dois anos após o início da puberdade (primeiro ciclo menstrual da menina), o estrogênio e o hormônio do crescimento estimulam o desenvolvimento e o crescimento da gordura glandular e dos tecidos suspensórios que compõem a mama.

Isso continua por aproximadamente quatro anos até que a forma final da mama (tamanho, volume, densidade) seja estabelecida por volta dos 21 anos.

A mamoplasia (aumento dos seios) nas meninas começa na puberdade, ao contrário de todos os outros primatas nos quais os seios aumentam apenas durante a lactação.


=== Alterações durante o ciclo menstrual ===

Durante o ciclo menstrual, os seios são aumentados pela retenção de água pré-menstrual e crescimento temporário.


=== Gravidez e amamentação ===

Os seios atingem a plena maturidade apenas quando ocorre a primeira gravidez da mulher.

Alterações nos seios estão entre os primeiros sinais de gravidez.

Os seios tornam-se maiores, o complexo mamilo-aréola torna-se maior e mais escuro, as glândulas de Montgomery aumentam e as veias às vezes se tornam mais visíveis.

A sensibilidade mamária durante a gravidez é comum, especialmente durante o primeiro trimestre.

No meio da gravidez, a mama é fisiologicamente capaz de lactação e algumas mulheres podem expressar colostro, uma forma de leite materno. A gravidez causa níveis elevados do hormônio prolactina, que tem um papel fundamental na produção de leite.

No entanto, a produção de leite é bloqueada pelos hormônios progesterona e estrogênio até após o parto, quando os níveis de progesterona e estrogênio despencam.


=== Menopausa ===

Na menopausa, ocorre a atrofia da mama.

Os seios podem diminuir de tamanho quando os níveis de estrogênio circulante diminuem.

O tecido adiposo e as glândulas lácteas também começam a murchar.

Os seios também podem aumentar de tamanho devido aos efeitos colaterais adversos das pílulas anticoncepcionais orais combinadas.

O tamanho dos seios também pode aumentar e diminuir em resposta às flutuações de peso.

As mudanças físicas nas mamas são frequentemente registradas nas estrias do envelope da pele; podem servir como indicadores históricos dos aumentos e diminuições do tamanho e volume dos seios de uma mulher ao longo de sua vida.


== Amamentação ==


A função primária dos seios, como glândulas mamárias, é nutrir a criança com leite materno.

O leite é produzido em células secretoras de leite nos alvéolos.

Quando os seios são estimulados pela sucção do bebê, o cérebro da mãe secreta oxitocina.

Altos níveis de ocitocina desencadeiam a contração das células musculares ao redor dos alvéolos, fazendo com que o leite flua ao longo dos ductos que conectam os alvéolos ao mamilo. tanto para nutrição quanto para conforto.

O leite materno fornece todos os nutrientes necessários para os primeiros seis meses de vida, e depois continua sendo uma importante fonte de nutrição, juntamente com alimentos sólidos, até pelo menos um ou dois anos de idade.


== Significado clínico ==


A mama é suscetível a inúmeras condições benignas e malignas.

As condições benignas mais frequentes são a mastite puerperal, as alterações fibrocísticas da mama e a mastalgia.
A lactação não relacionada à gravidez é conhecida como galactorréia.

Pode ser causada por certos medicamentos (como medicamentos antipsicóticos), estresse físico extremo ou distúrbios endócrinos.

A lactação em recém-nascidos é causada por hormônios da mãe que cruzaram a corrente sanguínea do bebê durante a gravidez.


=== Câncer de mama ===


O câncer de mama é a causa mais comum de morte por câncer entre as mulheres e é uma das principais causas de morte entre as mulheres.

Fatores que parecem estar implicados na diminuição do risco de câncer de mama são exames regulares das mamas por profissionais de saúde, mamografias regulares, autoexame das mamas, dieta saudável e exercícios para diminuir o excesso de gordura corporal e amamentação.


=== seios masculinos ===

Tanto as fêmeas quanto os machos desenvolvem seios a partir dos mesmos tecidos embriológicos.

Normalmente, os machos produzem níveis mais baixos de estrogênios e níveis mais altos de andrógenos, ou seja, testosterona, que suprimem os efeitos dos estrogênios no desenvolvimento de tecido mamário excessivo.
Em meninos e homens, o desenvolvimento anormal da mama se manifesta como ginecomastia, consequência de um desequilíbrio bioquímico entre os níveis normais de estrogênio e testosterona no corpo masculino.

Cerca de 70% dos meninos desenvolvem temporariamente o tecido mamário durante a adolescência.
A condição geralmente se resolve sozinha dentro de dois anos.

Quando ocorre a lactação masculina, é considerado um sintoma de um distúrbio da glândula pituitária.


=== Cirurgia plástica ===


A cirurgia plástica pode ser realizada para aumentar ou reduzir o tamanho das mamas, ou reconstruir a mama em casos de doenças deformantes, como o câncer de mama.

Os procedimentos de aumento de mama e lifting de mama (mastopexia) são feitos apenas por razões estéticas, enquanto a redução de mama às vezes é indicada clinicamente.
Nos casos em que os seios da mulher são gravemente assimétricos, a cirurgia pode ser realizada para aumentar o seio menor, reduzir o tamanho do seio maior ou ambos. A cirurgia de aumento de mama geralmente não interfere na capacidade futura de amamentar.

A cirurgia de redução de mama leva mais frequentemente à diminuição da sensação no complexo aréola-mamilar e à baixa produção de leite em mulheres que optam por amamentar.

Os implantes podem interferir na mamografia (imagens de raios-x da mama).


== Sociedade e cultura ==



=== Geral ===

Na iconografia cristã, algumas obras de arte retratam mulheres com os seios nas mãos ou em uma bandeja, significando que morreram como mártires por terem seus seios decepados; um exemplo disso é Santa Ágata da Sicília.

Femen é um grupo ativista feminista que usa protestos de topless como parte de suas campanhas contra instituições religiosas de turismo sexual, sexismo e homofobia.

Ativistas do Femen têm sido regularmente detidas pela polícia em resposta a seus protestos. Há uma longa história de seios femininos sendo usados ​​por comediantes como tema de comédia (por exemplo, rotinas burlescas/slapstick do comediante britânico Benny Hill).


=== História da arte ===

Nas sociedades pré-históricas europeias, eram comuns esculturas de figuras femininas com seios pronunciados ou muito exagerados.

Um exemplo típico é a chamada Vênus de Willendorf, uma das muitas estatuetas de Vênus paleolíticas com amplos quadris e seios.

Artefatos como tigelas, gravuras rupestres e estátuas sagradas com seios foram registrados desde 15.000 aC até a antiguidade tardia em toda a Europa, Norte da África e Oriente Médio.
Muitas divindades femininas representando amor e fertilidade estavam associadas a seios e leite materno.

Figuras da deusa fenícia Astarte foram representadas como pilares cravejados de seios.

Ísis, uma deusa egípcia que representava, entre muitas outras coisas, a maternidade ideal, era frequentemente retratada como faraós amamentando, confirmando assim seu status divino como governantes.

Mesmo certas divindades masculinas representando regeneração e fertilidade eram ocasionalmente representadas com apêndices semelhantes a seios, como o deus do rio Hapy, considerado responsável pelo transbordamento anual do Nilo.
Os seios femininos também eram proeminentes na arte minóica na forma das famosas estatuetas da Deusa Serpente e algumas outras peças, embora a maioria dos seios femininos seja coberta.

Na Grécia Antiga existiam vários cultos de adoração à "Kourotrofos", a mãe que amamenta, representada por deusas como Gaia, Hera e Ártemis.

A adoração de divindades simbolizadas pelo seio feminino na Grécia tornou-se menos comum durante o primeiro milênio.

A adoração popular de deusas femininas diminuiu significativamente durante a ascensão das cidades-estados gregas, um legado que foi passado para o Império Romano posterior. Durante meados do primeiro milênio aC, a cultura grega experimentou uma mudança gradual na percepção dos seios femininos .

As mulheres na arte estavam cobertas de roupas do pescoço para baixo, incluindo deusas femininas como Atena, a patrona de Atenas que representava o esforço heróico.

Houve exceções: Afrodite, a deusa do amor, foi mais frequentemente retratada totalmente nua, embora em posturas que pretendiam retratar timidez ou modéstia, um retrato que foi comparado às pin ups modernas pela historiadora Marilyn Yalom.

Embora os homens nus fossem retratados em pé, a maioria das representações de nudez feminina na arte grega ocorria "geralmente com cortinas à mão e com uma postura de autoproteção curvada para a frente".

Uma lenda popular na época era das Amazonas, uma tribo de guerreiras ferozes que se socializavam com os homens apenas para procriação e até removiam um seio para se tornarem melhores guerreiras (a ideia era que o seio direito interferiria no funcionamento de um arco e flecha).

A lenda era um motivo popular na arte durante a antiguidade grega e romana e serviu como um conto de advertência antitético.

 


=== Imagem corporal ===

Muitas mulheres consideram seus seios importantes para sua atratividade sexual, como um sinal de feminilidade que é importante para seu senso de identidade.

Uma mulher com seios menores pode considerar seus seios menos atraentes.


=== Vestuário ===


Como os seios são principalmente tecido adiposo, sua forma pode – dentro de limites – ser moldada por roupas, como roupas de fundação.

Sutiãs são comumente usados ​​por cerca de 90% das mulheres ocidentais, e muitas vezes são usados ​​para apoio.

A norma social na maioria das culturas ocidentais é cobrir os seios em público, embora a extensão da cobertura varie dependendo do contexto social.

Algumas religiões atribuem um status especial ao seio feminino, seja em ensinamentos formais ou por meio de simbolismo.

O Islã proíbe mulheres livres de exporem seus seios em público.
Muitas culturas, incluindo as ocidentais na América do Norte, associam os seios à sexualidade e tendem a considerar os seios nus como imodestos ou indecentes.

Em algumas culturas, como a Himba no norte da Namíbia, as mulheres de seios nus são normais.

Em algumas culturas africanas, por exemplo, a coxa é considerada altamente sexualizada e nunca exposta em público, mas a exposição da mama não é um tabu.

Em alguns países e regiões ocidentais, o topless feminino na praia é aceitável, embora possa não ser aceitável no centro da cidade. As atitudes sociais e as leis relativas à amamentação em público variam muito.

Em muitos países, a amamentação em público é comum, protegida legalmente e geralmente não é considerada um problema.

No entanto, mesmo que a prática possa ser legal ou socialmente aceita, algumas mães podem, no entanto, relutar em expor um seio em público para amamentar devido a objeções reais ou potenciais de outras pessoas, comentários negativos ou assédio.

Estima-se que cerca de 63% das mães em todo o mundo tenham amamentado publicamente.

Mulheres de seios nus são legais e culturalmente aceitáveis ​​em praias públicas na Austrália e em grande parte da Europa.

A cineasta Lina Esco fez um filme intitulado Free the Nipple, que é sobre "... leis contra topless feminino ou restrições a imagens de mamilos femininos, mas não masculinos", que Esco afirma ser um exemplo de sexismo na sociedade.


=== Característica sexual ===


Em algumas culturas, os seios desempenham um papel na atividade sexual humana.

Na cultura ocidental, os seios têm um "... status sexual sagrado, sem dúvida mais fetichizado do que a genitália de ambos os sexos".

Os seios e especialmente os mamilos estão entre as várias zonas erógenas humanas.

São sensíveis ao toque, pois possuem muitas terminações nervosas; e é comum pressioná-los ou massageá-los com as mãos ou oralmente antes ou durante a atividade sexual.

Durante a excitação sexual, o tamanho dos seios aumenta, os padrões venosos nos seios tornam-se mais visíveis e os mamilos endurecem.

Em comparação com outros primatas, os seios humanos são proporcionalmente grandes ao longo da vida das fêmeas adultas.

Alguns escritores sugeriram que eles podem ter evoluído como um sinal visual de maturidade sexual e fertilidade. Muitas pessoas consideram os seios femininos nus como esteticamente agradáveis ​​ou eróticos, e podem provocar desejos sexuais elevados em homens em muitas culturas.

Na antiga obra indiana o Kama Sutra, coçar levemente os seios com unhas e morder com os dentes são considerados eróticos.

Algumas pessoas demonstram um interesse sexual por seios femininos distinto daquele da pessoa, o que pode ser considerado um fetiche de seios.

Uma série de modas ocidentais incluem roupas que acentuam os seios, como o uso de sutiãs push-up e vestidos decote (decote profundo) e blusas que mostram decote.

Enquanto a cultura americana prefere seios jovens e eretos, algumas culturas veneram mulheres com seios caídos, indicando maternidade e sabedoria da experiência. mais tempo do que outras partes do corpo.

Os autores do estudo especularam inicialmente que a razão para isso se deve à endocrinologia com seios maiores indicando níveis mais altos de estrogênio e um sinal de maior fertilidade, mas os pesquisadores disseram que "os homens podem estar olhando com mais frequência para os seios porque são simplesmente esteticamente agradável, independentemente do tamanho." Algumas mulheres relatam atingir um orgasmo com a estimulação do mamilo, mas isso é raro.

Pesquisas sugerem que os orgasmos são orgasmos genitais e também podem estar diretamente ligados à "área genital do cérebro".

Nesses casos, parece que a sensação dos mamilos viaja para a mesma parte do cérebro que as sensações da vagina, clitóris e colo do útero.

A estimulação do mamilo pode desencadear contrações uterinas, que então produzem uma sensação na área genital do cérebro.


=== Geografia antropomórfica ===


Há muitas montanhas com o nome do peito porque se assemelham a ele na aparência e por isso são objetos de veneração religiosa e ancestral como símbolo de fertilidade e bem-estar.

Na Ásia, havia a "Montanha do Peito", que tinha uma caverna onde o monge budista Bodhidharma (Da Mo) passava muito tempo em meditação.

Outras dessas montanhas são o Monte Elgon, na fronteira Uganda-Quênia; Beinn Chìochan e os Maiden Paps na Escócia; o Bundok ng Susong Dalaga ('as montanhas do peito da donzela') na Ilha Talim, Filipinas, as colinas gêmeas conhecidas como Paps of Anu (Dá Chích Anann ou 'os seios de Anu'), perto de Killarney na Irlanda; os 2.086 m de altura Tetica de Bacares ou La Tetica na Sierra de Los Filabres, Espanha; Khao Nom Sao na Tailândia, Cerro Las Tetas em Porto Rico; e os Peitos de Afrodite em Mykonos, entre muitos outros.

Nos Estados Unidos, o Teton Range é nomeado após a palavra francesa para 'mamilo'.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Breast

;;;FR;;;



SEIN


La poitrine est l'une des deux proéminences situées sur la région ventrale supérieure du torse d'un primate.

Les femmes et les hommes développent des seins à partir des mêmes tissus embryologiques.
Chez les femelles, il sert de glande mammaire, qui produit et sécrète du lait pour nourrir les nourrissons.

La graisse sous-cutanée recouvre et enveloppe un réseau de conduits qui convergent vers le mamelon, et ces tissus donnent au sein sa taille et sa forme.

Aux extrémités des conduits se trouvent des lobules, ou groupes d'alvéoles, où le lait est produit et stocké en réponse à des signaux hormonaux.

Pendant la grossesse, le sein répond à une interaction complexe d'hormones, y compris les œstrogènes, la progestérone et la prolactine, qui interviennent dans l'achèvement de son développement, à savoir la maturation lobuloalvéolaire, en préparation de la lactation et de l'allaitement.
Les humains sont les seuls animaux à avoir des seins permanents.

À la puberté, les œstrogènes, associés à l'hormone de croissance, provoquent une croissance mammaire permanente chez les femmes.

Cela ne se produit que dans une bien moindre mesure chez les autres primates - le développement des seins chez les autres primates ne se produit généralement qu'avec la grossesse.

En plus de leur fonction principale d'alimentation des nourrissons, les seins féminins ont des caractéristiques sociales et sexuelles.

Les seins ont été présentés dans la sculpture, l'art et la photographie anciens et modernes.

Ils peuvent figurer en bonne place dans la perception du corps et de l'attrait sexuel d'une femme.

Un certain nombre de cultures associent les seins à la sexualité et ont tendance à considérer les seins nus en public comme impudiques ou indécents.

Les seins, en particulier les mamelons, sont une zone érogène.


== Étymologie et terminologie ==

Le mot anglais sein dérive du vieux mot anglais brēost («sein, sein») du proto-germanique * breustam (sein), de la base proto-indo-européenne bhreus– (gonfler, germer).

L'orthographe du sein est conforme aux prononciations dialectales écossaise et nord-anglaise.

Le dictionnaire Merriam-Webster déclare que "brest en moyen anglais, [vient] du vieil anglais brēost ; semblable au vieux haut allemand brust ..., vieil irlandais brú [ventre], [et] bryukho russe"; la première utilisation connue du terme était avant le 12ème siècle. Un grand nombre de termes familiers pour les seins sont utilisés en anglais, allant des termes assez polis au vulgaire ou à l'argot.

Certaines expressions d'argot vulgaire peuvent être considérées comme désobligeantes ou sexistes envers les femmes.


== Développement évolutif ==

Les humains sont les seuls mammifères dont les seins grossissent de façon permanente après la maturité sexuelle (connue chez l'homme sous le nom de puberté).

En 2019, la raison de ce changement évolutif était inconnue.

Plusieurs hypothèses ont été avancées :
Un lien a été proposé avec des processus de synthèse de la déhydroépiandrostérone, précurseur de l'hormone stéroïdienne endogène, qui a lieu dans les régions du corps riches en graisses comme les fesses et les seins.

Ceux-ci ont contribué au développement du cerveau humain et ont joué un rôle dans l'augmentation de la taille du cerveau.

L'élargissement du sein peut à cette fin avoir eu lieu dès l'Homo ergaster (1,7-1,4 MYA).

D'autres hypothèses sur la formation des seins peuvent alors avoir pris le relais en tant que moteurs principaux. Il a été suggéré par les zoologistes Avishag et Amotz Zahavi que la taille des seins humains peut être expliquée par la théorie du handicap du dimorphisme sexuel.

Cela verrait l'explication des seins plus gros comme étant une démonstration honnête de la santé de la femme et de sa capacité à les développer et à les porter dans sa vie.

Les partenaires potentiels peuvent alors évaluer les gènes d'un partenaire potentiel pour leur capacité à maintenir sa santé même avec le fardeau énergétique supplémentaire qu'elle porte. Le zoologiste Desmond Morris décrit une approche sociobiologique dans son livre scientifique populaire The Naked Ape.

Il suggère, en faisant des comparaisons avec les autres primates, que les seins ont évolué pour remplacer les fesses gonflées comme signal sexuel, d'ovulation.

Il note comment les humains ont, relativement parlant, de gros pénis ainsi que de gros seins.

De plus, les premiers humains ont adopté la bipédie et le coït face à face.

Il a donc suggéré que des signaux sexuels élargis aidaient à maintenir le lien entre un homme et une femme accouplés, même s'ils accomplissaient des tâches différentes et étaient donc séparés pendant de longues périodes. L'étude The Evolution of the Human Breast (2001) a proposé que la forme arrondie du sein d'une femme le sein a évolué pour empêcher la progéniture du nourrisson de suffoquer pendant qu'elle se nourrit à la tétine ; c'est-à-dire qu'en raison de la petite mâchoire du nourrisson humain, qui ne dépassait pas du visage pour atteindre le mamelon, il pourrait bloquer les narines contre le sein de la mère s'il était de forme plus plate (cf. chimpanzé commun).

Théoriquement, à mesure que la mâchoire humaine reculait dans le visage, le corps de la femme compensait avec des seins ronds. Cheveu.

La position verticale humaine signifiait que les nourrissons devaient être portés à la hanche ou à l'épaule plutôt que sur le dos comme chez les singes.

Cela donne au nourrisson moins d'occasions de trouver la tétine ou l'achat pour s'accrocher aux poils de la mère.

La mobilité du mamelon sur un gros sein chez la plupart des femmes humaines donne au nourrisson plus de capacité à le saisir et à le nourrir. les seins partageaient la fonction d'une bosse de chameau, pour stocker la graisse comme réserve d'énergie.


== Anatomie ==


Chez les femmes, les seins recouvrent les muscles grands pectoraux et s'étendent en moyenne du niveau de la deuxième côte au niveau de la sixième côte à l'avant de la cage thoracique humaine ; ainsi, les seins couvrent une grande partie de la poitrine et des parois de la poitrine.

À l'avant de la poitrine, le tissu mammaire peut s'étendre de la clavicule (clavicule) au milieu du sternum (sternum).

Sur les côtés de la poitrine, le tissu mammaire peut s'étendre dans l'aisselle (aisselle) et peut atteindre l'arrière jusqu'au muscle latissimus dorsi, s'étendant du bas du dos à l'os de l'humérus (l'os du haut du bras) .

En tant que glande mammaire, le sein est composé de différentes couches de tissus, principalement de deux types : tissu adipeux ; et le tissu glandulaire, qui affecte les fonctions de lactation des seins.: 115 Morphologiquement, le sein est en forme de larme.

La couche de tissu superficiel (fascia superficiel) est séparée de la peau par 0,5 à 2,5 cm de graisse sous-cutanée (tissu adipeux).

Les ligaments suspenseurs de Cooper sont des prolongements fibreux qui irradient du fascia superficiel vers l'enveloppe cutanée.

Le sein de la femme adulte contient 14 à 18 lobes lactifères irréguliers qui convergent vers le mamelon.

Les canaux galactophores de 2,0 à 4,5 mm sont immédiatement entourés d'un tissu conjonctif dense qui soutient les glandes.

Le lait sort du sein par le mamelon, qui est entouré d'une zone de peau pigmentée appelée aréole.

La taille de l'aréole peut varier considérablement chez les femmes.

L'aréole contient des glandes sudoripares modifiées appelées glandes de Montgomery.

Ces glandes sécrètent un liquide huileux qui lubrifie et protège le mamelon pendant l'allaitement.

Les composés volatils contenus dans ces sécrétions peuvent également servir de stimulus olfactif pour l'appétit du nouveau-né. Les dimensions et le poids du sein varient considérablement d'une femme à l'autre.

Un sein de taille petite à moyenne pèse 500 grammes (1,1 livre) ou moins, et un gros sein peut peser environ 750 à 1 000 grammes (1,7 à 2,2 livres) ou plus.

Les ratios de composition tissulaire du sein varient également d'une femme à l'autre.

Les seins de certaines femmes ont une proportion plus élevée de tissu glandulaire que de tissu adipeux ou conjonctif.

Le rapport graisse/tissu conjonctif détermine la densité ou la fermeté du sein.

Au cours de la vie d'une femme, ses seins changent de taille, de forme et de poids en raison des changements hormonaux pendant la puberté, le cycle menstruel, la grossesse, l'allaitement et la ménopause.


=== Structure glandulaire ===

Le sein est une glande apocrine qui produit le lait utilisé pour nourrir un nourrisson.

Le mamelon du sein est entouré par l'aréole (complexe mamelon-aréole).

L'aréole a de nombreuses glandes sébacées et la couleur de la peau varie du rose au brun foncé.

Les unités de base du sein sont les unités lobulaires du canal terminal (TDLU), qui produisent le lait maternel gras.

Ils confèrent au sein ses fonctions d'alimentation de la progéniture en tant que glande mammaire.

Ils sont répartis dans tout le corps du sein.

Environ les deux tiers du tissu lactifère se trouvent à moins de 30 mm de la base du mamelon.

Les canaux lactifères terminaux drainent le lait des TDLU dans 4 à 18 canaux lactifères, qui se drainent vers le mamelon.

Le rapport glandes laitières/graisse est de 2:1 chez une femme qui allaite et de 1:1 chez une femme qui n'allaite pas.

Outre les glandes mammaires, le sein est également composé de tissus conjonctifs (collagène, élastine), de graisse blanche et des ligaments suspenseurs de Cooper.

La sensation dans le sein est assurée par l'innervation du système nerveux périphérique au moyen des branches cutanées avant (antérieure) et latérales (latérales) des quatrième, cinquième et sixième nerfs intercostaux.

Le nerf T-4 (nerf spinal thoracique 4), qui innerve la zone dermatomique, fournit la sensation au complexe mamelon-aréole.


=== Drainage lymphatique ===

Environ 75 % de la lymphe du sein se déplace vers les ganglions lymphatiques axillaires du même côté du corps, tandis que 25 % de la lymphe se déplace vers les ganglions parasternaux (à côté de l'os du sternum). : 116 Une petite quantité de lymphe restante se déplace à l'autre sein et aux ganglions lymphatiques abdominaux.

La région sous-aréolaire possède un plexus lymphatique appelé « plexus sous-aréolaire de Sappey ».

Les ganglions lymphatiques axillaires comprennent les groupes de ganglions lymphatiques pectoraux (poitrine), sous-scapulaires (sous l'omoplate) et huméraux (zone humérus-os), qui se drainent vers les ganglions lymphatiques axillaires centraux et vers les ganglions lymphatiques axillaires apicaux.

Le drainage lymphatique des seins est particulièrement pertinent en oncologie car le cancer du sein est commun à la glande mammaire et les cellules cancéreuses peuvent métastaser (se détacher) d'une tumeur et être dispersées dans d'autres parties du corps au moyen du système lymphatique.


=== Forme, texture et support ===

Les variations morphologiques de la taille, de la forme, du volume, de la densité des tissus, de la localisation pectorale et de l'espacement des seins déterminent leur forme naturelle, leur apparence et leur position sur la poitrine d'une femme.

La taille des seins et d'autres caractéristiques ne prédisent pas le rapport graisse/glande laitière ni la possibilité pour la femme d'allaiter un enfant.

La taille et la forme des seins sont influencées par les changements hormonaux de la vie normale (thelarche, menstruation, grossesse, ménopause) et les conditions médicales (par exemple, hypertrophie mammaire virginale).

La forme des seins est naturellement déterminée par le soutien des ligaments suspenseurs de Cooper, les structures musculaires et osseuses sous-jacentes de la poitrine, et par l'enveloppe cutanée.

Les ligaments suspenseurs soutiennent le sein à partir de la clavicule (clavicule) et du fascia clavico-pectoral (clavicule et poitrine) en traversant et englobant les tissus adipeux et des glandes lactiques.

Le sein est positionné, fixé et soutenu sur la paroi thoracique, tandis que sa forme est établie et maintenue par l'enveloppe cutanée.

Chez la plupart des femmes, un sein est légèrement plus gros que l'autre.

Une asymétrie plus évidente et persistante dans la taille des seins se produit chez jusqu'à 25 % des femmes. Bien qu'il soit communément admis que l'allaitement provoque l'affaissement des seins, les chercheurs ont découvert que les seins d'une femme s'affaissent en raison de quatre facteurs clés : le tabagisme, le nombre de grossesses , la gravité et la perte ou le gain de poids. La base de chaque sein est attachée à la poitrine par le fascia profond au-dessus des muscles pectoraux majeurs.

L'espace entre le sein et le muscle grand pectoral, appelé espace rétromammaire, donne de la mobilité au sein.
La poitrine (cavité thoracique) s'incline progressivement vers l'extérieur à partir de l'entrée thoracique (au sommet du sternum) et au-dessus des côtes les plus basses qui soutiennent les seins.

Le pli sous-mammaire, où la partie inférieure du sein rencontre la poitrine, est une caractéristique anatomique créée par l'adhérence de la peau du sein et des tissus conjonctifs sous-jacents de la poitrine ; le FMI est l'étendue la plus basse du sein anatomique.

Le tissu mammaire normal a généralement une texture nodulaire ou granuleuse, dans une mesure qui varie considérablement d'une femme à l'autre.


== Développement ==


Les seins sont principalement composés de tissus adipeux, glandulaires et conjonctifs.

Parce que ces tissus ont des récepteurs hormonaux, leurs tailles et volumes fluctuent en fonction des changements hormonaux propres à la thelarche (poussée des seins), aux menstruations (production d'œufs), à la grossesse (reproduction), à la lactation (alimentation de la progéniture) et à la ménopause (fin des menstruations). ).


=== Puberté ===


La structure morphologique du sein humain est identique chez les hommes et les femmes jusqu'à la puberté.

Pour les filles pubères en thelarche (le stade de développement des seins), les hormones sexuelles féminines (principalement les œstrogènes) en conjonction avec l'hormone de croissance favorisent la germination, la croissance et le développement des seins.

Pendant ce temps, les glandes mammaires grandissent en taille et en volume et commencent à reposer sur la poitrine.

Ces stades de développement des caractéristiques sexuelles secondaires (seins, poils pubiens, etc.) sont illustrés dans l'échelle de Tanner en cinq étapes. Au cours de l'arche, les seins en développement sont parfois de taille inégale, et généralement le sein gauche est légèrement plus gros.

Cette condition d'asymétrie est transitoire et statistiquement normale dans le développement physique et sexuel féminin.

Les conditions médicales peuvent entraîner un surdéveloppement (p. ex., hypertrophie virginale du sein, macromastie) ou un sous-développement (p. ex., déformation tubéreuse du sein, micromastie) chez les filles et les femmes.
Environ deux ans après le début de la puberté (le premier cycle menstruel d'une fille), les œstrogènes et l'hormone de croissance stimulent le développement et la croissance de la graisse glandulaire et des tissus suspenseurs qui composent le sein.

Cela se poursuit pendant environ quatre ans jusqu'à ce que la forme définitive du sein (taille, volume, densité) soit établie vers l'âge de 21 ans.

La mammoplasie (hypertrophie mammaire) chez les filles commence à la puberté, contrairement à tous les autres primates chez qui les seins ne grossissent que pendant la lactation.


=== Changements au cours du cycle menstruel ===

Pendant le cycle menstruel, les seins sont agrandis par la rétention d'eau prémenstruelle et la croissance temporaire.


=== Grossesse et allaitement ===

Les seins n'atteignent leur pleine maturité que lors de la première grossesse d'une femme.

Les changements aux seins sont parmi les premiers signes de grossesse.

Les seins deviennent plus gros, le complexe mamelon-aréole devient plus gros et plus foncé, les glandes de Montgomery grossissent et les veines deviennent parfois plus visibles.

La sensibilité des seins pendant la grossesse est courante, surtout au cours du premier trimestre.

Au milieu de la grossesse, le sein est physiologiquement capable de lacter et certaines femmes peuvent exprimer du colostrum, une forme de lait maternel. La grossesse entraîne des niveaux élevés de prolactine, une hormone qui joue un rôle clé dans la production de lait.

Cependant, la production de lait est bloquée par les hormones progestérone et œstrogène jusqu'après l'accouchement, lorsque les niveaux de progestérone et d'œstrogène chutent.


=== Ménopause ===

À la ménopause, une atrophie mammaire survient.

Les seins peuvent diminuer de taille lorsque les niveaux d'œstrogènes circulants diminuent.

Le tissu adipeux et les glandes mammaires commencent également à se flétrir.

Les seins peuvent également grossir à cause des effets secondaires indésirables des pilules contraceptives orales combinées.

La taille des seins peut également augmenter et diminuer en réponse aux fluctuations de poids.

Les modifications physiques des seins sont souvent enregistrées dans les vergetures de l'enveloppe cutanée; ils peuvent servir d'indicateurs historiques des augmentations et des diminutions de la taille et du volume des seins d'une femme tout au long de sa vie.


== Allaitement ==


La fonction principale des seins, en tant que glandes mammaires, est de nourrir un nourrisson avec du lait maternel.

Le lait est produit dans les cellules sécrétant du lait dans les alvéoles.

Lorsque les seins sont stimulés par la tétée de son bébé, le cerveau de la mère sécrète de l'ocytocine.

Des niveaux élevés d'ocytocine déclenchent la contraction des cellules musculaires entourant les alvéoles, provoquant l'écoulement du lait le long des canaux qui relient les alvéoles au mamelon. Les nouveau-nés à terme ont un instinct et un besoin de sucer un mamelon, et les bébés allaités allaitent pendant tant pour la nutrition que pour le confort.

Le lait maternel fournit tous les nutriments nécessaires pendant les six premiers mois de la vie, puis reste une source importante de nutrition, aux côtés des aliments solides, jusqu'à l'âge d'au moins un ou deux ans.


== Signification clinique ==


Le sein est sensible à de nombreuses affections bénignes et malignes.

Les affections bénignes les plus fréquentes sont la mammite puerpérale, les modifications fibrokystiques du sein et la mastalgie.
La lactation non liée à la grossesse est connue sous le nom de galactorrhée.

Elle peut être causée par certains médicaments (comme les antipsychotiques), un stress physique extrême ou des troubles endocriniens.

La lactation chez les nouveau-nés est causée par les hormones de la mère qui sont passées dans la circulation sanguine du bébé pendant la grossesse.


=== Cancer du sein ===


Le cancer du sein est la cause la plus fréquente de décès par cancer chez les femmes et c'est l'une des principales causes de décès chez les femmes.

Les facteurs qui semblent être impliqués dans la diminution du risque de cancer du sein sont les examens réguliers des seins par des professionnels de la santé, les mammographies régulières, l'auto-examen des seins, une alimentation saine et l'exercice pour réduire l'excès de graisse corporelle et l'allaitement.


=== Seins masculins ===

Les femmes et les hommes développent des seins à partir des mêmes tissus embryologiques.

Normalement, les hommes produisent des niveaux inférieurs d'œstrogènes et des niveaux plus élevés d'androgènes, à savoir la testostérone, qui suppriment les effets des œstrogènes dans le développement de tissus mammaires excessifs.
Chez les garçons et les hommes, le développement anormal des seins se manifeste par une gynécomastie, conséquence d'un déséquilibre biochimique entre les niveaux normaux d'œstrogène et de testostérone dans le corps masculin.

Environ 70% des garçons développent temporairement du tissu mammaire pendant l'adolescence.
La condition se résout généralement d'elle-même dans les deux ans.

Lorsque l'allaitement masculin se produit, il est considéré comme un symptôme d'un trouble de la glande pituitaire.


=== Chirurgie plastique ===


La chirurgie plastique peut être pratiquée pour augmenter ou réduire la taille des seins, ou reconstruire le sein en cas de maladie déformante, comme le cancer du sein.

Les procédures d'augmentation mammaire et de lifting mammaire (mastopexie) ne sont effectuées que pour des raisons esthétiques, alors que la réduction mammaire est parfois médicalement indiquée.
Dans les cas où les seins d'une femme sont gravement asymétriques, une intervention chirurgicale peut être effectuée pour agrandir le plus petit sein, réduire la taille du plus gros sein, ou les deux. La chirurgie d'augmentation mammaire n'interfère généralement pas avec la capacité future d'allaiter.

La chirurgie de réduction mammaire entraîne plus fréquemment une diminution de la sensation dans le complexe mamelon-aréole et une faible production de lait chez les femmes qui choisissent d'allaiter.

Les implants peuvent interférer avec la mammographie (images radiographiques des seins).


== Société et culture ==



=== Général ===

Dans l'iconographie chrétienne, certaines œuvres d'art représentent des femmes les seins dans les mains ou sur un plateau, signifiant qu'elles sont mortes en martyr en se faisant sectionner les seins ; un exemple en est Sainte Agathe de Sicile.

Femen est un groupe d'activistes féministes qui utilise les manifestations seins nus dans le cadre de leurs campagnes contre les institutions religieuses du tourisme sexuel, le sexisme et l'homophobie.

Les militantes Femen ont été régulièrement détenues par la police en réponse à leurs protestations. Il existe une longue histoire d'utilisation des seins féminins par les comédiens comme sujet de comédie (par exemple, les routines burlesques / burlesques du comique britannique Benny Hill).


=== Histoire des arts ===

Dans les sociétés préhistoriques européennes, les sculptures de figures féminines aux seins prononcés ou très exagérés étaient courantes.

Un exemple typique est la soi-disant Vénus de Willendorf, l'une des nombreuses figurines de Vénus paléolithiques avec des hanches et une poitrine amples.

Des artefacts tels que des bols, des gravures rupestres et des statues sacrées avec des seins ont été enregistrés de 15 000 avant JC jusqu'à la fin de l'Antiquité dans toute l'Europe, l'Afrique du Nord et le Moyen-Orient.
De nombreuses divinités féminines représentant l'amour et la fertilité étaient associées aux seins et au lait maternel.

Les figures de la déesse phénicienne Astarte étaient représentées sous la forme de piliers cloutés de seins.

Isis, une déesse égyptienne qui représentait, entre autres, la maternité idéale, était souvent représentée comme des pharaons allaitants, confirmant ainsi leur statut divin de souverains.

Même certaines divinités masculines représentant la régénération et la fertilité étaient parfois représentées avec des appendices en forme de poitrine, comme le dieu du fleuve Hapy qui était considéré comme responsable du débordement annuel du Nil.
Les seins féminins étaient également importants dans l'art minoen sous la forme des célèbres statuettes de la déesse du serpent et de quelques autres pièces, bien que la plupart des seins féminins soient couverts.

Dans la Grèce antique, il y avait plusieurs cultes vénérant le "Kourotrophos", la mère allaitante, représentée par des déesses telles que Gaïa, Héra et Artémis.

Le culte des divinités symbolisées par le sein féminin en Grèce est devenu moins courant au cours du premier millénaire.

L'adoration populaire des déesses féminines a considérablement diminué lors de la montée des cités grecques, un héritage qui a été transmis au dernier Empire romain. Au milieu du premier millénaire avant notre ère, la culture grecque a connu un changement progressif dans la perception des seins féminins. .

Les femmes dans l'art étaient couvertes de vêtements du cou aux pieds, y compris des déesses féminines comme Athéna, la patronne d'Athènes qui représentait l'effort héroïque.

Il y avait des exceptions: Aphrodite, la déesse de l'amour, était plus fréquemment représentée entièrement nue, bien que dans des postures destinées à dépeindre la timidité ou la modestie, une représentation qui a été comparée aux pin-ups modernes par l'historienne Marilyn Yalom.

Bien que des hommes nus aient été représentés debout, la plupart des représentations de la nudité féminine dans l'art grec se produisaient "généralement avec des draperies à portée de main et avec une posture de flexion vers l'avant et d'auto-protection".

Une légende populaire à l'époque était celle des Amazones, une tribu de féroces guerrières qui ne socialisaient avec les hommes que pour la procréation et qui enlevaient même un sein pour devenir de meilleures guerrières (l'idée étant que le sein droit interférerait avec le fonctionnement d'un arc et La Flèche).

La légende était un motif populaire dans l'art pendant l'Antiquité grecque et romaine et servait de récit édifiant antithétique.

 


=== Image corporelle ===

De nombreuses femmes considèrent leurs seins comme importants pour leur attrait sexuel, comme un signe de féminité important pour leur estime de soi.

Une femme avec des seins plus petits peut considérer ses seins comme moins attrayants.


=== Vêtements ===


Étant donné que les seins sont principalement constitués de tissus adipeux, leur forme peut, dans certaines limites, être façonnée par les vêtements, tels que les sous-vêtements.

Les soutiens-gorge sont couramment portés par environ 90% des femmes occidentales et sont souvent portés pour le soutien.

La norme sociale dans la plupart des cultures occidentales est de couvrir les seins en public, bien que l'étendue de la couverture varie en fonction du contexte social.

Certaines religions attribuent un statut spécial au sein féminin, soit dans les enseignements formels, soit par le biais du symbolisme.

L'Islam interdit aux femmes libres d'exposer leurs seins en public.
De nombreuses cultures, y compris les cultures occidentales en Amérique du Nord, associent les seins à la sexualité et ont tendance à considérer les seins nus comme impudiques ou indécents.

Dans certaines cultures, comme les Himba dans le nord de la Namibie, les femmes aux seins nus sont normales.

Dans certaines cultures africaines, par exemple, la cuisse est considérée comme hautement sexualisée et jamais exposée en public, mais l'exposition des seins n'est pas taboue.

Dans quelques pays et régions occidentaux, les seins nus féminins à la plage sont acceptables, même si cela peut ne pas être acceptable dans le centre-ville. Les attitudes sociales et les lois concernant l'allaitement en public varient considérablement.

Dans de nombreux pays, l'allaitement en public est courant, protégé par la loi et généralement pas considéré comme un problème.

Cependant, même si la pratique peut être légale ou socialement acceptée, certaines mères peuvent néanmoins être réticentes à exposer un sein en public pour allaiter en raison d'objections réelles ou potentielles d'autres personnes, de commentaires négatifs ou de harcèlement.

On estime qu'environ 63 % des mères dans le monde ont allaité publiquement.

Les femmes aux seins nus sont légales et culturellement acceptables sur les plages publiques en Australie et dans une grande partie de l'Europe.

La cinéaste Lina Esco a réalisé un film intitulé Free the Nipple , qui parle de "... lois contre les seins nus féminins ou les restrictions sur les images de mamelons féminins, mais pas masculins", qui, selon Esco, est un exemple de sexisme dans la société.


=== Caractéristique sexuelle ===


Dans certaines cultures, les seins jouent un rôle dans l'activité sexuelle humaine.

Dans la culture occidentale, les seins ont un "... statut sexuel sacré, sans doute plus fétichisé que les organes génitaux des deux sexes".

Les seins et surtout les mamelons font partie des différentes zones érogènes humaines.

Ils sont sensibles au toucher car ils possèdent de nombreuses terminaisons nerveuses ; et il est courant de les presser ou de les masser avec les mains ou oralement avant ou pendant l'activité sexuelle.

Pendant l'excitation sexuelle, la taille des seins augmente, les motifs veineux à travers les seins deviennent plus visibles et les mamelons durcissent.

Par rapport aux autres primates, les seins humains sont proportionnellement gros tout au long de la vie des femelles adultes.

Certains auteurs ont suggéré qu'ils pourraient avoir évolué comme un signal visuel de maturité sexuelle et de fertilité. De nombreuses personnes considèrent que les seins féminins nus sont esthétiquement agréables ou érotiques, et ils peuvent susciter des désirs sexuels accrus chez les hommes dans de nombreuses cultures.

Dans l'ancien travail indien, le Kama Sutra, le léger grattage des seins avec les ongles et la morsure des dents sont considérés comme érotiques.

Certaines personnes manifestent un intérêt sexuel pour les seins féminins distinct de celui de la personne, ce qui peut être considéré comme un fétichisme du sein.

Un certain nombre de modes occidentales incluent des vêtements qui accentuent les seins, comme l'utilisation de soutiens-gorge push-up et de robes et chemisiers décolletés (décolleté plongeant) qui montrent le décolleté.

Alors que la culture américaine préfère les seins jeunes et droits, certaines cultures vénèrent les femmes aux seins tombants, indiquant le maternage et la sagesse de l'expérience. Des recherches menées à l'Université Victoria de Wellington ont montré que les seins sont souvent la première chose que les hommes regardent, et pour un plus longtemps que les autres parties du corps.

Les auteurs de l'étude avaient initialement émis l'hypothèse que la raison en était due à l'endocrinologie avec des seins plus gros indiquant des niveaux plus élevés d'œstrogène et un signe de plus grande fertilité, mais les chercheurs ont déclaré que "les hommes peuvent regarder plus souvent les seins parce qu'ils sont simplement esthétique, quelle que soit la taille. "Certaines femmes déclarent avoir atteint un orgasme grâce à la stimulation des mamelons, mais cela est rare.

La recherche suggère que les orgasmes sont des orgasmes génitaux et peuvent également être directement liés à "la région génitale du cerveau".

Dans ces cas, il semble que la sensation des mamelons se déplace vers la même partie du cerveau que les sensations du vagin, du clitoris et du col de l'utérus.

La stimulation des mamelons peut déclencher des contractions utérines, qui produisent alors une sensation dans la région génitale du cerveau.


=== Géographie anthropomorphique ===


De nombreuses montagnes portent le nom du sein parce qu'elles lui ressemblent en apparence et sont donc des objets de vénération religieuse et ancestrale en tant que symbole de fertilité et de bien-être.

En Asie, il y avait "Breast Mountain", qui avait une grotte où le moine bouddhiste Bodhidharma (Da Mo) passait beaucoup de temps en méditation.

D'autres montagnes de poitrine de ce type sont le mont Elgon à la frontière entre l'Ouganda et le Kenya; Beinn Chiochan et les Maiden Paps en Ecosse ; le Bundok ng Susong Dalaga («montagnes du sein de la jeune fille») sur l'île de Talim, aux Philippines, les collines jumelles connues sous le nom de Paps of Anu (Dá Chích Anann ou «les seins d'Anu»), près de Killarney en Irlande; la Tetica de Bacares ou La Tetica, haute de 2 086 m, dans la Sierra de Los Filabres, en Espagne ; Khao Nom Sao en Thaïlande, Cerro Las Tetas à Porto Rico ; et les seins d'Aphrodite à Mykonos, parmi beaucoup d'autres.

Aux États-Unis, la chaîne Teton tire son nom du mot français signifiant «téton».



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sein
