

CEREBRAL CORTEX


The cerebral cortex, also known as the cerebral mantle, is the outer layer of neural tissue of the cerebrum of the brain in humans and other mammals. 

The cerebral cortex mostly consists of the six-layered neocortex, with just 10% consisting of allocortex. 

It is separated into two cortices, by the longitudinal fissure that divides the cerebrum into the left and right cerebral hemispheres. 

The two hemispheres are joined beneath the cortex by the corpus callosum. 

The cerebral cortex is the largest site of neural integration in the central nervous system. 

It plays a key role in attention, perception, awareness, thought, memory, language, and consciousness.
In most mammals, apart from small mammals that have small brains, the cerebral cortex is folded, providing a greater surface area in the confined volume of the cranium. 

Apart from minimising brain and cranial volume, cortical folding is crucial for the wiring of the brain and its functional organisation. 

In mammals with a small brain there is no folding and the cortex is smooth.A fold or ridge in the cortex is termed a gyrus (plural gyri) and a groove is termed a sulcus (plural sulci). 

These surface convolutions appear during fetal development and continue to mature after birth through the process of gyrification. 

In the human brain the majority of the cerebral cortex is not visible from the outside, but buried in the sulci, and the insular cortex is completely hidden. 

The major sulci and gyri mark the divisions of the cerebrum into the lobes of the brain.
There are between 14 and 16 billion neurons in the human cerebral cortex. 

These are organised into horizontal cortical layers, and radially into cortical columns and minicolumns. 

Cortical areas have specific functions such as movement in the motor cortex, and sight in the visual cortex.


== Structure ==


The cerebral cortex is the outer covering of the surfaces of the cerebral hemispheres and is folded into peaks called gyri, and grooves called sulci. 

In the human brain it is between two and three or four millimetres thick, and makes up 40 per cent of the brain's mass. 90 per cent of the cerebral cortex is the six-layered neocortex with the other 10 per cent made up of allocortex. 

There are between 14 and 16 billion neurons in the cortex, and these are organized radially in cortical columns, and minicolumns, in the horizontally organized layers of the cortex.The neocortex is separable into different regions of cortex known in the plural as cortices, and include the motor cortex and visual cortex. 

About two thirds of the cortical surface is buried in the sulci and the insular cortex is completely hidden. 

The cortex is thickest over the top of a gyrus and thinnest at the bottom of a sulcus.


=== Folds ===


The cerebral cortex is folded in a way that allows a large surface area of neural tissue to fit within the confines of the neurocranium. 

When unfolded in the human, each hemispheric cortex has a total surface area of about 0.12 square metres (1.3 sq ft). 

The folding is inward away from the surface of the brain, and is also present on the medial surface of each hemisphere within the longitudinal fissure. 

Most mammals have a cerebral cortex that is convoluted with the peaks known as gyri and the troughs or grooves known as sulci. 

Some small mammals including some small rodents have smooth cerebral surfaces without gyrification.


=== Lobes ===

The larger sulci and gyri mark the divisions of the cortex of the cerebrum into the lobes of the brain. 

There are four main lobes: the frontal lobe, parietal lobe, temporal lobe, and occipital lobe. 

The insular cortex is often included as the insular lobe. 

The limbic lobe is a rim of cortex on the medial side of each hemisphere and is also often included. 

There are also three lobules of the brain described: the paracentral lobule, the superior parietal lobule, and the inferior parietal lobule.


=== Thickness ===

For species of mammals, larger brains (in absolute terms, not just in relation to body size) tend to have thicker cortices. 

The smallest mammals, such as shrews, have a neocortical thickness of about 0.5 mm; the ones with the largest brains, such as humans and fin whales, have thicknesses of 2–4 mm. 

There is an approximately logarithmic relationship between brain weight and cortical thickness.Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain (MRI) makes it possible to get a measure for the thickness of the human cerebral cortex and relate it to other measures. 

The thickness of different cortical areas varies but in general, sensory cortex is thinner than motor cortex. 

One study has found some positive association between the cortical thickness and intelligence.
Another study has found that the somatosensory cortex is thicker in migraine sufferers, though it is not known if this is the result of migraine attacks or the cause of them.
A later study using a larger patient population reports no change in the cortical thickness in migraine sufferers.
A genetic disorder of the cerebral cortex, whereby decreased folding in certain areas results in a microgyrus, where there are four layers instead of six, is in some instances seen to be related to dyslexia.


=== Layers of neocortex ===


The neocortex is formed of six layers, numbered I to VI, from the outermost layer I – near to the pia mater, to the innermost layer VI – near to the underlying white matter. 

Each cortical layer has a characteristic distribution of different neurons and their connections with other cortical and subcortical regions. 

There are direct connections between different cortical areas and indirect connections via the thalamus.
One of the clearest examples of cortical layering is the line of Gennari in the primary visual cortex. 

This is a band of whiter tissue that can be observed with the naked eye in the calcarine sulcus of the occipital lobe. 

The line of Gennari is composed of axons bringing visual information from the thalamus into layer IV of the visual cortex.
Staining cross-sections of the cortex to reveal the position of neuronal cell bodies and the intracortical axon tracts allowed neuroanatomists in the early 20th century to produce a detailed description of the laminar structure of the cortex in different species. 

The work of Korbinian Brodmann (1909) established that the mammalian neocortex is consistently divided into six layers.


==== Layer I ====
Layer I is the molecular layer, and contains few scattered neurons, including GABAergic rosehip neurons. 

Layer I consists largely of extensions of apical dendritic tufts of pyramidal neurons and horizontally oriented axons, as well as glial cells. 

During development, Cajal-Retzius cells and subpial granular layer cells are present in this layer. 

Also, some spiny stellate cells can be found here. 

Inputs to the apical tufts are thought to be crucial for the feedback interactions in the cerebral cortex involved in associative learning and attention. 

While it was once thought that the input to layer I came from the cortex itself, it is now realized that layer I across the cerebral cortex mantle receives substantial input from matrix or M-type thalamus cells (in contrast to core or C-type that go to layer IV).


==== Layer II ====
Layer II, the external granular layer, contains small pyramidal neurons and numerous stellate neurons.


==== Layer III ====
Layer III, the external pyramidal layer, contains predominantly small and medium-size pyramidal neurons, as well as non-pyramidal neurons with vertically oriented intracortical axons; layers I through III are the main target of interhemispheric corticocortical afferents, and layer III is the principal source of corticocortical efferents.


==== Layer IV ====
Layer IV, the internal granular layer, contains different types of stellate and pyramidal cells, and is the main target of thalamocortical afferents from thalamus type C neurons (core-type ) as well as intra-hemispheric corticocortical afferents. 

The layers above layer IV are also referred to as supragranular layers (layers I-III), whereas the layers below are referred to as infragranular layers (layers V and VI).


==== Layer V ====
Layer V, the internal pyramidal layer, contains large pyramidal neurons. 

Axons from these leave the cortex and connect with subcortical structures including the basal ganglia. 

In the primary motor cortex of the frontal lobe, layer V contains giant pyramidal cells called Betz cells, whose axons travel through the internal capsule, the brain stem, and the spinal cord forming the corticospinal tract, which is the main pathway for voluntary motor control.


==== Layer VI ====
Layer VI, the polymorphic or multiform layer, contains few large pyramidal neurons and many small spindle-like pyramidal and multiform neurons; layer VI sends efferent fibers to the thalamus, establishing a very precise reciprocal interconnection between the cortex and the thalamus. 

That is, layer VI neurons from one cortical column connect with thalamus neurons that provide input to the same cortical column. 

These connections are both excitatory and inhibitory. 

Neurons send excitatory fibers to neurons in the thalamus and also send collaterals to the thalamic reticular nucleus that inhibit these same thalamus neurons or ones adjacent to them. 

One theory is that because the inhibitory output is reduced by cholinergic input to the cerebral cortex, this provides the brainstem with adjustable "gain control for the relay of lemniscal inputs".


=== Columns ===

The cortical layers are not simply stacked one over the other; there exist characteristic connections between different layers and neuronal types, which span all the thickness of the cortex. 

These cortical microcircuits are grouped into cortical columns and minicolumns. 

It has been proposed that the minicolumns are the basic functional units of the cortex. 

In 1957, Vernon Mountcastle showed that the functional properties of the cortex change abruptly between laterally adjacent points; however, they are continuous in the direction perpendicular to the surface. 

Later works have provided evidence of the presence of functionally distinct cortical columns in the visual cortex (Hubel and Wiesel, 1959), auditory cortex,
and associative cortex.
Cortical areas that lack a layer IV are called agranular. 

Cortical areas that have only a rudimentary layer IV are called dysgranular. 

Information processing within each layer is determined by different temporal dynamics with that in layers II/III having a slow 2 Hz oscillation while that in layer V has a fast 10–15 Hz oscillation.


=== Types of cortex ===

Based on the differences in laminar organization the cerebral cortex can be classified into two types, the large area of neocortex which has six cell layers, and the much smaller area of allocortex that has three or four layers:
The neocortex is also known as the isocortex or neopallium and is the part of the mature cerebral cortex with six distinct layers. 

Examples of neocortical areas include the granular primary motor cortex, and the striate primary visual cortex. 

The neocortex has two subtypes, the true isocortex and the proisocortex which is a transitional region between the isocortex and the regions of the periallocortex.
The allocortex is the part of the cerebral cortex with three or four layers, and has three subtypes, the paleocortex with three cortical laminae, the archicortex which has four or five, and a transitional area adjacent to the allocortex, the periallocortex. 

Examples of allocortex are the olfactory cortex and the hippocampus.There is a transitional area between the neocortex and the allocortex called the paralimbic cortex, where layers 2, 3 and 4 are merged. 

This area incorporates the proisocortex of the neocortex and the periallocortex of the allocortex. 

In addition, the cerebral cortex may be classified into four lobes: the frontal lobe, temporal lobe, the parietal lobe, and the occipital lobe, named from their overlying bones of the skull.


== Blood supply and drainage ==


Blood supply to the cerebral cortex is part of the cerebral circulation. 

Cerebral arteries supply the blood that perfuses the cerebrum. 

This arterial blood carries oxygen, glucose, and other nutrients to the cortex. 

Cerebral veins drain the deoxygenated blood, and metabolic wastes including carbon dioxide, back to the heart.
The main arteries supplying the cortex are the anterior cerebral artery, the middle cerebral artery, and the posterior cerebral artery. 

The anterior cerebral artery supplies the anterior portions of the brain, including most of the frontal lobe. 

The middle cerebral artery supplies the parietal lobes, temporal lobes, and parts of the occipital lobes. 

The middle cerebral artery splits into two branches to supply the left and right hemisphere, where they branch further. 

The posterior cerebral artery supplies the occipital lobes.
The circle of Willis is the main blood system that deals with blood supply in the cerebrum and cerebral cortex.


== Development ==


The prenatal development of the cerebral cortex is a complex and finely tuned process called corticogenesis, influenced by the interplay between genes and the environment.


=== Neural tube ===

The cerebral cortex develops from the most anterior part, the forebrain region, of the neural tube. 

The neural plate folds and closes to form the neural tube. 

From the cavity inside the neural tube develops the ventricular system, and, from the neuroepithelial cells of its walls, the neurons and glia of the nervous system. 

The most anterior (front, or cranial) part of the neural plate, the prosencephalon, which is evident before neurulation begins, gives rise to the cerebral hemispheres and later cortex.


=== Cortical neuron development ===


Cortical neurons are generated within the ventricular zone, next to the ventricles. 

At first, this zone contains neural stem cells, that transition to radial glial cells–progenitor cells, which divide to produce glial cells and neurons.


==== Radial glia ====

The cerebral cortex is composed of a heterogenous population of cells that give rise to different cell types. 

The majority of these cells are derived from radial glia migration that form the different cell types of the neocortex and it is a period associated with an increase in neurogenesis. 

Similarly, the process of neurogenesis regulates lamination to form the different layers of the cortex. 

During this process there is an increase in the restriction of cell fate that begins with earlier progenitors giving rise to any cell type in the cortex and later progenitors giving rise only to neurons of superficial layers. 

This differential cell fate creates an inside-out topography in the cortex with younger neurons in superficial layers and older neurons in deeper layers. 

In addition, laminar neurons are stopped in S or G2 phase in order to give a fine distinction between the different cortical layers. 

Laminar differentiation is not fully complete until after birth since during development laminar neurons are still sensitive to extrinsic signals and environmental cues.Although the majority of the cells that compose the cortex are derived locally from radial glia there is a subset population of neurons that migrate from other regions. 

Radial glia give rise to neurons that are pyramidal in shape and use glutamate as a neurotransmitter, however these migrating cells contribute neurons that are stellate-shaped and use GABA as their main neurotransmitter. 

These GABAergic neurons are generated by progenitor cells in the medial ganglionic eminence (MGE) that migrate tangentially to the cortex via the subventricular zone. 

This migration of GABAergic neurons is particularly important since GABA receptors are excitatory during development. 

This excitation is primarily driven by the flux of chloride ions through the GABA receptor, however in adults chloride concentrations shift causing an inward flux of chloride that hyperpolarizes postsynaptic neurons.
The glial fibers produced in the first divisions of the progenitor cells are radially oriented, spanning the thickness of the cortex from the ventricular zone to the outer, pial surface, and provide scaffolding for the migration of neurons outwards from the ventricular zone.At birth there are very few dendrites present on the cortical neuron's cell body, and the axon is undeveloped. 

During the first year of life the dendrites become dramatically increased in number, such that they can accommodate up to a hundred thousand synaptic connections with other neurons. 

The axon can develop to extend a long way from the cell body.


=== Asymmetric division ===

The first divisions of the progenitor cells are symmetric, which duplicates the total number of progenitor cells at each mitotic cycle. 

Then, some progenitor cells begin to divide asymmetrically, producing one postmitotic cell that migrates along the radial glial fibers, leaving the ventricular zone, and one progenitor cell, which continues to divide until the end of development, when it differentiates into a glial cell or an ependymal cell. 

As the G1 phase of mitosis is elongated, in what is seen as selective cell-cycle lengthening, the newly born neurons migrate to more superficial layers of the cortex. 

The migrating daughter cells become the pyramidal cells of the cerebral cortex. 

The development process is time ordered and regulated by hundreds of genes and epigenetic regulatory mechanisms.


=== Layer organization ===

The layered structure of the mature cerebral cortex is formed during development. 

The first pyramidal neurons generated migrate out of the ventricular zone and subventricular zone, together with reelin-producing Cajal–Retzius neurons, from the preplate. 

Next, a cohort of neurons migrating into the middle of the preplate divides this transient layer into the superficial marginal zone, which will become layer I of the mature neocortex, and the subplate, forming a middle layer called the cortical plate. 

These cells will form the deep layers of the mature cortex, layers five and six. 

Later born neurons migrate radially into the cortical plate past the deep layer neurons, and become the upper layers (two to four). 

Thus, the layers of the cortex are created in an inside-out order. 

The only exception to this inside-out sequence of neurogenesis occurs in the layer I of primates, in which, in contrast to rodents, neurogenesis continues throughout the entire period of corticogenesis.


=== Cortical patterning ===


The map of functional cortical areas, which include primary motor and visual cortex, originates from a 'protomap', which is regulated by molecular signals such as fibroblast growth factor FGF8 early in embryonic development. 

These signals regulate the size, shape, and position of cortical areas on the surface of the cortical primordium, in part by regulating gradients of transcription factor expression, through a process called cortical patterning. 

Examples of such transcription factors include the genes EMX2 and PAX6. 

Together, both transcription factors form an opposing gradient of expression. 

Pax6 is highly expressed at the rostral lateral pole, while Emx2 is highly expressed in the caudomedial pole. 

The establishment of this gradient is important for proper development. 

For example, mutations in Pax6 can cause expression levels of Emx2 to expand out of its normal expression domain, which would ultimately lead to an expansion of the areas normally derived from the caudal medial cortex, such as the visual cortex. 

On the contrary, if mutations in Emx2 occur, it can cause the Pax6-expressing domain to expand and result in the frontal and motor cortical regions enlarging. 

Therefore, researchers believe that similar gradients and signaling centers next to the cortex could contribute to the regional expression of these transcription factors.
Two very well studied patterning signals for the cortex include FGF and retinoic acid. 

If FGFs are misexpressed in different areas of the developing cortex, cortical patterning is disrupted. 

Specifically, when Fgf8 is increased in the anterior pole, Emx2 is downregulated and a caudal shift in the cortical region occurs. 

This ultimately causes an expansion of the rostral regions. 

Therefore, Fgf8 and other FGFs play a role in the regulation of expression of Emx2 and Pax6 and represent how the cerebral cortex can become specialized for different functions.Rapid expansion of the cortical surface area is regulated by the amount of self-renewal of radial glial cells and is partly regulated by FGF and Notch genes. 

During the period of cortical neurogenesis and layer formation, many higher mammals begin the process of gyrification, which generates the characteristic folds of the cerebral cortex. 

Gyrification is regulated by a DNA-associated protein Trnp1 and by FGF and SHH signaling


== Evolution ==


Of all the different brain regions, the cerebral cortex shows the largest evolutionary variation and has evolved most recently. 

In contrast to the highly conserved circuitry of the medulla oblongata, for example, which serves critical functions such as regulation of heart and respiration rates, many areas of the cerebral cortex are not strictly necessary for survival. 

Thus, the evolution of the cerebral cortex has seen the advent and modification of new functional areas—particularly association areas that do not directly receive input from outside the cortex.A key theory of cortical evolution is embodied in the radial unit hypothesis and related protomap hypothesis, first proposed by Rakic. 

This theory states that new cortical areas are formed by the addition of new radial units, which is accomplished at the stem cell level. 

The protomap hypothesis states that the cellular and molecular identity and characteristics of neurons in each cortical area are specified by cortical stem cells, known as radial glial cells, in a primordial map. 

This map is controlled by secreted signaling proteins and downstream transcription factors.


== Function ==



=== Connections ===

The cerebral cortex is connected to various subcortical structures such as the thalamus and the basal ganglia, sending information to them along efferent connections and receiving information from them via afferent connections. 

Most sensory information is routed to the cerebral cortex via the thalamus. 

Olfactory information, however, passes through the olfactory bulb to the olfactory cortex (piriform cortex). 

The majority of connections are from one area of the cortex to another, rather than from subcortical areas; Braitenberg and Schüz (1998) claim that in primary sensory areas, at the cortical level where the input fibers terminate, up to 20% of the synapses are supplied by extracortical afferents but that in other areas and other layers the percentage is likely to be much lower.


=== Cortical areas ===

The whole of the cerebral cortex was divided into 52 different areas in an early presentation by Korbinian Brodmann. 

These areas known as Brodmann areas, are based on their cytoarchitecture but also relate to various functions. 

An example is Brodmann area 17 which is the primary visual cortex.
In more general terms the cortex is typically described as comprising three parts: sensory, motor, and association areas.


==== Sensory areas ====

The sensory areas are the cortical areas that receive and process information from the senses. 

Parts of the cortex that receive sensory inputs from the thalamus are called primary sensory areas. 

The senses of vision, hearing, and touch are served by the primary visual cortex, primary auditory cortex and primary somatosensory cortex respectively. 

In general, the two hemispheres receive information from the opposite (contralateral) side of the body. 

For example, the right primary somatosensory cortex receives information from the left limbs, and the right visual cortex receives information from the left visual field. 

The organization of sensory maps in the cortex reflects that of the corresponding sensing organ, in what is known as a topographic map. 

Neighboring points in the primary visual cortex, for example, correspond to neighboring points in the retina. 

This topographic map is called a retinotopic map. 

In the same way, there exists a tonotopic map in the primary auditory cortex and a somatotopic map in the primary sensory cortex. 

This last topographic map of the body onto the posterior central gyrus has been illustrated as a deformed human representation, the somatosensory homunculus, where the size of different body parts reflects the relative density of their innervation. 

Areas with much sensory innervation, such as the fingertips and the lips, require more cortical area to process finer sensation.


==== Motor areas ====
The motor areas are located in both hemispheres of the cortex. 

The motor areas are very closely related to the control of voluntary movements, especially fine fragmented movements performed by the hand. 

The right half of the motor area controls the left side of the body, and vice versa.
Two areas of the cortex are commonly referred to as motor:

Primary motor cortex, which executes voluntary movements
Supplementary motor areas and premotor cortex, which select voluntary movements.In addition, motor functions have been described for:

Posterior parietal cortex, which guides voluntary movements in space
Dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, which decides which voluntary movements to make according to higher-order instructions, rules, and self-generated thoughts.Just underneath the cerebral cortex are interconnected subcortical masses of grey matter called basal ganglia (or nuclei). 

The basal ganglia receive input from the substantia nigra of the midbrain and motor areas of the cerebral cortex, and send signals back to both of these locations. 

They are involved in motor control. 

They are found lateral to the thalamus. 

The main components of the basal ganglia are the caudate nucleus, the putamen, the globus pallidus, the substantia nigra, the nucleus accumbens, and the subthalamic nucleus. 

The putamen and globus pallidus are also collectively known as the lentiform nucleus, because together they form a lens-shaped body. 

The putamen and caudate nucleus are also collectively called the corpus striatum after their striped appearance.


==== Association areas ====

The association areas are the parts of the cerebral cortex that do not belong to the primary regions. 

They function to produce a meaningful perceptual experience of the world, enable us to interact effectively, and support abstract thinking and language. 

The parietal, temporal, and occipital lobes – all located in the posterior part of the cortex – integrate sensory information and information stored in memory. 

The frontal lobe or prefrontal association complex is involved in planning actions and movement, as well as abstract thought. 

Globally, the association areas are organized as distributed networks. 

Each network connects areas distributed across widely spaced regions of the cortex. 

Distinct networks are positioned adjacent to one another yielding a complex series of interwoven networks. 

The specific organization of the association networks is debated with evidence for interactions, hierarchical relationships, and competition between networks.In humans, association networks are particularly important to language function. 

In the past it was theorized that language abilities are localized in Broca's area in areas of the left inferior frontal gyrus, BA44 and BA45, for language expression and in Wernicke's area BA22, for language reception. 

However, the processes of language expression and reception have been shown to occur in areas other than just those structures around the lateral sulcus, including the frontal lobe, basal ganglia, cerebellum, and pons.


== Clinical significance ==


Neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's disease and Lafora disease, show as a marker, an atrophy of the grey matter of the cerebral cortex.Other diseases of the central nervous system include neurological disorders such as epilepsy, movement disorders, and difficulties in speech (aphasia).
Brain damage from disease or trauma, can involve damage to a specific lobe such as in frontal lobe disorder, and associated functions will be affected. 

The blood-brain barrier that serves to protect the brain from infection can become compromised allowing entry to pathogens.
The developing fetus is susceptible to a range of environmental factors that can cause birth defects and problems in later development. 

Maternal alcohol consumption for example can cause fetal alcohol spectrum disorder. 

Other factors that can cause neurodevelopment disorders are toxicants such as drugs, and exposure to radiation as from X-rays. 

Infections can also affect the development of the cortex. 

A viral infection is one of the causes of lissencephaly, which results in a smooth cortex without gyrification.
A type of electrocorticography called cortical stimulation mapping is an invasive procedure that involves placing electrodes directly onto the exposed brain in order to localise the functions of specific areas of the cortex. 

It is used in clinical and therapeutic applications including pre-surgical mapping.


=== Genes associated with cortical disorders ===

There are a number of genetic mutations that can cause a wide range of genetic disorders of the cerebral cortex, including microcephaly, schizencephaly and types of lissencephaly. 

Chromosome abnormalities can also result causing a number of neurodevelopmental disorders such as fragile X syndrome and Rett syndrome.
MCPH1 codes for microcephalin, and disorders in this and in ASPM are associated with microcephaly. 

Mutations in the gene NBS1 that codes for nibrin can cause Nijmegen breakage syndrome, characterised by microcephaly.Mutations in EMX2, and COL4A1 are associated with schizencephaly, a condition marked by the absence of large parts of the cerebral hemispheres.


== History ==

In 1909, Korbinian Brodmann distinguished different areas of the neocortex based on cytoarchitectural difference and divided the cerebral cortex into 52 regions.Rafael Lorente de Nó, a student of Santiago Ramon y Cajal identified more than 40 different types of cortical neurons based on the distribution of their dendrites and axons.


== Other animals ==


The cerebral cortex is derived from the pallium, a layered structure found in the forebrain of all vertebrates. 

The basic form of the pallium is a cylindrical layer enclosing fluid-filled ventricles. 

Around the circumference of the cylinder are four zones, the dorsal pallium, medial pallium, ventral pallium, and lateral pallium, which are thought to be homologous to the neocortex, hippocampus, amygdala, and olfactory cortex, respectively.
Until recently no counterpart to the cerebral cortex had been recognized in invertebrates. 

However, a study published in the journal Cell in 2010, based on gene expression profiles, reported strong affinities between the cerebral cortex and the mushroom bodies of the ragworm Platynereis dumerilii. 

Mushroom bodies are structures in the brains of many types of worms and arthropods that are known to play important roles in learning and memory; the genetic evidence indicates a common evolutionary origin, and therefore indicates that the origins of the earliest precursors of the cerebral cortex date back to the Precambrian era.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cerebral_cortex
;;;ES;;;



CORTEZA CEREBRAL


La corteza cerebral, también conocida como manto cerebral, es la capa externa de tejido neural del cerebro del cerebro en humanos y otros mamíferos.

La corteza cerebral consiste principalmente en la neocorteza de seis capas, y solo el 10% consiste en alocorteza.

Está separado en dos cortezas por la fisura longitudinal que divide el cerebro en los hemisferios cerebrales derecho e izquierdo.

Los dos hemisferios están unidos debajo de la corteza por el cuerpo calloso.

La corteza cerebral es el sitio más grande de integración neuronal en el sistema nervioso central.

Desempeña un papel clave en la atención, la percepción, la conciencia, el pensamiento, la memoria, el lenguaje y la conciencia.
En la mayoría de los mamíferos, aparte de los mamíferos pequeños que tienen cerebros pequeños, la corteza cerebral está plegada, proporcionando una mayor superficie en el volumen confinado del cráneo.

Además de minimizar el volumen cerebral y craneal, el plegamiento cortical es crucial para el cableado del cerebro y su organización funcional.

En los mamíferos con un cerebro pequeño no hay plegamiento y la corteza es lisa. Un pliegue o cresta en la corteza se denomina circunvolución (plural gyri) y un surco se denomina surco (plural sulci).

Estas circunvoluciones superficiales aparecen durante el desarrollo fetal y continúan madurando después del nacimiento a través del proceso de girificación.

En el cerebro humano, la mayor parte de la corteza cerebral no es visible desde el exterior, sino enterrada en los surcos, y la corteza insular está completamente oculta.

Los surcos y circunvoluciones principales marcan las divisiones del cerebro en los lóbulos del cerebro.
Hay entre 14 y 16 mil millones de neuronas en la corteza cerebral humana.

Estos se organizan en capas corticales horizontales y radialmente en columnas y minicolumnas corticales.

Las áreas corticales tienen funciones específicas como el movimiento en la corteza motora y la vista en la corteza visual.


== Estructura ==


La corteza cerebral es la cubierta exterior de las superficies de los hemisferios cerebrales y está plegada en picos llamados circunvoluciones y surcos llamados surcos.

En el cerebro humano tiene entre dos y tres o cuatro milímetros de espesor y constituye el 40 por ciento de la masa del cerebro. El 90 por ciento de la corteza cerebral es la neocorteza de seis capas y el otro 10 por ciento está formado por alocorteza.

Hay entre 14 y 16 mil millones de neuronas en la corteza, y están organizadas radialmente en columnas corticales y minicolumnas, en las capas organizadas horizontalmente de la corteza. La neocorteza es separable en diferentes regiones de la corteza conocidas en plural como cortezas, y incluyen la corteza motora y la corteza visual.

Aproximadamente dos tercios de la superficie cortical están enterrados en los surcos y la corteza insular está completamente oculta.

La corteza es más gruesa sobre la parte superior de una circunvolución y más delgada en la parte inferior de un surco.


=== Pliegues ===


La corteza cerebral está plegada de tal manera que permite que una gran superficie de tejido neural quepa dentro de los confines del neurocráneo.

Cuando se despliega en el ser humano, cada corteza hemisférica tiene una superficie total de aproximadamente 0,12 metros cuadrados (1,3 pies cuadrados).

El pliegue se aleja de la superficie del cerebro y también está presente en la superficie medial de cada hemisferio dentro de la fisura longitudinal.

La mayoría de los mamíferos tienen una corteza cerebral que se enreda con los picos conocidos como circunvoluciones y los valles o surcos conocidos como surcos.

Algunos pequeños mamíferos, incluidos algunos pequeños roedores, tienen superficies cerebrales lisas sin girificación.


=== Lóbulos ===

Los surcos y circunvoluciones más grandes marcan las divisiones de la corteza del cerebro en los lóbulos del cerebro.

Hay cuatro lóbulos principales: el lóbulo frontal, el lóbulo parietal, el lóbulo temporal y el lóbulo occipital.

La corteza insular a menudo se incluye como el lóbulo insular.

El lóbulo límbico es un borde de la corteza en el lado medial de cada hemisferio y también se incluye a menudo.

También se describen tres lóbulos del cerebro: el lóbulo paracentral, el lóbulo parietal superior y el lóbulo parietal inferior.


=== Grosor ===

Para las especies de mamíferos, los cerebros más grandes (en términos absolutos, no solo en relación con el tamaño del cuerpo) tienden a tener cortezas más gruesas.

Los mamíferos más pequeños, como las musarañas, tienen un grosor neocortical de unos 0,5 mm; los que tienen los cerebros más grandes, como los humanos y los rorcuales comunes, tienen un grosor de 2 a 4 mm.

Existe una relación aproximadamente logarítmica entre el peso del cerebro y el grosor cortical. Las imágenes por resonancia magnética del cerebro (IRM) permiten obtener una medida del grosor de la corteza cerebral humana y relacionarla con otras medidas.

El grosor de las diferentes áreas corticales varía pero, en general, la corteza sensorial es más delgada que la corteza motora.

Un estudio ha encontrado una asociación positiva entre el grosor cortical y la inteligencia.
Otro estudio ha encontrado que la corteza somatosensorial es más gruesa en los que sufren de migraña, aunque no se sabe si esto es el resultado de los ataques de migraña o la causa de los mismos.
Un estudio posterior que utilizó una población de pacientes más grande no informa cambios en el grosor cortical en pacientes con migraña.
Un trastorno genético de la corteza cerebral, por el cual la disminución del plegamiento en ciertas áreas da como resultado un microgiro, donde hay cuatro capas en lugar de seis, en algunos casos se considera que está relacionado con la dislexia.


=== Capas de neocorteza ===


La neocorteza está formada por seis capas, numeradas de la I a la VI, desde la capa más externa I, cerca de la piamadre, hasta la capa más interna VI, cerca de la sustancia blanca subyacente.

Cada capa cortical tiene una distribución característica de diferentes neuronas y sus conexiones con otras regiones corticales y subcorticales.

Hay conexiones directas entre diferentes áreas corticales y conexiones indirectas a través del tálamo.
Uno de los ejemplos más claros de capas corticales es la línea de Gennari en la corteza visual primaria.

Se trata de una banda de tejido más blanco que se observa a simple vista en el surco calcarino del lóbulo occipital.

La línea de Gennari está compuesta por axones que traen información visual desde el tálamo a la capa IV de la corteza visual.
La tinción de secciones transversales de la corteza para revelar la posición de los cuerpos celulares neuronales y los tractos axónicos intracorticales permitió a los neuroanatomistas de principios del siglo XX producir una descripción detallada de la estructura laminar de la corteza en diferentes especies.

El trabajo de Korbinian Brodmann (1909) estableció que la neocorteza de los mamíferos se divide consistentemente en seis capas.


==== Capa I ====
La capa I es la capa molecular y contiene pocas neuronas dispersas, incluidas las neuronas de rosa mosqueta GABAérgicas.

La capa I consta en gran parte de extensiones de penachos dendríticos apicales de neuronas piramidales y axones orientados horizontalmente, así como células gliales.

Durante el desarrollo, las células de Cajal-Retzius y las células de la capa granular subpial están presentes en esta capa.

Además, aquí se pueden encontrar algunas células estrelladas espinosas.

Se cree que las entradas a los mechones apicales son cruciales para las interacciones de retroalimentación en la corteza cerebral involucradas en el aprendizaje asociativo y la atención.

Si bien alguna vez se pensó que la entrada a la capa I provenía de la corteza misma, ahora se sabe que la capa I a través del manto de la corteza cerebral recibe una entrada sustancial de las células del tálamo de la matriz o tipo M (en contraste con el núcleo o tipo C que ir a la capa IV).


==== Capa II ====
La capa II, la capa granular externa, contiene pequeñas neuronas piramidales y numerosas neuronas estrelladas.


==== Capa III ====
La capa III, la capa piramidal externa, contiene predominantemente neuronas piramidales de tamaño pequeño y mediano, así como neuronas no piramidales con axones intracorticales orientados verticalmente; las capas I a III son el objetivo principal de las fibras aferentes corticocorticales interhemisféricas, y la capa III es la fuente principal de las fibras eferentes corticocorticales.


==== Capa IV ====
La capa IV, la capa granular interna, contiene diferentes tipos de células estrelladas y piramidales, y es el objetivo principal de los aferentes talamocorticales de las neuronas tipo C del tálamo (tipo central), así como de los aferentes corticocorticales intrahemisféricos.

Las capas por encima de la capa IV también se denominan capas supragranulares (capas I-III), mientras que las capas inferiores se denominan capas infragranulares (capas V y VI).


==== Capa V ====
La capa V, la capa piramidal interna, contiene neuronas piramidales grandes.

Los axones de estos salen de la corteza y se conectan con estructuras subcorticales, incluidos los ganglios basales.

En la corteza motora primaria del lóbulo frontal, la capa V contiene células piramidales gigantes llamadas células de Betz, cuyos axones viajan a través de la cápsula interna, el tronco encefálico y la médula espinal formando el tracto corticoespinal, que es la vía principal para el control motor voluntario. .


==== Capa VI ====
La capa VI, la capa polimórfica o multiforme, contiene pocas neuronas piramidales grandes y muchas neuronas piramidales y multiformes pequeñas en forma de huso; la capa VI envía fibras eferentes al tálamo, estableciendo una interconexión recíproca muy precisa entre la corteza y el tálamo.

Es decir, las neuronas de la capa VI de una columna cortical se conectan con las neuronas del tálamo que proporcionan información a la misma columna cortical.

Estas conexiones son excitatorias e inhibitorias.

Las neuronas envían fibras excitatorias a las neuronas del tálamo y también envían colaterales al núcleo reticular talámico que inhiben estas mismas neuronas del tálamo o las adyacentes.

Una teoría es que debido a que la salida inhibidora se reduce por la entrada colinérgica a la corteza cerebral, esto proporciona al tronco encefálico un "control de ganancia ajustable para el relé de entradas lemniscales".


=== Columnas ===

Las capas corticales no están simplemente apiladas unas sobre otras; existen conexiones características entre diferentes capas y tipos neuronales, que abarcan todo el espesor de la corteza.

Estos microcircuitos corticales se agrupan en columnas y minicolumnas corticales.

Se ha propuesto que las minicolumnas son las unidades funcionales básicas de la corteza.

En 1957, Vernon Mountcastle demostró que las propiedades funcionales de la corteza cambian abruptamente entre puntos lateralmente adyacentes; sin embargo, son continuas en la dirección perpendicular a la superficie.

Trabajos posteriores han proporcionado evidencia de la presencia de columnas corticales funcionalmente distintas en la corteza visual (Hubel y Wiesel, 1959), la corteza auditiva,
y corteza asociativa.
Las áreas corticales que carecen de una capa IV se denominan agranulares.

Las áreas corticales que tienen solo una capa IV rudimentaria se denominan disgranulares.

El procesamiento de la información dentro de cada capa está determinado por diferentes dinámicas temporales, ya que en las capas II/III tiene una oscilación lenta de 2 Hz, mientras que en la capa V tiene una oscilación rápida de 10 a 15 Hz.


=== Tipos de corteza ===

Según las diferencias en la organización laminar, la corteza cerebral se puede clasificar en dos tipos, el área grande de neocorteza que tiene seis capas de células y el área mucho más pequeña de alocorteza que tiene tres o cuatro capas:
La neocorteza también se conoce como isocorteza o neopalio y es la parte de la corteza cerebral madura con seis capas distintas.

Los ejemplos de áreas neocorticales incluyen la corteza motora primaria granular y la corteza visual primaria estriada.

La neocorteza tiene dos subtipos, la verdadera isocorteza y la proisocorteza, que es una región de transición entre la isocorteza y las regiones de la periallocorteza.
La alocorteza es la parte de la corteza cerebral con tres o cuatro capas, y tiene tres subtipos, la paleocorteza con tres láminas corticales, la arquicorteza que tiene cuatro o cinco, y un área de transición adyacente a la alocorteza, la perialocorteza.

Ejemplos de alocorteza son la corteza olfativa y el hipocampo. Existe un área de transición entre la neocorteza y la alocorteza llamada corteza paralímbica, donde se fusionan las capas 2, 3 y 4.

Esta área incorpora la proisocorteza de la neocorteza y la periallocorteza de la alocorteza.

Además, la corteza cerebral se puede clasificar en cuatro lóbulos: el lóbulo frontal, el lóbulo temporal, el lóbulo parietal y el lóbulo occipital, denominados así por los huesos del cráneo que los recubren.


== Suministro de sangre y drenaje ==


El suministro de sangre a la corteza cerebral es parte de la circulación cerebral.

Las arterias cerebrales suministran la sangre que irriga el cerebro.

Esta sangre arterial transporta oxígeno, glucosa y otros nutrientes a la corteza.

Las venas cerebrales drenan la sangre desoxigenada y los desechos metabólicos, incluido el dióxido de carbono, de regreso al corazón.
Las principales arterias que irrigan la corteza son la arteria cerebral anterior, la arteria cerebral media y la arteria cerebral posterior.

La arteria cerebral anterior irriga las porciones anteriores del cerebro, incluida la mayor parte del lóbulo frontal.

La arteria cerebral media irriga los lóbulos parietales, los lóbulos temporales y partes de los lóbulos occipitales.

La arteria cerebral media se divide en dos ramas para irrigar los hemisferios izquierdo y derecho, donde se ramifican aún más.

La arteria cerebral posterior irriga los lóbulos occipitales.
El círculo de Willis es el principal sistema sanguíneo que se ocupa del suministro de sangre en el cerebro y la corteza cerebral.


== Desarrollo ==


El desarrollo prenatal de la corteza cerebral es un proceso complejo y finamente sintonizado llamado corticogénesis, influenciado por la interacción entre los genes y el medio ambiente.


=== Tubo neural ===

La corteza cerebral se desarrolla a partir de la parte más anterior, la región del cerebro anterior, del tubo neural.

La placa neural se pliega y se cierra para formar el tubo neural.

A partir de la cavidad interior del tubo neural se desarrolla el sistema ventricular y, a partir de las células neuroepiteliales de sus paredes, las neuronas y glía del sistema nervioso.

La parte más anterior (frontal o craneal) de la placa neural, el prosencéfalo, que es evidente antes de que comience la neurulación, da origen a los hemisferios cerebrales y posteriormente a la corteza.


=== Desarrollo de neuronas corticales ===


Las neuronas corticales se generan dentro de la zona ventricular, junto a los ventrículos.

Al principio, esta zona contiene células madre neurales, que hacen la transición a células gliales radiales: células progenitoras, que se dividen para producir células gliales y neuronas.


==== Glía radial ====

La corteza cerebral está compuesta por una población heterogénea de células que dan lugar a diferentes tipos de células.

La mayoría de estas células se derivan de la migración de la glía radial que forma los diferentes tipos celulares del neocórtex y es un período asociado a un aumento de la neurogénesis.

De manera similar, el proceso de neurogénesis regula la laminación para formar las diferentes capas de la corteza.

Durante este proceso hay un aumento en la restricción del destino celular que comienza con progenitores más tempranos que dan lugar a cualquier tipo de célula en la corteza y progenitores posteriores que dan lugar solo a neuronas de capas superficiales.

Este destino celular diferencial crea una topografía de adentro hacia afuera en la corteza con neuronas más jóvenes en capas superficiales y neuronas más viejas en capas más profundas.

Además, las neuronas laminares se detienen en la fase S o G2 para dar una distinción fina entre las diferentes capas corticales.

La diferenciación laminar no está completamente completa hasta después del nacimiento, ya que durante el desarrollo, las neuronas laminares siguen siendo sensibles a señales extrínsecas y señales ambientales. otras regiones.

La glía radial da lugar a neuronas que tienen forma piramidal y usan glutamato como neurotransmisor, sin embargo, estas células migratorias aportan neuronas que tienen forma estrellada y usan GABA como su principal neurotransmisor.

Estas neuronas GABAérgicas son generadas por células progenitoras en la eminencia ganglionar medial (MGE) que migran tangencialmente a la corteza a través de la zona subventricular.

Esta migración de neuronas GABAérgicas es particularmente importante ya que los receptores GABA son excitatorios durante el desarrollo.

Esta excitación es impulsada principalmente por el flujo de iones de cloruro a través del receptor GABA; sin embargo, en los adultos, las concentraciones de cloruro cambian y provocan un flujo de cloruro hacia el interior que hiperpolariza las neuronas postsinápticas.
Las fibras gliales producidas en las primeras divisiones de las células progenitoras están orientadas radialmente, abarcando el grosor de la corteza desde la zona ventricular hasta la superficie exterior de la piamadre, y proporcionan un andamiaje para la migración de las neuronas hacia el exterior de la zona ventricular. hay muy pocas dendritas presentes en el cuerpo celular de la neurona cortical, y el axón no está desarrollado.

Durante el primer año de vida, el número de dendritas aumenta drásticamente, de modo que pueden albergar hasta cien mil conexiones sinápticas con otras neuronas.

El axón puede desarrollarse para extenderse mucho desde el cuerpo celular.


=== División asimétrica ===

Las primeras divisiones de las células progenitoras son simétricas, lo que duplica el número total de células progenitoras en cada ciclo mitótico.

Luego, algunas células progenitoras comienzan a dividirse asimétricamente, produciendo una célula posmitótica que migra a lo largo de las fibras gliales radiales, saliendo de la zona ventricular, y una célula progenitora, que continúa dividiéndose hasta el final del desarrollo, cuando se diferencia en una célula glial o una célula ependimaria.

A medida que se alarga la fase G1 de la mitosis, en lo que se considera un alargamiento selectivo del ciclo celular, las neuronas recién nacidas migran a capas más superficiales de la corteza.

Las células hijas migratorias se convierten en las células piramidales de la corteza cerebral.

El proceso de desarrollo está ordenado en el tiempo y regulado por cientos de genes y mecanismos reguladores epigenéticos.


=== Organización de capas ===

La estructura en capas de la corteza cerebral madura se forma durante el desarrollo.

Las primeras neuronas piramidales generadas migran fuera de la zona ventricular y la zona subventricular, junto con las neuronas de Cajal-Retzius productoras de reelina, de la preplaca.

A continuación, una cohorte de neuronas que migran hacia el centro de la preplaca divide esta capa transitoria en la zona marginal superficial, que se convertirá en la capa I de la neocorteza madura, y la subplaca, formando una capa intermedia denominada placa cortical.

Estas células formarán las capas profundas de la corteza madura, las capas cinco y seis.

Las neuronas nacidas más tarde migran radialmente hacia la placa cortical más allá de las neuronas de la capa profunda y se convierten en las capas superiores (dos a cuatro).

Por lo tanto, las capas de la corteza se crean en un orden de adentro hacia afuera.

La única excepción a esta secuencia de neurogénesis de adentro hacia afuera ocurre en la capa I de los primates, en la que, a diferencia de los roedores, la neurogénesis continúa durante todo el período de corticogénesis.


=== Patrón cortical ===


El mapa de las áreas corticales funcionales, que incluyen la corteza visual y motora primaria, se origina a partir de un "protomapa", que está regulado por señales moleculares como el factor de crecimiento de fibroblastos FGF8 en las primeras etapas del desarrollo embrionario.

Estas señales regulan el tamaño, la forma y la posición de las áreas corticales en la superficie del primordio cortical, en parte mediante la regulación de los gradientes de expresión del factor de transcripción, a través de un proceso llamado patrón cortical.

Los ejemplos de tales factores de transcripción incluyen los genes EMX2 y PAX6.

Juntos, ambos factores de transcripción forman un gradiente de expresión opuesto.

Pax6 se expresa mucho en el polo lateral rostral, mientras que Emx2 se expresa mucho en el polo caudomedial.

El establecimiento de este gradiente es importante para un correcto desarrollo.

Por ejemplo, las mutaciones en Pax6 pueden hacer que los niveles de expresión de Emx2 se expandan fuera de su dominio de expresión normal, lo que en última instancia conduciría a una expansión de las áreas normalmente derivadas de la corteza caudal medial, como la corteza visual.

Por el contrario, si se producen mutaciones en Emx2, puede hacer que el dominio que expresa Pax6 se expanda y provoque el agrandamiento de las regiones corticales motoras y frontales.

Por lo tanto, los investigadores creen que gradientes y centros de señalización similares próximos a la corteza podrían contribuir a la expresión regional de estos factores de transcripción.
Dos señales de patrones muy bien estudiadas para la corteza incluyen FGF y ácido retinoico.

Si los FGF se expresan incorrectamente en diferentes áreas de la corteza en desarrollo, se interrumpe el patrón cortical.

Específicamente, cuando Fgf8 aumenta en el polo anterior, Emx2 disminuye y se produce un desplazamiento caudal en la región cortical.

En última instancia, esto provoca una expansión de las regiones rostrales.

Por lo tanto, Fgf8 y otros FGF juegan un papel en la regulación de la expresión de Emx2 y Pax6 y representan cómo la corteza cerebral puede especializarse para diferentes funciones. La rápida expansión del área de superficie cortical está regulada por la cantidad de autorrenovación de la glía radial. y está parcialmente regulado por los genes FGF y Notch.

Durante el período de neurogénesis cortical y formación de capas, muchos mamíferos superiores inician el proceso de girificación, que genera los pliegues característicos de la corteza cerebral.

La girificación está regulada por una proteína Trnp1 asociada al ADN y por la señalización de FGF y SHH


== Evolución ==


De todas las diferentes regiones del cerebro, la corteza cerebral muestra la mayor variación evolutiva y ha evolucionado más recientemente.

En contraste con el circuito altamente conservado del bulbo raquídeo, por ejemplo, que cumple funciones críticas como la regulación del ritmo cardíaco y respiratorio, muchas áreas de la corteza cerebral no son estrictamente necesarias para la supervivencia.

Por lo tanto, la evolución de la corteza cerebral ha visto el advenimiento y la modificación de nuevas áreas funcionales, en particular áreas de asociación que no reciben información directamente del exterior de la corteza. Una teoría clave de la evolución cortical está incorporada en la hipótesis de la unidad radial y la hipótesis del protomapa relacionado. , propuesto por primera vez por Rakic.

Esta teoría establece que las nuevas áreas corticales se forman mediante la adición de nuevas unidades radiales, lo que se logra a nivel de células madre.

La hipótesis del protomapa establece que la identidad celular y molecular y las características de las neuronas en cada área cortical están especificadas por células madre corticales, conocidas como células gliales radiales, en un mapa primordial.

Este mapa está controlado por proteínas de señalización secretadas y factores de transcripción aguas abajo.


== Función ==



=== Conexiones ===

La corteza cerebral está conectada a varias estructuras subcorticales como el tálamo y los ganglios basales, les envía información a través de conexiones eferentes y recibe información de ellos a través de conexiones aferentes.

La mayor parte de la información sensorial se envía a la corteza cerebral a través del tálamo.

La información olfativa, sin embargo, pasa a través del bulbo olfativo a la corteza olfativa (corteza piriforme).

La mayoría de las conexiones son de un área de la corteza a otra, en lugar de áreas subcorticales; Braitenberg y Schüz (1998) afirman que en las áreas sensoriales primarias, en el nivel cortical donde terminan las fibras de entrada, hasta el 20 % de las sinapsis son suministradas por aferentes extracorticales, pero que en otras áreas y otras capas es probable que el porcentaje sea mucho mayor. más bajo.


=== Áreas corticales ===

La totalidad de la corteza cerebral se dividió en 52 áreas diferentes en una presentación temprana de Korbinian Brodmann.

Estas áreas, conocidas como áreas de Brodmann, se basan en su citoarquitectura pero también se relacionan con varias funciones.

Un ejemplo es el área 17 de Brodmann, que es la corteza visual primaria.
En términos más generales, la corteza suele describirse como compuesta de tres partes: áreas sensoriales, motoras y de asociación.


==== Áreas sensoriales ====

Las áreas sensoriales son las áreas corticales que reciben y procesan la información de los sentidos.

Las partes de la corteza que reciben información sensorial del tálamo se denominan áreas sensoriales primarias.

Los sentidos de la vista, el oído y el tacto son atendidos por la corteza visual primaria, la corteza auditiva primaria y la corteza somatosensorial primaria, respectivamente.

En general, los dos hemisferios reciben información del lado opuesto (contralateral) del cuerpo.

Por ejemplo, la corteza somatosensorial primaria derecha recibe información de las extremidades izquierdas y la corteza visual derecha recibe información del campo visual izquierdo.

La organización de los mapas sensoriales en la corteza refleja la del órgano sensorial correspondiente, en lo que se conoce como mapa topográfico.

Los puntos vecinos en la corteza visual primaria, por ejemplo, corresponden a puntos vecinos en la retina.

Este mapa topográfico se llama mapa retinotópico.

Del mismo modo, existe un mapa tonotópico en la corteza auditiva primaria y un mapa somatotópico en la corteza sensorial primaria.

Este último mapa topográfico del cuerpo en la circunvolución central posterior se ha ilustrado como una representación humana deformada, el homúnculo somatosensorial, donde el tamaño de las diferentes partes del cuerpo refleja la densidad relativa de su inervación.

Las áreas con mucha inervación sensorial, como las yemas de los dedos y los labios, requieren más área cortical para procesar sensaciones más finas.


==== Zonas motoras ====
Las áreas motoras están ubicadas en ambos hemisferios de la corteza.

Las áreas motoras están muy relacionadas con el control de los movimientos voluntarios, especialmente los movimientos fragmentados finos que realiza la mano.

La mitad derecha del área motora controla el lado izquierdo del cuerpo y viceversa.
Dos áreas de la corteza se denominan comúnmente motoras:

Corteza motora primaria, que ejecuta los movimientos voluntarios.
Áreas motoras suplementarias y corteza premotora, que seleccionan los movimientos voluntarios. Además, se han descrito funciones motoras para:

Corteza parietal posterior, que guía los movimientos voluntarios en el espacio
Corteza prefrontal dorsolateral, que decide qué movimientos voluntarios hacer de acuerdo con instrucciones de orden superior, reglas y pensamientos autogenerados. Justo debajo de la corteza cerebral hay masas subcorticales interconectadas de materia gris llamadas ganglios basales (o núcleos).

Los ganglios basales reciben información de la sustancia negra del mesencéfalo y de las áreas motoras de la corteza cerebral y envían señales a ambos lugares.

Intervienen en el control motor.

Se encuentran laterales al tálamo.

Los componentes principales de los ganglios basales son el núcleo caudado, el putamen, el globo pálido, la sustancia negra, el núcleo accumbens y el núcleo subtalámico.

El putamen y el globo pálido también se conocen colectivamente como núcleo lentiforme, porque juntos forman un cuerpo en forma de lente.

El putamen y el núcleo caudado también se denominan colectivamente cuerpo estriado debido a su apariencia rayada.


==== Áreas de asociación ====

Las áreas de asociación son las partes de la corteza cerebral que no pertenecen a las regiones primarias.

Funcionan para producir una experiencia perceptiva significativa del mundo, nos permiten interactuar de manera efectiva y respaldan el pensamiento y el lenguaje abstractos.

Los lóbulos parietal, temporal y occipital, todos ubicados en la parte posterior de la corteza, integran la información sensorial y la información almacenada en la memoria.

El lóbulo frontal o complejo de asociación prefrontal está involucrado en la planificación de acciones y movimientos, así como en el pensamiento abstracto.

Globalmente, las áreas de asociación están organizadas como redes distribuidas.

Cada red conecta áreas distribuidas en regiones muy espaciadas de la corteza.

Distintas redes se colocan adyacentes entre sí, lo que produce una serie compleja de redes entretejidas.

La organización específica de las redes de asociación se debate con evidencia de interacciones, relaciones jerárquicas y competencia entre redes. En humanos, las redes de asociación son particularmente importantes para la función del lenguaje.

En el pasado se teorizó que las habilidades lingüísticas se localizan en el área de Broca en áreas de la circunvolución frontal inferior izquierda, BA44 y BA45, para la expresión del lenguaje y en el área de Wernicke BA22, para la recepción del lenguaje.

Sin embargo, se ha demostrado que los procesos de expresión y recepción del lenguaje ocurren en áreas distintas de las estructuras alrededor del surco lateral, incluido el lóbulo frontal, los ganglios basales, el cerebelo y la protuberancia.


== Importancia clínica ==


Las enfermedades neurodegenerativas como la enfermedad de Alzheimer y la enfermedad de Lafora, muestran como marcador, una atrofia de la materia gris de la corteza cerebral. Otras enfermedades del sistema nervioso central incluyen trastornos neurológicos como la epilepsia, trastornos del movimiento y dificultades en el habla (afasia) .
El daño cerebral por enfermedad o trauma puede implicar daño a un lóbulo específico, como en el trastorno del lóbulo frontal, y las funciones asociadas se verán afectadas.

La barrera hematoencefálica que sirve para proteger el cerebro de infecciones puede verse comprometida y permitir la entrada de patógenos.
El feto en desarrollo es susceptible a una variedad de factores ambientales que pueden causar defectos de nacimiento y problemas en el desarrollo posterior.

El consumo materno de alcohol, por ejemplo, puede causar un trastorno del espectro alcohólico fetal.

Otros factores que pueden causar trastornos del neurodesarrollo son los tóxicos como los fármacos y la exposición a radiaciones como los rayos X.

Las infecciones también pueden afectar el desarrollo de la corteza.

Una infección viral es una de las causas de la lisencefalia, que da como resultado una corteza lisa sin girificación.
Un tipo de electrocorticografía llamado mapeo de estimulación cortical es un procedimiento invasivo que consiste en colocar electrodos directamente en el cerebro expuesto para localizar las funciones de áreas específicas de la corteza.

Se utiliza en aplicaciones clínicas y terapéuticas, incluido el mapeo prequirúrgico.


=== Genes asociados con trastornos corticales ===

Hay una serie de mutaciones genéticas que pueden causar una amplia gama de trastornos genéticos de la corteza cerebral, que incluyen microcefalia, esquizencefalia y tipos de lisencefalia.

Las anomalías cromosómicas también pueden causar una serie de trastornos del desarrollo neurológico, como el síndrome de X frágil y el síndrome de Rett.
MCPH1 codifica para microcefalia, y los trastornos en este y en ASPM se asocian con microcefalia.

Las mutaciones en el gen NBS1 que codifica la nibrina pueden causar el síndrome de rotura de Nijmegen, caracterizado por microcefalia. Las mutaciones en EMX2 y COL4A1 están asociadas con la esquizencefalia, una condición caracterizada por la ausencia de grandes partes de los hemisferios cerebrales.


== Historia ==

En 1909, Korbinian Brodmann distinguió diferentes áreas de la neocorteza basándose en diferencias citoarquitectónicas y dividió la corteza cerebral en 52 regiones. Rafael Lorente de Nó, alumno de Santiago Ramón y Cajal identificó más de 40 tipos diferentes de neuronas corticales basándose en la distribución de sus dendritas y axones.


== Otros animales ==


La corteza cerebral se deriva del palio, una estructura en capas que se encuentra en el cerebro anterior de todos los vertebrados.

La forma básica del palio es una capa cilíndrica que encierra ventrículos llenos de líquido.

Alrededor de la circunferencia del cilindro hay cuatro zonas, el palio dorsal, el palio medial, el palio ventral y el palio lateral, que se cree que son homólogos a la neocorteza, el hipocampo, la amígdala y la corteza olfativa, respectivamente.
Hasta hace poco no se había reconocido en los invertebrados ninguna contrapartida de la corteza cerebral.

Sin embargo, un estudio publicado en la revista Cell en 2010, basado en perfiles de expresión génica, informó fuertes afinidades entre la corteza cerebral y los cuerpos de hongos del gusano de trapo Platynereis dumerilii.

Los cuerpos de hongos son estructuras en los cerebros de muchos tipos de gusanos y artrópodos que se sabe que juegan un papel importante en el aprendizaje y la memoria; la evidencia genética indica un origen evolutivo común y, por lo tanto, indica que los orígenes de los primeros precursores de la corteza cerebral se remontan a la era precámbrica.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cerebral_cortex

;;;PT;;;



CÓRTEX CEREBRAL


O córtex cerebral, também conhecido como manto cerebral, é a camada externa do tecido neural do cérebro do cérebro em humanos e outros mamíferos.

O córtex cerebral consiste principalmente no neocórtex de seis camadas, com apenas 10% consistindo em alocórtex.

É separado em dois córtices, pela fissura longitudinal que divide o cérebro nos hemisférios cerebrais esquerdo e direito.

Os dois hemisférios são unidos abaixo do córtex pelo corpo caloso.

O córtex cerebral é o maior local de integração neural no sistema nervoso central.

Ela desempenha um papel fundamental na atenção, percepção, consciência, pensamento, memória, linguagem e consciência.
Na maioria dos mamíferos, com exceção dos pequenos mamíferos que possuem cérebros pequenos, o córtex cerebral é dobrado, proporcionando uma maior área de superfície no volume confinado do crânio.

Além de minimizar o volume cerebral e craniano, o dobramento cortical é crucial para a fiação do cérebro e sua organização funcional.

Em mamíferos com um cérebro pequeno não há dobras e o córtex é liso. Uma dobra ou crista no córtex é chamada de giro (giros no plural) e um sulco é denominado sulco (sulcos no plural).

Essas circunvoluções superficiais aparecem durante o desenvolvimento fetal e continuam a amadurecer após o nascimento através do processo de girificação.

No cérebro humano, a maior parte do córtex cerebral não é visível do lado de fora, mas enterrado nos sulcos, e o córtex insular está completamente oculto.

Os maiores sulcos e giros marcam as divisões do cérebro nos lobos do cérebro.
Existem entre 14 e 16 bilhões de neurônios no córtex cerebral humano.

Estes são organizados em camadas corticais horizontais e radialmente em colunas corticais e minicolunas.

As áreas corticais têm funções específicas, como o movimento no córtex motor e a visão no córtex visual.


== Estrutura ==


O córtex cerebral é a cobertura externa das superfícies dos hemisférios cerebrais e é dobrado em picos chamados giros e sulcos chamados sulcos.

No cérebro humano, tem entre dois e três ou quatro milímetros de espessura e representa 40% da massa do cérebro. 90 por cento do córtex cerebral é o neocórtex de seis camadas com os outros 10 por cento constituídos por alocórtex.

Existem entre 14 e 16 bilhões de neurônios no córtex, e estes são organizados radialmente em colunas corticais e minicolunas, nas camadas organizadas horizontalmente do córtex. incluem o córtex motor e o córtex visual.

Cerca de dois terços da superfície cortical estão enterrados nos sulcos e o córtex insular está completamente oculto.

O córtex é mais espesso na parte superior de um giro e mais fino na parte inferior de um sulco.


=== Dobras ===


O córtex cerebral é dobrado de uma forma que permite que uma grande área de superfície de tecido neural se encaixe dentro dos limites do neurocrânio.

Quando desdobrado no humano, cada córtex hemisférico tem uma área de superfície total de cerca de 0,12 metros quadrados (1,3 pés quadrados).

A dobra está para dentro, longe da superfície do cérebro, e também está presente na superfície medial de cada hemisfério dentro da fissura longitudinal.

A maioria dos mamíferos tem um córtex cerebral que é convoluto com os picos conhecidos como giros e os vales ou sulcos conhecidos como sulcos.

Alguns pequenos mamíferos, incluindo alguns pequenos roedores, têm superfícies cerebrais lisas sem girificação.


=== Lobos ===

Os sulcos e giros maiores marcam as divisões do córtex do cérebro nos lobos do cérebro.

Existem quatro lobos principais: lobo frontal, lobo parietal, lobo temporal e lobo occipital.

O córtex insular é frequentemente incluído como lobo insular.

O lobo límbico é uma borda do córtex no lado medial de cada hemisfério e também é frequentemente incluído.

Existem também três lóbulos do cérebro descritos: o lóbulo paracentral, o lóbulo parietal superior e o lóbulo parietal inferior.


=== Espessura ===

Para espécies de mamíferos, cérebros maiores (em termos absolutos, não apenas em relação ao tamanho do corpo) tendem a ter córtices mais espessos.

Os menores mamíferos, como os musaranhos, têm uma espessura neocortical de cerca de 0,5 mm; aqueles com os maiores cérebros, como humanos e baleias-comuns, têm espessuras de 2 a 4 mm.

Existe uma relação aproximadamente logarítmica entre o peso do cérebro e a espessura cortical. A ressonância magnética do cérebro (RM) permite obter uma medida da espessura do córtex cerebral humano e relacioná-la com outras medidas.

A espessura das diferentes áreas corticais varia, mas, em geral, o córtex sensorial é mais fino que o córtex motor.

Um estudo encontrou alguma associação positiva entre a espessura cortical e a inteligência.
Outro estudo descobriu que o córtex somatossensorial é mais espesso em quem sofre de enxaqueca, embora não se saiba se isso é o resultado de ataques de enxaqueca ou a causa deles.
Um estudo posterior usando uma população maior de pacientes não relata nenhuma alteração na espessura cortical em pacientes com enxaqueca.
Um distúrbio genético do córtex cerebral, pelo qual o dobramento diminuído em certas áreas resulta em um microgiro, onde há quatro camadas em vez de seis, é, em alguns casos, relacionado à dislexia.


=== Camadas de neocórtex ===


O neocórtex é formado por seis camadas, numeradas de I a VI, desde a camada mais externa I – próxima à pia-máter, até a camada mais interna VI – próxima à substância branca subjacente.

Cada camada cortical tem uma distribuição característica de diferentes neurônios e suas conexões com outras regiões corticais e subcorticais.

Existem conexões diretas entre diferentes áreas corticais e conexões indiretas através do tálamo.
Um dos exemplos mais claros de camadas corticais é a linha de Gennari no córtex visual primário.

Esta é uma faixa de tecido mais branco que pode ser observada a olho nu no sulco calcarino do lobo occipital.

A linha de Gennari é composta de axônios que trazem informações visuais do tálamo para a camada IV do córtex visual.
A coloração de cortes transversais do córtex para revelar a posição dos corpos celulares neuronais e dos tratos axônicos intracorticais permitiu que os neuroanatomistas no início do século 20 produzissem uma descrição detalhada da estrutura laminar do córtex em diferentes espécies.

O trabalho de Korbinian Brodmann (1909) estabeleceu que o neocórtex dos mamíferos é consistentemente dividido em seis camadas.


==== Camada I ====
A camada I é a camada molecular e contém poucos neurônios dispersos, incluindo neurônios GABAérgicos de rosa mosqueta.

A camada I consiste principalmente em extensões de tufos dendríticos apicais de neurônios piramidais e axônios orientados horizontalmente, bem como células gliais.

Durante o desenvolvimento, células de Cajal-Retzius e células da camada granular subpial estão presentes nesta camada.

Além disso, algumas células estreladas espinhosas podem ser encontradas aqui.

As entradas para os tufos apicais são consideradas cruciais para as interações de feedback no córtex cerebral envolvidas no aprendizado associativo e na atenção.

Enquanto se pensava que a entrada para a camada I vinha do próprio córtex, agora se percebe que a camada I através do manto do córtex cerebral recebe uma entrada substancial da matriz ou das células do tálamo do tipo M (em contraste com o núcleo ou o tipo C que vá para a camada IV).


==== Camada II ====
A camada II, a camada granular externa, contém pequenos neurônios piramidais e numerosos neurônios estrelados.


==== Camada III ====
A camada III, a camada piramidal externa, contém predominantemente neurônios piramidais de tamanho pequeno e médio, bem como neurônios não piramidais com axônios intracorticais orientados verticalmente; as camadas I a III são o principal alvo dos aferentes corticocorticais inter-hemisféricos, e a camada III é a principal fonte de eferentes corticocorticais.


==== Camada IV ====
A camada IV, a camada granular interna, contém diferentes tipos de células estreladas e piramidais, e é o principal alvo dos aferentes talamocorticais dos neurônios do tipo C do tálamo (tipo núcleo), bem como dos aferentes corticocorticais intra-hemisféricos.

As camadas acima da camada IV também são chamadas de camadas supragranulares (camadas I-III), enquanto as camadas abaixo são chamadas de camadas infragranulares (camadas V e VI).


==== Camada V ====
A camada V, a camada piramidal interna, contém grandes neurônios piramidais.

Axônios destes deixam o córtex e se conectam com estruturas subcorticais, incluindo os gânglios da base.

No córtex motor primário do lobo frontal, a camada V contém células piramidais gigantes chamadas células de Betz, cujos axônios percorrem a cápsula interna, o tronco encefálico e a medula espinhal formando o trato corticoespinhal, que é a principal via para o controle motor voluntário .


==== Camada VI ====
A camada VI, a camada polimórfica ou multiforme, contém poucos neurônios piramidais grandes e muitos neurônios piramidais e multiformes pequenos fusiformes; a camada VI envia fibras eferentes ao tálamo, estabelecendo uma interconexão recíproca muito precisa entre o córtex e o tálamo.

Ou seja, os neurônios da camada VI de uma coluna cortical se conectam com os neurônios do tálamo que fornecem entrada para a mesma coluna cortical.

Essas conexões são excitatórias e inibitórias.

Os neurônios enviam fibras excitatórias para os neurônios do tálamo e também enviam colaterais para o núcleo reticular talâmico que inibem esses mesmos neurônios do tálamo ou adjacentes a eles.

Uma teoria é que, como a saída inibitória é reduzida pela entrada colinérgica para o córtex cerebral, isso fornece ao tronco cerebral um "controle de ganho ajustável para o relé de entradas lemniscal".


=== Colunas ===

As camadas corticais não são simplesmente empilhadas uma sobre a outra; existem conexões características entre diferentes camadas e tipos neuronais, que abrangem toda a espessura do córtex.

Esses microcircuitos corticais são agrupados em colunas corticais e minicolunas.

Foi proposto que as minicolunas são as unidades funcionais básicas do córtex.

Em 1957, Vernon Mountcastle mostrou que as propriedades funcionais do córtex mudam abruptamente entre pontos lateralmente adjacentes; no entanto, eles são contínuos na direção perpendicular à superfície.

Trabalhos posteriores forneceram evidências da presença de colunas corticais funcionalmente distintas no córtex visual (Hubel e Wiesel, 1959), córtex auditivo,
e córtex associativo.
As áreas corticais que não possuem uma camada IV são chamadas de agranulares.

As áreas corticais que possuem apenas uma camada IV rudimentar são chamadas de disgranulares.

O processamento da informação dentro de cada camada é determinado por diferentes dinâmicas temporais, sendo que nas camadas II/III tem uma oscilação lenta de 2 Hz, enquanto que na camada V tem uma oscilação rápida de 10 a 15 Hz.


=== Tipos de córtex ===

Com base nas diferenças na organização laminar, o córtex cerebral pode ser classificado em dois tipos, a grande área do neocórtex, que possui seis camadas de células, e a área muito menor do alocórtex, que possui três ou quatro camadas:
O neocórtex também é conhecido como isocórtex ou neopálio e é a parte do córtex cerebral maduro com seis camadas distintas.

Exemplos de áreas neocorticais incluem o córtex motor primário granular e o córtex visual primário estriado.

O neocórtex possui dois subtipos, o isocórtex verdadeiro e o proisocórtex que é uma região de transição entre o isocórtex e as regiões do periallocórtex.
O alocórtex é a parte do córtex cerebral com três ou quatro camadas, e possui três subtipos, o paleocórtex com três lâminas corticais, o arquicórtex que tem quatro ou cinco, e uma área de transição adjacente ao alocórtex, o periallocórtex.

Exemplos de alocórtex são o córtex olfativo e o hipocampo. Existe uma área de transição entre o neocórtex e o alocórtex chamada córtex paralímbico, onde as camadas 2, 3 e 4 são fundidas.

Esta área incorpora o proisocórtex do neocórtex e o periallocórtex do alocórtex.

Além disso, o córtex cerebral pode ser classificado em quatro lobos: lobo frontal, lobo temporal, lobo parietal e lobo occipital, nomeados a partir de seus ossos sobrejacentes do crânio.


== Suprimento de sangue e drenagem ==


O suprimento sanguíneo para o córtex cerebral faz parte da circulação cerebral.

As artérias cerebrais fornecem o sangue que perfunde o cérebro.

Esse sangue arterial transporta oxigênio, glicose e outros nutrientes para o córtex.

As veias cerebrais drenam o sangue desoxigenado e os resíduos metabólicos, incluindo o dióxido de carbono, de volta ao coração.
As principais artérias que suprem o córtex são a artéria cerebral anterior, a artéria cerebral média e a artéria cerebral posterior.

A artéria cerebral anterior supre as porções anteriores do cérebro, incluindo a maior parte do lobo frontal.

A artéria cerebral média supre os lobos parietais, lobos temporais e partes dos lobos occipitais.

A artéria cerebral média se divide em dois ramos para suprir os hemisférios esquerdo e direito, onde se ramificam ainda mais.

A artéria cerebral posterior supre os lobos occipitais.
O círculo de Willis é o principal sistema sanguíneo que lida com o suprimento de sangue no cérebro e no córtex cerebral.


== Desenvolvimento ==


O desenvolvimento pré-natal do córtex cerebral é um processo complexo e afinado chamado corticogênese, influenciado pela interação entre os genes e o ambiente.


=== Tubo neural ===

O córtex cerebral desenvolve-se a partir da parte mais anterior, a região do prosencéfalo, do tubo neural.

A placa neural se dobra e se fecha para formar o tubo neural.

Da cavidade interna do tubo neural desenvolve-se o sistema ventricular e, das células neuroepiteliais de suas paredes, os neurônios e a glia do sistema nervoso.

A parte mais anterior (frontal ou cranial) da placa neural, o prosencéfalo, que é evidente antes do início da neurulação, dá origem aos hemisférios cerebrais e ao córtex posterior.


=== Desenvolvimento de neurônios corticais ===


Neurônios corticais são gerados dentro da zona ventricular, próximo aos ventrículos.

No início, essa zona contém células-tronco neurais, que fazem a transição para células gliais radiais – células progenitoras, que se dividem para produzir células gliais e neurônios.


==== Glia radial ====

O córtex cerebral é composto por uma população heterogênea de células que dão origem a diferentes tipos celulares.

A maioria dessas células é derivada da migração da glia radial que forma os diferentes tipos celulares do neocórtex e é um período associado ao aumento da neurogênese.

Da mesma forma, o processo de neurogênese regula a laminação para formar as diferentes camadas do córtex.

Durante este processo há um aumento na restrição do destino celular que começa com progenitores anteriores dando origem a qualquer tipo de célula no córtex e progenitores posteriores dando origem apenas a neurônios das camadas superficiais.

Esse destino celular diferencial cria uma topografia de dentro para fora no córtex com neurônios mais jovens em camadas superficiais e neurônios mais velhos em camadas mais profundas.

Além disso, os neurônios laminares são parados na fase S ou G2 para dar uma distinção fina entre as diferentes camadas corticais.

A diferenciação laminar não está totalmente completa até após o nascimento, uma vez que durante o desenvolvimento os neurônios laminares ainda são sensíveis a sinais extrínsecos e estímulos ambientais. outras regiões.

A glia radial dá origem a neurônios que são de forma piramidal e usam glutamato como neurotransmissor, no entanto, essas células migratórias contribuem com neurônios em forma de estrela e usam GABA como seu principal neurotransmissor.

Esses neurônios GABAérgicos são gerados por células progenitoras na eminência ganglionar medial (EMG) que migram tangencialmente ao córtex via zona subventricular.

Essa migração de neurônios GABAérgicos é particularmente importante, pois os receptores GABA são excitatórios durante o desenvolvimento.

Essa excitação é impulsionada principalmente pelo fluxo de íons cloreto através do receptor GABA, no entanto, em adultos, as concentrações de cloreto mudam, causando um fluxo interno de cloreto que hiperpolariza os neurônios pós-sinápticos.
As fibras gliais produzidas nas primeiras divisões das células progenitoras são orientadas radialmente, abrangendo a espessura do córtex da zona ventricular até a superfície externa, pial, e fornecem suporte para a migração dos neurônios para fora da zona ventricular. há muito poucos dendritos presentes no corpo celular do neurônio cortical, e o axônio é pouco desenvolvido.

Durante o primeiro ano de vida, os dendritos aumentam drasticamente em número, de modo que podem acomodar até cem mil conexões sinápticas com outros neurônios.

O axônio pode se desenvolver para se estender por um longo caminho a partir do corpo celular.


=== Divisão assimétrica ===

As primeiras divisões das células progenitoras são simétricas, o que duplica o número total de células progenitoras em cada ciclo mitótico.

Então, algumas células progenitoras começam a se dividir de forma assimétrica, produzindo uma célula pós-mitótica que migra ao longo das fibras gliais radiais, deixando a zona ventricular, e uma célula progenitora, que continua a se dividir até o final do desenvolvimento, quando se diferencia em uma célula glial ou uma célula ependimária.

À medida que a fase G1 da mitose é alongada, no que é visto como alongamento seletivo do ciclo celular, os neurônios recém-nascidos migram para camadas mais superficiais do córtex.

As células filhas migratórias tornam-se as células piramidais do córtex cerebral.

O processo de desenvolvimento é ordenado no tempo e regulado por centenas de genes e mecanismos regulatórios epigenéticos.


=== Organização de camadas ===

A estrutura em camadas do córtex cerebral maduro é formada durante o desenvolvimento.

Os primeiros neurônios piramidais gerados migram para fora da zona ventricular e da zona subventricular, juntamente com os neurônios Cajal-Retzius produtores de reelina, da pré-placa.

Em seguida, uma coorte de neurônios migrando para o meio da pré-placa divide essa camada transitória na zona marginal superficial, que se tornará a camada I do neocórtex maduro, e a subplaca, formando uma camada intermediária chamada de placa cortical.

Essas células formarão as camadas profundas do córtex maduro, camadas cinco e seis.

Os neurônios nascidos mais tarde migram radialmente para a placa cortical passando pelos neurônios da camada profunda e se tornam as camadas superiores (duas a quatro).

Assim, as camadas do córtex são criadas em ordem de dentro para fora.

A única exceção a essa sequência de dentro para fora da neurogênese ocorre na camada I dos primatas, na qual, ao contrário dos roedores, a neurogênese continua durante todo o período da corticogênese.


=== Padrões corticais ===


O mapa de áreas corticais funcionais, que incluem o córtex motor primário e visual, se origina de um 'protomapa', que é regulado por sinais moleculares como o fator de crescimento de fibroblastos FGF8 no início do desenvolvimento embrionário.

Esses sinais regulam o tamanho, a forma e a posição das áreas corticais na superfície do primórdio cortical, em parte regulando os gradientes de expressão do fator de transcrição, por meio de um processo chamado padronização cortical.

Exemplos de tais fatores de transcrição incluem os genes EMX2 e PAX6.

Juntos, ambos os fatores de transcrição formam um gradiente de expressão oposto.

Pax6 é altamente expresso no pólo rostral lateral, enquanto Emx2 é altamente expresso no pólo caudomedial.

O estabelecimento deste gradiente é importante para o desenvolvimento adequado.

Por exemplo, mutações em Pax6 podem fazer com que os níveis de expressão de Emx2 se expandam para fora de seu domínio de expressão normal, o que acabaria levando a uma expansão das áreas normalmente derivadas do córtex medial caudal, como o córtex visual.

Pelo contrário, se ocorrerem mutações em Emx2, isso pode fazer com que o domínio que expressa Pax6 se expanda e resulte no aumento das regiões corticais frontal e motora.

Portanto, os pesquisadores acreditam que gradientes semelhantes e centros de sinalização próximos ao córtex podem contribuir para a expressão regional desses fatores de transcrição.
Dois sinais de padronização muito bem estudados para o córtex incluem FGF e ácido retinóico.

Se os FGFs são expressos incorretamente em diferentes áreas do córtex em desenvolvimento, o padrão cortical é interrompido.

Especificamente, quando Fgf8 está aumentado no pólo anterior, Emx2 é regulado negativamente e ocorre um deslocamento caudal na região cortical.

Isso acaba causando uma expansão das regiões rostrais.

Portanto, Fgf8 e outros FGFs desempenham um papel na regulação da expressão de Emx2 e Pax6 e representam como o córtex cerebral pode se especializar para diferentes funções. e é parcialmente regulado pelos genes FGF e Notch.

Durante o período de neurogênese cortical e formação de camadas, muitos mamíferos superiores iniciam o processo de girificação, que gera as dobras características do córtex cerebral.

A girificação é regulada por uma proteína associada ao DNA Trnp1 e pela sinalização de FGF e SHH


== Evolução ==


De todas as diferentes regiões do cérebro, o córtex cerebral mostra a maior variação evolutiva e evoluiu mais recentemente.

Em contraste com os circuitos altamente conservados da medula oblonga, por exemplo, que atende a funções críticas, como a regulação das frequências cardíaca e respiratória, muitas áreas do córtex cerebral não são estritamente necessárias para a sobrevivência.

Assim, a evolução do córtex cerebral viu o advento e a modificação de novas áreas funcionais - particularmente áreas de associação que não recebem diretamente informações de fora do córtex. , proposto pela primeira vez por Rakic.

Essa teoria afirma que novas áreas corticais são formadas pela adição de novas unidades radiais, o que é realizado no nível das células-tronco.

A hipótese do protomapa afirma que a identidade celular e molecular e as características dos neurônios em cada área cortical são especificadas por células-tronco corticais, conhecidas como células gliais radiais, em um mapa primordial.

Este mapa é controlado por proteínas de sinalização segregadas e fatores de transcrição a jusante.


== Função ==



=== Conexões ===

O córtex cerebral está conectado a várias estruturas subcorticais, como o tálamo e os gânglios da base, enviando informações a eles por meio de conexões eferentes e recebendo informações deles por meio de conexões aferentes.

A maioria das informações sensoriais é encaminhada para o córtex cerebral através do tálamo.

A informação olfativa, no entanto, passa através do bulbo olfativo para o córtex olfativo (córtex piriforme).

A maioria das conexões é de uma área do córtex para outra, e não de áreas subcorticais; Braitenberg e Schüz (1998) afirmam que em áreas sensoriais primárias, no nível cortical onde terminam as fibras de entrada, até 20% das sinapses são supridas por aferentes extracorticais, mas que em outras áreas e outras camadas a porcentagem é provavelmente muito maior. mais baixo.


=== Áreas corticais ===

Todo o córtex cerebral foi dividido em 52 áreas diferentes em uma apresentação inicial de Korbinian Brodmann.

Essas áreas conhecidas como áreas de Brodmann, são baseadas em sua citoarquitetura, mas também se relacionam com várias funções.

Um exemplo é a área 17 de Brodmann, que é o córtex visual primário.
Em termos mais gerais, o córtex é tipicamente descrito como compreendendo três partes: áreas sensoriais, motoras e de associação.


==== Áreas sensoriais ====

As áreas sensoriais são as áreas corticais que recebem e processam informações dos sentidos.

Partes do córtex que recebem informações sensoriais do tálamo são chamadas de áreas sensoriais primárias.

Os sentidos da visão, audição e tato são servidos pelo córtex visual primário, córtex auditivo primário e córtex somatossensorial primário, respectivamente.

Em geral, os dois hemisférios recebem informações do lado oposto (contralateral) do corpo.

Por exemplo, o córtex somatossensorial primário direito recebe informações dos membros esquerdos e o córtex visual direito recebe informações do campo visual esquerdo.

A organização dos mapas sensoriais no córtex reflete a do órgão sensorial correspondente, no que é conhecido como mapa topográfico.

Pontos vizinhos no córtex visual primário, por exemplo, correspondem a pontos vizinhos na retina.

Este mapa topográfico é chamado de mapa retinotópico.

Da mesma forma, existe um mapa tonotópico no córtex auditivo primário e um mapa somatotópico no córtex sensorial primário.

Este último mapa topográfico do corpo no giro central posterior foi ilustrado como uma representação humana deformada, o homúnculo somatossensorial, onde o tamanho de diferentes partes do corpo reflete a densidade relativa de sua inervação.

Áreas com muita inervação sensorial, como as pontas dos dedos e os lábios, requerem mais área cortical para processar uma sensação mais fina.


==== Áreas motoras ====
As áreas motoras estão localizadas em ambos os hemisférios do córtex.

As áreas motoras estão intimamente relacionadas ao controle dos movimentos voluntários, especialmente os movimentos finos e fragmentados realizados pela mão.

A metade direita da área motora controla o lado esquerdo do corpo e vice-versa.
Duas áreas do córtex são comumente referidas como motoras:

Córtex motor primário, que executa movimentos voluntários
Áreas motoras suplementares e córtex pré-motor, que selecionam movimentos voluntários. Além disso, as funções motoras foram descritas para:

Córtex parietal posterior, que guia os movimentos voluntários no espaço
Córtex pré-frontal dorsolateral, que decide quais movimentos voluntários devem ser feitos de acordo com instruções de ordem superior, regras e pensamentos autogerados. Logo abaixo do córtex cerebral estão massas subcorticais interconectadas de substância cinzenta chamadas gânglios basais (ou núcleos).

Os gânglios da base recebem informações da substância negra do mesencéfalo e áreas motoras do córtex cerebral e enviam sinais de volta para esses dois locais.

Eles estão envolvidos no controle motor.

São encontrados lateralmente ao tálamo.

Os principais componentes dos gânglios da base são o núcleo caudado, o putâmen, o globo pálido, a substância negra, o núcleo accumbens e o núcleo subtalâmico.

O putâmen e o globo pálido também são conhecidos coletivamente como núcleo lentiforme, porque juntos formam um corpo em forma de lente.

O putâmen e o núcleo caudado também são chamados coletivamente de corpo estriado após sua aparência listrada.


==== Áreas de associação ====

As áreas de associação são as partes do córtex cerebral que não pertencem às regiões primárias.

Eles funcionam para produzir uma experiência perceptiva significativa do mundo, permitem-nos interagir de forma eficaz e apoiam o pensamento abstrato e a linguagem.

Os lobos parietal, temporal e occipital – todos localizados na parte posterior do córtex – integram informações sensoriais e informações armazenadas na memória.

O lobo frontal ou complexo de associação pré-frontal está envolvido no planejamento de ações e movimentos, bem como no pensamento abstrato.

Globalmente, as áreas associativas estão organizadas como redes distribuídas.

Cada rede conecta áreas distribuídas em regiões amplamente espaçadas do córtex.

Redes distintas são posicionadas adjacentes umas às outras produzindo uma série complexa de redes entrelaçadas.

A organização específica das redes de associação é debatida com evidências de interações, relacionamentos hierárquicos e competição entre redes. Em humanos, as redes de associação são particularmente importantes para a função da linguagem.

No passado, teorizava-se que as habilidades linguísticas se localizavam na área de Broca nas áreas do giro frontal inferior esquerdo, BA44 e BA45, para expressão da linguagem e na área de Wernicke BA22, para recepção da linguagem.

No entanto, os processos de expressão e recepção da linguagem demonstraram ocorrer em outras áreas além daquelas estruturas ao redor do sulco lateral, incluindo o lobo frontal, gânglios da base, cerebelo e ponte.


== Significado clínico ==


Doenças neurodegenerativas, como a doença de Alzheimer e a doença de Lafora, mostram como marcador, uma atrofia da substância cinzenta do córtex cerebral. Outras doenças do sistema nervoso central incluem distúrbios neurológicos como epilepsia, distúrbios do movimento e dificuldades na fala (afasia) .
Danos cerebrais por doenças ou traumas podem envolver danos a um lobo específico, como no distúrbio do lobo frontal, e as funções associadas serão afetadas.

A barreira hematoencefálica que serve para proteger o cérebro da infecção pode ficar comprometida, permitindo a entrada de patógenos.
O feto em desenvolvimento é suscetível a uma série de fatores ambientais que podem causar defeitos congênitos e problemas no desenvolvimento posterior.

O consumo materno de álcool, por exemplo, pode causar transtorno do espectro alcoólico fetal.

Outros fatores que podem causar distúrbios do neurodesenvolvimento são as substâncias tóxicas, como as drogas, e a exposição à radiação a partir dos raios X.

As infecções também podem afetar o desenvolvimento do córtex.

Uma infecção viral é uma das causas da lisencefalia, que resulta em um córtex liso sem girificação.
Um tipo de eletrocorticografia chamado mapeamento de estimulação cortical é um procedimento invasivo que envolve a colocação de eletrodos diretamente no cérebro exposto para localizar as funções de áreas específicas do córtex.

É usado em aplicações clínicas e terapêuticas, incluindo mapeamento pré-cirúrgico.


=== Genes associados a distúrbios corticais ===

Há uma série de mutações genéticas que podem causar uma ampla gama de distúrbios genéticos do córtex cerebral, incluindo microcefalia, esquizencefalia e tipos de lisencefalia.

Anormalidades cromossômicas também podem resultar em vários distúrbios do neurodesenvolvimento, como a síndrome do X frágil e a síndrome de Rett.
Códigos MCPH1 para microcefalina, e distúrbios nesta e na ASPM estão associados à microcefalia.

Mutações no gene NBS1 que codifica a nibrina podem causar a síndrome de quebra de Nijmegen, caracterizada por microcefalia. Mutações em EMX2 e COL4A1 estão associadas à esquizencefalia, condição marcada pela ausência de grande parte dos hemisférios cerebrais.


== História ==

Em 1909, Korbinian Brodmann distinguiu diferentes áreas do neocórtex com base na diferença citoarquitetônica e dividiu o córtex cerebral em 52 regiões. Rafael Lorente de Nó, aluno de Santiago Ramon y Cajal identificou mais de 40 tipos diferentes de neurônios corticais com base na distribuição de seus dendritos e axônios.


== Outros animais ==


O córtex cerebral é derivado do pálio, uma estrutura em camadas encontrada no prosencéfalo de todos os vertebrados.

A forma básica do pálio é uma camada cilíndrica envolvendo ventrículos cheios de líquido.

Ao redor da circunferência do cilindro estão quatro zonas, o pálio dorsal, pálio medial, pálio ventral e pálio lateral, que se acredita serem homólogos ao neocórtex, hipocampo, amígdala e córtex olfativo, respectivamente.
Até recentemente, nenhuma contraparte do córtex cerebral havia sido reconhecida em invertebrados.

No entanto, um estudo publicado na revista Cell em 2010, baseado em perfis de expressão gênica, relatou fortes afinidades entre o córtex cerebral e os corpos de cogumelo do ragworm Platynereis dumerilii.

Corpos de cogumelos são estruturas nos cérebros de muitos tipos de vermes e artrópodes que são conhecidos por desempenhar papéis importantes no aprendizado e na memória; a evidência genética indica uma origem evolutiva comum e, portanto, indica que as origens dos primeiros precursores do córtex cerebral remontam à era pré-cambriana.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cerebral_cortex

;;;FR;;;



CORTEX CÉRÉBRAL


Le cortex cérébral, également connu sous le nom de manteau cérébral, est la couche externe du tissu neural du cerveau du cerveau chez l'homme et d'autres mammifères.

Le cortex cérébral se compose principalement du néocortex à six couches, avec seulement 10% d'allocortex.

Il est séparé en deux cortex, par la fissure longitudinale qui divise le cerveau en hémisphères cérébraux gauche et droit.

Les deux hémisphères sont reliés sous le cortex par le corps calleux.

Le cortex cérébral est le plus grand site d'intégration neuronale du système nerveux central.

Il joue un rôle clé dans l'attention, la perception, la conscience, la pensée, la mémoire, le langage et la conscience.
Chez la plupart des mammifères, à l'exception des petits mammifères qui ont un petit cerveau, le cortex cérébral est replié, offrant une plus grande surface dans le volume confiné du crâne.

Outre la minimisation du volume cérébral et crânien, le repliement cortical est crucial pour le câblage du cerveau et son organisation fonctionnelle.

Chez les mammifères avec un petit cerveau, il n'y a pas de pliage et le cortex est lisse. Un pli ou une crête dans le cortex est appelé un gyrus (gyri au pluriel) et une rainure est appelée un sulcus (sulci au pluriel).

Ces circonvolutions de surface apparaissent au cours du développement fœtal et continuent à mûrir après la naissance grâce au processus de gyrification.

Dans le cerveau humain, la majorité du cortex cérébral n'est pas visible de l'extérieur, mais enfoui dans les sillons, et le cortex insulaire est complètement caché.

Les principaux sulci et gyri marquent les divisions du cerveau dans les lobes du cerveau.
Il y a entre 14 et 16 milliards de neurones dans le cortex cérébral humain.

Celles-ci sont organisées en couches corticales horizontales et radialement en colonnes et minicolonnes corticales.

Les zones corticales ont des fonctions spécifiques telles que le mouvement dans le cortex moteur et la vue dans le cortex visuel.


== Structure ==


Le cortex cérébral est le revêtement extérieur des surfaces des hémisphères cérébraux et est plié en pics appelés gyri et en rainures appelées sulci.

Dans le cerveau humain, il mesure entre deux et trois ou quatre millimètres d'épaisseur et représente 40 % de la masse du cerveau. 90% du cortex cérébral est le néocortex à six couches, les 10% restants étant constitués d'allocortex.

Il y a entre 14 et 16 milliards de neurones dans le cortex, et ceux-ci sont organisés radialement en colonnes corticales, et minicolonnes, dans les couches organisées horizontalement du cortex. Le néocortex est séparable en différentes régions du cortex appelées au pluriel cortex, et comprennent le cortex moteur et le cortex visuel.

Environ les deux tiers de la surface corticale sont enfouis dans les sillons et le cortex insulaire est complètement caché.

Le cortex est le plus épais au sommet d'un gyrus et le plus mince au fond d'un sillon.


=== Plis ===


Le cortex cérébral est plié d'une manière qui permet à une grande surface de tissu neural de s'insérer dans les limites du neurocrâne.

Lorsqu'il est déplié chez l'homme, chaque cortex hémisphérique a une surface totale d'environ 0,12 mètre carré (1,3 pied carré).

Le pliage est vers l'intérieur loin de la surface du cerveau et est également présent sur la surface médiale de chaque hémisphère dans la fissure longitudinale.

La plupart des mammifères ont un cortex cérébral qui est alambiqué avec les pics appelés gyri et les creux ou rainures appelés sulci.

Certains petits mammifères dont certains petits rongeurs ont des surfaces cérébrales lisses sans gyrification.


=== Lobes ===

Les sulci et gyri plus grands marquent les divisions du cortex du cerveau dans les lobes du cerveau.

Il existe quatre lobes principaux : le lobe frontal, le lobe pariétal, le lobe temporal et le lobe occipital.

Le cortex insulaire est souvent inclus comme lobe insulaire.

Le lobe limbique est un bord du cortex sur le côté médial de chaque hémisphère et est également souvent inclus.

Trois lobules cérébraux sont également décrits : le lobule paracentral, le lobule pariétal supérieur et le lobule pariétal inférieur.


=== Épaisseur ===

Pour les espèces de mammifères, les cerveaux plus gros (en termes absolus, pas seulement par rapport à la taille du corps) ont tendance à avoir des cortex plus épais.

Les plus petits mammifères, comme les musaraignes, ont une épaisseur néocorticale d'environ 0,5 mm ; ceux qui ont les plus gros cerveaux, comme les humains et les rorquals communs, ont des épaisseurs de 2 à 4 mm.

Il existe une relation approximativement logarithmique entre le poids du cerveau et l'épaisseur corticale. L'imagerie par résonance magnétique du cerveau (IRM) permet d'obtenir une mesure de l'épaisseur du cortex cérébral humain et de la relier à d'autres mesures.

L'épaisseur des différentes zones corticales varie mais en général, le cortex sensoriel est plus fin que le cortex moteur.

Une étude a trouvé une association positive entre l'épaisseur corticale et l'intelligence.
Une autre étude a révélé que le cortex somatosensoriel est plus épais chez les personnes souffrant de migraine, bien qu'on ne sache pas si cela est le résultat de crises de migraine ou la cause de celles-ci.
Une étude ultérieure utilisant une plus grande population de patients ne rapporte aucun changement dans l'épaisseur corticale chez les personnes souffrant de migraine.
Un trouble génétique du cortex cérébral, par lequel une diminution du repliement dans certaines zones entraîne un microgyrus, où il y a quatre couches au lieu de six, est dans certains cas considéré comme lié à la dyslexie.


=== Couches de néocortex ===


Le néocortex est formé de six couches, numérotées de I à VI, de la couche la plus externe I - près de la pie-mère, à la couche la plus interne VI - près de la substance blanche sous-jacente.

Chaque couche corticale a une distribution caractéristique de différents neurones et leurs connexions avec d'autres régions corticales et sous-corticales.

Il existe des connexions directes entre les différentes aires corticales et des connexions indirectes via le thalamus.
L'un des exemples les plus clairs de stratification corticale est la ligne de Gennari dans le cortex visuel primaire.

Il s'agit d'une bande de tissu plus blanc qui peut être observée à l'œil nu dans le sillon calcarin du lobe occipital.

La lignée de Gennari est composée d'axones apportant des informations visuelles du thalamus à la couche IV du cortex visuel.
La coloration de coupes transversales du cortex pour révéler la position des corps cellulaires neuronaux et des voies axonales intracorticales a permis aux neuroanatomistes du début du XXe siècle de produire une description détaillée de la structure laminaire du cortex chez différentes espèces.

Les travaux de Korbinian Brodmann (1909) ont établi que le néocortex des mammifères est systématiquement divisé en six couches.


==== Couche I ====
La couche I est la couche moléculaire et contient peu de neurones dispersés, y compris des neurones GABAergiques de l'églantier.

La couche I se compose en grande partie d'extensions de touffes dendritiques apicales de neurones pyramidaux et d'axones orientés horizontalement, ainsi que de cellules gliales.

Au cours du développement, des cellules de Cajal-Retzius et des cellules de la couche granulaire sous-piale sont présentes dans cette couche.

En outre, certaines cellules étoilées épineuses peuvent être trouvées ici.

On pense que les entrées des touffes apicales sont cruciales pour les interactions de rétroaction dans le cortex cérébral impliquées dans l'apprentissage associatif et l'attention.

Alors qu'on pensait autrefois que l'apport à la couche I provenait du cortex lui-même, on se rend compte maintenant que la couche I à travers le manteau du cortex cérébral reçoit un apport substantiel de la matrice ou des cellules du thalamus de type M (contrairement au noyau ou au type C qui aller à la couche IV).


==== Couche II ====
La couche II, la couche granulaire externe, contient de petits neurones pyramidaux et de nombreux neurones étoilés.


==== Couche III ====
La couche III, la couche pyramidale externe, contient principalement des neurones pyramidaux de petite et moyenne taille, ainsi que des neurones non pyramidaux avec des axones intracorticaux orientés verticalement; les couches I à III sont la cible principale des afférences corticocorticales interhémisphériques, et la couche III est la principale source des efférents corticocorticaux.


==== Couche IV ====
La couche IV, la couche granulaire interne, contient différents types de cellules étoilées et pyramidales, et est la cible principale des afférences thalamocorticales des neurones du thalamus de type C (type noyau) ainsi que des afférences corticocorticales intra-hémisphériques.

Les couches au-dessus de la couche IV sont également appelées couches supragranulaires (couches I-III), tandis que les couches en dessous sont appelées couches infragranulaires (couches V et VI).


==== Couche V ====
La couche V, la couche pyramidale interne, contient de grands neurones pyramidaux.

Les axones de ceux-ci quittent le cortex et se connectent aux structures sous-corticales, y compris les ganglions de la base.

Dans le cortex moteur primaire du lobe frontal, la couche V contient des cellules pyramidales géantes appelées cellules de Betz, dont les axones traversent la capsule interne, le tronc cérébral et la moelle épinière formant le tractus corticospinal, qui est la principale voie de contrôle moteur volontaire. .


==== Couche VI ====
La couche VI, la couche polymorphe ou multiforme, contient peu de grands neurones pyramidaux et de nombreux petits neurones pyramidaux et multiformes en forme de fuseau ; la couche VI envoie des fibres efférentes vers le thalamus, établissant une interconnexion réciproque très précise entre le cortex et le thalamus.

Autrement dit, les neurones de la couche VI d'une colonne corticale se connectent aux neurones du thalamus qui fournissent une entrée à la même colonne corticale.

Ces connexions sont à la fois excitatrices et inhibitrices.

Les neurones envoient des fibres excitatrices aux neurones du thalamus et envoient également des collatérales au noyau réticulaire thalamique qui inhibent ces mêmes neurones du thalamus ou ceux qui leur sont adjacents.

Une théorie est que parce que la sortie inhibitrice est réduite par l'entrée cholinergique dans le cortex cérébral, cela fournit au tronc cérébral un "contrôle de gain réglable pour le relais des entrées lemniscales".


=== Colonnes ===

Les couches corticales ne sont pas simplement empilées les unes sur les autres ; il existe des connexions caractéristiques entre différentes couches et types de neurones, qui traversent toute l'épaisseur du cortex.

Ces microcircuits corticaux sont regroupés en colonnes et minicolonnes corticales.

Il a été proposé que les minicolonnes sont les unités fonctionnelles de base du cortex.

En 1957, Vernon Mountcastle a montré que les propriétés fonctionnelles du cortex changent brusquement entre des points latéralement adjacents ; cependant, ils sont continus dans la direction perpendiculaire à la surface.

Des travaux ultérieurs ont mis en évidence la présence de colonnes corticales fonctionnellement distinctes dans le cortex visuel (Hubel et Wiesel, 1959), le cortex auditif,
et le cortex associatif.
Les zones corticales dépourvues de couche IV sont dites agranulaires.

Les zones corticales qui n'ont qu'une couche IV rudimentaire sont dites dysgranulaires.

Le traitement de l'information au sein de chaque couche est déterminé par une dynamique temporelle différente, celle des couches II / III ayant une oscillation lente de 2 Hz tandis que celle de la couche V a une oscillation rapide de 10 à 15 Hz.


=== Types de cortex ===

Sur la base des différences d'organisation laminaire, le cortex cérébral peut être classé en deux types, la grande zone de néocortex qui a six couches cellulaires et la zone beaucoup plus petite d'allocortex qui a trois ou quatre couches :
Le néocortex est également connu sous le nom d'isocortex ou de néopallium et fait partie du cortex cérébral mature avec six couches distinctes.

Des exemples de zones néocorticales comprennent le cortex moteur primaire granuleux et le cortex visuel primaire strié.

Le néocortex a deux sous-types, le véritable isocortex et le proisocortex qui est une région de transition entre l'isocortex et les régions du périallocortex.
L'allocortex est la partie du cortex cérébral à trois ou quatre couches et comporte trois sous-types, le paléocortex à trois lames corticales, l'archicortex qui en a quatre ou cinq et une zone de transition adjacente à l'allocortex, le périallocortex.

Des exemples d'allocortex sont le cortex olfactif et l'hippocampe. Il existe une zone de transition entre le néocortex et l'allocortex appelée cortex paralimbique, où les couches 2, 3 et 4 sont fusionnées.

Cette zone intègre le proisocortex du néocortex et le périallocortex de l'allocortex.

De plus, le cortex cérébral peut être classé en quatre lobes : le lobe frontal, le lobe temporal, le lobe pariétal et le lobe occipital, nommés d'après leurs os sus-jacents du crâne.


== Approvisionnement en sang et drainage ==


L'apport sanguin au cortex cérébral fait partie de la circulation cérébrale.

Les artères cérébrales alimentent le sang qui perfuse le cerveau.

Ce sang artériel transporte l'oxygène, le glucose et d'autres nutriments vers le cortex.

Les veines cérébrales drainent le sang désoxygéné et les déchets métaboliques, y compris le dioxyde de carbone, vers le cœur.
Les principales artères irriguant le cortex sont l'artère cérébrale antérieure, l'artère cérébrale moyenne et l'artère cérébrale postérieure.

L'artère cérébrale antérieure alimente les parties antérieures du cerveau, y compris la majeure partie du lobe frontal.

L'artère cérébrale moyenne alimente les lobes pariétaux, les lobes temporaux et des parties des lobes occipitaux.

L'artère cérébrale moyenne se divise en deux branches pour alimenter les hémisphères gauche et droit, où elles se ramifient plus loin.

L'artère cérébrale postérieure irrigue les lobes occipitaux.
Le cercle de Willis est le principal système sanguin qui s'occupe de l'approvisionnement en sang dans le cerveau et le cortex cérébral.


== Développement ==


Le développement prénatal du cortex cérébral est un processus complexe et finement réglé appelé corticogenèse, influencé par l'interaction entre les gènes et l'environnement.


=== Tube neural ===

Le cortex cérébral se développe à partir de la partie la plus antérieure, la région du cerveau antérieur, du tube neural.

La plaque neurale se plie et se ferme pour former le tube neural.

De la cavité à l'intérieur du tube neural se développe le système ventriculaire et, à partir des cellules neuroépithéliales de ses parois, les neurones et la glie du système nerveux.

La partie la plus antérieure (avant ou crânienne) de la plaque neurale, le prosencéphale, qui est évident avant le début de la neurulation, donne naissance aux hémisphères cérébraux et plus tard au cortex.


=== Développement des neurones corticaux ===


Les neurones corticaux sont générés dans la zone ventriculaire, à côté des ventricules.

Au début, cette zone contient des cellules souches neurales, qui se transforment en cellules gliales radiales - cellules progénitrices, qui se divisent pour produire des cellules gliales et des neurones.


==== Glie radiale ====

Le cortex cérébral est composé d'une population hétérogène de cellules qui donnent naissance à différents types cellulaires.

La majorité de ces cellules sont issues de la migration gliale radiale qui forment les différents types cellulaires du néocortex et c'est une période associée à une augmentation de la neurogenèse.

De même, le processus de neurogenèse régule la stratification pour former les différentes couches du cortex.

Au cours de ce processus, il y a une augmentation de la restriction du destin cellulaire qui commence avec les progéniteurs antérieurs donnant naissance à n'importe quel type de cellule dans le cortex et les progéniteurs ultérieurs ne donnant naissance qu'aux neurones des couches superficielles.

Ce destin cellulaire différentiel crée une topographie inversée dans le cortex avec des neurones plus jeunes dans les couches superficielles et des neurones plus âgés dans les couches plus profondes.

De plus, les neurones laminaires sont arrêtés en phase S ou G2 afin de distinguer finement les différentes couches corticales.

La différenciation laminaire n'est complètement complète qu'après la naissance, car pendant le développement, les neurones laminaires sont encore sensibles aux signaux extrinsèques et aux signaux environnementaux. Bien que la majorité des cellules qui composent le cortex soient dérivées localement de la glie radiale, il existe un sous-ensemble de neurones qui migrent de autres régions.

La glie radiale donne naissance à des neurones de forme pyramidale et utilise le glutamate comme neurotransmetteur, mais ces cellules migrantes contribuent aux neurones en forme d'étoile et utilisent le GABA comme principal neurotransmetteur.

Ces neurones GABAergiques sont générés par des cellules progénitrices de l'éminence ganglionnaire médiale (MGE) qui migrent tangentiellement au cortex via la zone sous-ventriculaire.

Cette migration des neurones GABAergiques est particulièrement importante car les récepteurs GABA sont excitateurs au cours du développement.

Cette excitation est principalement entraînée par le flux d'ions chlorure à travers le récepteur GABA, mais chez les adultes, les concentrations de chlorure se déplacent, provoquant un flux entrant de chlorure qui hyperpolarise les neurones post-synaptiques.
Les fibres gliales produites dans les premières divisions des cellules progénitrices sont orientées radialement, couvrant l'épaisseur du cortex de la zone ventriculaire à la surface piale externe, et fournissent un échafaudage pour la migration des neurones vers l'extérieur de la zone ventriculaire. À la naissance, il y a il y a très peu de dendrites présentes sur le corps cellulaire du neurone cortical et l'axone n'est pas développé.

Au cours de la première année de vie, les dendrites augmentent considérablement en nombre, de sorte qu'elles peuvent accueillir jusqu'à cent mille connexions synaptiques avec d'autres neurones.

L'axone peut se développer pour s'étendre loin du corps cellulaire.


=== Division asymétrique ===

Les premières divisions des cellules progénitrices sont symétriques, ce qui duplique le nombre total de cellules progénitrices à chaque cycle mitotique.

Ensuite, certaines cellules progénitrices commencent à se diviser de manière asymétrique, produisant une cellule postmitotique qui migre le long des fibres gliales radiales, en quittant la zone ventriculaire, et une cellule progénitrice, qui continue à se diviser jusqu'à la fin du développement, lorsqu'elle se différencie en une cellule gliale ou une cellule épendymaire.

Au fur et à mesure que la phase G1 de la mitose est allongée, dans ce qui est considéré comme un allongement sélectif du cycle cellulaire, les neurones nouvellement nés migrent vers des couches plus superficielles du cortex.

Les cellules filles migrantes deviennent les cellules pyramidales du cortex cérébral.

Le processus de développement est ordonné dans le temps et régulé par des centaines de gènes et de mécanismes de régulation épigénétiques.


=== Organisation des calques ===

La structure en couches du cortex cérébral mature se forme au cours du développement.

Les premiers neurones pyramidaux générés migrent hors de la zone ventriculaire et de la zone sous-ventriculaire, avec les neurones de Cajal-Retzius producteurs de reeline, à partir de la préplaque.

Ensuite, une cohorte de neurones migrant vers le milieu de la préplaque divise cette couche transitoire en la zone marginale superficielle, qui deviendra la couche I du néocortex mature, et la sous-plaque, formant une couche médiane appelée plaque corticale.

Ces cellules formeront les couches profondes du cortex mature, les couches cinq et six.

Les neurones nés plus tard migrent radialement dans la plaque corticale au-delà des neurones de la couche profonde et deviennent les couches supérieures (deux à quatre).

Ainsi, les couches du cortex sont créées dans un ordre inversé.

La seule exception à cette séquence de neurogenèse à l'envers se produit dans la couche I des primates, dans laquelle, contrairement aux rongeurs, la neurogenèse se poursuit tout au long de la période de corticogenèse.


=== Modélisation corticale ===


La carte des zones corticales fonctionnelles, qui comprennent le cortex moteur et visuel primaire, provient d'une «protocarte», qui est régulée par des signaux moléculaires tels que le facteur de croissance des fibroblastes FGF8 au début du développement embryonnaire.

Ces signaux régulent la taille, la forme et la position des zones corticales à la surface de l'ébauche corticale, en partie en régulant les gradients d'expression du facteur de transcription, par un processus appelé structuration corticale.

Des exemples de tels facteurs de transcription comprennent les gènes EMX2 et PAX6.

Ensemble, les deux facteurs de transcription forment un gradient d'expression opposé.

Pax6 est fortement exprimé au pôle latéral rostral, tandis que Emx2 est fortement exprimé au pôle caudomédial.

L'établissement de ce gradient est important pour un bon développement.

Par exemple, des mutations dans Pax6 peuvent entraîner une expansion des niveaux d'expression d'Emx2 hors de son domaine d'expression normal, ce qui conduirait finalement à une expansion des zones normalement dérivées du cortex médial caudal, comme le cortex visuel.

Au contraire, si des mutations dans Emx2 se produisent, elles peuvent provoquer l'expansion du domaine exprimant Pax6 et entraîner l'élargissement des régions corticales frontales et motrices.

Par conséquent, les chercheurs pensent que des gradients et des centres de signalisation similaires à côté du cortex pourraient contribuer à l'expression régionale de ces facteurs de transcription.
Deux signaux de structuration très bien étudiés pour le cortex comprennent le FGF et l'acide rétinoïque.

Si les FGF sont mal exprimés dans différentes zones du cortex en développement, la structuration corticale est perturbée.

Plus précisément, lorsque Fgf8 est augmenté dans le pôle antérieur, Emx2 est régulé à la baisse et un déplacement caudal dans la région corticale se produit.

Cela provoque finalement une expansion des régions rostrales.

Par conséquent, Fgf8 et d'autres FGF jouent un rôle dans la régulation de l'expression de Emx2 et Pax6 et représentent comment le cortex cérébral peut se spécialiser pour différentes fonctions. L'expansion rapide de la surface corticale est régulée par la quantité d'auto-renouvellement de la gliale radiale cellules et est en partie régulée par les gènes FGF et Notch.

Pendant la période de neurogenèse corticale et de formation des couches, de nombreux mammifères supérieurs commencent le processus de gyrification, qui génère les plis caractéristiques du cortex cérébral.

La gyrification est régulée par une protéine associée à l'ADN Trnp1 et par la signalisation FGF et SHH


== Évolution ==


De toutes les différentes régions du cerveau, le cortex cérébral présente la plus grande variation évolutive et a évolué le plus récemment.

Contrairement aux circuits hautement conservés du bulbe rachidien, par exemple, qui remplissent des fonctions essentielles telles que la régulation des rythmes cardiaque et respiratoire, de nombreuses zones du cortex cérébral ne sont pas strictement nécessaires à la survie.

Ainsi, l'évolution du cortex cérébral a vu l'avènement et la modification de nouvelles zones fonctionnelles, en particulier les zones d'association qui ne reçoivent pas directement d'entrée de l'extérieur du cortex. Une théorie clé de l'évolution corticale est incarnée dans l'hypothèse de l'unité radiale et l'hypothèse de protomap associée. , d'abord proposé par Rakic.

Cette théorie stipule que de nouvelles zones corticales sont formées par l'ajout de nouvelles unités radiales, ce qui est accompli au niveau des cellules souches.

L'hypothèse de la protocarte stipule que l'identité cellulaire et moléculaire et les caractéristiques des neurones de chaque zone corticale sont spécifiées par des cellules souches corticales, appelées cellules gliales radiales, dans une carte primordiale.

Cette carte est contrôlée par des protéines de signalisation sécrétées et des facteurs de transcription en aval.


== Fonction ==



=== Connexions ===

Le cortex cérébral est connecté à diverses structures sous-corticales telles que le thalamus et les ganglions de la base, leur envoyant des informations via des connexions efférentes et en recevant des informations via des connexions afférentes.

La plupart des informations sensorielles sont acheminées vers le cortex cérébral via le thalamus.

L'information olfactive, cependant, passe par le bulbe olfactif jusqu'au cortex olfactif (cortex piriforme).

La majorité des connexions se font d'une zone du cortex à une autre, plutôt que des zones sous-corticales ; Braitenberg et Schüz (1998) affirment que dans les zones sensorielles primaires, au niveau cortical où se terminent les fibres d'entrée, jusqu'à 20 % des synapses sont alimentées par des afférences extracorticales, mais que dans d'autres zones et d'autres couches, le pourcentage est susceptible d'être beaucoup plus élevé. plus bas.


=== Zones corticales ===

L'ensemble du cortex cérébral a été divisé en 52 zones différentes dans une première présentation par Korbinian Brodmann.

Ces aires, dites aires de Brodmann, reposent sur leur cytoarchitecture mais concernent également diverses fonctions.

Un exemple est la zone 17 de Brodmann qui est le cortex visuel primaire.
En termes plus généraux, le cortex est généralement décrit comme comprenant trois parties : les zones sensorielle, motrice et associative.


==== Zones sensorielles ====

Les zones sensorielles sont les zones corticales qui reçoivent et traitent les informations des sens.

Les parties du cortex qui reçoivent des entrées sensorielles du thalamus sont appelées zones sensorielles primaires.

Les sens de la vision, de l'ouïe et du toucher sont servis respectivement par le cortex visuel primaire, le cortex auditif primaire et le cortex somatosensoriel primaire.

En général, les deux hémisphères reçoivent des informations du côté opposé (contralatéral) du corps.

Par exemple, le cortex somatosensoriel primaire droit reçoit des informations des membres gauches et le cortex visuel droit reçoit des informations du champ visuel gauche.

L'organisation des cartes sensorielles dans le cortex reflète celle de l'organe sensible correspondant, dans ce que l'on appelle une carte topographique.

Les points voisins du cortex visuel primaire, par exemple, correspondent aux points voisins de la rétine.

Cette carte topographique est appelée carte rétinotopique.

De la même manière, il existe une carte tonotopique dans le cortex auditif primaire et une carte somatotopique dans le cortex sensoriel primaire.

Cette dernière carte topographique du corps sur le gyrus central postérieur a été illustrée comme une représentation humaine déformée, l' homoncule somatosensoriel , où la taille des différentes parties du corps reflète la densité relative de leur innervation.

Les zones avec beaucoup d'innervation sensorielle, telles que le bout des doigts et les lèvres, nécessitent plus de zone corticale pour traiter une sensation plus fine.


==== Zones motrices ====
Les aires motrices sont situées dans les deux hémisphères du cortex.

Les aires motrices sont très étroitement liées au contrôle des mouvements volontaires, en particulier des mouvements fragmentés fins effectués par la main.

La moitié droite de la zone motrice contrôle le côté gauche du corps et vice versa.
Deux zones du cortex sont communément appelées motrices :

Cortex moteur primaire, qui exécute les mouvements volontaires
Les aires motrices supplémentaires et le cortex prémoteur, qui sélectionnent les mouvements volontaires. De plus, les fonctions motrices ont été décrites pour :

Cortex pariétal postérieur, qui guide les mouvements volontaires dans l'espace
Cortex préfrontal dorsolatéral, qui décide des mouvements volontaires à effectuer en fonction d'instructions, de règles et de pensées auto-générées d'ordre supérieur. Juste sous le cortex cérébral se trouvent des masses sous-corticales interconnectées de matière grise appelées ganglions de la base (ou noyaux).

Les ganglions de la base reçoivent des informations de la substantia nigra du mésencéphale et des zones motrices du cortex cérébral et renvoient des signaux à ces deux endroits.

Ils sont impliqués dans le contrôle moteur.

On les trouve latéralement au thalamus.

Les principaux composants des ganglions de la base sont le noyau caudé, le putamen, le globus pallidus, la substance noire, le noyau accumbens et le noyau sous-thalamique.

Le putamen et le globus pallidus sont également connus sous le nom de noyau lentiforme, car ensemble, ils forment un corps en forme de lentille.

Le putamen et le noyau caudé sont également appelés collectivement le corps strié après leur apparence rayée.


==== Espaces associatifs ====

Les aires d'association sont les parties du cortex cérébral qui n'appartiennent pas aux régions primaires.

Ils fonctionnent pour produire une expérience perceptive significative du monde, nous permettent d'interagir efficacement et soutiennent la pensée et le langage abstraits.

Les lobes pariétal, temporal et occipital – tous situés dans la partie postérieure du cortex – intègrent les informations sensorielles et les informations stockées en mémoire.

Le lobe frontal ou complexe d'association préfrontal est impliqué dans la planification des actions et du mouvement, ainsi que dans la pensée abstraite.

Globalement, les espaces associatifs sont organisés en réseaux distribués.

Chaque réseau relie des zones réparties dans des régions largement espacées du cortex.

Des réseaux distincts sont positionnés les uns à côté des autres, ce qui donne une série complexe de réseaux entrelacés.

L'organisation spécifique des réseaux d'association est débattue avec des preuves d'interactions, de relations hiérarchiques et de concurrence entre les réseaux. Chez l'homme, les réseaux d'association sont particulièrement importants pour la fonction du langage.

Dans le passé, il a été théorisé que les capacités linguistiques sont localisées dans l'aire de Broca dans les zones du gyrus frontal inférieur gauche, BA44 et BA45, pour l'expression du langage et dans l'aire de Wernicke BA22, pour la réception du langage.

Cependant, il a été démontré que les processus d'expression et de réception du langage se produisent dans des zones autres que les seules structures autour du sillon latéral, y compris le lobe frontal, les ganglions de la base, le cervelet et le pont.


== Signification clinique ==


Les maladies neurodégénératives telles que la maladie d'Alzheimer et la maladie de Lafora, montrent comme marqueur, une atrophie de la matière grise du cortex cérébral. D'autres maladies du système nerveux central comprennent des troubles neurologiques tels que l'épilepsie, des troubles du mouvement et des difficultés d'élocution (aphasie) .
Les dommages au cerveau dus à une maladie ou à un traumatisme peuvent impliquer des dommages à un lobe spécifique, comme dans le cas d'un trouble du lobe frontal, et les fonctions associées seront affectées.

La barrière hémato-encéphalique qui sert à protéger le cerveau contre les infections peut être compromise, permettant ainsi l'entrée d'agents pathogènes.
Le fœtus en développement est sensible à une gamme de facteurs environnementaux qui peuvent causer des malformations congénitales et des problèmes de développement ultérieur.

La consommation d'alcool par la mère, par exemple, peut provoquer un trouble du spectre de l'alcoolisation fœtale.

D'autres facteurs pouvant causer des troubles du développement neurologique sont les substances toxiques telles que les médicaments et l'exposition aux rayonnements comme les rayons X.

Les infections peuvent également affecter le développement du cortex.

Une infection virale est l'une des causes de la lissencéphalie, qui se traduit par un cortex lisse sans gyrification.
Un type d'électrocorticographie appelé cartographie de stimulation corticale est une procédure invasive qui consiste à placer des électrodes directement sur le cerveau exposé afin de localiser les fonctions de zones spécifiques du cortex.

Il est utilisé dans des applications cliniques et thérapeutiques, y compris la cartographie pré-chirurgicale.


=== Gènes associés aux troubles corticaux ===

Il existe un certain nombre de mutations génétiques qui peuvent causer un large éventail de troubles génétiques du cortex cérébral, notamment la microcéphalie, la schizencéphalie et les types de lissencéphalie.

Des anomalies chromosomiques peuvent également entraîner un certain nombre de troubles neurodéveloppementaux tels que le syndrome de l'X fragile et le syndrome de Rett.
MCPH1 code pour la microcéphaline, et les troubles de celle-ci et de l'ASPM sont associés à la microcéphalie.

Des mutations dans le gène NBS1 qui code pour la nibrine peuvent provoquer le syndrome de rupture de Nimègue, caractérisé par une microcéphalie.


== Historique ==

En 1909, Korbinian Brodmann a distingué différentes zones du néocortex en fonction de la différence cytoarchitecturale et a divisé le cortex cérébral en 52 régions. Rafael Lorente de Nó, un étudiant de Santiago Ramon y Cajal a identifié plus de 40 types différents de neurones corticaux en fonction de la distribution des leurs dendrites et axones.


== Autres animaux ==


Le cortex cérébral est dérivé du pallium, une structure en couches présente dans le cerveau antérieur de tous les vertébrés.

La forme de base du pallium est une couche cylindrique renfermant des ventricules remplis de liquide.

Autour de la circonférence du cylindre se trouvent quatre zones, le pallium dorsal, le pallium médial, le pallium ventral et le pallium latéral, que l'on pense être respectivement homologues du néocortex, de l'hippocampe, de l'amygdale et du cortex olfactif.
Jusqu'à récemment, aucune contrepartie du cortex cérébral n'avait été reconnue chez les invertébrés.

Cependant, une étude publiée dans la revue Cell en 2010, basée sur des profils d'expression génique, a fait état de fortes affinités entre le cortex cérébral et les corps fongiques du ragworm Platynereis dumerilii.

Les corps de champignons sont des structures dans le cerveau de nombreux types de vers et d'arthropodes connus pour jouer un rôle important dans l'apprentissage et la mémoire. les preuves génétiques indiquent une origine évolutive commune, et indiquent donc que les origines des premiers précurseurs du cortex cérébral remontent à l'ère précambrienne.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cerebral_cortex
