

CIRCULATORY SYSTEM


The blood circulatory system, is a system of organs that includes the heart, blood vessels, and blood which is circulated throughout the entire body of a human or other vertebrate. 

It includes the cardiovascular system, or vascular system, that consists of the heart and blood vessels (from Greek kardia meaning heart, and from Latin vascula meaning vessels). 

The circulatory system has two divisions, a systemic circulation or circuit, and a pulmonary circulation or circuit. 

Some sources use the terms cardiovascular system and vascular system interchangeably with the circulatory system.The network of blood vessels are the great vessels of the heart including large elastic arteries, and large veins; other arteries, smaller arterioles, 
capillaries that join with venules (small veins), and other veins. 

The circulatory system is closed in vertebrates, which means that the blood never leaves the network of blood vessels. 

Some invertebrates such as arthropods have an open circulatory system. 

Diploblasts such as sponges, and comb jellies lack a circulatory system. 
Blood is a fluid consisting of plasma, red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets that is circulated around the body carrying oxygen and nutrients to the tissues, and waste materials away. 

Circulated nutrients include proteins and minerals, other components transported are gases such as oxygen, and carbon dioxide, hormones, and hemoglobin; providing nourishment, help in the immune system to fight diseases, and in maintaining homeostasis by stabilizing temperature and natural pH. 
In vertebrates, complementary to the circulatory system is the lymphatic system. 

This system carries excess plasma filtered from the capillaries as interstitial fluid between cells, away from the body tissues in an accessory route to return the excess fluid back to the blood circulation as lymph. 

The passage of lymph takes much longer than that of blood. 

The lymphatic system is a subsystem that is essential for the functioning of the blood circulatory system; without it the blood would become depleted of fluid. 

The lymphatic system works together with the immune system. 

Unlike the closed circulatory system, the lymphatic system is an open system. 

Some sources describe it as a secondary circulatory system. 
The circulatory system can be affected by many cardiovascular diseases. 

Cardiologists are medical professionals which specialise in the heart, and cardiothoracic surgeons specialise in operating on the heart and its surrounding areas. 

Vascular surgeons focus on other parts of the circulatory system.


== Structure ==


The circulatory system includes the heart, blood vessels, and blood. 

The cardiovascular system in all vertebrates, consists of the heart and blood vessels. 

The circulatory system is further divided into two major circuits – a pulmonary circulation, and a systemic circulation. 

The pulmonary circulation is a circuit loop from the right heart taking deoxygenated blood to the lungs where it is oxygenated and returned to the left heart. 

The systemic circulation is a circuit loop that delivers oxygenated blood from the left heart to the rest of the body, and returns deoxygenated blood back to the right heart via large veins known as the venae cavae. 

The systemic circulation can also be defined as two parts – a macrocirculation and a microcirculation. 

An average adult contains five to six quarts (roughly 4.7 to 5.7 liters) of blood, accounting for approximately 7% of their total body weight. 

Blood consists of plasma, red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets. 

The digestive system also works with the circulatory system to provide the nutrients the system needs to keep the heart pumping.Further circulatory routes are associated, such as the coronary circulation to the heart itself, the cerebral circulation to the brain, renal circulation to the kidneys, and bronchial circulation to the bronchi in the lungs.
The human circulatory system is closed, meaning that the blood is contained within the vascular network. 

Nutrients travel through tiny blood vessels of the microcirculation to reach organs. 

The lymphatic system is an essential subsystem of the circulatory system consisting of a network of lymphatic vessels, lymph nodes, organs, tissues and circulating lymph. 

This subsystem is an open system. 

A major function is to carry the lymph, draining and returning interstitial fluid into the lymphatic ducts back to the heart for return to the circulatory system. 

Another major function is working together with the immune system to provide defense against pathogens.


=== Heart ===


The heart pumps blood to all parts of the body providing nutrients and oxygen to every cell, and removing waste products. 

The left heart pumps oxygenated blood returned from the lungs to the rest of the body in the systemic circulation. 

The right heart pumps deoxygenated blood to the lungs in the pulmonary circulation. 

In the human heart there is one atrium and one ventricle for each circulation, and with both a systemic and a pulmonary circulation there are four chambers in total: left atrium, left ventricle, right atrium and right ventricle. 

The right atrium is the upper chamber of the right side of the heart. 

The blood that is returned to the right atrium is deoxygenated (poor in oxygen) and passed into the right ventricle to be pumped through the pulmonary artery to the lungs for re-oxygenation and removal of carbon dioxide. 

The left atrium receives newly oxygenated blood from the lungs as well as the pulmonary vein which is passed into the strong left ventricle to be pumped through the aorta to the different organs of the body.


==== Pulmonary circulation ====

The pulmonary circulation is the portion of the cardiovascular system in which oxygen-depleted blood is pumped away from the heart, via the pulmonary artery, to the lungs and returned, oxygenated, to the heart via the pulmonary vein.
Oxygen-deprived blood from the superior and inferior vena cava enters the right atrium of the heart and flows through the tricuspid valve (right atrioventricular valve) into the right ventricle, from which it is then pumped through the pulmonary semilunar valve into the pulmonary artery to the lungs. 

Gas exchange occurs in the lungs, whereby CO2 is released from the blood, and oxygen is absorbed. 

The pulmonary vein returns the now oxygen-rich blood to the left atrium.A separate system known as the bronchial circulation supplies blood to the tissue of the larger airways of the lung.


==== Systemic circulation ====

Systemic circulation is the portion of the cardiovascular system which transports oxygenated blood away from the heart through the aorta from the left ventricle where the blood has been previously deposited from pulmonary circulation, to the rest of the body, and returns oxygen-depleted blood back to the heart.


=== Blood vessels ===

The blood vessels of the circulatory system are the arteries, veins, and capillaries. 

The large arteries and veins that take blood to, and away from the heart are known as the great vessels.


==== Arteries ====

Oxygenated blood enters the systemic circulation when leaving the left ventricle, through the aortic semilunar valve. 

The first part of the systemic circulation is the aorta, a massive and thick-walled artery. 

The aorta arches and gives branches supplying the upper part of the body after passing through the aortic opening of the diaphragm at the level of thoracic ten vertebra, it enters the abdomen. 

Later, it descends down and supplies branches to abdomen, pelvis, perineum and the lower limbs.The walls of aorta are elastic. 

This elasticity helps to maintain the blood pressure throughout the body. 

When the aorta receives almost five litres of blood from the heart, it recoils and is responsible for pulsating blood pressure. 

As the aorta branches into smaller arteries, their elasticity goes on decreasing and their compliance goes on increasing.


==== Capillaries ====
Arteries branch into small passages called arterioles and then into the capillaries. 

The capillaries merge to bring blood into the venous system.


==== Veins ====

Capillaries merge into venules, which merge into veins. 

The venous system feeds into the two major veins: the superior vena cava – which mainly drains tissues above the heart – and the inferior vena cava – which mainly drains tissues below the heart. 

These two large veins empty into the right atrium of the heart.


==== Portal veins ====

The general rule is that arteries from the heart branch out into capillaries, which collect into veins leading back to the heart. 

Portal veins are a slight exception to this. 

In humans the only significant example is the hepatic portal vein which combines from capillaries around the gastrointestinal tract where the blood absorbs the various products of digestion; rather than leading directly back to the heart, the hepatic portal vein branches into a second capillary system in the liver.


==== Coronary circulation ====

The heart itself is supplied with oxygen and nutrients through a small "loop" of the systemic circulation and derives very little from the blood contained within the four chambers.
The coronary circulation system provides a blood supply to the heart muscle itself. 

The coronary circulation begins near the origin of the aorta by two coronary arteries: the right coronary artery and the left coronary artery. 

After nourishing the heart muscle, blood returns through the coronary veins into the coronary sinus and from this one into the right atrium. 

Back flow of blood through its opening during atrial systole is prevented by Thebesian valve. 

The smallest cardiac veins drain directly into the heart chambers.


==== Cerebral circulation ====

The brain has a dual blood supply, an anterior and a posterior circulation from arteries at its front and back. 

The anterior circulation arises from the internal carotid arteries to supply the front of the brain. 

The posterior circulation arises from the vertebral arteries, to supply the back of the brain and brainstem. 

The circulation from the front and the back join (anastomise) at the circle of Willis.


==== Renal circulation ====
The renal circulation is the blood supply to the kidneys, contains many specialized blood vessels and receives around 20% of the cardiac output. 

It branches from the abdominal aorta and returns blood to the ascending vena cava.


== Development ==


The development of the circulatory system starts with vasculogenesis in the embryo. 

The human arterial and venous systems develop from different areas in the embryo. 

The arterial system develops mainly from the aortic arches, six pairs of arches that develop on the upper part of the embryo. 

The venous system arises from three bilateral veins during weeks 4 – 8 of embryogenesis. 

Fetal circulation begins within the 8th week of development. 

Fetal circulation does not include the lungs, which are bypassed via the truncus arteriosus. 

Before birth the fetus obtains oxygen (and nutrients) from the mother through the placenta and the umbilical cord.


=== Arteries ===


The human arterial system originates from the aortic arches and from the dorsal aortae starting from week 4 of embryonic life. 

The first and second aortic arches regress and form only the maxillary arteries and stapedial arteries respectively. 

The arterial system itself arises from aortic arches 3, 4 and 6 (aortic arch 5 completely regresses).
The dorsal aortae, present on the dorsal side of the embryo, are initially present on both sides of the embryo. 

They later fuse to form the basis for the aorta itself. 

Approximately thirty smaller arteries branch from this at the back and sides. 

These branches form the intercostal arteries, arteries of the arms and legs, lumbar arteries and the lateral sacral arteries. 

Branches to the sides of the aorta will form the definitive renal, suprarenal and gonadal arteries. 

Finally, branches at the front of the aorta consist of the vitelline arteries and umbilical arteries. 

The vitelline arteries form the celiac, superior and inferior mesenteric arteries of the gastrointestinal tract. 

After birth, the umbilical arteries will form the internal iliac arteries.


=== Veins ===


The human venous system develops mainly from the vitelline veins, the umbilical veins and the cardinal veins, all of which empty into the sinus venosus.


== Function ==


About 98.5% of the oxygen in a sample of arterial blood in a healthy human, breathing air at sea-level pressure, is chemically combined with hemoglobin molecules. 

About 1.5% is physically dissolved in the other blood liquids and not connected to hemoglobin. 

The hemoglobin molecule is the primary transporter of oxygen in vertebrates.


== Clinical significance ==


Many diseases affect the circulatory system. 

These include a number of cardiovascular diseases, affecting the heart and blood vessels; hematologic diseases that affect the blood, such as anemia, and lymphatic diseases affecting the lymphatic system. 

Cardiologists are medical professionals which specialise in the heart, and cardiothoracic surgeons specialise in operating on the heart and its surrounding areas. 

Vascular surgeons focus on the blood vessels.


=== Cardiovascular disease ===


Diseases affecting the cardiovascular system are called cardiovascular disease.
Many of these diseases are called "lifestyle diseases" because they develop over time and are related to a person's exercise habits, diet, whether they smoke, and other lifestyle choices a person makes. 

Atherosclerosis is the precursor to many of these diseases. 

It is where small atheromatous plaques build up in the walls of medium and large arteries. 

This may eventually grow or rupture to occlude the arteries. 

It is also a risk factor for acute coronary syndromes, which are diseases that are characterised by a sudden deficit of oxygenated blood to the heart tissue. 

Atherosclerosis is also associated with problems such as aneurysm formation or splitting ("dissection") of arteries.
Another major cardiovascular disease involves the creation of a clot, called a "thrombus". 

These can originate in veins or arteries. 

Deep venous thrombosis, which mostly occurs in the legs, is one cause of clots in the veins of the legs, particularly when a person has been stationary for a long time. 

These clots may embolise, meaning travel to another location in the body. 

The results of this may include pulmonary embolus, transient ischaemic attacks, or stroke.
Cardiovascular diseases may also be congenital in nature, such as heart defects or persistent fetal circulation, where the circulatory changes that are supposed to happen after birth do not. 

Not all congenital changes to the circulatory system are associated with diseases, a large number are anatomical variations.


=== Investigations ===


The function and health of the circulatory system and its parts are measured in a variety of manual and automated ways. 

These include simple methods such as those that are part of the cardiovascular examination, including the taking of a person's pulse as an indicator of a person's heart rate, the taking of blood pressure through a sphygmomanometer or the use of a stethoscope to listen to the heart for murmurs which may indicate problems with the heart's valves. 

An electrocardiogram can also be used to evaluate the way in which electricity is conducted through the heart.
Other more invasive means can also be used. 

A cannula or catheter inserted into an artery may be used to measure pulse pressure or pulmonary wedge pressures. 

Angiography, which involves injecting a dye into an artery to visualise an arterial tree, can be used in the heart (coronary angiography) or brain. 

At the same time as the arteries are visualised, blockages or narrowings may be fixed through the insertion of stents, and active bleeds may be managed by the insertion of coils. 

An MRI may be used to image arteries, called an MRI angiogram. 

For evaluation of the blood supply to the lungs a CT pulmonary angiogram may be used. 

Vascular ultrasonography may be used to investigate vascular diseases affecting the venous system and the arterial system including the diagnosis of stenosis, thrombosis or venous insufficiency. 

An intravascular ultrasound using a catheter is also an option.


=== Surgery ===

There are a number of surgical procedures performed on the circulatory system:

Coronary artery bypass surgery
Coronary stent used in angioplasty
Vascular surgery
Vein stripping
Cosmetic proceduresCardiovascular procedures are more likely to be performed in an inpatient setting than in an ambulatory care setting; in the United States, only 28% of cardiovascular surgeries were performed in the ambulatory care setting.


== Society and culture ==

In Ancient Greece, the heart was thought to be the source of innate heat for the body.
The circulatory system as we know it was discovered by William Harvey.


== Other animals ==


While humans, as well as other vertebrates, have a closed blood circulatory system (meaning that the blood never leaves the network of arteries, veins and capillaries), some invertebrate groups have an open circulatory system containing a heart but limited blood vessels. 

The most primitive, diploblastic animal phyla lack circulatory systems.
An additional transport system, the lymphatic system, which is only found in animals with a closed blood circulation, is an open system providing an accessory route for excess interstitial fluid to be returned to the blood.The blood vascular system first appeared probably in an ancestor of the triploblasts over 600 million years ago, overcoming the time-distance constraints of diffusion, while endothelium evolved in an ancestral vertebrate some 540–510 million years ago.


=== Open circulatory system ===


In arthropods, the open circulatory system is a system in which a fluid in a cavity called the hemocoel bathes the organs directly with oxygen and nutrients, with there being no distinction between blood and interstitial fluid; this combined fluid is called hemolymph or haemolymph. 

Muscular movements by the animal during locomotion can facilitate hemolymph movement, but diverting flow from one area to another is limited. 

When the heart relaxes, blood is drawn back toward the heart through open-ended pores (ostia).
Hemolymph fills all of the interior hemocoel of the body and surrounds all cells. 

Hemolymph is composed of water, inorganic salts (mostly sodium, chloride, potassium, magnesium, and calcium), and organic compounds (mostly carbohydrates, proteins, and lipids). 

The primary oxygen transporter molecule is hemocyanin.
There are free-floating cells, the hemocytes, within the hemolymph. 

They play a role in the arthropod immune system.


=== Closed circulatory system ===


The circulatory systems of all vertebrates, as well as of annelids (for example, earthworms) and cephalopods (squids, octopuses and relatives) always keep their circulating blood enclosed within heart chambers or blood vessels and are classified as closed, just as in humans. 

Still, the systems of fish, amphibians, reptiles, and birds show various stages of the evolution of the circulatory system. 

Closed systems permit blood to be directed to the organs that require it.
In fish, the system has only one circuit, with the blood being pumped through the capillaries of the gills and on to the capillaries of the body tissues. 

This is known as single cycle circulation. 

The heart of fish is, therefore, only a single pump (consisting of two chambers).
In amphibians and most reptiles, a double circulatory system is used, but the heart is not always completely separated into two pumps. 

Amphibians have a three-chambered heart.
In reptiles, the ventricular septum of the heart is incomplete and the pulmonary artery is equipped with a sphincter muscle. 

This allows a second possible route of blood flow. 

Instead of blood flowing through the pulmonary artery to the lungs, the sphincter may be contracted to divert this blood flow through the incomplete ventricular septum into the left ventricle and out through the aorta. 

This means the blood flows from the capillaries to the heart and back to the capillaries instead of to the lungs. 

This process is useful to ectothermic (cold-blooded) animals in the regulation of their body temperature.
Mammals, birds and crocodilians show complete separation of the heart into two pumps, for a total of four heart chambers; it is thought that the four-chambered heart of birds and crocodilians evolved independently from that of mammals. 

Double circulatory systems permit blood to be repressurized after returning from the lungs, speeding up delivery of oxygen to tissues.


=== No circulatory system ===

Circulatory systems are absent in some animals, including flatworms. 

Their body cavity has no lining or enclosed fluid. 

Instead, a muscular pharynx leads to an extensively branched digestive system that facilitates direct diffusion of nutrients to all cells. 

The flatworm's dorso-ventrally flattened body shape also restricts the distance of any cell from the digestive system or the exterior of the organism. 

Oxygen can diffuse from the surrounding water into the cells, and carbon dioxide can diffuse out. 

Consequently, every cell is able to obtain nutrients, water and oxygen without the need of a transport system.
Some animals, such as jellyfish, have more extensive branching from their gastrovascular cavity (which functions as both a place of digestion and a form of circulation), this branching allows for bodily fluids to reach the outer layers, since the digestion begins in the inner layers.


== History ==


The earliest known writings on the circulatory system are found in the Ebers Papyrus (16th century BCE), an ancient Egyptian medical papyrus containing over 700 prescriptions and remedies, both physical and spiritual. 

In the papyrus, it acknowledges the connection of the heart to the arteries. 

The Egyptians thought air came in through the mouth and into the lungs and heart. 

From the heart, the air travelled to every member through the arteries. 

Although this concept of the circulatory system is only partially correct, it represents one of the earliest accounts of scientific thought.
In the 6th century BCE, the knowledge of circulation of vital fluids through the body was known to the Ayurvedic physician Sushruta in ancient India. 

He also seems to have possessed knowledge of the arteries, described as 'channels' by Dwivedi & Dwivedi (2007). 

The valves of the heart were discovered by a physician of the Hippocratean school around the 4th century BCE. 

However, their function was not properly understood then. 

Because blood pools in the veins after death, arteries look empty. 

Ancient anatomists assumed they were filled with air and that they were for the transport of air.
The Greek physician, Herophilus, distinguished veins from arteries but thought that the pulse was a property of arteries themselves. 

Greek anatomist Erasistratus observed that arteries that were cut during life bleed. 

He ascribed the fact to the phenomenon that air escaping from an artery is replaced with blood that enters between veins and arteries by very small vessels. 

Thus he apparently postulated capillaries but with reversed flow of blood.In 2nd-century AD Rome, the Greek physician Galen knew that blood vessels carried blood and identified venous (dark red) and arterial (brighter and thinner) blood, each with distinct and separate functions. 

Growth and energy were derived from venous blood created in the liver from chyle, while arterial blood gave vitality by containing pneuma (air) and originated in the heart. 

Blood flowed from both creating organs to all parts of the body where it was consumed and there was no return of blood to the heart or liver. 

The heart did not pump blood around, the heart's motion sucked blood in during diastole and the blood moved by the pulsation of the arteries themselves.
Galen believed that the arterial blood was created by venous blood passing from the left ventricle to the right by passing through 'pores' in the interventricular septum, air passed from the lungs via the pulmonary artery to the left side of the heart. 

As the arterial blood was created 'sooty' vapors were created and passed to the lungs also via the pulmonary artery to be exhaled.
In 1025, The Canon of Medicine by the Persian physician, Avicenna, "erroneously accepted the Greek notion regarding the existence of a hole in the ventricular septum by which the blood traveled between the ventricles." Despite this, Avicenna "correctly wrote on the cardiac cycles and valvular function", and "had a vision of blood circulation" in his Treatise on Pulse. 

While also refining Galen's erroneous theory of the pulse, Avicenna provided the first correct explanation of pulsation: "Every beat of the pulse comprises two movements and two pauses. 

Thus, expansion : pause : contraction : pause. [...] The pulse is a movement in the heart and arteries ... which takes the form of alternate expansion and contraction."In 1242, the Arabian physician, Ibn al-Nafis described the process of pulmonary circulation in greater, more accurate detail than his predecessors, though he believed, as they did, in the notion of vital spirit (pneuma), which he believed was formed in the left ventricle. 

Ibn al-Nafis stated in his Commentary on Anatomy in Avicenna's Canon:

"...the blood from the right chamber of the heart must arrive at the left chamber but there is no direct pathway between them. 

The thick septum of the heart is not perforated and does not have visible pores as some people thought or invisible pores as Galen thought. 

The blood from the right chamber must flow through the vena arteriosa (pulmonary artery) to the lungs, spread through its substances, be mingled there with air, pass through the arteria venosa (pulmonary vein) to reach the left chamber of the heart and there form the vital spirit..."
In addition, Ibn al-Nafis had an insight into what would become a larger theory of the capillary circulation. 

He stated that "there must be small communications or pores (manafidh in Arabic) between the pulmonary artery and vein," a prediction that preceded the discovery of the capillary system by more than 400 years. 

Ibn al-Nafis' theory, however, was confined to blood transit in the lungs and did not extend to the entire body.
Michael Servetus was the first European to describe the function of pulmonary circulation, although his achievement was not widely recognized at the time, for a few reasons. 

He firstly described it in the "Manuscript of Paris" (near 1546), but this work was never published. 

And later he published this description, but in a theological treatise, Christianismi Restitutio, not in a book on medicine. 

Only three copies of the book survived but these remained hidden for decades, the rest were burned shortly after its publication in 1553 because of persecution of Servetus by religious authorities.
Better known discovery of pulmonary circulation was by Vesalius's successor at Padua, Realdo Colombo, in 1559.

Finally, the English physician William Harvey, a pupil of Hieronymus Fabricius (who had earlier described the valves of the veins without recognizing their function), performed a sequence of experiments and published his Exercitatio Anatomica de Motu Cordis et Sanguinis in Animalibus in 1628, which "demonstrated that there had to be a direct connection between the venous and arterial systems throughout the body, and not just the lungs. 

Most importantly, he argued that the beat of the heart produced a continuous circulation of blood through minute connections at the extremities of the body. 

This is a conceptual leap that was quite different from Ibn al-Nafis' refinement of the anatomy and bloodflow in the heart and lungs." This work, with its essentially correct exposition, slowly convinced the medical world. 

However, Harvey was not able to identify the capillary system connecting arteries and veins; these were later discovered by Marcello Malpighi in 1661.
In 1956, André Frédéric Cournand, Werner Forssmann and Dickinson W. 

Richards were awarded the Nobel Prize in Medicine "for their discoveries concerning heart catheterization and pathological changes in the circulatory system."
In his Nobel lecture, Forssmann credits Harvey as birthing cardiology with the publication of his book in 1628.In the 1970s, Diana McSherry developed computer-based systems to create images of the circulatory system and heart without the need for surgery.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Circulatory_system
;;;ES;;;



SISTEMA CIRCULATORIO


El sistema circulatorio de la sangre es un sistema de órganos que incluye el corazón, los vasos sanguíneos y la sangre que circula por todo el cuerpo de un humano u otro vertebrado.

Incluye el sistema cardiovascular, o sistema vascular, que consiste en el corazón y los vasos sanguíneos (del griego kardia que significa corazón y del latín vascula que significa vasos).

El sistema circulatorio tiene dos divisiones, una circulación o circuito sistémico y una circulación o circuito pulmonar.

Algunas fuentes usan los términos sistema cardiovascular y sistema vascular indistintamente con el sistema circulatorio. La red de vasos sanguíneos son los grandes vasos del corazón, incluidas las grandes arterias elásticas y las grandes venas; otras arterias, arteriolas más pequeñas,
capilares que se unen con vénulas (pequeñas venas) y otras venas.

El sistema circulatorio está cerrado en los vertebrados, lo que significa que la sangre nunca sale de la red de vasos sanguíneos.

Algunos invertebrados como los artrópodos tienen un sistema circulatorio abierto.

Los diploblastos como las esponjas y las medusas en peine carecen de un sistema circulatorio.
La sangre es un líquido que consiste en plasma, glóbulos rojos, glóbulos blancos y plaquetas que circula por todo el cuerpo transportando oxígeno y nutrientes a los tejidos y eliminando los materiales de desecho.

Los nutrientes circulados incluyen proteínas y minerales, otros componentes transportados son gases como oxígeno y dióxido de carbono, hormonas y hemoglobina; proporcionando nutrición, ayuda en el sistema inmunológico para combatir enfermedades y en el mantenimiento de la homeostasis al estabilizar la temperatura y el pH natural.
En los vertebrados, complementario al sistema circulatorio es el sistema linfático.

Este sistema transporta el exceso de plasma filtrado de los capilares como líquido intersticial entre las células, lejos de los tejidos corporales en una vía accesoria para devolver el exceso de líquido a la circulación sanguínea como linfa.

El paso de la linfa tarda mucho más que el de la sangre.

El sistema linfático es un subsistema fundamental para el funcionamiento del sistema circulatorio sanguíneo; sin ella, la sangre se quedaría sin líquido.

El sistema linfático trabaja en conjunto con el sistema inmunológico.

A diferencia del sistema circulatorio cerrado, el sistema linfático es un sistema abierto.

Algunas fuentes lo describen como un sistema circulatorio secundario.
El sistema circulatorio puede verse afectado por muchas enfermedades cardiovasculares.

Los cardiólogos son profesionales médicos que se especializan en el corazón, y los cirujanos cardiotorácicos se especializan en operar el corazón y sus áreas circundantes.

Los cirujanos vasculares se enfocan en otras partes del sistema circulatorio.


== Estructura ==


El sistema circulatorio incluye el corazón, los vasos sanguíneos y la sangre.

El sistema cardiovascular en todos los vertebrados, consiste en el corazón y los vasos sanguíneos.

El sistema circulatorio se divide además en dos circuitos principales: una circulación pulmonar y una circulación sistémica.

La circulación pulmonar es un circuito que va desde el corazón derecho que lleva sangre desoxigenada a los pulmones, donde se oxigena y se devuelve al corazón izquierdo.

La circulación sistémica es un circuito que transporta sangre oxigenada desde el lado izquierdo del corazón al resto del cuerpo y devuelve sangre desoxigenada al lado derecho del corazón a través de grandes venas conocidas como venae cavae.

La circulación sistémica también se puede definir en dos partes: una macrocirculación y una microcirculación.

Un adulto promedio contiene de cinco a seis cuartos (aproximadamente 4,7 a 5,7 litros) de sangre, lo que representa aproximadamente el 7% de su peso corporal total.

La sangre se compone de plasma, glóbulos rojos, glóbulos blancos y plaquetas.

El sistema digestivo también trabaja con el sistema circulatorio para proporcionar los nutrientes que el sistema necesita para mantener el corazón bombeando. Se asocian otras rutas circulatorias, como la circulación coronaria al corazón mismo, la circulación cerebral al cerebro, la circulación renal a los riñones , y circulación bronquial a los bronquios en los pulmones.
El sistema circulatorio humano está cerrado, lo que significa que la sangre está contenida dentro de la red vascular.

Los nutrientes viajan a través de diminutos vasos sanguíneos de la microcirculación para llegar a los órganos.

El sistema linfático es un subsistema esencial del sistema circulatorio que consta de una red de vasos linfáticos, ganglios linfáticos, órganos, tejidos y linfa circulante.

Este subsistema es un sistema abierto.

Una función principal es transportar la linfa, drenar y devolver el líquido intersticial a los conductos linfáticos de regreso al corazón para regresar al sistema circulatorio.

Otra función importante es trabajar junto con el sistema inmunitario para brindar defensa contra los patógenos.


=== Corazón ===


El corazón bombea sangre a todas las partes del cuerpo proporcionando nutrientes y oxígeno a cada célula y eliminando los productos de desecho.

El corazón izquierdo bombea sangre oxigenada que regresa de los pulmones al resto del cuerpo en la circulación sistémica.

El corazón derecho bombea sangre desoxigenada a los pulmones en la circulación pulmonar.

En el corazón humano hay una aurícula y un ventrículo para cada circulación, y tanto en la circulación sistémica como en la pulmonar hay cuatro cámaras en total: aurícula izquierda, ventrículo izquierdo, aurícula derecha y ventrículo derecho.

La aurícula derecha es la cámara superior del lado derecho del corazón.

La sangre que regresa a la aurícula derecha está desoxigenada (pobre en oxígeno) y pasa al ventrículo derecho para ser bombeada a través de la arteria pulmonar hacia los pulmones para reoxigenación y eliminación de dióxido de carbono.

La aurícula izquierda recibe sangre recién oxigenada de los pulmones, así como de la vena pulmonar, que pasa al fuerte ventrículo izquierdo para ser bombeada a través de la aorta a los diferentes órganos del cuerpo.


==== Circulación pulmonar ====

La circulación pulmonar es la parte del sistema cardiovascular en la que la sangre sin oxígeno es bombeada desde el corazón, a través de la arteria pulmonar, hacia los pulmones y regresa, oxigenada, al corazón a través de la vena pulmonar.
La sangre privada de oxígeno de la vena cava superior e inferior ingresa a la aurícula derecha del corazón y fluye a través de la válvula tricúspide (válvula atrioventricular derecha) hacia el ventrículo derecho, desde donde luego se bombea a través de la válvula semilunar pulmonar hacia la arteria pulmonar para los pulmones.

El intercambio de gases se produce en los pulmones, por lo que se libera CO2 de la sangre y se absorbe oxígeno.

La vena pulmonar devuelve la sangre ahora rica en oxígeno a la aurícula izquierda. Un sistema separado conocido como circulación bronquial suministra sangre al tejido de las vías respiratorias más grandes del pulmón.


==== Circulación sistémica ====

La circulación sistémica es la parte del sistema cardiovascular que transporta la sangre oxigenada desde el corazón a través de la aorta desde el ventrículo izquierdo, donde la sangre se ha depositado previamente desde la circulación pulmonar, al resto del cuerpo y devuelve la sangre sin oxígeno a el corazón.


=== Vasos sanguíneos ===

Los vasos sanguíneos del sistema circulatorio son las arterias, las venas y los capilares.

Las grandes arterias y venas que llevan sangre hacia y desde el corazón se conocen como grandes vasos.


==== Arterias ====

La sangre oxigenada ingresa a la circulación sistémica al salir del ventrículo izquierdo, a través de la válvula semilunar aórtica.

La primera parte de la circulación sistémica es la aorta, una arteria masiva y de paredes gruesas.

La aorta se arquea y da ramas que irrigan la parte superior del cuerpo después de pasar a través de la abertura aórtica del diafragma al nivel de la vértebra torácica diez, ingresa al abdomen.

Posteriormente, desciende y da ramas al abdomen, la pelvis, el perineo y las extremidades inferiores. Las paredes de la aorta son elásticas.

Esta elasticidad ayuda a mantener la presión arterial en todo el cuerpo.

Cuando la aorta recibe casi cinco litros de sangre del corazón, retrocede y es responsable de la presión arterial pulsante.

A medida que la aorta se ramifica en arterias más pequeñas, su elasticidad disminuye y su distensibilidad aumenta.


==== Capilares ====
Las arterias se ramifican en pequeños pasajes llamados arteriolas y luego en los capilares.

Los capilares se unen para llevar sangre al sistema venoso.


==== Venas ====

Los capilares se fusionan en vénulas, que se fusionan en venas.

El sistema venoso alimenta las dos venas principales: la vena cava superior, que drena principalmente los tejidos por encima del corazón, y la vena cava inferior, que drena principalmente los tejidos por debajo del corazón.

Estas dos grandes venas desembocan en la aurícula derecha del corazón.


==== Venas porta ====

La regla general es que las arterias del corazón se ramifican en capilares, que se juntan en venas que regresan al corazón.

Las venas porta son una pequeña excepción a esto.

En los humanos, el único ejemplo significativo es la vena porta hepática que se combina con los capilares alrededor del tracto gastrointestinal donde la sangre absorbe los diversos productos de la digestión; en lugar de conducir directamente de regreso al corazón, la vena porta hepática se ramifica en un segundo sistema capilar en el hígado.


==== Circulación coronaria ====

El corazón mismo recibe oxígeno y nutrientes a través de un pequeño "bucle" de la circulación sistémica y se deriva muy poco de la sangre contenida dentro de las cuatro cámaras.
El sistema de circulación coronaria proporciona un suministro de sangre al propio músculo cardíaco.

La circulación coronaria comienza cerca del origen de la aorta por dos arterias coronarias: la arteria coronaria derecha y la arteria coronaria izquierda.

Después de nutrir el músculo cardíaco, la sangre regresa por las venas coronarias al seno coronario y de éste a la aurícula derecha.

La válvula de Tebesio impide el reflujo de sangre a través de su abertura durante la sístole auricular.

Las venas cardíacas más pequeñas drenan directamente en las cámaras del corazón.


==== Circulación cerebral ====

El cerebro tiene un suministro de sangre dual, una circulación anterior y posterior de las arterias en su parte anterior y posterior.

La circulación anterior surge de las arterias carótidas internas para irrigar la parte frontal del cerebro.

La circulación posterior surge de las arterias vertebrales, para irrigar la parte posterior del cerebro y el tronco encefálico.

La circulación anterior y posterior se unen (anastomizan) en el polígono de Willis.


==== Circulación renal ====
La circulación renal es el suministro de sangre a los riñones, contiene muchos vasos sanguíneos especializados y recibe alrededor del 20% del gasto cardíaco.

Se ramifica desde la aorta abdominal y devuelve la sangre a la vena cava ascendente.


== Desarrollo ==


El desarrollo del sistema circulatorio comienza con la vasculogénesis en el embrión.

Los sistemas arterial y venoso humanos se desarrollan a partir de diferentes áreas del embrión.

El sistema arterial se desarrolla principalmente a partir de los arcos aórticos, seis pares de arcos que se desarrollan en la parte superior del embrión.

El sistema venoso surge de tres venas bilaterales durante las semanas 4 a 8 de la embriogénesis.

La circulación fetal comienza dentro de la octava semana de desarrollo.

La circulación fetal no incluye los pulmones, que se desvían a través del tronco arterioso.

Antes del nacimiento, el feto obtiene oxígeno (y nutrientes) de la madre a través de la placenta y el cordón umbilical.


=== Arterias ===


El sistema arterial humano se origina en los arcos aórticos y en las aortas dorsales a partir de la semana 4 de vida embrionaria.

Los arcos aórticos primero y segundo retroceden y forman solo las arterias maxilares y las arterias estapediales, respectivamente.

El propio sistema arterial surge de los arcos aórticos 3, 4 y 6 (el arco aórtico 5 retrocede completamente).
Las aortas dorsales, presentes en el lado dorsal del embrión, inicialmente están presentes en ambos lados del embrión.

Posteriormente se fusionan para formar la base de la propia aorta.

Aproximadamente treinta arterias más pequeñas se ramifican en la parte posterior y los lados.

Estas ramas forman las arterias intercostales, las arterias de los brazos y las piernas, las arterias lumbares y las arterias sacras laterales.

Las ramas a los lados de la aorta formarán las arterias renal, suprarrenal y gonadal definitivas.

Finalmente, las ramas en el frente de la aorta consisten en las arterias vitelinas y las arterias umbilicales.

Las arterias vitelinas forman las arterias celíaca, mesentérica superior e inferior del tracto gastrointestinal.

Después del nacimiento, las arterias umbilicales formarán las arterias ilíacas internas.


=== Venas ===


El sistema venoso humano se desarrolla principalmente a partir de las venas vitelinas, las venas umbilicales y las venas cardinales, todas las cuales desembocan en el seno venoso.


== Función ==


Alrededor del 98,5% del oxígeno en una muestra de sangre arterial de un ser humano sano que respira aire a la presión del nivel del mar se combina químicamente con moléculas de hemoglobina.

Alrededor del 1,5% se disuelve físicamente en los otros líquidos sanguíneos y no está conectado a la hemoglobina.

La molécula de hemoglobina es el principal transportador de oxígeno en los vertebrados.


== Importancia clínica ==


Muchas enfermedades afectan el sistema circulatorio.

Estos incluyen una serie de enfermedades cardiovasculares, que afectan el corazón y los vasos sanguíneos; enfermedades hematológicas que afectan a la sangre, como la anemia, y enfermedades linfáticas que afectan al sistema linfático.

Los cardiólogos son profesionales médicos que se especializan en el corazón, y los cirujanos cardiotorácicos se especializan en operar el corazón y sus áreas circundantes.

Los cirujanos vasculares se enfocan en los vasos sanguíneos.


=== Enfermedad cardiovascular ===


Las enfermedades que afectan al sistema cardiovascular se denominan enfermedades cardiovasculares.
Muchas de estas enfermedades se denominan "enfermedades relacionadas con el estilo de vida" porque se desarrollan con el tiempo y están relacionadas con los hábitos de ejercicio, la dieta, el hábito de fumar y otras opciones de estilo de vida de una persona.

La aterosclerosis es el precursor de muchas de estas enfermedades.

Es donde se acumulan pequeñas placas de ateroma en las paredes de las arterias medianas y grandes.

Esto eventualmente puede crecer o romperse para ocluir las arterias.

También es un factor de riesgo para los síndromes coronarios agudos, que son enfermedades que se caracterizan por un déficit repentino de sangre oxigenada al tejido cardíaco.

La aterosclerosis también se asocia con problemas como la formación de aneurismas o la división ("disección") de las arterias.
Otra enfermedad cardiovascular importante implica la creación de un coágulo, llamado "trombo".

Estos pueden originarse en venas o arterias.

La trombosis venosa profunda, que ocurre principalmente en las piernas, es una de las causas de los coágulos en las venas de las piernas, especialmente cuando una persona ha estado inmóvil durante mucho tiempo.

Estos coágulos pueden embolizarse, es decir, viajar a otro lugar del cuerpo.

Los resultados de esto pueden incluir embolia pulmonar, ataques isquémicos transitorios o accidente cerebrovascular.
Las enfermedades cardiovasculares también pueden ser de naturaleza congénita, como defectos cardíacos o circulación fetal persistente, donde los cambios circulatorios que se supone que ocurren después del nacimiento no ocurren.

No todos los cambios congénitos del sistema circulatorio están asociados con enfermedades, un gran número son variaciones anatómicas.


=== Investigaciones ===


La función y la salud del sistema circulatorio y sus partes se miden en una variedad de formas manuales y automatizadas.

Estos incluyen métodos simples como los que forman parte del examen cardiovascular, incluida la toma del pulso de una persona como indicador de la frecuencia cardíaca de una persona, la toma de la presión arterial a través de un esfigmomanómetro o el uso de un estetoscopio para escuchar el corazón. para soplos que pueden indicar problemas con las válvulas del corazón.

También se puede usar un electrocardiograma para evaluar la forma en que se conduce la electricidad a través del corazón.
También se pueden utilizar otros medios más invasivos.

Se puede usar una cánula o catéter insertado en una arteria para medir la presión del pulso o las presiones de enclavamiento pulmonar.

La angiografía, que consiste en inyectar un tinte en una arteria para visualizar un árbol arterial, se puede usar en el corazón (angiografía coronaria) o en el cerebro.

Al mismo tiempo que se visualizan las arterias, los bloqueos o estrechamientos pueden corregirse mediante la inserción de stents, y las hemorragias activas pueden controlarse mediante la inserción de espirales.

Se puede usar una resonancia magnética para obtener imágenes de las arterias, lo que se denomina angiografía por resonancia magnética.

Para evaluar el suministro de sangre a los pulmones, se puede usar un angiograma pulmonar por TC.

La ecografía vascular se puede utilizar para investigar enfermedades vasculares que afectan al sistema venoso y al sistema arterial, incluido el diagnóstico de estenosis, trombosis o insuficiencia venosa.

Una ecografía intravascular con un catéter también es una opción.


=== Cirugía ===

Hay una serie de procedimientos quirúrgicos realizados en el sistema circulatorio:

Cirugía de bypass de la arteria coronaria
Stent coronario utilizado en angioplastia
Cirugía vascular
pelado de venas
Procedimientos estéticos Es más probable que los procedimientos cardiovasculares se realicen en un entorno hospitalario que en un entorno de atención ambulatoria; en los Estados Unidos, solo el 28% de las cirugías cardiovasculares se realizaron en el entorno de atención ambulatoria.


== Sociedad y cultura ==

En la antigua Grecia, se pensaba que el corazón era la fuente de calor innato del cuerpo.
El sistema circulatorio tal como lo conocemos fue descubierto por William Harvey.


== Otros animales ==


Mientras que los humanos, al igual que otros vertebrados, tienen un sistema circulatorio sanguíneo cerrado (lo que significa que la sangre nunca sale de la red de arterias, venas y capilares), algunos grupos de invertebrados tienen un sistema circulatorio abierto que contiene un corazón pero vasos sanguíneos limitados.

Los filos de animales diploblásticos más primitivos carecen de sistemas circulatorios.
Un sistema de transporte adicional, el sistema linfático, que solo se encuentra en animales con circulación sanguínea cerrada, es un sistema abierto que proporciona una ruta accesoria para que el exceso de líquido intersticial regrese a la sangre. El sistema vascular sanguíneo apareció por primera vez probablemente en un antepasado de los triploblastos hace más de 600 millones de años, superando las limitaciones de tiempo y distancia de la difusión, mientras que el endotelio evolucionó en un vertebrado ancestral hace unos 540-510 millones de años.


=== Sistema circulatorio abierto ===


En los artrópodos, el sistema circulatorio abierto es un sistema en el que un fluido en una cavidad llamada hemocoel baña los órganos directamente con oxígeno y nutrientes, sin distinción entre sangre y fluido intersticial; este líquido combinado se llama hemolinfa o hemolinfa.

Los movimientos musculares del animal durante la locomoción pueden facilitar el movimiento de la hemolinfa, pero el desvío del flujo de un área a otra es limitado.

Cuando el corazón se relaja, la sangre regresa al corazón a través de los poros abiertos (ostia).
La hemolinfa llena todo el hemocele interior del cuerpo y rodea todas las células.

La hemolinfa está compuesta de agua, sales inorgánicas (principalmente sodio, cloruro, potasio, magnesio y calcio) y compuestos orgánicos (principalmente carbohidratos, proteínas y lípidos).

La principal molécula transportadora de oxígeno es la hemocianina.
Hay células que flotan libremente, los hemocitos, dentro de la hemolinfa.

Desempeñan un papel en el sistema inmunológico de los artrópodos.


=== Sistema circulatorio cerrado ===


Los sistemas circulatorios de todos los vertebrados, así como de los anélidos (por ejemplo, lombrices de tierra) y cefalópodos (calamares, pulpos y parientes) siempre mantienen su sangre circulante encerrada dentro de las cámaras del corazón o vasos sanguíneos y se clasifican como cerrados, al igual que en los humanos.

Aún así, los sistemas de peces, anfibios, reptiles y aves muestran varias etapas de la evolución del sistema circulatorio.

Los sistemas cerrados permiten dirigir la sangre a los órganos que lo requieren.
En los peces, el sistema tiene un solo circuito, y la sangre se bombea a través de los capilares de las branquias hacia los capilares de los tejidos corporales.

Esto se conoce como circulación de ciclo único.

El corazón de pescado es, por lo tanto, una sola bomba (que consta de dos cámaras).
En los anfibios y la mayoría de los reptiles se utiliza un sistema circulatorio doble, pero el corazón no siempre está completamente separado en dos bombas.

Los anfibios tienen un corazón de tres cámaras.
En los reptiles, el tabique ventricular del corazón está incompleto y la arteria pulmonar está equipada con un músculo esfínter.

Esto permite una segunda ruta posible de flujo sanguíneo.

En lugar de que la sangre fluya a través de la arteria pulmonar hacia los pulmones, el esfínter puede contraerse para desviar este flujo de sangre a través del tabique ventricular incompleto hacia el ventrículo izquierdo y hacia afuera a través de la aorta.

Esto significa que la sangre fluye de los capilares al corazón y de regreso a los capilares en lugar de a los pulmones.

Este proceso es útil para los animales ectotérmicos (de sangre fría) en la regulación de su temperatura corporal.
Los mamíferos, las aves y los cocodrilos muestran una separación completa del corazón en dos bombas, para un total de cuatro cámaras cardíacas; se cree que el corazón de cuatro cámaras de las aves y los cocodrilos evolucionó independientemente del de los mamíferos.

Los sistemas circulatorios dobles permiten que la sangre se vuelva a presurizar después de regresar de los pulmones, lo que acelera el suministro de oxígeno a los tejidos.


=== Sin sistema circulatorio ===

Los sistemas circulatorios están ausentes en algunos animales, incluidos los platelmintos.

Su cavidad corporal no tiene revestimiento ni líquido encerrado.

En cambio, una faringe muscular conduce a un sistema digestivo ampliamente ramificado que facilita la difusión directa de nutrientes a todas las células.

La forma del cuerpo aplanado dorsoventralmente del platelminto también restringe la distancia de cualquier célula del sistema digestivo o del exterior del organismo.

El oxígeno puede difundirse desde el agua circundante hacia las células y el dióxido de carbono puede difundirse hacia afuera.

En consecuencia, cada célula es capaz de obtener nutrientes, agua y oxígeno sin necesidad de un sistema de transporte.
Algunos animales, como las medusas, tienen ramificaciones más extensas desde su cavidad gastrovascular (que funciona como un lugar de digestión y una forma de circulación), esta ramificación permite que los fluidos corporales lleguen a las capas externas, ya que la digestión comienza en el interior. capas.


== Historia ==


Los escritos más antiguos que se conocen sobre el sistema circulatorio se encuentran en el Papiro de Ebers (siglo XVI a. C.), un antiguo papiro médico egipcio que contiene más de 700 recetas y remedios, tanto físicos como espirituales.

En el papiro reconoce la conexión del corazón con las arterias.

Los egipcios pensaban que el aire entraba por la boca y entraba en los pulmones y el corazón.

Desde el corazón, el aire viajó a cada miembro a través de las arterias.

Aunque este concepto del sistema circulatorio es solo parcialmente correcto, representa uno de los primeros relatos del pensamiento científico.
En el siglo VI a. C., el médico ayurvédico Sushruta en la India antigua conocía el conocimiento de la circulación de fluidos vitales a través del cuerpo.

También parece haber tenido conocimiento de las arterias, descritas como 'canales' por Dwivedi & Dwivedi (2007).

Las válvulas del corazón fueron descubiertas por un médico de la escuela hipocrática alrededor del siglo IV a.

Sin embargo, su función no se entendió correctamente entonces.

Debido a que la sangre se acumula en las venas después de la muerte, las arterias se ven vacías.

Los anatomistas antiguos asumieron que estaban llenos de aire y que eran para el transporte de aire.
El médico griego Herófilo distinguió las venas de las arterias pero pensó que el pulso era una propiedad de las arterias mismas.

El anatomista griego Erasístrato observó que las arterias que se cortaban durante la vida sangraban.

Atribuyó el hecho al fenómeno de que el aire que escapa de una arteria es reemplazado por sangre que entra entre las venas y las arterias por medio de vasos muy pequeños.

Por lo tanto, aparentemente postuló los capilares pero con el flujo inverso de la sangre. En la Roma del siglo II d. C., el médico griego Galeno sabía que los vasos sanguíneos transportaban sangre e identificó la sangre venosa (roja oscura) y arterial (más brillante y más delgada), cada una con distinto y separado funciones

El crecimiento y la energía se derivaban de la sangre venosa creada en el hígado a partir del quilo, mientras que la sangre arterial daba vitalidad al contener pneuma (aire) y se originaba en el corazón.

La sangre fluía de ambos órganos creadores a todas las partes del cuerpo donde se consumía y no había retorno de sangre al corazón o al hígado.

El corazón no bombeaba sangre, el movimiento del corazón aspiraba sangre durante la diástole y la sangre se movía por la pulsación de las propias arterias.
Galen creía que la sangre arterial era creada por la sangre venosa que pasaba del ventrículo izquierdo al derecho pasando a través de 'poros' en el tabique interventricular, el aire pasaba de los pulmones a través de la arteria pulmonar al lado izquierdo del corazón.

A medida que se creaba la sangre arterial, se creaban vapores "hollín" que pasaban a los pulmones también a través de la arteria pulmonar para ser exhalados.
En 1025, El Canon de Medicina del médico persa Avicena, "aceptó erróneamente la noción griega sobre la existencia de un orificio en el tabique ventricular por el cual la sangre viajaba entre los ventrículos". A pesar de esto, Avicena "escribió correctamente sobre los ciclos cardíacos y la función valvular", y "tuvo una visión de la circulación sanguínea" en su Tratado sobre el pulso.

Mientras también refinaba la teoría errónea del pulso de Galeno, Avicena proporcionó la primera explicación correcta de la pulsación: "Cada latido del pulso comprende dos movimientos y dos pausas.

Así, expansión : pausa : contracción : pausa. [...] El pulso es un movimiento en el corazón y las arterias... que toma la forma de expansión y contracción alternas". En 1242, el médico árabe Ibn al-Nafis describió el proceso de circulación pulmonar en mayor, más detalles más precisos que sus predecesores, aunque creía, como ellos, en la noción de espíritu vital (pneuma), que creía que se formaba en el ventrículo izquierdo.

Ibn al-Nafis declaró en su Comentario sobre anatomía en el Canon de Avicena:

"...la sangre de la cámara derecha del corazón debe llegar a la cámara izquierda pero no hay un camino directo entre ellas.

El grueso tabique del corazón no está perforado y no tiene poros visibles como pensaban algunas personas o poros invisibles como pensaba Galeno.

La sangre de la cámara derecha debe fluir a través de la vena arteriosa (arteria pulmonar) hacia los pulmones, esparcirse a través de sus sustancias, mezclarse allí con el aire, pasar por la arteria venosa (vena pulmonar) para llegar a la cámara izquierda del corazón y allí formar el espíritu vital..."
Además, Ibn al-Nafis tuvo una idea de lo que se convertiría en una teoría más amplia de la circulación capilar.

Afirmó que "debe haber pequeñas comunicaciones o poros (manafidh en árabe) entre la arteria y la vena pulmonares", una predicción que precedió al descubrimiento del sistema capilar por más de 400 años.

La teoría de Ibn al-Nafis, sin embargo, se limitaba al tránsito de sangre en los pulmones y no se extendía a todo el cuerpo.
Michael Servetus fue el primer europeo en describir la función de la circulación pulmonar, aunque su logro no fue ampliamente reconocido en ese momento, por varias razones.

Primero lo describió en el "Manuscrito de París" (cerca de 1546), pero este trabajo nunca fue publicado.

Y más tarde publicó esta descripción, pero en un tratado teológico, Christianismi Restitutio, no en un libro de medicina.

Solo sobrevivieron tres copias del libro, pero permanecieron ocultas durante décadas, el resto fue quemado poco después de su publicación en 1553 debido a la persecución de Servet por parte de las autoridades religiosas.
El descubrimiento más conocido de la circulación pulmonar fue realizado por el sucesor de Vesalio en Padua, Realdo Colombo, en 1559.

Finalmente, el médico inglés William Harvey, alumno de Hieronymus Fabricius (quien antes había descrito las válvulas de las venas sin reconocer su función), realizó una secuencia de experimentos y publicó su Exercitatio Anatomica de Motu Cordis et Sanguinis en Animalibus en 1628, que "demostró que tenía que haber una conexión directa entre los sistemas venoso y arterial en todo el cuerpo, y no solo en los pulmones.

Más importante aún, argumentó que el latido del corazón producía una circulación continua de sangre a través de conexiones diminutas en las extremidades del cuerpo.

Este es un salto conceptual que fue bastante diferente del refinamiento de Ibn al-Nafis de la anatomía y el flujo sanguíneo en el corazón y los pulmones". Este trabajo, con su exposición esencialmente correcta, convenció lentamente al mundo médico.

Sin embargo, Harvey no pudo identificar el sistema capilar que conecta las arterias y las venas; estos fueron descubiertos más tarde por Marcello Malpighi en 1661.
En 1956, André Frédéric Cournand, Werner Forssmann y Dickinson W.

Richards recibió el Premio Nobel de Medicina "por sus descubrimientos sobre el cateterismo cardíaco y los cambios patológicos en el sistema circulatorio".
En su discurso del Nobel, Forssmann atribuye a Harvey el nacimiento de la cardiología con la publicación de su libro en 1628. En la década de 1970, Diana McSherry desarrolló sistemas informáticos para crear imágenes del sistema circulatorio y el corazón sin necesidad de cirugía.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Circulatory_system

;;;PT;;;



SISTEMA CIRCULATÓRIO


O sistema circulatório sanguíneo é um sistema de órgãos que inclui o coração, vasos sanguíneos e sangue que circula por todo o corpo de um ser humano ou outro vertebrado.

Inclui o sistema cardiovascular, ou sistema vascular, que consiste no coração e vasos sanguíneos (do grego kardia que significa coração e do latim vascula que significa vasos).

O sistema circulatório tem duas divisões, uma circulação ou circuito sistêmico e uma circulação ou circuito pulmonar.

Algumas fontes usam os termos sistema cardiovascular e sistema vascular de forma intercambiável com o sistema circulatório. A rede de vasos sanguíneos são os grandes vasos do coração, incluindo grandes artérias elásticas e grandes veias; outras artérias, arteríolas menores,
capilares que se unem a vênulas (pequenas veias) e outras veias.

O sistema circulatório é fechado nos vertebrados, o que significa que o sangue nunca sai da rede de vasos sanguíneos.

Alguns invertebrados, como os artrópodes, têm um sistema circulatório aberto.

Diploblastos como esponjas e geleias de pente não possuem sistema circulatório.
O sangue é um fluido composto por plasma, glóbulos vermelhos, glóbulos brancos e plaquetas que circula pelo corpo transportando oxigênio e nutrientes para os tecidos e eliminando os resíduos.

Os nutrientes circulados incluem proteínas e minerais, outros componentes transportados são gases como oxigênio e dióxido de carbono, hormônios e hemoglobina; fornecendo nutrição, ajuda no sistema imunológico para combater doenças e na manutenção da homeostase, estabilizando a temperatura e o pH natural.
Nos vertebrados, complementar ao sistema circulatório é o sistema linfático.

Este sistema transporta o excesso de plasma filtrado dos capilares como fluido intersticial entre as células, para longe dos tecidos do corpo em uma via acessória para devolver o excesso de fluido de volta à circulação sanguínea como linfa.

A passagem da linfa leva muito mais tempo do que a do sangue.

O sistema linfático é um subsistema essencial para o funcionamento do sistema circulatório sanguíneo; sem ela, o sangue ficaria sem fluido.

O sistema linfático trabalha em conjunto com o sistema imunológico.

Ao contrário do sistema circulatório fechado, o sistema linfático é um sistema aberto.

Algumas fontes descrevem-no como um sistema circulatório secundário.
O sistema circulatório pode ser afetado por muitas doenças cardiovasculares.

Os cardiologistas são profissionais médicos especializados no coração, e os cirurgiões cardiotorácicos se especializam em operar o coração e seus arredores.

Os cirurgiões vasculares se concentram em outras partes do sistema circulatório.


== Estrutura ==


O sistema circulatório inclui o coração, os vasos sanguíneos e o sangue.

O sistema cardiovascular em todos os vertebrados, consiste no coração e vasos sanguíneos.

O sistema circulatório é dividido em dois circuitos principais – uma circulação pulmonar e uma circulação sistêmica.

A circulação pulmonar é um circuito do coração direito que leva sangue desoxigenado para os pulmões, onde é oxigenado e retorna ao coração esquerdo.

A circulação sistêmica é um circuito que fornece sangue oxigenado do coração esquerdo para o resto do corpo e retorna o sangue desoxigenado de volta ao coração direito por meio de grandes veias conhecidas como veias cavas.

A circulação sistêmica também pode ser definida como duas partes – uma macrocirculação e uma microcirculação.

Um adulto médio contém cinco a seis quartos (aproximadamente 4,7 a 5,7 litros) de sangue, representando aproximadamente 7% do seu peso corporal total.

O sangue consiste em plasma, glóbulos vermelhos, glóbulos brancos e plaquetas.

O sistema digestivo também trabalha com o sistema circulatório para fornecer os nutrientes que o sistema precisa para manter o coração bombeando. Outras vias circulatórias estão associadas, como a circulação coronariana para o próprio coração, a circulação cerebral para o cérebro, a circulação renal para os rins , e circulação brônquica para os brônquios nos pulmões.
O sistema circulatório humano é fechado, o que significa que o sangue está contido na rede vascular.

Os nutrientes viajam através de minúsculos vasos sanguíneos da microcirculação para alcançar os órgãos.

O sistema linfático é um subsistema essencial do sistema circulatório que consiste em uma rede de vasos linfáticos, linfonodos, órgãos, tecidos e linfa circulante.

Este subsistema é um sistema aberto.

Uma função importante é transportar a linfa, drenando e retornando o fluido intersticial para os ductos linfáticos de volta ao coração para retornar ao sistema circulatório.

Outra função importante é trabalhar em conjunto com o sistema imunológico para fornecer defesa contra patógenos.


=== Coração ===


O coração bombeia sangue para todas as partes do corpo, fornecendo nutrientes e oxigênio para todas as células e removendo os resíduos.

O coração esquerdo bombeia o sangue oxigenado retornado dos pulmões para o resto do corpo na circulação sistêmica.

O coração direito bombeia sangue desoxigenado para os pulmões na circulação pulmonar.

No coração humano há um átrio e um ventrículo para cada circulação, e tanto na circulação sistêmica quanto na pulmonar há quatro câmaras no total: átrio esquerdo, ventrículo esquerdo, átrio direito e ventrículo direito.

O átrio direito é a câmara superior do lado direito do coração.

O sangue que retorna ao átrio direito é desoxigenado (pobre em oxigênio) e passa para o ventrículo direito para ser bombeado através da artéria pulmonar para os pulmões para reoxigenação e remoção de dióxido de carbono.

O átrio esquerdo recebe sangue recém-oxigenado dos pulmões, bem como a veia pulmonar que passa para o ventrículo esquerdo forte para ser bombeado através da aorta para os diferentes órgãos do corpo.


==== Circulação pulmonar ====

A circulação pulmonar é a porção do sistema cardiovascular na qual o sangue com pouco oxigênio é bombeado para fora do coração, através da artéria pulmonar, para os pulmões e retornado, oxigenado, ao coração pela veia pulmonar.
O sangue privado de oxigênio da veia cava superior e inferior entra no átrio direito do coração e flui através da válvula tricúspide (válvula atrioventricular direita) para o ventrículo direito, de onde é bombeado através da válvula semilunar pulmonar para a artéria pulmonar para os pulmões.

As trocas gasosas ocorrem nos pulmões, onde o CO2 é liberado do sangue e o oxigênio é absorvido.

A veia pulmonar retorna o sangue agora rico em oxigênio para o átrio esquerdo. Um sistema separado conhecido como circulação brônquica fornece sangue para o tecido das vias aéreas maiores do pulmão.


==== Circulação sistêmica ====

A circulação sistêmica é a porção do sistema cardiovascular que transporta o sangue oxigenado para fora do coração através da aorta do ventrículo esquerdo, onde o sangue foi previamente depositado da circulação pulmonar, para o resto do corpo, e retorna o sangue pobre em oxigênio de volta ao o coração.


=== Vasos sanguíneos ===

Os vasos sanguíneos do sistema circulatório são as artérias, veias e capilares.

As grandes artérias e veias que levam sangue para e para fora do coração são conhecidas como grandes vasos.


==== Artérias ====

O sangue oxigenado entra na circulação sistêmica ao sair do ventrículo esquerdo, através da válvula semilunar aórtica.

A primeira parte da circulação sistêmica é a aorta, uma artéria maciça e de paredes espessas.

A aorta arqueia e dá ramos que suprem a parte superior do corpo depois de passar pela abertura aórtica do diafragma ao nível da décima vértebra torácica, entra no abdome.

Posteriormente, desce e emite ramos para o abdome, pelve, períneo e membros inferiores. As paredes da aorta são elásticas.

Essa elasticidade ajuda a manter a pressão sanguínea em todo o corpo.

Quando a aorta recebe quase cinco litros de sangue do coração, ela recua e é responsável pela pressão arterial pulsante.

À medida que a aorta se ramifica em artérias menores, sua elasticidade diminui e sua complacência aumenta.


==== Capilares ====
As artérias se ramificam em pequenas passagens chamadas arteríolas e depois nos capilares.

Os capilares se fundem para trazer sangue para o sistema venoso.


==== Veias ====

Os capilares se fundem em vênulas, que se fundem em veias.

O sistema venoso alimenta as duas veias principais: a veia cava superior – que drena principalmente os tecidos acima do coração – e a veia cava inferior – que drena principalmente os tecidos abaixo do coração.

Essas duas grandes veias desembocam no átrio direito do coração.


==== Veias portais ====

A regra geral é que as artérias do coração se ramificam em capilares, que se reúnem em veias que levam de volta ao coração.

As veias portais são uma pequena exceção a isso.

Em humanos, o único exemplo significativo é a veia porta hepática, que se combina a partir de capilares ao redor do trato gastrointestinal, onde o sangue absorve os vários produtos da digestão; em vez de levar diretamente de volta ao coração, a veia porta hepática se ramifica em um segundo sistema capilar no fígado.


==== Circulação coronária ====

O próprio coração é suprido com oxigênio e nutrientes através de uma pequena "alça" da circulação sistêmica e deriva muito pouco do sangue contido nas quatro câmaras.
O sistema de circulação coronária fornece um suprimento de sangue para o próprio músculo cardíaco.

A circulação coronária começa perto da origem da aorta por duas artérias coronárias: a artéria coronária direita e a artéria coronária esquerda.

Depois de nutrir o músculo cardíaco, o sangue retorna pelas veias coronárias para o seio coronário e deste para o átrio direito.

O refluxo de sangue através de sua abertura durante a sístole atrial é impedido pela válvula de Tebes.

As menores veias cardíacas drenam diretamente para as câmaras cardíacas.


==== Circulação cerebral ====

O cérebro tem um suprimento sanguíneo duplo, uma circulação anterior e uma posterior das artérias em sua frente e atrás.

A circulação anterior origina-se das artérias carótidas internas para suprir a parte frontal do cérebro.

A circulação posterior origina-se das artérias vertebrais, para suprir a parte posterior do cérebro e o tronco encefálico.

A circulação de frente e de trás se junta (anastomiza) no círculo de Willis.


==== Circulação renal ====
A circulação renal é o suprimento sanguíneo para os rins, contém muitos vasos sanguíneos especializados e recebe cerca de 20% do débito cardíaco.

Ela se ramifica da aorta abdominal e retorna o sangue para a veia cava ascendente.


== Desenvolvimento ==


O desenvolvimento do sistema circulatório começa com a vasculogênese no embrião.

Os sistemas arteriais e venosos humanos desenvolvem-se a partir de diferentes áreas do embrião.

O sistema arterial se desenvolve principalmente a partir dos arcos aórticos, seis pares de arcos que se desenvolvem na parte superior do embrião.

O sistema venoso surge de três veias bilaterais durante as semanas 4 a 8 da embriogênese.

A circulação fetal começa na 8ª semana de desenvolvimento.

A circulação fetal não inclui os pulmões, que são desviados pelo truncus arteriosus.

Antes do nascimento, o feto obtém oxigênio (e nutrientes) da mãe através da placenta e do cordão umbilical.


=== Artérias ===


O sistema arterial humano origina-se dos arcos aórticos e da aorta dorsal a partir da 4ª semana de vida embrionária.

O primeiro e o segundo arcos aórticos regridem e formam apenas as artérias maxilares e as artérias estapedianas, respectivamente.

O próprio sistema arterial surge dos arcos aórticos 3, 4 e 6 (o arco aórtico 5 regride completamente).
As aortas dorsais, presentes no lado dorsal do embrião, estão inicialmente presentes em ambos os lados do embrião.

Mais tarde, eles se fundem para formar a base da própria aorta.

Aproximadamente trinta artérias menores ramificam-se desta nas costas e nas laterais.

Esses ramos formam as artérias intercostais, artérias dos braços e pernas, artérias lombares e artérias sacrais laterais.

Ramos para os lados da aorta formarão as artérias renais, suprarrenais e gonadais definitivas.

Finalmente, os ramos na frente da aorta consistem nas artérias vitelinas e nas artérias umbilicais.

As artérias vitelinas formam as artérias celíaca, mesentérica superior e inferior do trato gastrointestinal.

Após o nascimento, as artérias umbilicais formarão as artérias ilíacas internas.


=== Veias ===


O sistema venoso humano desenvolve-se principalmente a partir das veias vitelinas, veias umbilicais e veias cardinais, todas as quais desembocam no seio venoso.


== Função ==


Cerca de 98,5% do oxigênio em uma amostra de sangue arterial em um ser humano saudável, respirando ar à pressão do nível do mar, é quimicamente combinado com moléculas de hemoglobina.

Cerca de 1,5% está fisicamente dissolvido nos outros líquidos do sangue e não está ligado à hemoglobina.

A molécula de hemoglobina é o principal transportador de oxigênio nos vertebrados.


== Significado clínico ==


Muitas doenças afetam o sistema circulatório.

Estas incluem uma série de doenças cardiovasculares, que afetam o coração e os vasos sanguíneos; doenças hematológicas que afetam o sangue, como anemia, e doenças linfáticas que afetam o sistema linfático.

Os cardiologistas são profissionais médicos especializados no coração, e os cirurgiões cardiotorácicos se especializam em operar o coração e seus arredores.

Os cirurgiões vasculares se concentram nos vasos sanguíneos.


=== Doença cardiovascular ===


As doenças que afetam o sistema cardiovascular são chamadas de doenças cardiovasculares.
Muitas dessas doenças são chamadas de "doenças do estilo de vida" porque se desenvolvem ao longo do tempo e estão relacionadas aos hábitos de exercícios de uma pessoa, dieta, se ela fuma e outras escolhas de estilo de vida que uma pessoa faz.

A aterosclerose é a precursora de muitas dessas doenças.

É onde pequenas placas ateromatosas se acumulam nas paredes das artérias médias e grandes.

Isso pode eventualmente crescer ou se romper para ocluir as artérias.

Também é fator de risco para síndromes coronarianas agudas, que são doenças caracterizadas por um déficit súbito de sangue oxigenado para o tecido cardíaco.

A aterosclerose também está associada a problemas como a formação de aneurisma ou divisão ("dissecção") das artérias.
Outra importante doença cardiovascular envolve a criação de um coágulo, chamado de "trombo".

Estes podem se originar em veias ou artérias.

A trombose venosa profunda, que ocorre principalmente nas pernas, é uma das causas de coágulos nas veias das pernas, principalmente quando a pessoa está parada há muito tempo.

Esses coágulos podem embolizar, o que significa viajar para outro local do corpo.

Os resultados disso podem incluir embolia pulmonar, ataques isquêmicos transitórios ou acidente vascular cerebral.
As doenças cardiovasculares também podem ser de natureza congênita, como defeitos cardíacos ou circulação fetal persistente, onde as alterações circulatórias que deveriam ocorrer após o nascimento não ocorrem.

Nem todas as alterações congênitas do sistema circulatório estão associadas a doenças, grande parte são variações anatômicas.


=== Investigações ===


A função e a saúde do sistema circulatório e suas partes são medidas de várias maneiras manuais e automatizadas.

Estes incluem métodos simples, como aqueles que fazem parte do exame cardiovascular, incluindo a medição do pulso de uma pessoa como um indicador da frequência cardíaca de uma pessoa, a medição da pressão arterial por meio de um esfigmomanômetro ou o uso de um estetoscópio para ouvir o coração para sopros que podem indicar problemas com as válvulas do coração.

Um eletrocardiograma também pode ser usado para avaliar a maneira como a eletricidade é conduzida pelo coração.
Outros meios mais invasivos também podem ser usados.

Uma cânula ou cateter inserido em uma artéria pode ser usado para medir a pressão de pulso ou as pressões de cunha pulmonar.

A angiografia, que envolve a injeção de um corante em uma artéria para visualizar uma árvore arterial, pode ser usada no coração (angiografia coronariana) ou no cérebro.

Ao mesmo tempo em que as artérias são visualizadas, bloqueios ou estreitamentos podem ser corrigidos através da inserção de stents e sangramentos ativos podem ser controlados pela inserção de molas.

Uma ressonância magnética pode ser usada para imagens de artérias, chamada de angiografia por ressonância magnética.

Para avaliação do suprimento de sangue para os pulmões, uma angiografia pulmonar por TC pode ser usada.

A ultrassonografia vascular pode ser usada para investigar doenças vasculares que afetam o sistema venoso e o sistema arterial, incluindo o diagnóstico de estenose, trombose ou insuficiência venosa.

Um ultrassom intravascular usando um cateter também é uma opção.


=== Cirurgia ===

Existem vários procedimentos cirúrgicos realizados no sistema circulatório:

Cirurgia de revascularização miocárdica
Stent coronário usado em angioplastia
Cirurgia vascular
Remoção de veias
Procedimentos estéticosProcedimentos cardiovasculares são mais prováveis ​​de serem realizados em ambiente de internação do que em ambiente de atendimento ambulatorial; nos Estados Unidos, apenas 28% das cirurgias cardiovasculares foram realizadas no ambulatório.


== Sociedade e cultura ==

Na Grécia Antiga, pensava-se que o coração era a fonte de calor inata para o corpo.
O sistema circulatório como o conhecemos foi descoberto por William Harvey.


== Outros animais ==


Enquanto os humanos, assim como outros vertebrados, têm um sistema circulatório sanguíneo fechado (o que significa que o sangue nunca sai da rede de artérias, veias e capilares), alguns grupos de invertebrados têm um sistema circulatório aberto contendo um coração, mas vasos sanguíneos limitados.

Os filos animais diploblásticos mais primitivos não possuem sistemas circulatórios.
Um sistema de transporte adicional, o sistema linfático, que só é encontrado em animais com circulação sanguínea fechada, é um sistema aberto que fornece uma via acessória para o excesso de líquido intersticial retornar ao sangue. dos triploblastos há mais de 600 milhões de anos, superando as restrições de tempo-distância da difusão, enquanto o endotélio evoluiu em um vertebrado ancestral há cerca de 540-510 milhões de anos.


=== Sistema circulatório aberto ===


Nos artrópodes, o sistema circulatório aberto é um sistema no qual um fluido em uma cavidade chamada hemocele banha os órgãos diretamente com oxigênio e nutrientes, não havendo distinção entre sangue e fluido intersticial; este fluido combinado é chamado hemolinfa ou hemolinfa.

Os movimentos musculares do animal durante a locomoção podem facilitar o movimento da hemolinfa, mas o desvio do fluxo de uma área para outra é limitado.

Quando o coração relaxa, o sangue é puxado de volta para o coração através de poros abertos (óstios).
A hemolinfa preenche toda a hemocele interior do corpo e envolve todas as células.

A hemolinfa é composta de água, sais inorgânicos (principalmente sódio, cloreto, potássio, magnésio e cálcio) e compostos orgânicos (principalmente carboidratos, proteínas e lipídios).

A principal molécula transportadora de oxigênio é a hemocianina.
Existem células flutuantes, os hemócitos, dentro da hemolinfa.

Eles desempenham um papel no sistema imunológico dos artrópodes.


=== Sistema circulatório fechado ===


Os sistemas circulatórios de todos os vertebrados, assim como dos anelídeos (por exemplo, minhocas) e cefalópodes (lulas, polvos e parentes) sempre mantêm seu sangue circulante dentro das câmaras cardíacas ou vasos sanguíneos e são classificados como fechados, assim como nos humanos.

Ainda assim, os sistemas de peixes, anfíbios, répteis e aves mostram vários estágios da evolução do sistema circulatório.

Os sistemas fechados permitem que o sangue seja direcionado para os órgãos que o necessitam.
Nos peixes, o sistema tem apenas um circuito, com o sangue sendo bombeado pelos capilares das brânquias e para os capilares dos tecidos do corpo.

Isso é conhecido como circulação de ciclo único.

O coração do peixe é, portanto, apenas uma única bomba (composta por duas câmaras).
Nos anfíbios e na maioria dos répteis, é usado um sistema circulatório duplo, mas o coração nem sempre está completamente separado em duas bombas.

Os anfíbios têm um coração de três câmaras.
Nos répteis, o septo ventricular do coração é incompleto e a artéria pulmonar é equipada com um músculo esfincteriano.

Isso permite uma segunda via possível de fluxo sanguíneo.

Em vez de o sangue fluir através da artéria pulmonar para os pulmões, o esfíncter pode ser contraído para desviar esse fluxo sanguíneo através do septo ventricular incompleto para o ventrículo esquerdo e sair pela aorta.

Isso significa que o sangue flui dos capilares para o coração e de volta para os capilares em vez de para os pulmões.

Este processo é útil para animais ectotérmicos (de sangue frio) na regulação de sua temperatura corporal.
Mamíferos, pássaros e crocodilianos apresentam separação completa do coração em duas bombas, totalizando quatro câmaras cardíacas; acredita-se que o coração de quatro câmaras de pássaros e crocodilianos evoluiu independentemente do de mamíferos.

Os sistemas circulatórios duplos permitem que o sangue seja repressurizado após o retorno dos pulmões, acelerando o fornecimento de oxigênio aos tecidos.


=== Sem sistema circulatório ===

Os sistemas circulatórios estão ausentes em alguns animais, incluindo platelmintos.

Sua cavidade corporal não tem forro ou fluido fechado.

Em vez disso, uma faringe muscular leva a um sistema digestivo amplamente ramificado que facilita a difusão direta de nutrientes para todas as células.

A forma do corpo achatada dorso-ventralmente do platelminto também restringe a distância de qualquer célula do sistema digestivo ou do exterior do organismo.

O oxigênio pode se difundir da água circundante para as células e o dióxido de carbono pode se difundir.

Consequentemente, cada célula é capaz de obter nutrientes, água e oxigênio sem a necessidade de um sistema de transporte.
Alguns animais, como as águas-vivas, têm ramificações mais extensas a partir de sua cavidade gastrovascular (que funciona tanto como local de digestão quanto como forma de circulação), essa ramificação permite que os fluidos corporais atinjam as camadas externas, pois a digestão começa no interior camadas.


== História ==


Os primeiros escritos conhecidos sobre o sistema circulatório são encontrados no Papiro Ebers (século XVI aC), um antigo papiro médico egípcio contendo mais de 700 prescrições e remédios, tanto físicos quanto espirituais.

No papiro, reconhece a conexão do coração com as artérias.

Os egípcios pensavam que o ar entrava pela boca e entrava nos pulmões e no coração.

Do coração, o ar viajava para cada membro através das artérias.

Embora este conceito do sistema circulatório seja apenas parcialmente correto, ele representa um dos primeiros relatos do pensamento científico.
No século 6 aC, o conhecimento da circulação de fluidos vitais através do corpo era conhecido pelo médico ayurvédico Sushruta na Índia antiga.

Ele também parece ter conhecimento das artérias, descritas como 'canais' por Dwivedi & Dwivedi (2007).

As válvulas do coração foram descobertas por um médico da escola de Hipócrates por volta do século 4 aC.

No entanto, sua função não foi devidamente compreendida na época.

Como o sangue se acumula nas veias após a morte, as artérias parecem vazias.

Os antigos anatomistas supunham que eles estavam cheios de ar e que eram para o transporte de ar.
O médico grego Herófilo distinguia veias de artérias, mas achava que o pulso era uma propriedade das próprias artérias.

O anatomista grego Erasístrato observou que as artérias que foram cortadas durante a vida sangram.

Ele atribuiu o fato ao fenômeno de que o ar que escapa de uma artéria é substituído por sangue que entra entre veias e artérias por vasos muito pequenos.

Assim, ele aparentemente postulou capilares, mas com fluxo reverso de sangue. Na Roma do século II d.C., o médico grego Galeno sabia que os vasos sanguíneos transportavam sangue e identificavam o sangue venoso (vermelho escuro) e arterial (mais brilhante e mais fino), cada um com características distintas e separadas. funções.

Crescimento e energia foram derivados do sangue venoso criado no fígado a partir do quilo, enquanto o sangue arterial deu vitalidade por conter pneuma (ar) e originado no coração.

O sangue fluía de ambos os órgãos de criação para todas as partes do corpo onde era consumido e não havia retorno de sangue para o coração ou fígado.

O coração não bombeava sangue, o movimento do coração sugava o sangue durante a diástole e o sangue movia-se pela pulsação das próprias artérias.
Galeno acreditava que o sangue arterial era criado pelo sangue venoso que passava do ventrículo esquerdo para o direito passando por 'poros' no septo interventricular, o ar passava dos pulmões através da artéria pulmonar para o lado esquerdo do coração.

À medida que o sangue arterial era criado, vapores 'fuliginosos' eram criados e passados ​​para os pulmões também através da artéria pulmonar para serem exalados.
Em 1025, o Cânone da Medicina do médico persa Avicena "aceitou erroneamente a noção grega sobre a existência de um orifício no septo ventricular pelo qual o sangue viajava entre os ventrículos". Apesar disso, Avicena "escreveu corretamente sobre os ciclos cardíacos e a função valvular" e "teve uma visão da circulação sanguínea" em seu Tratado sobre o pulso.

Ao mesmo tempo em que refinava a teoria errônea do pulso de Galeno, Avicena forneceu a primeira explicação correta da pulsação: "Cada batida do pulso compreende dois movimentos e duas pausas.

Assim, expansão : pausa : contração : pausa. [...] O pulso é um movimento no coração e nas artérias ... que assume a forma de expansão e contração alternadas." Em 1242, o médico árabe Ibn al-Nafis descreveu o processo de circulação pulmonar em maior, mais detalhes precisos do que seus predecessores, embora acreditasse, como eles, na noção de espírito vital (pneuma), que ele acreditava ser formado no ventrículo esquerdo.

Ibn al-Nafis afirmou em seu Comentário sobre Anatomia no Cânon de Avicena:

"... o sangue da câmara direita do coração deve chegar à câmara esquerda, mas não há caminho direto entre elas.

O septo espesso do coração não é perfurado e não tem poros visíveis como alguns pensavam ou poros invisíveis como pensava Galeno.

O sangue da câmara direita deve fluir pela veia arteriosa (artéria pulmonar) até os pulmões, espalhar-se por suas substâncias, ali se misturar com o ar, passar pela artéria venosa (veia pulmonar) para chegar à câmara esquerda do coração e ali forma o espírito vital..."
Além disso, Ibn al-Nafis teve uma visão do que se tornaria uma teoria maior da circulação capilar.

Ele afirmou que "deve haver pequenas comunicações ou poros (manafidh em árabe) entre a artéria e a veia pulmonar", uma previsão que precedeu a descoberta do sistema capilar em mais de 400 anos.

A teoria de Ibn al-Nafis, no entanto, limitava-se ao trânsito do sangue nos pulmões e não se estendia a todo o corpo.
Michael Servetus foi o primeiro europeu a descrever a função da circulação pulmonar, embora sua conquista não tenha sido amplamente reconhecida na época, por alguns motivos.

Ele primeiro descreveu no "Manuscrito de Paris" (perto de 1546), mas este trabalho nunca foi publicado.

E mais tarde ele publicou essa descrição, mas em um tratado teológico, Christianismi Restitutio, não em um livro sobre medicina.

Apenas três exemplares do livro sobreviveram, mas estes permaneceram escondidos por décadas, o restante foi queimado logo após sua publicação em 1553 por causa da perseguição de Servet pelas autoridades religiosas.
A descoberta mais conhecida da circulação pulmonar foi feita pelo sucessor de Vesalius em Pádua, Realdo Colombo, em 1559.

Finalmente, o médico inglês William Harvey, aluno de Hieronymus Fabricius (que havia descrito anteriormente as válvulas das veias sem reconhecer sua função), realizou uma sequência de experimentos e publicou seu Exercitatio Anatomica de Motu Cordis et Sanguinis in Animalibus em 1628, que "demonstrou que tinha que haver uma conexão direta entre os sistemas venoso e arterial em todo o corpo, e não apenas os pulmões.

Mais importante ainda, ele argumentou que a batida do coração produzia uma circulação contínua de sangue através de conexões diminutas nas extremidades do corpo.

Este é um salto conceitual muito diferente do refinamento de Ibn al-Nafis da anatomia e do fluxo sanguíneo no coração e nos pulmões." Este trabalho, com sua exposição essencialmente correta, convenceu lentamente o mundo médico.

No entanto, Harvey não conseguiu identificar o sistema capilar que conecta artérias e veias; estes foram descobertos mais tarde por Marcello Malpighi em 1661.
Em 1956, André Frédéric Cournand, Werner Forssmann e Dickinson W.

Richards recebeu o Prêmio Nobel de Medicina "por suas descobertas sobre cateterismo cardíaco e alterações patológicas no sistema circulatório".
Em sua palestra no Nobel, Forssmann credita Harvey como a cardiologia do parto com a publicação de seu livro em 1628. Na década de 1970, Diana McSherry desenvolveu sistemas baseados em computador para criar imagens do sistema circulatório e do coração sem a necessidade de cirurgia.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Circulatory_system

;;;FR;;;



SYSTÈME CIRCULATOIRE


Le système circulatoire sanguin est un système d'organes qui comprend le cœur, les vaisseaux sanguins et le sang qui circule dans tout le corps d'un être humain ou d'un autre vertébré.

Il comprend le système cardiovasculaire, ou système vasculaire, composé du cœur et des vaisseaux sanguins (du grec kardia signifiant cœur, et du latin vascula signifiant vaisseaux).

Le système circulatoire a deux divisions, une circulation ou un circuit systémique et une circulation ou un circuit pulmonaire.

Certaines sources utilisent les termes système cardiovasculaire et système vasculaire de manière interchangeable avec le système circulatoire. Le réseau de vaisseaux sanguins sont les grands vaisseaux du cœur, y compris les grosses artères élastiques et les grosses veines ; autres artères, petites artérioles,
capillaires qui rejoignent les veinules (petites veines) et d'autres veines.

Le système circulatoire est fermé chez les vertébrés, ce qui signifie que le sang ne quitte jamais le réseau de vaisseaux sanguins.

Certains invertébrés comme les arthropodes ont un système circulatoire ouvert.

Les diploblastes tels que les éponges et les gelées en peigne n'ont pas de système circulatoire.
Le sang est un liquide composé de plasma, de globules rouges, de globules blancs et de plaquettes qui circule dans le corps, transportant l'oxygène et les nutriments vers les tissus et les déchets.

Les nutriments circulants comprennent les protéines et les minéraux, les autres composants transportés sont des gaz tels que l'oxygène et le dioxyde de carbone, les hormones et l'hémoglobine ; fournir de la nourriture, aider le système immunitaire à combattre les maladies et maintenir l'homéostasie en stabilisant la température et le pH naturel.
Chez les vertébrés, le système lymphatique est complémentaire du système circulatoire.

Ce système transporte l'excès de plasma filtré des capillaires sous forme de liquide interstitiel entre les cellules, loin des tissus corporels par une voie accessoire pour renvoyer l'excès de liquide dans la circulation sanguine sous forme de lymphe.

Le passage de la lymphe prend beaucoup plus de temps que celui du sang.

Le système lymphatique est un sous-système essentiel au fonctionnement du système circulatoire sanguin ; sans elle, le sang deviendrait appauvri en liquide.

Le système lymphatique travaille en collaboration avec le système immunitaire.

Contrairement au système circulatoire fermé, le système lymphatique est un système ouvert.

Certaines sources le décrivent comme un système circulatoire secondaire.
Le système circulatoire peut être affecté par de nombreuses maladies cardiovasculaires.

Les cardiologues sont des professionnels de la santé spécialisés dans le cœur, et les chirurgiens cardiothoraciques se spécialisent dans les opérations sur le cœur et ses environs.

Les chirurgiens vasculaires se concentrent sur d'autres parties du système circulatoire.


== Structure ==


Le système circulatoire comprend le cœur, les vaisseaux sanguins et le sang.

Le système cardiovasculaire de tous les vertébrés comprend le cœur et les vaisseaux sanguins.

Le système circulatoire est en outre divisé en deux circuits principaux - une circulation pulmonaire et une circulation systémique.

La circulation pulmonaire est une boucle de circuit partant du cœur droit qui transporte le sang désoxygéné vers les poumons où il est oxygéné et renvoyé vers le cœur gauche.

La circulation systémique est une boucle de circuit qui achemine le sang oxygéné du cœur gauche vers le reste du corps et renvoie le sang désoxygéné vers le cœur droit via de grosses veines appelées veines caves.

La circulation systémique peut également être définie comme deux parties - une macrocirculation et une microcirculation.

Un adulte moyen contient cinq à six pintes (environ 4,7 à 5,7 litres) de sang, ce qui représente environ 7 % de son poids corporel total.

Le sang est composé de plasma, de globules rouges, de globules blancs et de plaquettes.

Le système digestif travaille également avec le système circulatoire pour fournir les nutriments dont le système a besoin pour maintenir le rythme cardiaque. D'autres voies circulatoires sont associées, telles que la circulation coronarienne vers le cœur lui-même, la circulation cérébrale vers le cerveau, la circulation rénale vers les reins. , et la circulation bronchique vers les bronches dans les poumons.
Le système circulatoire humain est fermé, ce qui signifie que le sang est contenu dans le réseau vasculaire.

Les nutriments voyagent à travers de minuscules vaisseaux sanguins de la microcirculation pour atteindre les organes.

Le système lymphatique est un sous-système essentiel du système circulatoire constitué d'un réseau de vaisseaux lymphatiques, de ganglions lymphatiques, d'organes, de tissus et de lymphe circulante.

Ce sous-système est un système ouvert.

Une fonction majeure est de transporter la lymphe, de drainer et de renvoyer le liquide interstitiel dans les canaux lymphatiques vers le cœur pour le retourner dans le système circulatoire.

Une autre fonction majeure est de travailler avec le système immunitaire pour fournir une défense contre les agents pathogènes.


=== Coeur ===


Le cœur pompe le sang vers toutes les parties du corps, fournissant des nutriments et de l'oxygène à chaque cellule et éliminant les déchets.

Le cœur gauche pompe le sang oxygéné renvoyé des poumons vers le reste du corps dans la circulation systémique.

Le cœur droit pompe le sang désoxygéné vers les poumons dans la circulation pulmonaire.

Dans le cœur humain, il y a une oreillette et un ventricule pour chaque circulation, et avec une circulation systémique et pulmonaire, il y a quatre chambres au total : oreillette gauche, ventricule gauche, oreillette droite et ventricule droit.

L'oreillette droite est la cavité supérieure du côté droit du cœur.

Le sang qui est renvoyé dans l'oreillette droite est désoxygéné (pauvre en oxygène) et passe dans le ventricule droit pour être pompé à travers l'artère pulmonaire vers les poumons pour la réoxygénation et l'élimination du dioxyde de carbone.

L'oreillette gauche reçoit du sang nouvellement oxygéné des poumons ainsi que de la veine pulmonaire qui passe dans le ventricule gauche puissant pour être pompé à travers l'aorte vers les différents organes du corps.


==== Circulation pulmonaire ====

La circulation pulmonaire est la partie du système cardiovasculaire dans laquelle le sang appauvri en oxygène est pompé du cœur, via l'artère pulmonaire, vers les poumons et renvoyé, oxygéné, vers le cœur via la veine pulmonaire.
Le sang privé d'oxygène des veines caves supérieure et inférieure pénètre dans l'oreillette droite du cœur et s'écoule à travers la valve tricuspide (valve auriculo-ventriculaire droite) dans le ventricule droit, d'où il est ensuite pompé à travers la valve semi-lunaire pulmonaire dans l'artère pulmonaire pour les poumons.

L'échange de gaz se produit dans les poumons, par lequel le CO2 est libéré du sang et l'oxygène est absorbé.

La veine pulmonaire renvoie le sang désormais riche en oxygène vers l'oreillette gauche. Un système séparé appelé circulation bronchique alimente en sang les tissus des voies respiratoires plus larges du poumon.


==== Circulation systémique ====

La circulation systémique est la partie du système cardiovasculaire qui transporte le sang oxygéné du cœur à travers l'aorte du ventricule gauche où le sang a été précédemment déposé de la circulation pulmonaire, vers le reste du corps, et renvoie le sang appauvri en oxygène vers le cœur.


=== Vaisseaux sanguins ===

Les vaisseaux sanguins du système circulatoire sont les artères, les veines et les capillaires.

Les grosses artères et veines qui acheminent le sang vers le cœur et l'en éloignent sont appelées les grands vaisseaux.


==== Artères ====

Le sang oxygéné entre dans la circulation systémique en quittant le ventricule gauche, par la valve semi-lunaire aortique.

La première partie de la circulation systémique est l'aorte, une artère massive et à paroi épaisse.

L'aorte se cambre et donne des branches alimentant la partie supérieure du corps après être passée par l'ouverture aortique du diaphragme au niveau des dix vertèbres thoraciques, elle pénètre dans l'abdomen.

Plus tard, il descend et fournit des branches à l'abdomen, au bassin, au périnée et aux membres inférieurs. Les parois de l'aorte sont élastiques.

Cette élasticité aide à maintenir la tension artérielle dans tout le corps.

Lorsque l'aorte reçoit près de cinq litres de sang du cœur, elle recule et est responsable de la pression artérielle pulsée.

Au fur et à mesure que l'aorte se ramifie en artères plus petites, leur élasticité continue de diminuer et leur compliance continue d'augmenter.


==== Capillaires ====
Les artères se ramifient en petits passages appelés artérioles, puis dans les capillaires.

Les capillaires fusionnent pour amener le sang dans le système veineux.


==== Veines ====

Les capillaires fusionnent en veinules, qui fusionnent en veines.

Le système veineux alimente les deux veines principales : la veine cave supérieure – qui draine principalement les tissus au-dessus du cœur – et la veine cave inférieure – qui draine principalement les tissus sous le cœur.

Ces deux grosses veines se jettent dans l'oreillette droite du cœur.


==== Veines portes ====

La règle générale est que les artères du cœur se ramifient en capillaires, qui se rassemblent dans les veines menant au cœur.

Les veines portes sont une légère exception à cela.

Chez l'homme, le seul exemple significatif est la veine porte hépatique qui se combine à partir de capillaires autour du tractus gastro-intestinal où le sang absorbe les différents produits de la digestion ; plutôt que de retourner directement au cœur, la veine porte hépatique se ramifie dans un deuxième système capillaire dans le foie.


==== Circulation coronaire ====

Le cœur lui-même est alimenté en oxygène et en nutriments par une petite "boucle" de la circulation systémique et dérive très peu du sang contenu dans les quatre chambres.
Le système de circulation coronaire fournit un apport sanguin au muscle cardiaque lui-même.

La circulation coronarienne commence près de l'origine de l'aorte par deux artères coronaires : l'artère coronaire droite et l'artère coronaire gauche.

Après avoir nourri le muscle cardiaque, le sang retourne par les veines coronaires dans le sinus coronaire et de celui-ci dans l'oreillette droite.

Le reflux du sang à travers son ouverture pendant la systole auriculaire est empêché par la valve thébésienne.

Les plus petites veines cardiaques se drainent directement dans les cavités cardiaques.


==== Circulation cérébrale ====

Le cerveau a un double apport sanguin, une circulation antérieure et postérieure à partir des artères à l'avant et à l'arrière.

La circulation antérieure provient des artères carotides internes pour alimenter l'avant du cerveau.

La circulation postérieure provient des artères vertébrales, pour alimenter l'arrière du cerveau et du tronc cérébral.

Les circulations de face et de dos se rejoignent (anastomisent) au cercle de Willis.


==== Circulation rénale ====
La circulation rénale est l'apport sanguin aux reins, contient de nombreux vaisseaux sanguins spécialisés et reçoit environ 20% du débit cardiaque.

Il se ramifie à partir de l'aorte abdominale et renvoie le sang vers la veine cave ascendante.


== Développement ==


Le développement du système circulatoire commence par la vasculogenèse dans l'embryon.

Les systèmes artériels et veineux humains se développent à partir de différentes zones de l'embryon.

Le système artériel se développe principalement à partir des arcs aortiques, six paires d'arcs qui se développent sur la partie supérieure de l'embryon.

Le système veineux provient de trois veines bilatérales au cours des semaines 4 à 8 de l'embryogenèse.

La circulation fœtale commence au cours de la 8ème semaine de développement.

La circulation fœtale n'inclut pas les poumons, qui sont contournés par le tronc artériel.

Avant la naissance, le fœtus reçoit de la mère de l'oxygène (et des nutriments) par le placenta et le cordon ombilical.


=== Artères ===


Le système artériel humain provient des arcs aortiques et des aortes dorsales à partir de la semaine 4 de la vie embryonnaire.

Les premier et deuxième arcs aortiques régressent et ne forment respectivement que les artères maxillaires et les artères stapédiennes.

Le système artériel lui-même est issu des arcs aortiques 3, 4 et 6 (l'arc aortique 5 régresse complètement).
Les aortes dorsales, présentes sur la face dorsale de l'embryon, sont initialement présentes des deux côtés de l'embryon.

Ils fusionnent plus tard pour former la base de l'aorte elle-même.

Environ trente artères plus petites en partent à l'arrière et sur les côtés.

Ces branches forment les artères intercostales, les artères des bras et des jambes, les artères lombaires et les artères sacrées latérales.

Des branches sur les côtés de l'aorte formeront les artères rénales, surrénales et gonadiques définitives.

Enfin, les branches à l'avant de l'aorte sont constituées des artères vitellines et des artères ombilicales.

Les artères vitellines forment les artères coeliaques, mésentériques supérieures et inférieures du tractus gastro-intestinal.

Après la naissance, les artères ombilicales formeront les artères iliaques internes.


=== Veines ===


Le système veineux humain se développe principalement à partir des veines vitellines, des veines ombilicales et des veines cardinales, qui se jettent toutes dans le sinus veineux.


== Fonction ==


Environ 98,5% de l'oxygène dans un échantillon de sang artériel chez un être humain en bonne santé, respirant de l'air à la pression au niveau de la mer, est chimiquement combiné avec des molécules d'hémoglobine.

Environ 1,5 % est physiquement dissous dans les autres liquides sanguins et n'est pas lié à l'hémoglobine.

La molécule d'hémoglobine est le principal transporteur d'oxygène chez les vertébrés.


== Signification clinique ==


De nombreuses maladies affectent le système circulatoire.

Ceux-ci incluent un certain nombre de maladies cardiovasculaires, affectant le cœur et les vaisseaux sanguins ; les maladies hématologiques qui affectent le sang, telles que l'anémie, et les maladies lymphatiques affectant le système lymphatique.

Les cardiologues sont des professionnels de la santé spécialisés dans le cœur, et les chirurgiens cardiothoraciques se spécialisent dans les opérations sur le cœur et ses environs.

Les chirurgiens vasculaires se concentrent sur les vaisseaux sanguins.


=== Maladie cardiovasculaire ===


Les maladies affectant le système cardiovasculaire sont appelées maladies cardiovasculaires.
Beaucoup de ces maladies sont appelées "maladies du mode de vie" parce qu'elles se développent avec le temps et sont liées aux habitudes d'exercice, à l'alimentation, au fait qu'elles fument et à d'autres choix de mode de vie qu'une personne fait.

L'athérosclérose est le précurseur de bon nombre de ces maladies.

C'est là que de petites plaques athéromateuses s'accumulent dans les parois des artères moyennes et grandes.

Cela peut éventuellement se développer ou se rompre pour obstruer les artères.

C'est aussi un facteur de risque des syndromes coronariens aigus, qui sont des maladies qui se caractérisent par un déficit soudain de sang oxygéné vers le tissu cardiaque.

L'athérosclérose est également associée à des problèmes tels que la formation d'anévrismes ou la division ("dissection") des artères.
Une autre maladie cardiovasculaire majeure implique la formation d'un caillot, appelé "thrombus".

Ceux-ci peuvent provenir des veines ou des artères.

La thrombose veineuse profonde, qui survient principalement dans les jambes, est une cause de caillots dans les veines des jambes, en particulier lorsqu'une personne est immobile depuis longtemps.

Ces caillots peuvent s'emboliser, ce qui signifie qu'ils se déplacent vers un autre endroit du corps.

Les résultats peuvent inclure une embolie pulmonaire, des accidents ischémiques transitoires ou un accident vasculaire cérébral.
Les maladies cardiovasculaires peuvent également être de nature congénitale, telles que les malformations cardiaques ou la circulation fœtale persistante, où les changements circulatoires censés se produire après la naissance ne se produisent pas.

Toutes les modifications congénitales du système circulatoire ne sont pas associées à des maladies, un grand nombre sont des variations anatomiques.


=== Enquêtes ===


La fonction et la santé du système circulatoire et de ses composants sont mesurées de diverses manières manuelles et automatisées.

Il s'agit notamment de méthodes simples telles que celles qui font partie de l'examen cardiovasculaire, y compris la prise du pouls d'une personne comme indicateur de la fréquence cardiaque d'une personne, la prise de la pression artérielle à l'aide d'un sphygmomanomètre ou l'utilisation d'un stéthoscope pour écouter le cœur pour les souffles qui peuvent indiquer des problèmes avec les valves cardiaques.

Un électrocardiogramme peut également être utilisé pour évaluer la manière dont l'électricité est conduite à travers le cœur.
D'autres moyens plus invasifs peuvent également être utilisés.

Une canule ou un cathéter inséré dans une artère peut être utilisé pour mesurer la pression pulsée ou les pressions de coin pulmonaire.

L'angiographie, qui consiste à injecter un colorant dans une artère pour visualiser un arbre artériel, peut être utilisée dans le cœur (angiographie coronarienne) ou dans le cerveau.

En même temps que les artères sont visualisées, les blocages ou les rétrécissements peuvent être corrigés par l'insertion de stents, et les saignements actifs peuvent être gérés par l'insertion de coils.

Une IRM peut être utilisée pour imager les artères, appelée angiographie IRM.

Pour l'évaluation de l'apport sanguin aux poumons, une angiographie pulmonaire CT peut être utilisée.

L'échographie vasculaire peut être utilisée pour étudier les maladies vasculaires affectant le système veineux et le système artériel, y compris le diagnostic de sténose, de thrombose ou d'insuffisance veineuse.

Une échographie intravasculaire à l'aide d'un cathéter est également une option.


=== Chirurgie ===

Il existe un certain nombre d'interventions chirurgicales effectuées sur le système circulatoire:

Chirurgie de pontage coronarien
Stent coronaire utilisé en angioplastie
Chirurgie vasculaire
Stripping veineux
Interventions esthétiques Les interventions cardiovasculaires sont plus susceptibles d'être effectuées en milieu hospitalier qu'en milieu ambulatoire; aux États-Unis, seulement 28 % des chirurgies cardiovasculaires ont été effectuées en milieu de soins ambulatoires.


== Société et culture ==

Dans la Grèce antique, le cœur était considéré comme la source de chaleur innée du corps.
Le système circulatoire tel que nous le connaissons a été découvert par William Harvey.


== Autres animaux ==


Alors que les humains, ainsi que d'autres vertébrés, ont un système circulatoire sanguin fermé (ce qui signifie que le sang ne quitte jamais le réseau d'artères, de veines et de capillaires), certains groupes d'invertébrés ont un système circulatoire ouvert contenant un cœur mais des vaisseaux sanguins limités.

Les phylums animaux diploblastiques les plus primitifs manquent de systèmes circulatoires.
Un système de transport supplémentaire, le système lymphatique, que l'on ne trouve que chez les animaux à circulation sanguine fermée, est un système ouvert fournissant une voie accessoire pour que l'excès de liquide interstitiel soit renvoyé dans le sang. Le système vasculaire sanguin est probablement apparu pour la première fois chez un ancêtre. des triploblastes il y a plus de 600 millions d'années, surmontant les contraintes temps-distance de diffusion, tandis que l'endothélium a évolué chez un vertébré ancestral il y a environ 540 à 510 millions d'années.


=== Système circulatoire ouvert ===


Chez les arthropodes, le système circulatoire ouvert est un système dans lequel un fluide dans une cavité appelée hémocèle baigne les organes directement avec de l'oxygène et des nutriments, sans distinction entre le sang et le liquide interstitiel ; ce fluide combiné est appelé hémolymphe ou hémolymphe.

Les mouvements musculaires de l'animal pendant la locomotion peuvent faciliter le mouvement de l'hémolymphe, mais la déviation du flux d'une zone à une autre est limitée.

Lorsque le cœur se détend, le sang est ramené vers le cœur à travers des pores ouverts (ostia).
L'hémolymphe remplit tout l'hémocèle intérieur du corps et entoure toutes les cellules.

L'hémolymphe est composée d'eau, de sels inorganiques (principalement de sodium, de chlorure, de potassium, de magnésium et de calcium) et de composés organiques (principalement de glucides, de protéines et de lipides).

La principale molécule de transport d'oxygène est l'hémocyanine.
Il y a des cellules flottantes, les hémocytes, dans l'hémolymphe.

Ils jouent un rôle dans le système immunitaire des arthropodes.


=== Système circulatoire fermé ===


Les systèmes circulatoires de tous les vertébrés, ainsi que des annélides (par exemple, les vers de terre) et des céphalopodes (calmars, poulpes et apparentés) gardent toujours leur sang circulant enfermé dans des cavités cardiaques ou des vaisseaux sanguins et sont classés comme fermés, tout comme chez les humains.

Pourtant, les systèmes de poissons, d'amphibiens, de reptiles et d'oiseaux montrent différentes étapes de l'évolution du système circulatoire.

Les systèmes fermés permettent de diriger le sang vers les organes qui en ont besoin.
Chez les poissons, le système n'a qu'un seul circuit, le sang étant pompé à travers les capillaires des branchies et vers les capillaires des tissus corporels.

C'est ce qu'on appelle la circulation à cycle unique.

Le cœur de poisson n'est donc qu'une seule pompe (constituée de deux chambres).
Chez les amphibiens et la plupart des reptiles, un système circulatoire double est utilisé, mais le cœur n'est pas toujours complètement séparé en deux pompes.

Les amphibiens ont un cœur à trois chambres.
Chez les reptiles, le septum ventriculaire du cœur est incomplet et l'artère pulmonaire est équipée d'un muscle sphincter.

Cela permet une deuxième voie possible de circulation sanguine.

Au lieu que le sang circule à travers l'artère pulmonaire vers les poumons, le sphincter peut être contracté pour détourner ce flux sanguin à travers le septum ventriculaire incomplet dans le ventricule gauche et à travers l'aorte.

Cela signifie que le sang circule des capillaires vers le cœur et retourne vers les capillaires au lieu des poumons.

Ce processus est utile aux animaux ectothermes (à sang froid) dans la régulation de leur température corporelle.
Les mammifères, les oiseaux et les crocodiliens montrent une séparation complète du cœur en deux pompes, pour un total de quatre cavités cardiaques ; on pense que le cœur à quatre chambres des oiseaux et des crocodiliens a évolué indépendamment de celui des mammifères.

Les systèmes circulatoires doubles permettent au sang d'être repressurisé après son retour des poumons, accélérant l'apport d'oxygène aux tissus.


=== Pas de système circulatoire ===

Les systèmes circulatoires sont absents chez certains animaux, y compris les vers plats.

Leur cavité corporelle n'a pas de revêtement ou de liquide enfermé.

Au lieu de cela, un pharynx musclé conduit à un système digestif largement ramifié qui facilite la diffusion directe des nutriments à toutes les cellules.

La forme du corps aplati dorso-ventralement du ver plat limite également la distance de toute cellule du système digestif ou de l'extérieur de l'organisme.

L'oxygène peut diffuser de l'eau environnante dans les cellules, et le dioxyde de carbone peut se diffuser.

Par conséquent, chaque cellule est capable d'obtenir des nutriments, de l'eau et de l'oxygène sans avoir besoin d'un système de transport.
Certains animaux, comme les méduses, ont une ramification plus étendue à partir de leur cavité gastrovasculaire (qui fonctionne à la fois comme un lieu de digestion et une forme de circulation), cette ramification permet aux fluides corporels d'atteindre les couches externes, puisque la digestion commence dans la partie interne. couches.


== Historique ==


Les premiers écrits connus sur le système circulatoire se trouvent dans le papyrus Ebers (XVIe siècle avant notre ère), un ancien papyrus médical égyptien contenant plus de 700 prescriptions et remèdes, à la fois physiques et spirituels.

Dans le papyrus, il reconnaît la connexion du cœur aux artères.

Les Égyptiens pensaient que l'air entrait par la bouche et dans les poumons et le cœur.

Du cœur, l'air a voyagé à chaque membre à travers les artères.

Bien que ce concept du système circulatoire ne soit que partiellement correct, il représente l'un des premiers récits de la pensée scientifique.
Au 6ème siècle avant notre ère, la connaissance de la circulation des fluides vitaux à travers le corps était connue du médecin ayurvédique Sushruta dans l'Inde ancienne.

Il semble également avoir possédé la connaissance des artères, décrites comme des «canaux» par Dwivedi & Dwivedi (2007).

Les valves du cœur ont été découvertes par un médecin de l'école d'Hippocrate vers le 4ème siècle avant notre ère.

Cependant, leur fonction n'était pas bien comprise à l'époque.

Parce que le sang s'accumule dans les veines après la mort, les artères semblent vides.

Les anciens anatomistes supposaient qu'ils étaient remplis d'air et qu'ils étaient destinés au transport de l'air.
Le médecin grec Hérophile distinguait les veines des artères mais pensait que le pouls était une propriété des artères elles-mêmes.

L'anatomiste grec Erasistrate a observé que les artères coupées au cours de la vie saignent.

Il a attribué le fait au phénomène selon lequel l'air qui s'échappe d'une artère est remplacé par du sang qui pénètre entre les veines et les artères par de très petits vaisseaux.

Ainsi, il a apparemment postulé des capillaires mais avec un flux de sang inversé. Au IIe siècle après JC à Rome, le médecin grec Galien savait que les vaisseaux sanguins transportaient le sang et identifiaient le sang veineux (rouge foncé) et artériel (plus brillant et plus mince), chacun avec un sang distinct et séparé. les fonctions.

La croissance et l'énergie provenaient du sang veineux créé dans le foie à partir du chyle, tandis que le sang artériel donnait de la vitalité en contenant du pneuma (air) et provenait du cœur.

Le sang coulait des deux organes créateurs vers toutes les parties du corps où il était consommé et il n'y avait pas de retour de sang vers le cœur ou le foie.

Le cœur ne pompait pas le sang, le mouvement du cœur aspirait le sang pendant la diastole et le sang se déplaçait par la pulsation des artères elles-mêmes.
Galen croyait que le sang artériel était créé par le sang veineux passant du ventricule gauche vers le droit en passant par les «pores» du septum interventriculaire, l'air passant des poumons via l'artère pulmonaire au côté gauche du cœur.

Au fur et à mesure que le sang artériel était créé, des vapeurs «de suie» étaient créées et transmises aux poumons également via l'artère pulmonaire pour être expirées.
En 1025, Le Canon de la Médecine du médecin persan Avicenne "a accepté à tort la notion grecque concernant l'existence d'un trou dans le septum ventriculaire par lequel le sang voyageait entre les ventricules". Malgré cela, Avicenne "écrivait correctement sur les cycles cardiaques et la fonction valvulaire", et "avait une vision de la circulation sanguine" dans son Traité du pouls.

Tout en affinant également la théorie erronée du pouls de Galien, Avicenne a fourni la première explication correcte de la pulsation : "Chaque battement du pouls comprend deux mouvements et deux pauses.

Ainsi, expansion : pause : contraction : pause. [...] Le pouls est un mouvement du cœur et des artères... qui prend la forme d'une expansion et d'une contraction alternées. détail plus précis que ses prédécesseurs, bien qu'il croie, comme eux, à la notion d'esprit vital (pneuma), qu'il croyait se former dans le ventricule gauche.

Ibn al-Nafis a déclaré dans son Commentaire sur l'anatomie dans le Canon d'Avicenne :

"... le sang de la chambre droite du cœur doit arriver à la chambre gauche mais il n'y a pas de voie directe entre eux.

Le septum épais du cœur n'est pas perforé et n'a pas de pores visibles comme certains le pensaient ou de pores invisibles comme le pensait Galien.

Le sang de la chambre droite doit s'écouler par la veine artérielle (artère pulmonaire) jusqu'aux poumons, se répandre dans ses substances, s'y mêler à l'air, traverser l'artère veineuse (veine pulmonaire) pour atteindre la chambre gauche du cœur et là forment l'esprit vital..."
De plus, Ibn al-Nafis avait un aperçu de ce qui allait devenir une théorie plus large de la circulation capillaire.

Il a déclaré qu '«il doit y avoir de petites communications ou pores (manafidh en arabe) entre l'artère pulmonaire et la veine», une prédiction qui a précédé la découverte du système capillaire de plus de 400 ans.

La théorie d'Ibn al-Nafis, cependant, se limitait au transit sanguin dans les poumons et ne s'étendait pas à l'ensemble du corps.
Michael Servetus a été le premier Européen à décrire la fonction de la circulation pulmonaire, bien que sa réalisation n'ait pas été largement reconnue à l'époque, pour plusieurs raisons.

Il l'a d'abord décrit dans le "Manuscrit de Paris" (vers 1546), mais cet ouvrage n'a jamais été publié.

Et plus tard il publia cette description, mais dans un traité théologique, Christianismi Restitutio, pas dans un livre de médecine.

Seuls trois exemplaires du livre ont survécu mais ceux-ci sont restés cachés pendant des décennies, le reste a été brûlé peu de temps après sa publication en 1553 en raison de la persécution de Servet par les autorités religieuses.
La découverte la plus connue de la circulation pulmonaire fut celle du successeur de Vésale à Padoue, Realdo Colombo, en 1559.

Enfin, le médecin anglais William Harvey, élève de Hieronymus Fabricius (qui avait précédemment décrit les valvules des veines sans reconnaître leur fonction), réalisa une série d'expériences et publia en 1628 son Exercitatio Anatomica de Motu Cordis et Sanguinis in Animalibus, qui "a démontré qu'il devait y avoir une connexion directe entre les systèmes veineux et artériel dans tout le corps, et pas seulement les poumons.

Plus important encore, il a soutenu que le battement du cœur produisait une circulation continue du sang à travers de minuscules connexions aux extrémités du corps.

C'est un saut conceptuel qui était assez différent du raffinement d'Ibn al-Nafis de l'anatomie et de la circulation sanguine dans le cœur et les poumons. » Ce travail, avec son exposition essentiellement correcte, a lentement convaincu le monde médical.

Cependant, Harvey n'a pas été en mesure d'identifier le système capillaire reliant les artères et les veines ; ceux-ci ont ensuite été découverts par Marcello Malpighi en 1661.
En 1956, André Frédéric Cournand, Werner Forssmann et Dickinson W.

Richards a reçu le prix Nobel de médecine "pour ses découvertes concernant le cathétérisme cardiaque et les changements pathologiques dans le système circulatoire".
Dans sa conférence Nobel, Forssmann attribue à Harvey le mérite de la cardiologie de l'accouchement avec la publication de son livre en 1628. Dans les années 1970, Diana McSherry a développé des systèmes informatiques pour créer des images du système circulatoire et du cœur sans avoir besoin de chirurgie.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Circulatory_system
