

CLITORIS


The clitoris ( (listen) or (listen)) is a female sex organ present in mammals, ostriches and a limited number of other animals. 

In humans, the visible portion – the glans – is at the front junction of the labia minora (inner lips), above the opening of the urethra. 

Unlike the penis, the male homologue (equivalent) to the clitoris, it usually does not contain the distal portion (or opening) of the urethra and is therefore not used for urination. 

In most species, the clitoris lacks any reproductive function. 

While few animals urinate through the clitoris or use it reproductively, the spotted hyena, which has an especially large clitoris, urinates, mates, and gives birth via the organ. 

Some other mammals, such as lemurs and spider monkeys, also have a large clitoris.The clitoris is the human female's most sensitive erogenous zone and generally the primary anatomical source of human female sexual pleasure. 

In humans and other mammals, it develops from an outgrowth in the embryo called the genital tubercle. 

Initially undifferentiated, the tubercle develops into either a penis or a clitoris during the development of the reproductive system depending on exposure to androgens (which are primarily male hormones). 

The clitoris is a complex structure, and its size and sensitivity can vary. 

The glans (head) of the human clitoris is roughly the size and shape of a pea and is estimated to have about 8,000 sensory nerve endings.Sexological, medical, and psychological debate have focused on the clitoris, and it has been subject to social constructionist analyses and studies. 

Such discussions range from anatomical accuracy, gender inequality, female genital mutilation, and orgasmic factors and their physiological explanation for the G-spot. 

Although, in humans, the only known purpose of the clitoris is to provide sexual pleasure, whether the clitoris is vestigial, an adaptation, or serves a reproductive function has been debated. 

Social perceptions of the clitoris include the significance of its role in female sexual pleasure, assumptions about its true size and depth, and varying beliefs regarding genital modification such as clitoris enlargement, clitoris piercing and clitoridectomy. 

Genital modification may be for aesthetic, medical or cultural reasons.Knowledge of the clitoris is significantly impacted by cultural perceptions of the organ. 

Studies suggest that knowledge of its existence and anatomy is scant in comparison with that of other sexual organs and that more education about it could help alleviate social stigmas associated with the female body and female sexual pleasure, for example, that the clitoris and vulva in general are visually unappealing, that female masturbation is taboo, or that men should be expected to master and control women's orgasms.


== Etymology ==

The Oxford English Dictionary states that the word clitoris likely has its origin in the Ancient Greek κλειτορίς, kleitoris, perhaps derived from the verb κλείειν, kleiein, "to shut". 

Clitoris is also Greek for the word key, "indicating that the ancient anatomists considered it the key" to female sexuality. 

In addition to key, the Online Etymology Dictionary suggests other Greek candidates for the word's etymology include a noun meaning "latch" or "hook"; a verb meaning "to touch or titillate lasciviously", "to tickle" (one German synonym for the clitoris is der Kitzler, "the tickler"), although this verb is more likely derived from "clitoris"; and a word meaning "side of a hill", from the same root as "climax". 

The Oxford English Dictionary also states that the shortened form "clit", the first occurrence of which was noted in the United States, has been used in print since 1958: until then, the common abbreviation was "clitty".The plural forms are clitorises in English and clitorides in Latin. 

The Latin genitive is clitoridis, as in "glans clitoridis". 

In medical and sexological literature, the clitoris is sometimes referred to as "the female penis" or pseudo-penis, and the term clitoris is commonly used to refer to the glans alone; partially because of this, there have been various terms for the organ that have historically confused its anatomy.


== Structure ==



=== Development ===


In mammals, sexual differentiation is determined by the sperm that carries either an X or a Y (male) chromosome. 

The Y chromosome contains a sex-determining gene (SRY) that encodes a transcription factor for the protein TDF (testis determining factor) and triggers the creation of testosterone and anti-Müllerian hormone for the embryo's development into a male. 

This differentiation begins about eight or nine weeks after conception. 

Some sources state that it continues until the twelfth week, while others state that it is clearly evident by the thirteenth week and that the sex organs are fully developed by the sixteenth week.The clitoris develops from a phallic outgrowth in the embryo called the genital tubercle. 

Initially undifferentiated, the tubercle develops into either a clitoris or penis during the development of the reproductive system depending on exposure to androgens (which are primarily male hormones). 

The clitoris forms from the same tissues that become the glans and shaft of the penis, and this shared embryonic origin makes these two organs homologous (different versions of the same structure).If exposed to testosterone, the genital tubercle elongates to form the penis. 

By fusion of the urogenital folds – elongated spindle-shaped structures that contribute to the formation of the urethral groove on the belly aspect of the genital tubercle – the urogenital sinus closes completely and forms the spongy urethra, and the labioscrotal swellings unite to form the scrotum. 

In the absence of testosterone, the genital tubercle allows for formation of the clitoris; the initially rapid growth of the phallus gradually slows and the clitoris is formed. 

The urogenital sinus persists as the vestibule of the vagina, the two urogenital folds form the labia minora, and the labioscrotal swellings enlarge to form the labia majora, completing the female genitalia. 

A rare condition that can develop from higher than average androgen exposure is clitoromegaly.


=== Gross anatomy and histology ===



==== General ====

The clitoris contains external and internal components. 

It consists of the glans, the body (which is composed of two erectile structures known as the corpora cavernosa), and two crura ("legs"). 

It has a hood formed by the labia minora (inner lips). 

It also has vestibular or clitoral bulbs. 

The frenulum of clitoris is a frenulum on the undersurface of the glans and is created by the two medial parts of the labia minora. 

The clitoral body may be referred to as the shaft (or internal shaft), while the length of the clitoris between the glans and the body may also be referred to as the shaft. 

The shaft supports the glans, and its shape can be seen and felt through the clitoral hood.Research indicates that clitoral tissue extends into the vagina's anterior wall. Şenaylı et al. said that the histological evaluation of the clitoris, "especially of the corpora cavernosa, is incomplete because for many years the clitoris was considered a rudimentary and nonfunctional organ." They added that Baskin and colleagues examined the clitoris's masculinization after dissection and using imaging software after Masson chrome staining, put the serial dissected specimens together; this revealed that the nerves of the clitoris surround the whole clitoral body (corpus).The clitoris, vestibular bulbs, labia minora, and urethra involve two histologically distinct types of vascular tissue (tissue related to blood vessels), the first of which is trabeculated, erectile tissue innervated by the cavernous nerves. 

The trabeculated tissue has a spongy appearance; along with blood, it fills the large, dilated vascular spaces of the clitoris and the bulbs. 

Beneath the epithelium of the vascular areas is smooth muscle. 

As indicated by Yang et al.'s research, it may also be that the urethral lumen (the inner open space or cavity of the urethra), which is surrounded by spongy tissue, has tissue that "is grossly distinct from the vascular tissue of the clitoris and bulbs, and on macroscopic observation, is paler than the dark tissue" of the clitoris and bulbs. 

The second type of vascular tissue is non-erectile, which may consist of blood vessels that are dispersed within a fibrous matrix and have only a minimal amount of smooth muscle.


==== Glans and body ====

Highly innervated, the glans exists at the tip of the clitoral body as a fibro-vascular cap and is usually the size and shape of a pea, although it is sometimes much larger or smaller. 

The clitoral glans, or the entire clitoris, is estimated to have about 8,000 sensory nerve endings. 

Research conflicts on whether or not the glans is composed of erectile or non-erectile tissue. 

Although the clitoral body becomes engorged with blood upon sexual arousal, erecting the clitoral glans, some sources describe the clitoral glans and labia minora as composed of non-erectile tissue; this is especially the case for the glans. 

They state that the clitoral glans and labia minora have blood vessels that are dispersed within a fibrous matrix and have only a minimal amount of smooth muscle, or that the clitoral glans is "a midline, densely neural, non-erectile structure".Other descriptions of the glans assert that it is composed of erectile tissue and that erectile tissue is present within the labia minora. 

The glans may be noted as having glandular vascular spaces that are not as prominent as those in the clitoral body, with the spaces being separated more by smooth muscle than in the body and crura. 

Adipose tissue is absent in the labia minora, but the organ may be described as being made up of dense connective tissue, erectile tissue and elastic fibers.

The clitoral body forms a wishbone-shaped structure containing the corpora cavernosa – a pair of sponge-like regions of erectile tissue that contain most of the blood in the clitoris during clitoral erection. 

The two corpora forming the clitoral body are surrounded by thick fibro-elastic tunica albuginea, literally meaning "white covering", connective tissue. 

These corpora are separated incompletely from each other in the midline by a fibrous pectiniform septum – a comblike band of connective tissue extending between the corpora cavernosa.The clitoral body extends up to several centimeters before reversing direction and branching, resulting in an inverted "V" shape that extends as a pair of crura ("legs"). 

The crura are the proximal portions of the arms of the wishbone. 

Ending at the glans of the clitoris, the tip of the body bends anteriorly away from the pubis. 

Each crus (singular form of crura) is attached to the corresponding ischial ramus – extensions of the copora beneath the descending pubic rami. 

Concealed behind the labia minora, the crura end with attachment at or just below the middle of the pubic arch. 

Associated are the urethral sponge, perineal sponge, a network of nerves and blood vessels, the suspensory ligament of the clitoris, muscles and the pelvic floor.There is no identified correlation between the size of the clitoral glans, or clitoris as a whole, and a woman's age, height, weight, use of hormonal contraception, or being post-menopausal, although women who have given birth may have significantly larger clitoral measurements. 

Centimeter (cm) and millimeter (mm) measurements of the clitoris show variations in its size. 

The clitoral glans has been cited as typically varying from 2 mm to 1 cm and usually being estimated at 4 to 5 mm in both the transverse and longitudinal planes.A 1992 study concluded that the total clitoral length, including glans and body, is 16.0 ± 4.3 mm (0.63 ± 0.17 in), where 16 mm (0.63 in) is the mean and 4.3 mm (0.17 in) is the standard deviation. 

Concerning other studies, researchers from the Elizabeth Garrett Anderson and Obstetric Hospital in London measured the labia and other genital structures of 50 women from the age of 18 to 50, with a mean age of 35.6., from 2003 to 2004, and the results given for the clitoral glans were 3–10 mm for the range and 5.5 [1.7] mm for the mean. 

Other research indicates that the clitoral body can measure 5–7 centimetres (2.0–2.8 in) in length, while the clitoral body and crura together can be 10 centimetres (3.9 in) or more in length.


==== Hood ====

The clitoral hood projects at the front of the labia commissure, where the edges of the labia majora (outer lips) meet at the base of the pubic mound; it is partially formed by fusion of the upper part of the external folds of the labia minora (inner lips) and covers the glans and external shaft. 

There is considerable variation in how much of the glans protrudes from the hood and how much is covered by it, ranging from completely covered to fully exposed, and tissue of the labia minora also encircles the base of the glans.


==== Bulbs ====
The vestibular bulbs are more closely related to the clitoris than the vestibule because of the similarity of the trabecular and erectile tissue within the clitoris and bulbs, and the absence of trabecular tissue in other genital organs, with the erectile tissue's trabecular nature allowing engorgement and expansion during sexual arousal. 

The vestibular bulbs are typically described as lying close to the crura on either side of the vaginal opening; internally, they are beneath the labia majora. 

When engorged with blood, they cuff the vaginal opening and cause the vulva to expand outward. 

Although a number of texts state that they surround the vaginal opening, Ginger et al. state that this does not appear to be the case and tunica albuginea does not envelop the erectile tissue of the bulbs. 

In Yang et al.'s assessment of the bulbs' anatomy, they conclude that the bulbs "arch over the distal urethra, outlining what might be appropriately called the 'bulbar urethra' in women."


=== Homology ===

The clitoris and penis are generally the same anatomical structure, although the distal portion (or opening) of the urethra is absent in the clitoris of humans and most other animals. 

The idea that males have clitorises was suggested in 1987 by researcher Josephine Lowndes Sevely, who theorized that the male corpora cavernosa (a pair of sponge-like regions of erectile tissue which contain most of the blood in the penis during penile erection) are the true counterpart of the clitoris. 

She argued that "the male clitoris" is directly beneath the rim of the glans penis, where the frenulum of prepuce of the penis (a fold of the prepuce) is located, and proposed that this area be called the "Lownde's crown". 

Her theory and proposal, though acknowledged in anatomical literature, did not materialize in anatomy books. 

Modern anatomical texts show that the clitoris displays a hood that is the equivalent of the penis's foreskin, which covers the glans. 

It also has a shaft that is attached to the glans. 

The male corpora cavernosa are homologous to the corpus cavernosum clitoridis (the female cavernosa), the bulb of penis is homologous to the vestibular bulbs beneath the labia minora, the scrotum is homologous to the labia majora, and the penile urethra and part of the skin of the penis is homologous to the labia minora.Upon anatomical study, the penis can be described as a clitoris that has been mostly pulled out of the body and grafted on top of a significantly smaller piece of spongiosum containing the urethra. 

With regard to nerve endings, the human clitoris's estimated 8,000 or more (for its glans or clitoral body as a whole) is commonly cited as being twice as many as the nerve endings found in the human penis (for its glans or body as a whole) and as more than any other part of the human body. 

These reports sometimes conflict with other sources on clitoral anatomy or those concerning the nerve endings in the human penis. 

For example, while some sources estimate that the human penis has 4,000 nerve endings, other sources state that the glans or the entire penile structure have the same amount of nerve endings as the clitoral glans or discuss whether the uncircumcised penis has thousands more than the circumcised penis or is generally more sensitive.Some sources state that in contrast to the glans penis, the clitoral glans lacks smooth muscle within its fibrovascular cap and is thus differentiated from the erectile tissues of the clitoris and bulbs; additionally, bulb size varies and may be dependent on age and estrogenization. 

While the bulbs are considered the equivalent of the male spongiosum, they do not completely encircle the urethra.The thin corpus spongiosum of the penis runs along the underside of the penile shaft, enveloping the urethra, and expands at the end to form the glans. 

It partially contributes to erection, which are primarily caused by the two corpora cavernosa that comprise the bulk of the shaft; like the female cavernosa, the male cavernosa soak up blood and become erect when sexually excited. 

The male corpora cavernosa taper off internally on reaching the spongiosum head. 

With regard to the Y-shape of the cavernosa – crown, body, and legs – the body accounts for much more of the structure in men, and the legs are stubbier; typically, the cavernosa are longer and thicker in males than in females.


== Function ==



=== Sexual activity ===



==== General ====
The clitoris has an abundance of nerve endings, and is the human female's most sensitive erogenous zone and generally the primary anatomical source of human female sexual pleasure. 

When sexually stimulated, it may incite female sexual arousal. 

Sexual stimulation, including arousal, may result from mental stimulation, foreplay with a sexual partner, or masturbation, and can lead to orgasm. 

The most effective sexual stimulation of the organ is usually manually or orally (cunnilingus), which is often referred to as direct clitoral stimulation; in cases involving sexual penetration, these activities may also be referred to as additional or assisted clitoral stimulation.Direct clitoral stimulation involves physical stimulation to the external anatomy of the clitoris – glans, hood, and the external shaft. 

Stimulation of the labia minora (inner lips), due to its external connection with the glans and hood, may have the same effect as direct clitoral stimulation. 

Though these areas may also receive indirect physical stimulation during sexual activity, such as when in friction with the labia majora (outer lips), indirect clitoral stimulation is more commonly attributed to penile-vaginal penetration. 

Penile-anal penetration may also indirectly stimulate the clitoris by the shared sensory nerves (especially the pudendal nerve, which gives off the inferior anal nerves and divides into two terminal branches: the perineal nerve and the dorsal nerve of the clitoris).Due to the glans's high sensitivity, direct stimulation to it is not always pleasurable; instead, direct stimulation to the hood or the areas near the glans is often more pleasurable, with the majority of women preferring to use the hood to stimulate the glans, or to have the glans rolled between the lips of the labia, for indirect touch. 

It is also common for women to enjoy the shaft of the clitoris being softly caressed in concert with occasional circling of the clitoral glans. 

This might be with or without manual penetration of the vagina, while other women enjoy having the entire area of the vulva caressed. 

As opposed to use of dry fingers, stimulation from fingers that have been well-lubricated, either by vaginal lubrication or a personal lubricant, is usually more pleasurable for the external anatomy of the clitoris.As the clitoris's external location does not allow for direct stimulation by sexual penetration, any external clitoral stimulation while in the missionary position usually results from the pubic bone area, the movement of the groins when in contact. 

As such, some couples may engage in the woman-on-top position or the coital alignment technique, a sex position combining the "riding high" variation of the missionary position with pressure-counterpressure movements performed by each partner in rhythm with sexual penetration, to maximize clitoral stimulation. 

Lesbian couples may engage in tribadism for ample clitoral stimulation or for mutual clitoral stimulation during whole-body contact. 

Pressing the penis in a gliding or circular motion against the clitoris (intercrural sex), or stimulating it by movement against another body part, may also be practiced. 

A vibrator (such as a clitoral vibrator), dildo or other sex toy may be used. 

Other women stimulate the clitoris by use of a pillow or other inanimate object, by a jet of water from the faucet of a bathtub or shower, or by closing their legs and rocking.During sexual arousal, the clitoris and the whole of the genitalia engorge and change color as the erectile tissues fill with blood (vasocongestion), and the individual experiences vaginal contractions. 

The ischiocavernosus and bulbocavernosus muscles, which insert into the corpora cavernosa, contract and compress the dorsal vein of the clitoris (the only vein that drains the blood from the spaces in the corpora cavernosa), and the arterial blood continues a steady flow and having no way to drain out, fills the venous spaces until they become turgid and engorged with blood. 

This is what leads to clitoral erection.The clitoral glans doubles in diameter upon arousal and upon further stimulation, becomes less visible as it is covered by the swelling of tissues of the clitoral hood. 

The swelling protects the glans from direct contact, as direct contact at this stage can be more irritating than pleasurable. 

Vasocongestion eventually triggers a muscular reflex, which expels the blood that was trapped in surrounding tissues, and leads to an orgasm. 

A short time after stimulation has stopped, especially if orgasm has been achieved, the glans becomes visible again and returns to its normal state, with a few seconds (usually 5–10) to return to its normal position and 5–10 minutes to return to its original size. 

If orgasm is not achieved, the clitoris may remain engorged for a few hours, which women often find uncomfortable. 

Additionally, the clitoris is very sensitive after orgasm, making further stimulation initially painful for some women.


==== Clitoral and vaginal orgasmic factors ====

General statistics indicate that 70–80 percent of women require direct clitoral stimulation (consistent manual, oral or other concentrated friction against the external parts of the clitoris) to reach orgasm. 

Indirect clitoral stimulation (for example, via vaginal penetration) may also be sufficient for female orgasm. 

The area near the entrance of the vagina (the lower third) contains nearly 90 percent of the vaginal nerve endings, and there are areas in the anterior vaginal wall and between the top junction of the labia minora and the urethra that are especially sensitive, but intense sexual pleasure, including orgasm, solely from vaginal stimulation is occasional or otherwise absent because the vagina has significantly fewer nerve endings than the clitoris.Prominent debate over the quantity of vaginal nerve endings began with Alfred Kinsey. 

Although Sigmund Freud's theory that clitoral orgasms are a prepubertal or adolescent phenomenon and that vaginal (or G-spot) orgasms are something that only physically mature females experience had been criticized before, Kinsey was the first researcher to harshly criticize the theory. 

Through his observations of female masturbation and interviews with thousands of women, Kinsey found that most of the women he observed and surveyed could not have vaginal orgasms, a finding that was also supported by his knowledge of sex organ anatomy. 

Scholar Janice M. 

Irvine stated that he "criticized Freud and other theorists for projecting male constructs of sexuality onto women" and "viewed the clitoris as the main center of sexual response". 

He considered the vagina to be "relatively unimportant" for sexual satisfaction, relaying that "few women inserted fingers or objects into their vaginas when they masturbated". 

Believing that vaginal orgasms are "a physiological impossibility" because the vagina has insufficient nerve endings for sexual pleasure or climax, he "concluded that satisfaction from penile penetration [is] mainly psychological or perhaps the result of referred sensation".Masters and Johnson's research, as well as Shere Hite's, generally supported Kinsey's findings about the female orgasm. 

Masters and Johnson were the first researchers to determine that the clitoral structures surround and extend along and within the labia. 

They observed that both clitoral and vaginal orgasms have the same stages of physical response, and found that the majority of their subjects could only achieve clitoral orgasms, while a minority achieved vaginal orgasms. 

On that basis, they argued that clitoral stimulation is the source of both kinds of orgasms, reasoning that the clitoris is stimulated during penetration by friction against its hood. 

The research came at the time of the second-wave feminist movement, which inspired feminists to reject the distinction made between clitoral and vaginal orgasms. 

Feminist Anne Koedt argued that because men "have orgasms essentially by friction with the vagina" and not the clitoral area, this is why women's biology had not been properly analyzed. "Today, with extensive knowledge of anatomy, with [C. 

Lombard Kelly], Kinsey, and Masters and Johnson, to mention just a few sources, there is no ignorance on the subject [of the female orgasm]," she stated in her 1970 article The Myth of the Vaginal Orgasm. 

She added, "There are, however, social reasons why this knowledge has not been popularized. 

We are living in a male society which has not sought change in women's role."Supporting an anatomical relationship between the clitoris and vagina is a study published in 2005, which investigated the size of the clitoris; Australian urologist Helen O'Connell, described as having initiated discourse among mainstream medical professionals to refocus on and redefine the clitoris, noted a direct relationship between the legs or roots of the clitoris and the erectile tissue of the clitoral bulbs and corpora, and the distal urethra and vagina while using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) technology. 

While some studies, using ultrasound, have found physiological evidence of the G-spot in women who report having orgasms during vaginal intercourse, O'Connell argues that this interconnected relationship is the physiological explanation for the conjectured G-Spot and experience of vaginal orgasms, taking into account the stimulation of the internal parts of the clitoris during vaginal penetration. "The vaginal wall is, in fact, the clitoris," she said. "If you lift the skin off the vagina on the side walls, you get the bulbs of the clitoris – triangular, crescental masses of erectile tissue." O'Connell et al., having performed dissections on the female genitals of cadavers and used photography to map the structure of nerves in the clitoris, made the assertion in 1998 that there is more erectile tissue associated with the clitoris than is generally described in anatomical textbooks and were thus already aware that the clitoris is more than just its glans. 

They concluded that some females have more extensive clitoral tissues and nerves than others, especially having observed this in young cadavers compared to elderly ones, and therefore whereas the majority of females can only achieve orgasm by direct stimulation of the external parts of the clitoris, the stimulation of the more generalized tissues of the clitoris via vaginal intercourse may be sufficient for others.French researchers Odile Buisson and Pierre Foldès reported similar findings to that of O'Connell's. 

In 2008, they published the first complete 3D sonography of the stimulated clitoris and republished it in 2009 with new research, demonstrating the ways in which erectile tissue of the clitoris engorges and surrounds the vagina. 

On the basis of their findings, they argued that women may be able to achieve vaginal orgasm via stimulation of the G-spot, because the highly innervated clitoris is pulled closely to the anterior wall of the vagina when the woman is sexually aroused and during vaginal penetration. 

They assert that since the front wall of the vagina is inextricably linked with the internal parts of the clitoris, stimulating the vagina without activating the clitoris may be next to impossible. 

In their 2009 published study, the "coronal planes during perineal contraction and finger penetration demonstrated a close relationship between the root of the clitoris and the anterior vaginal wall". 

Buisson and Foldès suggested "that the special sensitivity of the lower anterior vaginal wall could be explained by pressure and movement of clitoris's root during a vaginal penetration and subsequent perineal contraction".Researcher Vincenzo Puppo, who, while agreeing that the clitoris is the center of female sexual pleasure and believing that there is no anatomical evidence of the vaginal orgasm, disagrees with O'Connell and other researchers' terminological and anatomical descriptions of the clitoris (such as referring to the vestibular bulbs as the "clitoral bulbs") and states that "the inner clitoris" does not exist because the penis cannot come in contact with the congregation of multiple nerves/veins situated until the angle of the clitoris, detailed by Kobelt, or with the roots of the clitoris, which do not have sensory receptors or erogenous sensitivity, during vaginal intercourse. 

Puppo's belief contrasts the general belief among researchers that vaginal orgasms are the result of clitoral stimulation; they reaffirm that clitoral tissue extends, or is at least stimulated by its bulbs, even in the area most commonly reported to be the G-spot.The G-spot being analogous to the base of the male penis has additionally been theorized, with sentiment from researcher Amichai Kilchevsky that because female fetal development is the "default" state in the absence of substantial exposure to male hormones and therefore the penis is essentially a clitoris enlarged by such hormones, there is no evolutionary reason why females would have an entity in addition to the clitoris that can produce orgasms. 

The general difficulty of achieving orgasms vaginally, which is a predicament that is likely due to nature easing the process of child bearing by drastically reducing the number of vaginal nerve endings, challenge arguments that vaginal orgasms help encourage sexual intercourse in order to facilitate reproduction. 

Supporting a distinct G-spot, however, is a study by Rutgers University, published in 2011, which was the first to map the female genitals onto the sensory portion of the brain; the scans indicated that the brain registered distinct feelings between stimulating the clitoris, the cervix and the vaginal wall – where the G-spot is reported to be – when several women stimulated themselves in a functional magnetic resonance (fMRI) machine. 

Barry Komisaruk, head of the research findings, stated that he feels that "the bulk of the evidence shows that the G-spot is not a particular thing" and that it is "a region, it's a convergence of many different structures".


=== Vestigiality, adaptionist and reproductive views ===

Whether the clitoris is vestigial, an adaptation, or serves a reproductive function has also been debated. 

Geoffrey Miller stated that Helen Fisher, Meredith Small and Sarah Blaffer Hrdy "have viewed the clitoral orgasm as a legitimate adaptation in its own right, with major implications for female sexual behavior and sexual evolution". 

Like Lynn Margulis and Natalie Angier, Miller believes, "The human clitoris shows no apparent signs of having evolved directly through male mate choice. 

It is not especially large, brightly colored, specifically shaped or selectively displayed during courtship." He contrasts this with other female species such as spider monkeys and spotted hyenas that have clitorises as long as their male counterparts. 

He said the human clitoris "could have evolved to be much more conspicuous if males had preferred sexual partners with larger brighter clitorises" and that "its inconspicuous design combined with its exquisite sensitivity suggests that the clitoris is important not as an object of male mate choice, but as a mechanism of female choice."While Miller stated that male scientists such as Stephen Jay Gould and Donald Symons "have viewed the female clitoral orgasm as an evolutionary side-effect of the male capacity for penile orgasm" and that they "suggested that clitoral orgasm cannot be an adaptation because it is too hard to achieve", Gould acknowledged that "most female orgasms emanate from a clitoral, rather than vaginal (or some other), site" and that his nonadaptive belief "has been widely misunderstood as a denial of either the adaptive value of female orgasm in general, or even as a claim that female orgasms lack significance in some broader sense". 

He said that although he accepts that "clitoral orgasm plays a pleasurable and central role in female sexuality and its joys," "[a]ll these favorable attributes, however, emerge just as clearly and just as easily, whether the clitoral site of orgasm arose as a spandrel or an adaptation". 

He added that the "male biologists who fretted over [the adaptionist questions] simply assumed that a deeply vaginal site, nearer the region of fertilization, would offer greater selective benefit" due to their Darwinian, summum bonum beliefs about enhanced reproductive success.Similar to Gould's beliefs about adaptionist views and that "females grow nipples as adaptations for suckling, and males grow smaller unused nipples as a spandrel based upon the value of single development channels", Elisabeth Lloyd suggested that there is little evidence to support an adaptionist account of female orgasm. 

Meredith L. 

Chivers stated that "Lloyd views female orgasm as an ontogenetic leftover; women have orgasms because the urogenital neurophysiology for orgasm is so strongly selected for in males that this developmental blueprint gets expressed in females without affecting fitness" and this is similar to "males hav[ing] nipples that serve no fitness-related function."At the 2002 conference for Canadian Society of Women in Philosophy, Nancy Tuana argued that the clitoris is unnecessary in reproduction; she stated that it has been ignored because of "a fear of pleasure. 

It is pleasure separated from reproduction. 

That's the fear." She reasoned that this fear causes ignorance, which veils female sexuality. 

O'Connell stated, "It boils down to rivalry between the sexes: the idea that one sex is sexual and the other reproductive. 

The truth is that both are sexual and both are reproductive." She reiterated that the vestibular bulbs appear to be part of the clitoris and that the distal urethra and vagina are intimately related structures, although they are not erectile in character, forming a tissue cluster with the clitoris that appears to be the location of female sexual function and orgasm.


== Clinical significance ==



=== Modification ===


Modifications to the clitoris can be intentional or unintentional. 

They include female genital mutilation (FGM), sex reassignment surgery (for trans men as part transitioning, which may also include clitoris enlargement), intersex surgery, and genital piercings. 

Use of anabolic steroids by bodybuilders and other athletes can result in significant enlargement of the clitoris in concert with other masculinizing effects on their bodies. 

Abnormal enlargement of the clitoris may also be referred to as clitoromegaly, but clitoromegaly is more commonly seen as a congenital anomaly of the genitalia.Those taking hormones or other medications as part of a transgender transition usually experience dramatic clitoral growth; individual desires and the difficulties of phalloplasty (construction of a penis) often result in the retention of the original genitalia with the enlarged clitoris as a penis analogue (metoidioplasty). 

However, the clitoris cannot reach the size of the penis through hormones. 

A surgery to add function to the clitoris, such as metoidioplasty, is an alternative to phalloplasty that permits retention of sexual sensation in the clitoris.In clitoridectomy, the clitoris may be removed as part of a radical vulvectomy to treat cancer such as vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia; however, modern treatments favor more conservative approaches, as invasive surgery can have psychosexual consequences. 

Clitoridectomy more often involves parts of the clitoris being partially or completely removed during FGM, which may be additionally known as female circumcision or female genital cutting (FGC). 

Removing the glans of the clitoris does not mean that the whole structure is lost, since the clitoris reaches deep into the genitals.In reduction clitoroplasty, a common intersex surgery, the glans is preserved and parts of the erectile bodies are excised. 

Problems with this technique include loss of sensation, loss of sexual function, and sloughing of the glans. 

One way to preserve the clitoris with its innervations and function is to imbricate and bury the clitoral glans; however, Şenaylı et al. state that "pain during stimulus because of trapped tissue under the scarring is nearly routine. 

In another method, 50 percent of the ventral clitoris is removed through the level base of the clitoral shaft, and it is reported that good sensation and clitoral function are observed in follow up"; additionally, it has "been reported that the complications are from the same as those in the older procedures for this method".With regard to females who have the condition congenital adrenal hyperplasia, the largest group requiring surgical genital correction, researcher Atilla Şenaylı stated, "The main expectations for the operations are to create a normal female anatomy, with minimal complications and improvement of life quality." Şenaylı added that "[c]osmesis, structural integrity, and coital capacity of the vagina, and absence of pain during sexual activity are the parameters to be judged by the surgeon." (Cosmesis usually refers to the surgical correction of a disfiguring defect.) He stated that although "expectations can be standardized within these few parameters, operative techniques have not yet become homogeneous. 

Investigators have preferred different operations for different ages of patients".Gender assessment and surgical treatment are the two main steps in intersex operations. "The first treatments for clitoromegaly were simply resection of the clitoris. 

Later, it was understood that the clitoris glans and sensory input are important to facilitate orgasm," stated Atilla. 

The clitoral glans's epithelium "has high cutaneous sensitivity, which is important in sexual responses", and it is because of this that "recession clitoroplasty was later devised as an alternative, but reduction clitoroplasty is the method currently performed."What is often referred to as "clit piercing" is the more common (and significantly less complicated) clitoral hood piercing. 

Since clitoral piercing is difficult and very painful, piercing of the clitoral hood is more common than piercing the clitoral shaft, owing to the small percentage of people who are anatomically suited for it. 

Clitoral hood piercings are usually channeled in the form of vertical piercings, and, to a lesser extent, horizontal piercings. 

The triangle piercing is a very deep horizontal hood piercing, and is done behind the clitoris as opposed to in front of it. 

For styles such as the Isabella, which pass through the clitoral shaft but are placed deep at the base, they provide unique stimulation and still require the proper genital build. 

The Isabella starts between the clitoral glans and the urethra, exiting at the top of the clitoral hood; this piercing is highly risky with regard to the damage that may occur because of intersecting nerves.


=== Sexual disorders ===

Persistent genital arousal disorder (PGAD) results in a spontaneous, persistent, and uncontrollable genital arousal in women, unrelated to any feelings of sexual desire. 

Clitoral priapism, also known as clitorism, is a rare, potentially painful medical condition and is sometimes described as an aspect of PGAD. 

With PGAD, arousal lasts for an unusually extended period of time (ranging from hours to days); it can also be associated with morphometric and vascular modifications of the clitoris.Drugs may cause or affect clitoral priapism. 

The drug trazodone is known to cause male priapism as a side effect, but there is only one documented report that it may have caused clitoral priapism, in which case discontinuing the medication may be a remedy. 

Additionally, nefazodone is documented to have caused clitoral engorgement, as distinct from clitoral priapism, in one case, and clitoral priapism can sometimes start as a result of, or only after, the discontinuation of antipsychotics or selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs).Because PGAD is relatively rare and, as its own concept apart from clitoral priapism, has only been researched since 2001, there is little research into what may cure or remedy the disorder. 

In some recorded cases, PGAD was caused by, or caused, a pelvic arterial-venous malformation with arterial branches to the clitoris; surgical treatment was effective in these cases.


== Society and culture ==



=== Ancient Greek–16th century knowledge and vernacular ===

With regard to historical and modern perceptions of the clitoris, the clitoris and the penis were considered equivalent by scholars for more than 2,500 years in all respects except their arrangement. 

Due to it being frequently omitted from, or misrepresented in, historical and contemporary anatomical texts, it was also subject to a continual cycle of male scholars claiming to have discovered it. 

The ancient Greeks, ancient Romans, and Greek and Roman generations up to and throughout the Renaissance, were aware that male and female sex organs are anatomically similar, but prominent anatomists such as Galen (129 – c. 200 AD) and Vesalius (1514–1564) regarded the vagina as the structural equivalent of the penis, except for being inverted; Vesalius argued against the existence of the clitoris in normal women, and his anatomical model described how the penis corresponds with the vagina, without a role for the clitoris.Ancient Greek and Roman sexuality additionally designated penetration as "male-defined" sexuality. 

The term tribas, or tribade, was used to refer to a woman or intersex individual who actively penetrated another person (male or female) through use of the clitoris or a dildo. 

As any sexual act was believed to require that one of the partners be "phallic" and that therefore sexual activity between women was impossible without this feature, mythology popularly associated lesbians with either having enlarged clitorises or as incapable of enjoying sexual activity without the substitution of a phallus.

In 1545, Charles Estienne was the first writer to identify the clitoris in a work based on dissection, but he concluded that it had a urinary function. 

Following this study, Realdo Colombo (also known as Matteo Renaldo Colombo), a lecturer in surgery at the University of Padua, Italy, published a book called De re anatomica in 1559, in which he describes the "seat of woman's delight". 

In his role as researcher, Colombo concluded, "Since no one has discerned these projections and their workings, if it is permissible to give names to things discovered by me, it should be called the love or sweetness of Venus.", in reference to the mythological Venus, goddess of erotic love. 

Colombo's claim was disputed by his successor at Padua, Gabriele Falloppio (discoverer of the fallopian tube), who claimed that he was the first to discover the clitoris. 

In 1561, Falloppio stated, "Modern anatomists have entirely neglected it ... and do not say a word about it ... and if others have spoken of it, know that they have taken it from me or my students." This caused an upset in the European medical community, and, having read Colombo's and Falloppio's detailed descriptions of the clitoris, Vesalius stated, "It is unreasonable to blame others for incompetence on the basis of some sport of nature you have observed in some women and you can hardly ascribe this new and useless part, as if it were an organ, to healthy women." He concluded, "I think that such a structure appears in hermaphrodites who otherwise have well formed genitals, as Paul of Aegina describes, but I have never once seen in any woman a penis (which Avicenna called albaratha and the Greeks called an enlarged nympha and classed as an illness) or even the rudiments of a tiny phallus."The average anatomist had difficulty challenging Galen's or Vesalius's research; Galen was the most famous physician of the Greek era and his works were considered the standard of medical understanding up to and throughout the Renaissance (i.e. for almost two thousand years), and various terms being used to describe the clitoris seemed to have further confused the issue of its structure. 

In addition to Avicenna's naming it the albaratha or virga ("rod") and Colombo's calling it sweetness of Venus, Hippocrates used the term columella ("little pillar'"), and Albucasis, an Arabic medical authority, named it tentigo ("tension"). 

The names indicated that each description of the structures was about the body and glans of the clitoris but usually the glans. 

It was additionally known to the Romans, who named it (vulgar slang) landica. 

However, Albertus Magnus, one of the most prolific writers of the Middle Ages, felt that it was important to highlight "homologies between male and female structures and function" by adding "a psychology of sexual arousal" that Aristotle had not used to detail the clitoris. 

While in Constantine's treatise Liber de coitu, the clitoris is referred to a few times, Magnus gave an equal amount of attention to male and female organs.Like Avicenna, Magnus also used the word virga for the clitoris, but employed it for the male and female genitals; despite his efforts to give equal ground to the clitoris, the cycle of suppression and rediscovery of the organ continued, and a 16th-century justification for clitoridectomy appears to have been confused by hermaphroditism and the imprecision created by the word nymphae substituted for the word clitoris. 

Nymphotomia was a medical operation to excise an unusually large clitoris, but what was considered "unusually large" was often a matter of perception. 

The procedure was routinely performed on Egyptian women, due to physicians such as Jacques Daléchamps who believed that this version of the clitoris was "an unusual feature that occurred in almost all Egyptian women [and] some of ours, so that when they find themselves in the company of other women, or their clothes rub them while they walk or their husbands wish to approach them, it erects like a male penis and indeed they use it to play with other women, as their husbands would do ... 

Thus the parts are cut".


=== 17th century–present day knowledge and vernacular ===


Caspar Bartholin, a 17th-century Danish anatomist, dismissed Colombo's and Falloppio's claims that they discovered the clitoris, arguing that the clitoris had been widely known to medical science since the second century. 

Although 17th-century midwives recommended to men and women that women should aspire to achieve orgasms to help them get pregnant for general health and well-being and to keep their relationships healthy, debate about the importance of the clitoris persisted, notably in the work of Regnier de Graaf in the 17th century and Georg Ludwig Kobelt in the 19th.Like Falloppio and Bartholin, De Graaf criticized Colombo's claim of having discovered the clitoris; his work appears to have provided the first comprehensive account of clitoral anatomy. "We are extremely surprised that some anatomists make no more mention of this part than if it did not exist at all in the universe of nature," he stated. "In every cadaver we have so far dissected we have found it quite perceptible to sight and touch." De Graaf stressed the need to distinguish nympha from clitoris, choosing to "always give [the clitoris] the name clitoris" to avoid confusion; this resulted in frequent use of the correct name for the organ among anatomists, but considering that nympha was also varied in its use and eventually became the term specific to the labia minora, more confusion ensued. 

Debate about whether orgasm was even necessary for women began in the Victorian era, and Freud's 1905 theory about the immaturity of clitoral orgasms (see above) negatively affected women's sexuality throughout most of the 20th century.Toward the end of World War I, a maverick British MP named Noel Pemberton Billing published an article entitled "The Cult of the Clitoris", furthering his conspiracy theories and attacking the actress Maud Allan and Margot Asquith, wife of the prime minister. 

The accusations led to a sensational libel trial, which Billing eventually won; Philip Hoare reports that Billing argued that "as a medical term, 'clitoris' would only be known to the 'initiated', and was incapable of corrupting moral minds". 

Jodie Medd argues in regard to "The Cult of the Clitoris" that "the female nonreproductive but desiring body [...] simultaneously demands and refuses interpretative attention, inciting scandal through its very resistance to representation."From the 18th – 20th century, especially during the 20th, details of the clitoris from various genital diagrams presented in earlier centuries were omitted from later texts. 

The full extent of the clitoris was alluded to by Masters and Johnson in 1966, but in such a muddled fashion that the significance of their description became obscured; in 1981, the Federation of Feminist Women's Health Clinics (FFWHC) continued this process with anatomically precise illustrations identifying 18 structures of the clitoris. 

Despite the FFWHC's illustrations, Josephine Lowndes Sevely, in 1987, described the vagina as more of the counterpart of the penis.Concerning other beliefs about the clitoris, Hite (1976 and 1981) found that, during sexual intimacy with a partner, clitoral stimulation was more often described by women as foreplay than as a primary method of sexual activity, including orgasm. 

Further, although the FFWHC's work significantly propelled feminist reformation of anatomical texts, it did not have a general impact. 

Helen O'Connell's late 1990s research motivated the medical community to start changing the way the clitoris is anatomically defined. 

O'Connell describes typical textbook descriptions of the clitoris as lacking detail and including inaccuracies, such as older and modern anatomical descriptions of the female human urethral and genital anatomy having been based on dissections performed on elderly cadavers whose erectile (clitoral) tissue had shrunk. 

She instead credits the work of Georg Ludwig Kobelt as the most comprehensive and accurate description of clitoral anatomy. 

MRI measurements, which provide a live and multi-planar method of examination, now complement the FFWHC's, as well as O'Connell's, research efforts concerning the clitoris, showing that the volume of clitoral erectile tissue is ten times that which is shown in doctors' offices and in anatomy text books.In Bruce Bagemihl's survey of The Zoological Record (1978–1997) – which contains over a million documents from over 6,000 scientific journals – 539 articles focusing on the penis were found, while 7 were found focusing on the clitoris. 

In 2000, researchers Shirley Ogletree and Harvey Ginsberg concluded that there is a general neglect of the word clitoris in common vernacular. 

They looked at the terms used to describe genitalia in the PsycINFO database from 1887 to 2000 and found that penis was used in 1,482 sources, vagina in 409, while clitoris was only mentioned in 83. 

They additionally analyzed 57 books listed in a computer database for sex instruction. 

In the majority of the books, penis was the most commonly discussed body part – mentioned more than clitoris, vagina, and uterus put together. 

They last investigated terminology used by college students, ranging from Euro-American (76%/76%), Hispanic (18%/14%), and African American (4%/7%), regarding the students' beliefs about sexuality and knowledge on the subject. 

The students were overwhelmingly educated to believe that the vagina is the female counterpart of the penis. 

The authors found that the students' belief that the inner portion of the vagina is the most sexually sensitive part of the female body correlated with negative attitudes toward masturbation and strong support for sexual myths.

A 2005 study reported that, among a sample of undergraduate students, the most frequently cited sources for knowledge about the clitoris were school and friends, and that this was associated with the least tested knowledge. 

Knowledge of the clitoris by self-exploration was the least cited, but "respondents correctly answered, on average, three of the five clitoral knowledge measures". 

The authors stated that "[k]nowledge correlated significantly with the frequency of women's orgasm in masturbation but not partnered sex" and that their "results are discussed in light of gender inequality and a social construction of sexuality, endorsed by both men and women, that privileges men's sexual pleasure over women's, such that orgasm for women is pleasing, but ultimately incidental." They concluded that part of the solution to remedying "this problem" requires that males and females are taught more about the clitoris than is currently practiced.In May 2013, humanitarian group Clitoraid launched the first annual International Clitoris Awareness Week, from 6 to 12 May. 

Clitoraid spokesperson Nadine Gary stated that the group's mission is to raise public awareness about the clitoris because it has "been ignored, vilified, made taboo, and considered sinful and shameful for centuries".In 2016, Odile Fillod created a 3D printable, open source, full-size model of the clitoris, for use in a set of anti-sexist videos she had been commissioned to produce. 

Fillod was interviewed by Stephanie Theobald, whose article in The Guardian stated that the 3D model would be used for sex education in French schools, from primary to secondary level, from September 2016 onwards; this was not the case, but the story went viral across the world.In a 2019 study, a questionnaire was administered to a sample of educational sciences postgraduate students to trace the level of their knowledge concerning the organs of the female and male reproductive system. 

The authors reported that about two-thirds of the students failed to name external female genitals, such as the clitoris and labia, even after detailed pictures were provided to them. 

A 2022 analysis reported that the clitoris is mentioned in only one out of 113 Greek secondary education textbooks used in biology classes from 1870s to present.


=== Contemporary art ===


In 2012, New York artist Sophia Wallace started work on a multimedia project to challenge misconceptions about the clitoris. 

Based on O'Connell's 1998 research, Wallace's work emphasizes the sheer scope and size of the human clitoris. 

She says that ignorance of this still seems to be pervasive in modern society. "It is a curious dilemma to observe the paradox that on the one hand the female body is the primary metaphor for sexuality, its use saturates advertising, art and the mainstream erotic imaginary," she said. "Yet, the clitoris, the true female sexual organ, is virtually invisible." The project is called Cliteracy and it includes a "clit rodeo", which is an interactive, climb-on model of a giant golden clitoris, including its inner parts, produced with the help of sculptor Kenneth Thomas. "It's been a showstopper wherever it's been shown. 

People are hungry to be able to talk about this," Wallace said. "I love seeing men standing up for the clit [...] Cliteracy is about not having one's body controlled or legislated [...] Not having access to the pleasure that is your birthright is a deeply political act."In 2016, another project started in New York, street art that has since spread to almost 100 cities: Clitorosity, a "community-driven effort to celebrate the full structure of the clitoris", combining chalk drawings and words to spark interaction and conversation with passers-by, which the team documents on social media. 

In 2016, Lori-Malépart Traversy made an animated documentary about the unrecognized anatomy of the clitoris.In 2017, Alli Sebastian Wolf created a golden 100:1 scale model anatomical of a clitoris, called the Glitoris and said, she hopes knowledge of the clitoris will soon become so uncontroversial that making art about them would be as irrelevant as making art about penises.Other projects listed by the BBC include Clito Clito, body-positive jewellery made in Berlin; Clitorissima, a documentary intended to normalize mother-daughter conversations about the clitoris; and a ClitArt festival in London, encompassing spoken word performances as well as visual art. 

French art collective Les Infemmes (a pun on "infamous" and "women") published a fanzine whose title can be translated as "The Clit Cheatsheet".


=== Influence on female genital mutilation ===


Significant controversy surrounds female genital mutilation (FGM), with the World Health Organization (WHO) being one of many health organizations that have campaigned against the procedures on behalf of human rights, stating that "FGM has no health benefits" and that it is "a violation of the human rights of girls and women" and "reflects deep-rooted inequality between the sexes". 

The practice has existed at one point or another in almost all human civilizations, most commonly to exert control over the sexual behavior, including masturbation, of girls and women, but also to change the clitoris's appearance. 

Custom and tradition are the most frequently cited reasons for FGM, with some cultures believing that not performing it has the possibility of disrupting the cohesiveness of their social and political systems, such as FGM also being a part of a girl's initiation into adulthood. 

Often, a girl is not considered an adult in an FGM-practicing society unless she has undergone FGM, and the "removal of the clitoris and labia – viewed by some as the male parts of a woman's body – is thought to enhance the girl's femininity, often synonymous with docility and obedience".Female genital mutilation is carried out in several societies, especially in Africa, with 85 percent of genital mutilations performed in Africa consisting of clitoridectomy or excision, and to a lesser extent in other parts of the Middle East and Southeast Asia, on girls from a few days old to mid-adolescent, often to reduce sexual desire in an effort to preserve vaginal virginity. 

The practice of FGM has spread globally, as immigrants from Asia, Africa, and the Middle East bring the custom with them. 

In the United States, it is sometimes practiced on girls born with a clitoris that is larger than usual. 

Comfort Momoh, who specializes in the topic of FGM, states that FGM might have been "practiced in ancient Egypt as a sign of distinction among the aristocracy"; there are reports that traces of infibulation are on Egyptian mummies. 

FGM is still routinely practiced in Egypt. 

Greenberg et al. report that "one study found that 97% of married women in Egypt had had some form of genital mutilation performed." Amnesty International estimated in 1997 that more than two million FGM procedures are performed every year.


== Other animals ==



=== General ===

Although the clitoris exists in all mammal species, few detailed studies of the anatomy of the clitoris in non-humans exist. 

The clitoris is especially developed in fossas, apes, lemurs, moles, and, like the penis in many non-human placental mammals, often contains a small bone. 

In females, this bone is known as the os clitoridis. 

The clitoris exists in turtles, ostriches, crocodiles, and in species of birds in which the male counterpart has a penis. 

Some intersex female bears mate and give birth through the tip of the clitoris; these species are grizzly bears, brown bears, American black bears and polar bears. 

Although the bears have been described as having "a birth canal that runs through the clitoris rather than forming a separate vagina" (a feature that is estimated to make up 10 to 20 percent of the bears' population), scientists state that female spotted hyenas are the only non-hermaphroditic female mammals devoid of an external vaginal opening, and whose sexual anatomy is distinct from usual intersex cases.


=== Non-human primates ===

In spider monkeys, the clitoris is especially developed and has an interior passage, or urethra, that makes it almost identical to the penis, and it retains and distributes urine droplets as the female spider monkey moves around. 

Scholar Alan F. 

Dixson stated that this urine "is voided at the bases of the clitoris, flows down the shallow groove on its perineal surface, and is held by the skin folds on each side of the groove". 

Because spider monkeys of South America have pendulous and erectile clitorises long enough to be mistaken for a penis, researchers and observers of the species look for a scrotum to determine the animal's sex; a similar approach is to identify scent-marking glands that may also be present on the clitoris.The clitoris erects in squirrel monkeys during dominance displays, which indirectly influences the squirrel monkeys' reproductive success.The clitoris of bonobos is larger and more externalized than in most mammals; Natalie Angier said that a young adolescent "female bonobo is maybe half the weight of a human teenager, but her clitoris is three times bigger than the human equivalent, and visible enough to waggle unmistakably as she walks". 

Female bonobos often engage in the practice of genital-genital (GG) rubbing, which is the non-human form of tribadism that human females engage in. 

Ethologist Jonathan Balcombe stated that female bonobos rub their clitorises together rapidly for ten to twenty seconds, and this behavior, "which may be repeated in rapid succession, is usually accompanied by grinding, shrieking, and clitoral engorgement"; he added that, on average, they engage in this practice "about once every two hours", and as bonobos sometimes mate face-to-face, "evolutionary biologist Marlene Zuk has suggested that the position of the clitoris in bonobos and some other primates has evolved to maximize stimulation during sexual intercourse".Many strepsirrhine species exhibit elongated clitorises that are either fully or partially tunneled by the urethra, including mouse lemurs, dwarf lemurs, all Eulemur species, lorises and galagos. 

Some of these species also exhibit a membrane seal across the vagina that closes the vaginal opening during the non-mating seasons, most notably mouse and dwarf lemurs. 

The clitoral morphology of the ring-tailed lemur is the most well-studied. 

They are described as having "elongated, pendulous clitorises that are [fully] tunneled by a urethra". 

The urethra is surrounded by erectile tissue, which allows for significant swelling during breeding seasons, but this erectile tissue differs from the typical male corpus spongiosum. 

Non-pregnant adult ring-tailed females do not show higher testosterone levels than males, but they do exhibit higher A4 and estrogen levels during seasonal aggression. 

During pregnancy, estrogen, A4, and testosterone levels are raised, but female fetuses are still "protected" from excess testosterone. 

These "masculinized" genitalia are often found alongside other traits, such as female-dominated social groups, reduced sexual dimorphism that makes females the same size as males, and even ratios of sexes in adult populations. 

This phenomenon that has been dubbed the "lemur syndrome". 

A 2014 study of Eulemur masculinization proposed that behavioral and morphological masculinization in female lemuriformes is an ancestral trait that likely emerged after their split from lorisiformes.


=== Spotted hyenas ===


While female spotted hyenas are sometimes referred to as hermaphrodites or as intersex, and scientists of ancient and later historical times believed that they were hermaphrodites, modern scientists do not refer to them as such. 

That designation is typically reserved for those who simultaneously exhibit features of both sexes; the genetic makeup of female spotted hyenas "are clearly distinct" from male spotted hyenas.Female spotted hyenas have a clitoris 90 percent as long and the same diameter as a male penis (171 millimeters long and 22 millimeters in diameter), and this pseudo-penis's formation seems largely androgen-independent because it appears in the female fetus before differentiation of the fetal ovary and adrenal gland. 

The spotted hyenas have a highly erectile clitoris, complete with a false scrotum; author John C. 

Wingfield stated that "the resemblance to male genitalia is so close that sex can be determined with confidence only by palpation of the scrotum". 

The pseudo-penis can also be distinguished from the males' genitalia by its greater thickness and more rounded glans. 

The female possesses no external vagina, as the labia are fused to form a pseudo-scrotum. 

In the females, this scrotum consists of soft adipose tissue. 

Like male spotted hyenas with regard to their penises, the female spotted hyenas have small penile spines on the head of their clitorises, which scholar Catherine Blackledge said makes "the clitoris tip feel like soft sandpaper". 

She added that the clitoris "extends away from the body in a sleek and slender arc, measuring, on average, over 17 cm from root to tip. 

Just like a penis, [it] is fully erectile, raising its head in hyena greeting ceremonies, social displays, games of rough and tumble or when sniffing out peers".

Due to their higher levels of androgen exposure during fetal development, the female hyenas are significantly more muscular and aggressive than their male counterparts; social-wise, they are of higher rank than the males, being dominant or dominant and alpha, and the females who have been exposed to higher levels of androgen than average become higher-ranking than their female peers. 

Subordinate females lick the clitorises of higher-ranked females as a sign of submission and obedience, but females also lick each other's clitorises as a greeting or to strengthen social bonds; in contrast, while all males lick the clitorises of dominant females, the females will not lick the penises of males because males are considered to be of lowest rank.The urethra and vagina of the female spotted hyena exit through the clitoris, allowing the females to urinate, copulate and give birth through this organ. 

This trait makes mating more laborious for the male than in other mammals, and also makes attempts to sexually coerce (physically force sexual activity on) females futile. 

Joan Roughgarden, an ecologist and evolutionary biologist, said that because the hyena's clitoris is higher on the belly than the vagina in most mammals, the male hyena "must slide his rear under the female when mating so that his penis lines up with [her clitoris]". 

In an action similar to pushing up a shirtsleeve, the "female retracts the [pseudo-penis] on itself, and creates an opening into which the male inserts his own penis". 

The male must practice this act, which can take a couple of months to successfully perform. 

Female spotted hyenas exposed to larger doses of androgen have significantly damaged ovaries, making it difficult to conceive. 

After giving birth, the pseudo-penis is stretched and loses much of its original aspects; it becomes a slack-walled and reduced prepuce with an enlarged orifice with split lips. 

Approximately 15% of the females die during their first time giving birth, and over 60% of their species' firstborn young die.A 2006 Baskin et al. study concluded, "The basic anatomical structures of the corporeal bodies in both sexes of humans and spotted hyenas were similar. 

As in humans, the dorsal nerve distribution was unique in being devoid of nerves at the 12 o'clock position in the penis and clitoris of the spotted hyena" and that "[d]orsal nerves of the penis/clitoris in humans and male spotted hyenas tracked along both sides of the corporeal body to the corpus spongiosum at the 5 and 7 o'clock positions. 

The dorsal nerves penetrated the corporeal body and distally the glans in the hyena", and in female hyenas, "the dorsal nerves fanned out laterally on the clitoral body. 

Glans morphology was different in appearance in both sexes, being wide and blunt in the female and tapered in the male".


=== Moles ===

Many species of Talpid moles exhibit peniform clitorises that are tunneled by the urethra and are found to have erectile tissue, most notably species from the Talpa genus found in Europe. 

Unique to this clade are the presence of ovotestes, wherein the female ovary also is mostly made up of sterile testicular tissue that secretes testosterone with only a small portion of the gonad containing ovarian tissue. 

Genetic studies have revealed that females have an XX genotype and do not have any translocated Y-linked genes. 

Detailed developmental studies of Talpa occidentalis have revealed that the female gonads develop in a "testis-like pattern". 

DMRT1, a gene that regulates development of Sertoli cells, was found to be expressed in female germ cells before meiosis, however no Sertoli cells were present in the fully-developed ovotestes. 

Additionally, the female germ cells only enter meiosis postnatally, a phenomenon that has not been found in any other eutherian mammal. 

Phylogenetic analyses have suggested that, like in lemuroids, this trait must have evolved in a common ancestor of the clade, and has been "turned off and on" in different Talpid lineages.Female European moles are highly territorial and will not allow males in to their territory outside of breeding season, the probable cause of this behavior being the high levels of testosterone secreted by the female ovotestes. 

During the non-breeding season, their vaginal opening is covered by skin, akin to the condition seen in mouse and dwarf lemurs.


=== Cats, sheep and mice ===

Researchers studying the peripheral and central afferent pathways from the feline clitoris concluded that "afferent neurons projecting to the clitoris of the cat were identified by WGA-HRP tracing in the S1 and S2 dorsal root ganglia. 

An average of 433 cells were identified on each side of the animal. 85 percent and 15 percent of the labeled cells were located in the S1 and S2 dorsal root ganglia, respectively. 

The average cross sectional area of clitoral afferent neuron profiles was 1.479±627 μm2." They also stated that light "constant pressure on the clitoris produced an initial burst of single unit firing (maximum frequencies 170–255 Hz) followed by rapid adaptation and a sustained firing (maximum 40 Hz), which was maintained during the stimulation" and that further examination of tonic firing "indicate that the clitoris is innervated by mechano-sensitive myelinated afferent fibers in the pudental nerve which project centrally to the region of the dorsal commissure in the L7-S1 spinal cord".The external phenotype and reproductive behavior of 21 freemartin sheep and two male pseudohermaphrodite sheep were recorded with the aim of identifying any characteristics that could predict a failure to breed. 

The vagina's length and the size and shape of the vulva and clitoris were among the aspects analyzed. 

While the study reported that "a number of physical and behavioural abnormalities were detected," it also concluded that "the only consistent finding in all 23 animals was a short vagina which varied in length from 3.1 to 7.0 cm, compared with 10 to 14 cm in normal animals."In a study concerning the clitoral structure of mice, the mouse perineal urethra was documented as being surrounded by erectile tissue forming the bulbs of the clitoris. 

The researchers stated, "In the mouse, as in human females, tissue organization in the corpora cavernosa of the clitoris is essentially similar to that of the penis except for the absence of a subalbugineal layer interposed between the tunica albuginea and the erectile tissue."


== Notes ==



=== Bibliography ===




https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clitoris
;;;ES;;;



CLÍTORIS


El clítoris ((escuchar) o (escuchar)) es un órgano sexual femenino presente en mamíferos, avestruces y un número limitado de otros animales.

En los humanos, la parte visible, el glande, se encuentra en la unión frontal de los labios menores (labios internos), por encima de la abertura de la uretra.

A diferencia del pene, el homólogo masculino (equivalente) del clítoris, por lo general no contiene la porción distal (o abertura) de la uretra y, por lo tanto, no se usa para orinar.

En la mayoría de las especies, el clítoris carece de función reproductiva.

Mientras que pocos animales orinan a través del clítoris o lo usan reproductivamente, la hiena manchada, que tiene un clítoris especialmente grande, orina, se aparea y da a luz a través del órgano.

Algunos otros mamíferos, como los lémures y los monos araña, también tienen un clítoris grande. El clítoris es la zona erógena más sensible de la hembra humana y, en general, la principal fuente anatómica del placer sexual femenino humano.

En humanos y otros mamíferos, se desarrolla a partir de un crecimiento en el embrión llamado tubérculo genital.

Inicialmente indiferenciado, el tubérculo se convierte en un pene o un clítoris durante el desarrollo del sistema reproductivo dependiendo de la exposición a los andrógenos (que son principalmente hormonas masculinas).

El clítoris es una estructura compleja, y su tamaño y sensibilidad pueden variar.

El glande (cabeza) del clítoris humano tiene aproximadamente el tamaño y la forma de un guisante y se estima que tiene unas 8000 terminaciones nerviosas sensoriales. análisis y estudios.

Tales discusiones van desde la precisión anatómica, la desigualdad de género, la mutilación genital femenina y los factores orgásmicos y su explicación fisiológica del punto G.

Aunque, en los humanos, el único propósito conocido del clítoris es proporcionar placer sexual, se ha debatido si el clítoris es un vestigio, una adaptación o cumple una función reproductiva.

Las percepciones sociales del clítoris incluyen la importancia de su papel en el placer sexual femenino, suposiciones sobre su verdadero tamaño y profundidad, y diversas creencias sobre la modificación genital, como el agrandamiento del clítoris, la perforación del clítoris y la clitoridectomía.

La modificación genital puede deberse a razones estéticas, médicas o culturales. El conocimiento del clítoris se ve afectado significativamente por las percepciones culturales del órgano.

Los estudios sugieren que el conocimiento de su existencia y anatomía es escaso en comparación con el de otros órganos sexuales y que una mayor educación al respecto podría ayudar a aliviar los estigmas sociales asociados con el cuerpo femenino y el placer sexual femenino, por ejemplo, que el clítoris y la vulva en general. son visualmente poco atractivos, que la masturbación femenina es un tabú, o que se debe esperar que los hombres dominen y controlen los orgasmos de las mujeres.


== Etimología ==

El Oxford English Dictionary afirma que la palabra clítoris probablemente tiene su origen en el griego antiguo κλειτορίς, kleitoris, quizás derivado del verbo κλείειν, kleiein, "cerrar".

Clítoris también significa en griego la palabra clave, "lo que indica que los antiguos anatomistas lo consideraban la clave" de la sexualidad femenina.

Además de clave, el Diccionario de etimología en línea sugiere que otros candidatos griegos para la etimología de la palabra incluyen un sustantivo que significa "pestillo" o "gancho"; un verbo que significa "tocar o excitar lascivamente", "hacer cosquillas" (un sinónimo alemán para el clítoris es der Kitzler, "el cosquillas"), aunque es más probable que este verbo se derive de "clítoris"; y una palabra que significa "ladera de una colina", de la misma raíz que "clímax".

El Oxford English Dictionary también establece que la forma abreviada "clítoris", cuya primera aparición se observó en los Estados Unidos, se ha utilizado impresa desde 1958: hasta entonces, la abreviatura común era "clítoris". Las formas plurales son clítoris. en inglés y clitorides en latín.

El genitivo latino es clitoridis, como en "glans clitoridis".

En la literatura médica y sexológica, el clítoris a veces se denomina "el pene femenino" o pseudopene, y el término clítoris se usa comúnmente para referirse solo al glande; en parte debido a esto, ha habido varios términos para el órgano que históricamente han confundido su anatomía.


== Estructura ==



=== Desarrollo ===


En los mamíferos, la diferenciación sexual está determinada por el esperma que lleva un cromosoma X o Y (masculino).

El cromosoma Y contiene un gen determinante del sexo (SRY) que codifica un factor de transcripción para la proteína TDF (factor determinante testicular) y desencadena la creación de testosterona y hormona antimülleriana para el desarrollo del embrión en un varón.

Esta diferenciación comienza unas ocho o nueve semanas después de la concepción.

Algunas fuentes afirman que continúa hasta la duodécima semana, mientras que otras afirman que es claramente evidente en la decimotercera semana y que los órganos sexuales están completamente desarrollados en la decimosexta semana. El clítoris se desarrolla a partir de un crecimiento fálico en el embrión llamado tubérculo genital. .

Inicialmente indiferenciado, el tubérculo se convierte en clítoris o pene durante el desarrollo del sistema reproductivo dependiendo de la exposición a los andrógenos (que son principalmente hormonas masculinas).

El clítoris se forma a partir de los mismos tejidos que se convierten en el glande y el eje del pene, y este origen embrionario compartido hace que estos dos órganos sean homólogos (diferentes versiones de la misma estructura). Si se expone a la testosterona, el tubérculo genital se alarga para formar el pene.

Mediante la fusión de los pliegues urogenitales (estructuras alargadas en forma de huso que contribuyen a la formación del surco uretral en la cara ventral del tubérculo genital), el seno urogenital se cierra por completo y forma la uretra esponjosa, y las protuberancias labioescrotales se unen para formar el escroto. .

En ausencia de testosterona, el tubérculo genital permite la formación del clítoris; el rápido crecimiento inicial del falo se ralentiza gradualmente y se forma el clítoris.

El seno urogenital persiste como el vestíbulo de la vagina, los dos pliegues urogenitales forman los labios menores y las protuberancias labioescrotales se agrandan para formar los labios mayores, completando los genitales femeninos.

Una condición rara que puede desarrollarse a partir de una exposición a andrógenos superior a la media es la clitoromegalia.


=== Anatomía macroscópica e histología ===



==== Generalidades ====

El clítoris contiene componentes externos e internos.

Consiste en el glande, el cuerpo (que se compone de dos estructuras eréctiles conocidas como cuerpos cavernosos) y dos pilares ("piernas").

Tiene una capucha formada por los labios menores (labios internos).

También tiene bulbos vestibulares o del clítoris.

El frenillo del clítoris es un frenillo en la superficie inferior del glande y está formado por las dos partes mediales de los labios menores.

El cuerpo del clítoris puede denominarse eje (o eje interno), mientras que la longitud del clítoris entre el glande y el cuerpo también puede denominarse eje.

El eje sostiene el glande y su forma se puede ver y sentir a través del capuchón del clítoris. Las investigaciones indican que el tejido del clítoris se extiende hacia la pared anterior de la vagina. Şenayli et al. Dijo que la evaluación histológica del clítoris, “especialmente de los cuerpos cavernosos, es incompleta porque durante muchos años se consideró al clítoris como un órgano rudimentario y no funcional”. Agregaron que Baskin y sus colegas examinaron la masculinización del clítoris después de la disección y, utilizando un software de imágenes después de la tinción con cromo de Masson, juntaron las muestras diseccionadas en serie; esto reveló que los nervios del clítoris rodean todo el cuerpo del clítoris (cuerpo). El clítoris, los bulbos vestibulares, los labios menores y la uretra involucran dos tipos histológicamente distintos de tejido vascular (tejido relacionado con los vasos sanguíneos),

El tejido trabeculado tiene un aspecto esponjoso; junto con la sangre, llena los grandes espacios vasculares dilatados del clítoris y los bulbos.

Debajo del epitelio de las áreas vasculares hay músculo liso.

Como lo indica la investigación de Yang et al., también puede ser que la luz uretral (el espacio interior abierto o la cavidad de la uretra), que está rodeada de tejido esponjoso, tenga tejido que "es muy distinto del tejido vascular de el clítoris y los bulbos, y en la observación macroscópica, es más pálido que el tejido oscuro" del clítoris y los bulbos.

El segundo tipo de tejido vascular es el no eréctil, que puede consistir en vasos sanguíneos que están dispersos dentro de una matriz fibrosa y tienen solo una cantidad mínima de músculo liso.


==== Glande y cuerpo ====

Altamente inervado, el glande existe en la punta del cuerpo del clítoris como un casquete fibrovascular y generalmente tiene el tamaño y la forma de un guisante, aunque a veces es mucho más grande o más pequeño.

Se estima que el glande del clítoris, o todo el clítoris, tiene unas 8.000 terminaciones nerviosas sensoriales.

Investigue conflictos sobre si el glande está compuesto o no de tejido eréctil o no eréctil.

Aunque el cuerpo del clítoris se llena de sangre con la excitación sexual, erigiendo el glande del clítoris, algunas fuentes describen el glande del clítoris y los labios menores como compuestos de tejido no eréctil; este es especialmente el caso del glande.

Afirman que el glande del clítoris y los labios menores tienen vasos sanguíneos que están dispersos dentro de una matriz fibrosa y tienen solo una cantidad mínima de músculo liso, o que el glande del clítoris es "una estructura de línea media, densamente neural, no eréctil". Otras descripciones del glande afirman que está compuesto de tejido eréctil y que el tejido eréctil está presente dentro de los labios menores.

Se puede observar que el glande tiene espacios vasculares glandulares que no son tan prominentes como los del cuerpo del clítoris, con los espacios más separados por músculo liso que en el cuerpo y los pilares.

El tejido adiposo está ausente en los labios menores, pero el órgano puede describirse como formado por tejido conjuntivo denso, tejido eréctil y fibras elásticas.

El cuerpo del clítoris forma una estructura en forma de espoleta que contiene los cuerpos cavernosos, un par de regiones esponjosas de tejido eréctil que contienen la mayor parte de la sangre del clítoris durante la erección del clítoris.

Los dos cuerpos que forman el cuerpo del clítoris están rodeados por una gruesa túnica albugínea fibroelástica, que literalmente significa "cubierta blanca", tejido conectivo.

Estos cuerpos están separados de forma incompleta entre sí en la línea media por un tabique pectiniforme fibroso, una banda de tejido conectivo en forma de peine que se extiende entre los cuerpos cavernosos. El cuerpo del clítoris se extiende hasta varios centímetros antes de invertir la dirección y ramificarse, lo que da como resultado una "V" invertida. forma que se extiende como un par de pilares ("piernas").

Los pilares son las porciones proximales de los brazos de la horquilla.

Terminando en el glande del clítoris, la punta del cuerpo se dobla anteriormente alejándose del pubis.

Cada pilar (forma singular de pilar) está unido a la rama isquiática correspondiente, extensiones de la copora debajo de las ramas púbicas descendentes.

Ocultos detrás de los labios menores, los pilares terminan con un accesorio en o justo debajo de la mitad del arco púbico.

Asociados están la esponja uretral, la esponja perineal, una red de nervios y vasos sanguíneos, el ligamento suspensorio del clítoris, los músculos y el piso pélvico. No existe una correlación identificada entre el tamaño del glande del clítoris, o clítoris como un todo, y la edad, la altura, el peso, el uso de anticonceptivos hormonales o la posmenopausia de una mujer, aunque las mujeres que han dado a luz pueden tener medidas del clítoris significativamente más grandes.

Las medidas del clítoris en centímetros (cm) y milímetros (mm) muestran variaciones en su tamaño.

Se ha citado que el glande del clítoris varía típicamente de 2 mm a 1 cm y, por lo general, se estima en 4 a 5 mm tanto en el plano transversal como en el longitudinal. Un estudio de 1992 concluyó que la longitud total del clítoris, incluido el glande y el cuerpo, es 16,0 ± 4,3 mm (0,63 ± 0,17 pulgadas), donde 16 mm (0,63 pulgadas) es la media y 4,3 mm (0,17 pulgadas) es la desviación estándar.

En cuanto a otros estudios, investigadores del Elizabeth Garrett Anderson and Obstetric Hospital de Londres midieron los labios y otras estructuras genitales de 50 mujeres de 18 a 50 años de edad, con una edad media de 35,6 años, de 2003 a 2004, y los resultados arrojaron para el glande del clítoris fueron de 3 a 10 mm para el rango y de 5,5 [1,7] mm para el medio.

Otra investigación indica que el cuerpo del clítoris puede medir de 5 a 7 centímetros (2,0 a 2,8 pulgadas) de largo, mientras que el cuerpo del clítoris y los pilares juntos pueden medir 10 centímetros (3,9 pulgadas) o más de largo.


==== Capucha ====

El capuchón del clítoris se proyecta al frente de la comisura de los labios, donde los bordes de los labios mayores (labios externos) se unen en la base del montículo púbico; está parcialmente formado por la fusión de la parte superior de los pliegues externos de los labios menores (labios internos) y cubre el glande y el eje externo.

Existe una variación considerable en la cantidad de glande que sobresale del capuchón y la cantidad que cubre, desde completamente cubierto hasta completamente expuesto, y el tejido de los labios menores también rodea la base del glande.


==== Bombillas ====
Los bulbos vestibulares están más estrechamente relacionados con el clítoris que con el vestíbulo debido a la similitud del tejido trabecular y eréctil dentro del clítoris y los bulbos, y la ausencia de tejido trabecular en otros órganos genitales, con la naturaleza trabecular del tejido eréctil que permite la congestión y expansión. durante la excitación sexual.

Los bulbos vestibulares se describen normalmente como situados cerca de los pilares a ambos lados de la abertura vaginal; internamente, están debajo de los labios mayores.

Cuando se llenan de sangre, tapan la abertura vaginal y hacen que la vulva se expanda hacia afuera.

Aunque varios textos afirman que rodean la abertura vaginal, Ginger et al. afirmar que este no parece ser el caso y que la túnica albugínea no envuelve el tejido eréctil de los bulbos.

En la evaluación de Yang et al. de la anatomía de los bulbos, concluyen que los bulbos "se arquean sobre la uretra distal, delineando lo que podría llamarse apropiadamente la 'uretra bulbar' en las mujeres".


=== Homología ===

El clítoris y el pene generalmente tienen la misma estructura anatómica, aunque la porción distal (o abertura) de la uretra está ausente en el clítoris de los humanos y la mayoría de los otros animales.

La idea de que los hombres tienen clítoris fue sugerida en 1987 por la investigadora Josephine Lowndes Sevely, quien teorizó que los cuerpos cavernosos masculinos (un par de regiones esponjosas de tejido eréctil que contienen la mayor parte de la sangre en el pene durante la erección del pene) son los verdaderos contraparte del clítoris.

Argumentó que "el clítoris masculino" está directamente debajo del borde del glande del pene, donde se encuentra el frenillo del prepucio del pene (un pliegue del prepucio), y propuso que esta área se llamara "corona de Lownde".

Su teoría y propuesta, aunque reconocida en la literatura anatómica, no se materializó en los libros de anatomía.

Los textos anatómicos modernos muestran que el clítoris presenta un capuchón equivalente al prepucio del pene, que cubre el glande.

También tiene un eje que se une al glande.

Los cuerpos cavernosos masculinos son homólogos al cuerpo cavernoso del clítoris (el cavernoso femenino), el bulbo del pene es homólogo a los bulbos vestibulares debajo de los labios menores, el escroto es homólogo a los labios mayores y la uretra peneana y parte de la piel. del pene es homólogo a los labios menores. Tras un estudio anatómico, el pene puede describirse como un clítoris que se ha sacado en su mayor parte del cuerpo y se ha injertado encima de una pieza significativamente más pequeña de esponjoso que contiene la uretra.

Con respecto a las terminaciones nerviosas, el clítoris humano estimado en 8000 o más (para su glande o cuerpo del clítoris en su totalidad) se cita comúnmente como el doble de las terminaciones nerviosas que se encuentran en el pene humano (para su glande o cuerpo en su totalidad). ) y como más que cualquier otra parte del cuerpo humano.

Estos informes a veces entran en conflicto con otras fuentes sobre la anatomía del clítoris o sobre las terminaciones nerviosas del pene humano.

Por ejemplo, mientras que algunas fuentes estiman que el pene humano tiene 4000 terminaciones nerviosas, otras fuentes afirman que el glande o toda la estructura del pene tienen la misma cantidad de terminaciones nerviosas que el glande del clítoris o discuten si el pene no circuncidado tiene miles más que el circuncidado. pene o es generalmente más sensible. Algunas fuentes afirman que, en contraste con el glande del pene, el glande del clítoris carece de músculo liso dentro de su capa fibrovascular y, por lo tanto, se diferencia de los tejidos eréctiles del clítoris y los bulbos; además, el tamaño del bulbo varía y puede depender de la edad y la estrogenización.

Si bien los bulbos se consideran el equivalente del esponjoso masculino, no rodean completamente la uretra. El delgado cuerpo esponjoso del pene corre a lo largo de la parte inferior del cuerpo del pene, envuelve la uretra y se expande al final para formar el glande.

Contribuye parcialmente a la erección, que es causada principalmente por los dos cuerpos cavernosos que comprenden la mayor parte del eje; al igual que la cavernosa femenina, la cavernosa masculina absorbe sangre y se pone erecta cuando se excita sexualmente.

Los cuerpos cavernosos masculinos se estrechan internamente al llegar a la cabeza esponjosa.

Con respecto a la forma de Y de la cavernosa (coronilla, cuerpo y piernas), el cuerpo explica mucho más la estructura en los hombres y las piernas son más rechonchas; típicamente, los cavernosos son más largos y gruesos en los machos que en las hembras.


== Función ==



=== Actividad sexual ===



==== Generalidades ====
El clítoris tiene una gran cantidad de terminaciones nerviosas y es la zona erógena más sensible de la mujer humana y, en general, la principal fuente anatómica del placer sexual femenino humano.

Cuando se estimula sexualmente, puede incitar a la excitación sexual femenina.

La estimulación sexual, incluida la excitación, puede resultar de la estimulación mental, los juegos previos con una pareja sexual o la masturbación, y puede conducir al orgasmo.

La estimulación sexual más efectiva del órgano suele ser manual u oral (cunnilingus), lo que a menudo se denomina estimulación directa del clítoris; en los casos que involucran penetración sexual, estas actividades también pueden denominarse estimulación del clítoris adicional o asistida. La estimulación directa del clítoris implica la estimulación física de la anatomía externa del clítoris: glande, capuchón y eje externo.

La estimulación de los labios menores (labios internos), debido a su conexión externa con el glande y el capuchón, puede tener el mismo efecto que la estimulación directa del clítoris.

Aunque estas áreas también pueden recibir estimulación física indirecta durante la actividad sexual, como cuando están en contacto con los labios mayores (labios externos), la estimulación indirecta del clítoris se atribuye más comúnmente a la penetración peneana-vaginal.

La penetración peneano-anal también puede estimular indirectamente el clítoris por los nervios sensoriales compartidos (especialmente el nervio pudendo, que emite los nervios anales inferiores y se divide en dos ramas terminales: el nervio perineal y el nervio dorsal del clítoris). Debido a la la alta sensibilidad del glande, la estimulación directa no siempre es placentera; en cambio, la estimulación directa en el capuchón o las áreas cercanas al glande suele ser más placentera, y la mayoría de las mujeres prefieren usar el capuchón para estimular el glande, o hacer rodar el glande entre los labios de los labios, para un toque indirecto.

También es común que las mujeres disfruten de que el eje del clítoris sea acariciado suavemente junto con un movimiento circular ocasional del glande del clítoris.

Esto puede ser con o sin penetración manual de la vagina, mientras que otras mujeres disfrutan de que les acaricien toda el área de la vulva.

A diferencia del uso de los dedos secos, la estimulación de los dedos bien lubricados, ya sea con lubricación vaginal o con un lubricante personal, suele ser más placentera para la anatomía externa del clítoris. Como la ubicación externa del clítoris no permite la estimulación directa por penetración sexual, cualquier estimulación externa del clítoris mientras está en la posición del misionero generalmente resulta del área del hueso púbico, el movimiento de las ingles cuando están en contacto.

Como tal, algunas parejas pueden participar en la posición de mujer arriba o la técnica de alineación coital, una posición sexual que combina la variación de "montar alto" de la posición del misionero con movimientos de presión y contrapresión realizados por cada pareja al ritmo de la penetración sexual. para maximizar la estimulación del clítoris.

Las parejas de lesbianas pueden participar en el tribadismo para una amplia estimulación del clítoris o para la estimulación mutua del clítoris durante el contacto de todo el cuerpo.

También se puede practicar presionar el pene con un movimiento deslizante o circular contra el clítoris (sexo intercrural), o estimularlo mediante el movimiento contra otra parte del cuerpo.

Se puede usar un vibrador (como un vibrador para el clítoris), un consolador u otro juguete sexual.

Otras mujeres estimulan el clítoris mediante el uso de una almohada u otro objeto inanimado, mediante un chorro de agua del grifo de una bañera o ducha, o cerrando las piernas y meciéndose. Durante la excitación sexual, el clítoris y la totalidad de los genitales se hinchan. y cambia de color a medida que los tejidos eréctiles se llenan de sangre (vasocongestión) y la persona experimenta contracciones vaginales.

Los músculos isquiocavernoso y bulbocavernoso, que se insertan en los cuerpos cavernosos, contraen y comprimen la vena dorsal del clítoris (la única vena que drena la sangre de los espacios en los cuerpos cavernosos), y la sangre arterial continúa un flujo constante y sin tener manera de drenar, llena los espacios venosos hasta que se vuelven turgentes y llenos de sangre.

Esto es lo que conduce a la erección del clítoris. El glande del clítoris duplica su diámetro con la excitación y, con más estimulación, se vuelve menos visible ya que está cubierto por la hinchazón de los tejidos del capuchón del clítoris.

La hinchazón protege el glande del contacto directo, ya que el contacto directo en esta etapa puede ser más irritante que placentero.

La vasocongestión finalmente desencadena un reflejo muscular, que expulsa la sangre que estaba atrapada en los tejidos circundantes y conduce al orgasmo.

Poco tiempo después de que se detiene la estimulación, especialmente si se ha logrado el orgasmo, el glande vuelve a ser visible y vuelve a su estado normal, con unos pocos segundos (generalmente de 5 a 10) para volver a su posición normal y de 5 a 10 minutos para volver. a su tamaño original.

Si no se logra el orgasmo, el clítoris puede permanecer congestionado durante algunas horas, lo que a menudo resulta incómodo para las mujeres.

Además, el clítoris es muy sensible después del orgasmo, lo que hace que la estimulación adicional sea inicialmente dolorosa para algunas mujeres.


==== Factores orgásmicos clitoridianos y vaginales ====

Las estadísticas generales indican que entre el 70 y el 80 por ciento de las mujeres requieren estimulación directa del clítoris (fricción constante manual, oral u otra fricción concentrada contra las partes externas del clítoris) para alcanzar el orgasmo.

La estimulación indirecta del clítoris (por ejemplo, a través de la penetración vaginal) también puede ser suficiente para el orgasmo femenino.

El área cercana a la entrada de la vagina (el tercio inferior) contiene casi el 90 por ciento de las terminaciones nerviosas vaginales, y hay áreas en la pared vaginal anterior y entre la unión superior de los labios menores y la uretra que son especialmente sensibles, pero el placer sexual intenso, incluido el orgasmo, únicamente a partir de la estimulación vaginal es ocasional o está ausente porque la vagina tiene muchas menos terminaciones nerviosas que el clítoris. El debate destacado sobre la cantidad de terminaciones nerviosas vaginales comenzó con Alfred Kinsey.

Aunque la teoría de Sigmund Freud de que los orgasmos del clítoris son un fenómeno prepuberal o adolescente y que los orgasmos vaginales (o del punto G) son algo que solo experimentan las mujeres físicamente maduras había sido criticada anteriormente, Kinsey fue el primer investigador en criticar duramente la teoría.

A través de sus observaciones de la masturbación femenina y entrevistas con miles de mujeres, Kinsey descubrió que la mayoría de las mujeres que observó y encuestó no podían tener orgasmos vaginales, un hallazgo que también fue respaldado por su conocimiento de la anatomía de los órganos sexuales.

La académica Janice M.

Irvine declaró que "criticó a Freud y otros teóricos por proyectar construcciones masculinas de la sexualidad en las mujeres" y "veía el clítoris como el centro principal de la respuesta sexual".

Consideró que la vagina es "relativamente poco importante" para la satisfacción sexual, transmitiendo que "pocas mujeres insertan dedos u objetos en sus vaginas cuando se masturban".

Creyendo que los orgasmos vaginales son "una imposibilidad fisiológica" porque la vagina no tiene suficientes terminaciones nerviosas para el placer sexual o el clímax, "concluyó que la satisfacción de la penetración del pene [es] principalmente psicológica o quizás el resultado de la sensación referida". La investigación de Masters y Johnson, así como los de Shere Hite, generalmente apoyaron los hallazgos de Kinsey sobre el orgasmo femenino.

Masters y Johnson fueron los primeros investigadores en determinar que las estructuras del clítoris rodean y se extienden a lo largo y dentro de los labios.

Observaron que tanto los orgasmos del clítoris como los vaginales tienen las mismas etapas de respuesta física, y descubrieron que la mayoría de sus sujetos solo podían lograr orgasmos del clítoris, mientras que una minoría lograba orgasmos vaginales.

Sobre esa base, argumentaron que la estimulación del clítoris es la fuente de ambos tipos de orgasmos, razonando que el clítoris es estimulado durante la penetración por la fricción contra su capuchón.

La investigación se produjo en el momento de la segunda ola del movimiento feminista, que inspiró a las feministas a rechazar la distinción entre orgasmos clitoridianos y vaginales.

La feminista Anne Koedt argumentó que debido a que los hombres "tienen orgasmos esencialmente por fricción con la vagina" y no con el área del clítoris, esta es la razón por la cual la biología de las mujeres no se ha analizado adecuadamente. "Hoy, con amplios conocimientos de anatomía, con [C.

Lombard Kelly], Kinsey y Masters and Johnson, por mencionar solo algunas fuentes, no hay ignorancia sobre el tema [del orgasmo femenino]", afirmó en su artículo de 1970 El mito del orgasmo vaginal.

Añadió: "Sin embargo, existen razones sociales por las que este conocimiento no se ha popularizado.

Vivimos en una sociedad masculina que no ha buscado un cambio en el papel de la mujer". Un estudio publicado en 2005 que investigó el tamaño del clítoris, que investigó el tamaño del clítoris, respalda una relación anatómica entre el clítoris y la vagina; la uróloga australiana Helen O'Connell, describió como después de haber iniciado un discurso entre los principales profesionales médicos para reenfocar y redefinir el clítoris, notó una relación directa entre las piernas o raíces del clítoris y el tejido eréctil de los bulbos y cuerpos del clítoris, y la uretra distal y la vagina al usar imágenes de resonancia magnética ( resonancia magnética).

Si bien algunos estudios, utilizando ultrasonido, han encontrado evidencia fisiológica del punto G en mujeres que informan tener orgasmos durante el coito vaginal, O'Connell argumenta que esta relación interconectada es la explicación fisiológica del Punto G conjeturado y la experiencia de los orgasmos vaginales. teniendo en cuenta la estimulación de las partes internas del clítoris durante la penetración vaginal. "La pared vaginal es, de hecho, el clítoris", dijo. "Si levantas la piel de la vagina en las paredes laterales, obtienes los bulbos del clítoris: masas triangulares en forma de media luna de tejido eréctil". O'Connell et al., después de haber realizado disecciones en los genitales femeninos de cadáveres y utilizado la fotografía para mapear la estructura de los nervios en el clítoris,

Llegaron a la conclusión de que algunas hembras tienen tejidos y nervios del clítoris más extensos que otras, especialmente después de haber observado esto en cadáveres jóvenes en comparación con los ancianos y, por lo tanto, mientras que la mayoría de las hembras solo pueden alcanzar el orgasmo mediante la estimulación directa de las partes externas del clítoris, el la estimulación de los tejidos más generalizados del clítoris a través del coito vaginal puede ser suficiente para otros. Los investigadores franceses Odile Buisson y Pierre Foldès informaron hallazgos similares a los de O'Connell.

En 2008, publicaron la primera ecografía 3D completa del clítoris estimulado y la volvieron a publicar en 2009 con una nueva investigación, que demuestra las formas en que el tejido eréctil del clítoris hincha y rodea la vagina.

Sobre la base de sus hallazgos, argumentaron que las mujeres pueden lograr un orgasmo vaginal a través de la estimulación del punto G, porque el clítoris altamente inervado se acerca a la pared anterior de la vagina cuando la mujer está excitada sexualmente y durante la vagina. penetración.

Afirman que dado que la pared frontal de la vagina está indisolublemente unida a las partes internas del clítoris, estimular la vagina sin activar el clítoris puede ser casi imposible.

En su estudio publicado en 2009, los "planos coronales durante la contracción perineal y la penetración de los dedos demostraron una estrecha relación entre la raíz del clítoris y la pared vaginal anterior".

Buisson y Foldès sugirieron "que la sensibilidad especial de la pared vaginal anterior inferior podría explicarse por la presión y el movimiento de la raíz del clítoris durante una penetración vaginal y la subsiguiente contracción perineal". El investigador Vincenzo Puppo, quien, si bien concuerda en que el clítoris es el centro de placer sexual femenino y creyendo que no hay evidencia anatómica del orgasmo vaginal, no está de acuerdo con las descripciones terminológicas y anatómicas del clítoris de O'Connell y otros investigadores (como referirse a los bulbos vestibulares como "bulbos del clítoris") y afirma que "el clítoris interior" no existe porque el pene no puede entrar en contacto con la congregación de múltiples nervios/venas situadas hasta el ángulo del clítoris, detallado por Kobelt, ni con las raíces del clítoris,que no tienen receptores sensoriales o sensibilidad erógena, durante el coito vaginal.

La creencia de Puppo contrasta con la creencia general entre los investigadores de que los orgasmos vaginales son el resultado de la estimulación del clítoris; reafirman que el tejido del clítoris se extiende, o al menos es estimulado por sus bulbos, incluso en el área más comúnmente reportada como el punto G. También se ha teorizado, con sentimiento, que el punto G es análogo a la base del pene masculino. del investigador Amichai Kilchevsky que debido a que el desarrollo fetal femenino es el estado "predeterminado" en ausencia de una exposición sustancial a las hormonas masculinas y, por lo tanto, el pene es esencialmente un clítoris agrandado por tales hormonas, no hay razón evolutiva por la cual las mujeres tendrían una entidad adicional al clítoris que puede producir orgasmos.

La dificultad general de lograr orgasmos por vía vaginal, que es una situación que probablemente se deba a que la naturaleza facilita el proceso de tener hijos al reducir drásticamente la cantidad de terminaciones nerviosas vaginales, desafía los argumentos de que los orgasmos vaginales ayudan a fomentar las relaciones sexuales para facilitar la reproducción.

Sin embargo, un estudio de la Universidad de Rutgers, publicado en 2011, que fue el primero en mapear los genitales femeninos en la parte sensorial del cerebro, respalda un punto G distinto; los escaneos indicaron que el cerebro registró distintas sensaciones entre estimular el clítoris, el cuello uterino y la pared vaginal, donde se informa que está el punto G, cuando varias mujeres se estimularon a sí mismas en una máquina de resonancia magnética funcional (fMRI).

Barry Komisaruk, jefe de los hallazgos de la investigación, afirmó que siente que "la mayor parte de la evidencia muestra que el punto G no es algo en particular" y que es "una región, es una convergencia de muchas estructuras diferentes".


=== Puntos de vista vestigiales, adaptacionistas y reproductivos ===

También se ha debatido si el clítoris es un vestigio, una adaptación o cumple una función reproductiva.

Geoffrey Miller afirmó que Helen Fisher, Meredith Small y Sarah Blaffer Hrdy "han visto el orgasmo del clítoris como una adaptación legítima por derecho propio, con importantes implicaciones para el comportamiento sexual femenino y la evolución sexual".

Al igual que Lynn Margulis y Natalie Angier, Miller cree que "el clítoris humano no muestra signos aparentes de haber evolucionado directamente a través de la elección de pareja masculina.

No es especialmente grande, de colores brillantes, de forma específica o se muestra selectivamente durante el cortejo." Él contrasta esto con otras especies hembras como los monos araña y las hienas manchadas que tienen clítoris tan largos como sus contrapartes masculinas.

Dijo que el clítoris humano "podría haber evolucionado para ser mucho más llamativo si los hombres hubieran preferido parejas sexuales con clítoris más grandes y brillantes" y que "su diseño discreto combinado con su exquisita sensibilidad sugiere que el clítoris es importante, no como un objeto de elección de pareja masculina". , sino como un mecanismo de elección femenina". Mientras que Miller afirmó que científicos masculinos como Stephen Jay Gould y Donald Symons "han visto el orgasmo del clítoris femenino como un efecto secundario evolutivo de la capacidad masculina para el orgasmo del pene" y que "sugirieron que el orgasmo del clítoris no puede ser una adaptación porque es demasiado difícil de lograr", Gould reconoció que "la mayoría de los orgasmos femeninos emanan del sitio del clítoris, en lugar de la vagina (o algún otro)" y que su creencia no adaptativa "ha sido ampliamente malinterpretado como una negación del valor adaptativo del orgasmo femenino en general, o incluso como una afirmación de que los orgasmos femeninos carecen de significado en un sentido más amplio".

Dijo que aunque acepta que "el orgasmo del clítoris juega un papel placentero y central en la sexualidad femenina y sus alegrías", "[t]odos estos atributos favorables, sin embargo, emergen con la misma claridad y facilidad, ya sea que el sitio del clítoris del orgasmo surgió como una enjuta o una adaptación".

Agregó que los "biólogos masculinos que se preocuparon por [las preguntas adaptacionistas] simplemente asumieron que un sitio profundamente vaginal, más cercano a la región de la fertilización, ofrecería un mayor beneficio selectivo" debido a sus creencias darwinianas summum bonum sobre un mayor éxito reproductivo. Similar a Las creencias de Gould sobre los puntos de vista adaptacionistas y que "a las hembras les crecen pezones como adaptaciones para amamantar, y a los machos les crecen pezones más pequeños sin usar como un tímpano basado en el valor de los canales de desarrollo únicos", Elisabeth Lloyd sugirió que hay poca evidencia para apoyar una cuenta adaptacionista de la hembra. orgasmo.

meredith l

Chivers afirmó que "Lloyd ve el orgasmo femenino como un remanente ontogenético; las mujeres tienen orgasmos porque la neurofisiología urogenital para el orgasmo está tan fuertemente seleccionada en los hombres que este plan de desarrollo se expresa en las mujeres sin afectar la aptitud física" y esto es similar a "los hombres tienen [ ing] pezones que no cumplen ninguna función relacionada con la aptitud". En la conferencia de 2002 de la Sociedad Canadiense de Mujeres en Filosofía, Nancy Tuana argumentó que el clítoris es innecesario en la reproducción; afirmó que se ha ignorado por "miedo al placer".

Es el placer separado de la reproducción.

Ese es el miedo." Ella razonó que este miedo causa ignorancia, que vela la sexualidad femenina.

O'Connell declaró: "Todo se reduce a la rivalidad entre los sexos: la idea de que un sexo es sexual y el otro reproductivo.

La verdad es que ambos son sexuales y ambos son reproductivos”. Reiteró que los bulbos vestibulares parecen ser parte del clítoris y que la uretra distal y la vagina son estructuras íntimamente relacionadas, aunque no son de carácter eréctil, formando un cúmulo de tejidos. con el clítoris que parece ser el lugar de la función sexual femenina y el orgasmo.


== Importancia clínica ==



=== Modificación ===


Las modificaciones al clítoris pueden ser intencionales o no intencionales.

Incluyen la mutilación genital femenina (MGF), cirugía de reasignación de sexo (para hombres trans como parte de la transición, que también puede incluir agrandamiento del clítoris), cirugía intersexual y perforaciones genitales.

El uso de esteroides anabólicos por parte de culturistas y otros atletas puede resultar en un agrandamiento significativo del clítoris junto con otros efectos masculinizantes en sus cuerpos.

El agrandamiento anormal del clítoris también puede denominarse clitoromegalia, pero la clitoromegalia se considera más comúnmente como una anomalía congénita de los genitales. Las personas que toman hormonas u otros medicamentos como parte de una transición transgénero generalmente experimentan un crecimiento drástico del clítoris; los deseos individuales y las dificultades de la faloplastia (construcción de un pene) a menudo dan como resultado la retención de los genitales originales con el clítoris agrandado como un análogo del pene (metoidioplastia).

Sin embargo, el clítoris no puede alcanzar el tamaño del pene a través de las hormonas.

Una cirugía para agregar función al clítoris, como la metoidioplastia, es una alternativa a la faloplastia que permite la retención de la sensación sexual en el clítoris. En la clitoridectomía, el clítoris puede extirparse como parte de una vulvectomía radical para tratar el cáncer, como la neoplasia intraepitelial vulvar. ; sin embargo, los tratamientos modernos favorecen enfoques más conservadores, ya que la cirugía invasiva puede tener consecuencias psicosexuales.

La clitoridectomía más a menudo implica la extirpación parcial o total de partes del clítoris durante la mutilación genital femenina, lo que también puede conocerse como circuncisión femenina o corte genital femenino (FGC).

Quitar el glande del clítoris no significa que se pierda toda la estructura, ya que el clítoris llega profundamente a los genitales. En la clitoroplastia de reducción, una cirugía intersexual común, se preserva el glande y se extirpan partes de los cuerpos eréctiles.

Los problemas con esta técnica incluyen pérdida de sensibilidad, pérdida de la función sexual y desprendimiento del glande.

Una forma de preservar el clítoris con su inervación y función es imbricar y enterrar el glande del clítoris; sin embargo, Şenaylı et al. afirman que "el dolor durante el estímulo debido al tejido atrapado debajo de la cicatrización es casi rutinario".

En otro método, se extrae el 50 por ciento del clítoris ventral a través de la base nivelada del eje del clítoris, y se informa que se observa una buena sensación y función del clítoris en el seguimiento"; además, se ha "reportado que las complicaciones son de las mismas que en los procedimientos más antiguos para este método". Con respecto a las mujeres que tienen hiperplasia suprarrenal congénita, el grupo más grande que requiere corrección genital quirúrgica, el investigador Atilla Şenaylı afirmó: "Las principales expectativas para las operaciones son crear un anatomía femenina, con complicaciones mínimas y mejora de la calidad de vida". Şenaylı agregó que "[c]osmesis, integridad estructural y capacidad coital de la vagina, y ausencia de dolor durante la actividad sexual son los parámetros que debe juzgar el cirujano".(Cosmesis por lo general se refiere a la corrección quirúrgica de un defecto que desfigura). Afirmó que aunque "las expectativas se pueden estandarizar dentro de estos pocos parámetros, las técnicas quirúrgicas aún no se han vuelto homogéneas.

Los investigadores han preferido diferentes operaciones para diferentes edades de los pacientes". La evaluación del género y el tratamiento quirúrgico son los dos pasos principales en las operaciones intersexuales. "Los primeros tratamientos para la clitoromegalia fueron simplemente la resección del clítoris.

Más tarde, se entendió que el glande del clítoris y la información sensorial son importantes para facilitar el orgasmo", afirmó Atilla.

El epitelio del glande del clítoris "tiene una alta sensibilidad cutánea, que es importante en las respuestas sexuales", y es por eso que "luego se ideó la clitoroplastia de recesión como una alternativa, pero la clitoroplastia de reducción es el método que se realiza actualmente". ya que la "perforación del clítoris" es la perforación del capuchón del clítoris más común (y significativamente menos complicada).

Dado que la perforación del clítoris es difícil y muy dolorosa, la perforación del capuchón del clítoris es más común que la perforación del eje del clítoris, debido al pequeño porcentaje de personas anatómicamente adecuadas para ello.

Las perforaciones del capuchón del clítoris suelen canalizarse en forma de perforaciones verticales y, en menor medida, perforaciones horizontales.

La perforación del triángulo es una perforación horizontal muy profunda en el capó y se realiza detrás del clítoris en lugar de delante de él.

Los estilos como el Isabella, que atraviesan el eje del clítoris pero se colocan profundamente en la base, brindan una estimulación única y aún requieren la construcción genital adecuada.

Isabella comienza entre el glande del clítoris y la uretra, saliendo por la parte superior del capuchón del clítoris; esta perforación es de alto riesgo en cuanto a los daños que se pueden producir por la intersección de los nervios.


=== Trastornos sexuales ===

El trastorno de excitación genital persistente (PGAD, por sus siglas en inglés) da como resultado una excitación genital espontánea, persistente e incontrolable en las mujeres, sin relación con ningún sentimiento de deseo sexual.

El priapismo del clítoris, también conocido como clítoris, es una afección médica rara y potencialmente dolorosa y, a veces, se describe como un aspecto del PGAD.

Con PGAD, la excitación dura un período de tiempo inusualmente prolongado (que va desde horas hasta días); también puede estar asociado con modificaciones morfométricas y vasculares del clítoris. Los medicamentos pueden causar o afectar el priapismo del clítoris.

Se sabe que el medicamento trazodona causa priapismo masculino como efecto secundario, pero solo hay un informe documentado de que puede haber causado priapismo del clítoris, en cuyo caso, suspender el medicamento puede ser un remedio.

Además, se ha documentado que la nefazodona causó congestión del clítoris, a diferencia del priapismo del clítoris, en un caso, y el priapismo del clítoris a veces puede comenzar como resultado de, o solo después, de la interrupción de los antipsicóticos o los inhibidores selectivos de la recaptación de serotonina (ISRS). Porque El PGAD es relativamente raro y, como su propio concepto aparte del priapismo del clítoris, solo se ha investigado desde 2001, hay poca investigación sobre lo que puede curar o remediar el trastorno.

En algunos casos registrados, el PGAD fue causado o causado por una malformación arteriovenosa pélvica con ramas arteriales al clítoris; el tratamiento quirúrgico fue efectivo en estos casos.


== Sociedad y cultura ==



=== Griego antiguo: conocimiento y lengua vernácula del siglo XVI ===

Con respecto a las percepciones históricas y modernas del clítoris, los eruditos consideraron que el clítoris y el pene eran equivalentes durante más de 2500 años en todos los aspectos excepto en su disposición.

Debido a que con frecuencia se omite o se tergiversa en los textos anatómicos históricos y contemporáneos, también estuvo sujeto a un ciclo continuo de eruditos masculinos que afirmaban haberlo descubierto.

Los antiguos griegos, los antiguos romanos y las generaciones griegas y romanas hasta el Renacimiento y durante todo el Renacimiento sabían que los órganos sexuales masculinos y femeninos son anatómicamente similares, pero anatomistas prominentes como Galeno (129 - c. 200 dC) y Vesalius (1514- 1564) consideró a la vagina como el equivalente estructural del pene, excepto por estar invertida; Vesalius argumentó en contra de la existencia del clítoris en las mujeres normales, y su modelo anatómico describió cómo el pene se corresponde con la vagina, sin un papel para el clítoris. La sexualidad de los antiguos griegos y romanos también designaba la penetración como una sexualidad "definida como masculina".

El término tribas, o tribade, se usaba para referirse a una mujer o persona intersexual que penetraba activamente a otra persona (hombre o mujer) mediante el uso del clítoris o un consolador.

Como se creía que cualquier acto sexual requería que uno de los miembros de la pareja fuera "fálico" y que, por lo tanto, la actividad sexual entre mujeres era imposible sin esta característica, la mitología asociaba popularmente a las lesbianas con clítoris agrandados o como incapaces de disfrutar de la actividad sexual sin la sustitución de un falo.

En 1545, Charles Estienne fue el primer escritor en identificar el clítoris en un trabajo basado en la disección, pero concluyó que tenía una función urinaria.

A raíz de este estudio, Realdo Colombo (también conocido como Matteo Renaldo Colombo), profesor de cirugía en la Universidad de Padua, Italia, publicó un libro llamado De re anatomica en 1559, en el que describe el "asiento del deleite de la mujer".

En su papel de investigador, Colombo concluyó: "Puesto que nadie ha discernido estas proyecciones y su funcionamiento, si es permisible dar nombres a las cosas descubiertas por mí, debería llamarse el amor o la dulzura de Venus", en referencia a la mitológica Venus, diosa del amor erótico.

La afirmación de Colombo fue cuestionada por su sucesor en Padua, Gabriele Falloppio (descubridor de la trompa de Falopio), quien afirmó que él fue el primero en descubrir el clítoris.

En 1561, Falloppio declaró: "Los anatomistas modernos lo han descuidado por completo ... y no dicen una palabra al respecto ... y si otros han hablado de él, sepa que me lo han quitado a mí o a mis alumnos". Esto causó malestar en la comunidad médica europea y, después de leer las descripciones detalladas del clítoris de Colombo y Falloppio, Vesalius declaró: "No es razonable culpar a otros por la incompetencia sobre la base de algún deporte de la naturaleza que has observado en algunas mujeres y Difícilmente se puede atribuir esta parte nueva e inútil, como si fuera un órgano, a mujeres sanas". Concluyó: "Creo que tal estructura aparece en los hermafroditas que, por lo demás, tienen genitales bien formados, como describe Pablo de Egina,

Además de que Avicena la nombró albaratha o virga ("vara") y Colombo la llamó dulzura de Venus, Hipócrates usó el término columela ("pequeña columna"), y Albucasis, una autoridad médica árabe, la llamó tentigo ("tensión ").

Los nombres indicaban que cada descripción de las estructuras se refería al cuerpo y al glande del clítoris, pero generalmente al glande.

También era conocida por los romanos, que la llamaron (jerga vulgar) landica.

Sin embargo, Albertus Magnus, uno de los escritores más prolíficos de la Edad Media, consideró que era importante resaltar las "homologías entre las estructuras y funciones masculinas y femeninas" añadiendo "una psicología de la excitación sexual" que Aristóteles no había utilizado para detallar la clítoris.

Mientras que en el tratado Liber de coitu de Constantino, el clítoris se menciona unas pocas veces, Magnus prestó la misma atención a los órganos masculinos y femeninos. Al igual que Avicena, Magnus también usó la palabra virga para el clítoris, pero la empleó para el masculino y el femenino. genitales femeninos; a pesar de sus esfuerzos por dar igual terreno al clítoris, el ciclo de supresión y redescubrimiento del órgano continuó, y una justificación del siglo XVI para la clitoridectomía parece haber sido confundida por el hermafroditismo y la imprecisión creada por la palabra nymphae sustituida por la palabra clítoris. .

La nimfotomia era una operación médica para extirpar un clítoris inusualmente grande, pero lo que se consideraba "inusualmente grande" era a menudo una cuestión de percepción.

El procedimiento se realizaba de forma rutinaria en mujeres egipcias, debido a que médicos como Jacques Daléchamps creían que esta versión del clítoris era "una característica inusual que ocurría en casi todas las mujeres egipcias [y] en algunas de las nuestras, de modo que cuando se encuentran en la compañía de otras mujeres, o sus ropas las rozan al caminar o sus maridos desean acercarse a ellas, se erige como un pene masculino y de hecho ellas lo utilizan para jugar con otras mujeres, como lo harían sus maridos...

Así se cortan las partes".


=== Siglo 17-presente conocimiento y lengua vernácula ===


Caspar Bartholin, un anatomista danés del siglo XVII, rechazó las afirmaciones de Colombo y Falloppio de que descubrieron el clítoris, argumentando que el clítoris había sido ampliamente conocido por la ciencia médica desde el siglo II.

Aunque las parteras del siglo XVII recomendaban a hombres y mujeres que las mujeres deberían aspirar a alcanzar el orgasmo para ayudarlas a quedar embarazadas para la salud y el bienestar general y para mantener sus relaciones sanas, el debate sobre la importancia del clítoris persistió, especialmente en el trabajo de Regnier de Graaf en el siglo XVII y Georg Ludwig Kobelt en el XIX. Al igual que Falloppio y Bartholin, De Graaf criticó la afirmación de Colombo de haber descubierto el clítoris; su trabajo parece haber proporcionado la primera descripción completa de la anatomía del clítoris. "Estamos extremadamente sorprendidos de que algunos anatomistas no hagan más mención de esta parte que si no existiera en absoluto en el universo de la naturaleza", afirmó. "En cada cadáver que hemos disecado hasta ahora, lo hemos encontrado bastante perceptible a la vista y al tacto". De Graaf enfatizó la necesidad de distinguir la ninfa del clítoris, eligiendo "dar [al clítoris] siempre el nombre de clítoris" para evitar confusiones; esto resultó en el uso frecuente del nombre correcto para el órgano entre los anatomistas, pero considerando que nympha también variaba en su uso y eventualmente se convirtió en el término específico para los labios menores, se produjo más confusión.

El debate sobre si el orgasmo era incluso necesario para las mujeres comenzó en la era victoriana, y la teoría de Freud de 1905 sobre la inmadurez de los orgasmos del clítoris (ver arriba) afectó negativamente la sexualidad de las mujeres durante la mayor parte del siglo XX. Hacia el final de la Primera Guerra Mundial, un inconformista El parlamentario británico de nombre Noel Pemberton Billing publicó un artículo titulado "El culto del clítoris", profundizando en sus teorías conspirativas y atacando a la actriz Maud Allan y Margot Asquith, esposa del primer ministro.

Las acusaciones llevaron a un sensacional juicio por difamación, que finalmente ganó Billing; Philip Hoare informa que Billing argumentó que "como término médico, 'clítoris' solo sería conocido por los 'iniciados' y era incapaz de corromper las mentes morales".

Jodie Medd argumenta con respecto a "El culto del clítoris" que "el cuerpo femenino no reproductivo pero deseante [...] simultáneamente exige y rechaza la atención interpretativa, incitando al escándalo a través de su misma resistencia a la representación". Desde el siglo XVIII al XX, especialmente durante el siglo XX, los detalles del clítoris de varios diagramas genitales presentados en siglos anteriores se omitieron en textos posteriores.

Masters y Johnson aludieron a la extensión total del clítoris en 1966, pero de una manera tan confusa que el significado de su descripción se oscureció; en 1981, la Federación de Clínicas de Salud de la Mujer Feminista (FFWHC) continuó este proceso con ilustraciones anatómicamente precisas que identifican 18 estructuras del clítoris.

A pesar de las ilustraciones de la FFWHC, Josephine Lowndes Sevely, en 1987, describió la vagina como la contraparte del pene. Con respecto a otras creencias sobre el clítoris, Hite (1976 y 1981) encontró que, durante la intimidad sexual con una pareja, la estimulación del clítoris era las mujeres lo describen más a menudo como un juego previo que como un método principal de actividad sexual, incluido el orgasmo.

Además, aunque el trabajo de la FFWHC impulsó significativamente la reforma feminista de los textos anatómicos, no tuvo un impacto general.

La investigación de Helen O'Connell a fines de la década de 1990 motivó a la comunidad médica a comenzar a cambiar la forma en que se define anatómicamente el clítoris.

O'Connell describe que las descripciones típicas del clítoris en los libros de texto carecen de detalles e incluyen inexactitudes, como descripciones anatómicas más antiguas y modernas de la anatomía genital y uretral humana femenina que se basan en disecciones realizadas en cadáveres ancianos cuyo tejido eréctil (clitorial) se había reducido.

En cambio, acredita el trabajo de Georg Ludwig Kobelt como la descripción más completa y precisa de la anatomía del clítoris.

Las mediciones de resonancia magnética, que proporcionan un método de examen en vivo y multiplanar, ahora complementan los esfuerzos de investigación de la FFWHC y de O'Connell sobre el clítoris, y muestran que el volumen del tejido eréctil del clítoris es diez veces mayor que el que se muestra en los médicos. ' y en libros de texto de anatomía. En la encuesta de Bruce Bagemihl de The Zoological Record (1978–1997), que contiene más de un millón de documentos de más de 6,000 revistas científicas, se encontraron 539 artículos centrados en el pene, mientras que 7 se centraron en el clítoris.

En 2000, los investigadores Shirley Ogletree y Harvey Ginsberg concluyeron que existe un descuido general de la palabra clítoris en la lengua vernácula común.

Examinaron los términos utilizados para describir los genitales en la base de datos PsycINFO de 1887 a 2000 y encontraron que el pene se usaba en 1482 fuentes, la vagina en 409, mientras que el clítoris solo se mencionaba en 83.

Además, analizaron 57 libros que figuran en una base de datos informática para la instrucción sexual.

En la mayoría de los libros, el pene era la parte del cuerpo más discutida, más mencionada que el clítoris, la vagina y el útero juntos.

La última vez que investigaron la terminología utilizada por los estudiantes universitarios, que van desde euro-americano (76%/76%), hispano (18%/14%) y afroamericano (4%/7%), con respecto a las creencias de los estudiantes sobre la sexualidad y conocimiento sobre el tema.

Los estudiantes fueron abrumadoramente educados para creer que la vagina es la contraparte femenina del pene.

Los autores encontraron que la creencia de los estudiantes de que la parte interior de la vagina es la parte sexualmente más sensible del cuerpo femenino se correlacionaba con actitudes negativas hacia la masturbación y un fuerte apoyo a los mitos sexuales.

Un estudio de 2005 informó que, entre una muestra de estudiantes universitarios, las fuentes de conocimiento sobre el clítoris más citadas fueron la escuela y los amigos, y que esto se asoció con el conocimiento menos probado.

El conocimiento del clítoris por autoexploración fue el menos citado, pero "los encuestados respondieron correctamente, en promedio, tres de las cinco medidas de conocimiento del clítoris".

Los autores afirmaron que "el conocimiento se correlacionó significativamente con la frecuencia del orgasmo de las mujeres en la masturbación pero no en el sexo en pareja" y que sus "resultados se discuten a la luz de la desigualdad de género y una construcción social de la sexualidad, respaldada tanto por hombres como por mujeres. que privilegia el placer sexual de los hombres sobre el de las mujeres, de modo que el orgasmo para las mujeres es placentero, pero en última instancia es incidental". Llegaron a la conclusión de que parte de la solución para remediar "este problema" requiere que a hombres y mujeres se les enseñe más sobre el clítoris de lo que se practica actualmente. .

La portavoz de Clitoraid, Nadine Gary, declaró que la misión del grupo es aumentar la conciencia pública sobre el clítoris porque "ha sido ignorado, vilipendiado, tabú y considerado pecaminoso y vergonzoso durante siglos". En 2016, Odile Fillod creó un código abierto imprimible en 3D , modelo de tamaño completo del clítoris, para usar en una serie de videos antisexistas que le habían encargado producir.

Fillod fue entrevistado por Stephanie Theobald, cuyo artículo en The Guardian afirmaba que el modelo 3D se utilizaría para la educación sexual en las escuelas francesas, desde el nivel primario hasta el secundario, a partir de septiembre de 2016; no fue así, pero la historia se viralizó en todo el mundo. En un estudio de 2019, se administró un cuestionario a una muestra de estudiantes de posgrado en ciencias de la educación para rastrear el nivel de su conocimiento sobre los órganos del sistema reproductivo femenino y masculino.

Los autores informaron que aproximadamente dos tercios de los estudiantes no nombraron los genitales femeninos externos, como el clítoris y los labios, incluso después de que se les proporcionaron imágenes detalladas.

Un análisis de 2022 informó que el clítoris se menciona solo en uno de los 113 libros de texto griegos de educación secundaria utilizados en las clases de biología desde la década de 1870 hasta el presente.


=== Arte contemporáneo ===


En 2012, la artista neoyorquina Sophia Wallace comenzó a trabajar en un proyecto multimedia para desafiar los conceptos erróneos sobre el clítoris.

Basado en la investigación de O'Connell de 1998, el trabajo de Wallace enfatiza el alcance y el tamaño del clítoris humano.

Ella dice que la ignorancia de esto todavía parece ser generalizada en la sociedad moderna. “Es un dilema curioso observar la paradoja de que por un lado el cuerpo femenino es la principal metáfora de la sexualidad, su uso satura la publicidad, el arte y el imaginario erótico mainstream”, dijo. "Sin embargo, el clítoris, el verdadero órgano sexual femenino, es prácticamente invisible". El proyecto se llama Cliteracy e incluye un "rodeo de clítoris", que es un modelo interactivo para subir de un clítoris dorado gigante, incluidas sus partes internas, producido con la ayuda del escultor Kenneth Thomas. "Ha sido un éxito dondequiera que se haya mostrado.

La gente tiene hambre de poder hablar de esto", dijo Wallace. "Me encanta ver a los hombres defender el clítoris [...] La alfabetización clítoris se trata de no tener el cuerpo controlado o legislado [...] No tener acceso al el placer que es tu derecho de nacimiento es un acto profundamente político". En 2016, comenzó otro proyecto en Nueva York, arte callejero que desde entonces se ha extendido a casi 100 ciudades: Clitorosity, un "esfuerzo impulsado por la comunidad para celebrar la estructura completa del clítoris". , que combina dibujos con tiza y palabras para provocar la interacción y la conversación con los transeúntes, que el equipo documenta en las redes sociales.

En 2016, Lori-Malépart Traversy realizó un documental animado sobre la anatomía no reconocida del clítoris. En 2017, Alli Sebastian Wolf creó un modelo anatómico dorado a escala 100: 1 de un clítoris, llamado Glitoris y dijo que espera conocer el clítoris. pronto se volverá tan incontrovertible que hacer arte sobre ellos sería tan irrelevante como hacer arte sobre penes. Otros proyectos enumerados por la BBC incluyen Clito Clito, joyería corporal positiva hecha en Berlín; Clitorissima, un documental destinado a normalizar las conversaciones madre-hija sobre el clítoris; y un festival ClitArt en Londres, que abarca representaciones de palabras habladas y artes visuales.

El colectivo de arte francés Les Infemmes (un juego de palabras con "infame" y "mujeres") publicó un fanzine cuyo título se puede traducir como "The Clit Cheatsheet".


=== Influencia en la mutilación genital femenina ===


Una gran controversia rodea a la mutilación genital femenina (MGF), siendo la Organización Mundial de la Salud (OMS) una de las muchas organizaciones de salud que han hecho campaña contra los procedimientos en nombre de los derechos humanos, afirmando que "la MGF no tiene beneficios para la salud" y que es " una violación de los derechos humanos de las niñas y las mujeres" y "refleja una desigualdad profundamente arraigada entre los sexos".

La práctica ha existido en un momento u otro en casi todas las civilizaciones humanas, más comúnmente para ejercer control sobre el comportamiento sexual, incluida la masturbación, de niñas y mujeres, pero también para cambiar la apariencia del clítoris.

La costumbre y la tradición son las razones citadas con más frecuencia para la MGF, y algunas culturas creen que no realizarla tiene la posibilidad de alterar la cohesión de sus sistemas sociales y políticos, como que la MGF también es parte de la iniciación de una niña en la edad adulta.

A menudo, una niña no se considera adulta en una sociedad que practica la mutilación genital femenina a menos que se haya sometido a la mutilación genital femenina, y se cree que la "extirpación del clítoris y los labios vaginales, vistos por algunos como las partes masculinas del cuerpo de una mujer, realza la feminidad de la niña". , a menudo sinónimo de docilidad y obediencia". La mutilación genital femenina se lleva a cabo en varias sociedades, especialmente en África, con el 85 por ciento de las mutilaciones genitales realizadas en África que consisten en clitoridectomía o escisión, y en menor medida en otras partes de Oriente Medio. y el Sudeste Asiático, en niñas desde unos pocos días hasta la mitad de la adolescencia, a menudo para reducir el deseo sexual en un esfuerzo por preservar la virginidad vaginal.

La práctica de la MGF se ha extendido a nivel mundial, ya que los inmigrantes de Asia, África y Medio Oriente traen la costumbre con ellos.

En los Estados Unidos, a veces se practica en niñas que nacen con un clítoris más grande de lo normal.

Comfort Momoh, que se especializa en el tema de la MGF, afirma que la MGF podría haber sido "practicada en el antiguo Egipto como un signo de distinción entre la aristocracia"; hay informes de que hay rastros de infibulación en las momias egipcias.

La mutilación genital femenina todavía se practica de forma rutinaria en Egipto.

Greenberg et al. informan que "un estudio encontró que el 97% de las mujeres casadas en Egipto habían tenido algún tipo de mutilación genital". Amnistía Internacional estimó en 1997 que cada año se realizan más de dos millones de procedimientos de mutilación genital femenina.


== Otros animales ==



=== Generalidades ===

Aunque el clítoris existe en todas las especies de mamíferos, existen pocos estudios detallados de la anatomía del clítoris en no humanos.

El clítoris está especialmente desarrollado en fosas, simios, lémures, topos y, al igual que el pene en muchos mamíferos placentarios no humanos, a menudo contiene un pequeño hueso.

En las mujeres, este hueso se conoce como os clitoridis.

El clítoris existe en tortugas, avestruces, cocodrilos y en especies de aves en las que el macho tiene pene.

Algunas osas intersexuales se aparean y dan a luz a través de la punta del clítoris; estas especies son los osos pardos, los osos pardos, los osos negros americanos y los osos polares.

Aunque se ha descrito que los osos tienen "un canal de parto que atraviesa el clítoris en lugar de formar una vagina separada" (una característica que se estima representa entre el 10 y el 20 por ciento de la población de osos), los científicos afirman que las hienas manchadas hembras son los únicos mamíferos hembra no hermafroditas desprovistos de una abertura vaginal externa y cuya anatomía sexual es distinta de los casos intersexuales habituales.


=== Primates no humanos ===

En los monos araña, el clítoris está especialmente desarrollado y tiene un pasaje interior, o uretra, que lo hace casi idéntico al pene, y retiene y distribuye las gotas de orina a medida que la hembra se mueve.

El académico Alan F.

Dixson afirmó que esta orina "se elimina en la base del clítoris, fluye por el surco poco profundo en su superficie perineal y es retenida por los pliegues de la piel a cada lado del surco".

Debido a que los monos araña de América del Sur tienen clítoris colgantes y eréctiles lo suficientemente largos como para confundirlos con un pene, los investigadores y observadores de la especie buscan un escroto para determinar el sexo del animal; un enfoque similar es identificar las glándulas que marcan el olor que también pueden estar presentes en el clítoris. El clítoris se erige en los monos ardilla durante las demostraciones de dominancia, lo que influye indirectamente en el éxito reproductivo de los monos ardilla. El clítoris de los bonobos es más grande y más exteriorizado que en los monos ardilla. la mayoría de los mamíferos; Natalie Angier dijo que una joven adolescente "mujer bonobo pesa quizás la mitad del peso de un adolescente humano, pero su clítoris es tres veces más grande que el equivalente humano y lo suficientemente visible como para menearse inequívocamente mientras camina".

Los bonobos femeninos a menudo se involucran en la práctica del frotamiento genital-genital (GG), que es la forma no humana de tribadismo en la que participan las mujeres humanas.

El etólogo Jonathan Balcombe afirmó que las hembras de bonobo se frotan el clítoris rápidamente durante diez a veinte segundos, y este comportamiento, "que puede repetirse en rápida sucesión, suele ir acompañado de rechinamiento, chillidos y congestión del clítoris"; agregó que, en promedio, se involucran en esta práctica "aproximadamente una vez cada dos horas", y dado que los bonobos a veces se aparean cara a cara, "la bióloga evolutiva Marlene Zuk ha sugerido que la posición del clítoris en los bonobos y algunos otros primates ha evolucionado para maximizar la estimulación durante las relaciones sexuales". Muchas especies de estrepsirrinas exhiben clítoris alargados que están total o parcialmente canalizados por la uretra, incluidos los lémures ratón, los lémures enanos, todas las especies de Eulemur, los loris y los galagos.

Algunas de estas especies también exhiben un sello de membrana a través de la vagina que cierra la abertura vaginal durante las temporadas que no son de apareamiento, sobre todo los ratones y los lémures enanos.

La morfología del clítoris del lémur de cola anillada es la mejor estudiada.

Se describen con "clítoris colgantes alargados que están [totalmente] canalizados por una uretra".

La uretra está rodeada de tejido eréctil, lo que permite una inflamación significativa durante la temporada de reproducción, pero este tejido eréctil difiere del típico cuerpo esponjoso masculino.

Las hembras adultas de cola anillada no embarazadas no muestran niveles más altos de testosterona que los machos, pero sí exhiben niveles más altos de A4 y estrógeno durante la agresión estacional.

Durante el embarazo, los niveles de estrógeno, A4 y testosterona aumentan, pero los fetos femeninos aún están "protegidos" del exceso de testosterona.

Estos genitales "masculinizados" a menudo se encuentran junto con otros rasgos, como grupos sociales dominados por mujeres, dimorfismo sexual reducido que hace que las mujeres tengan el mismo tamaño que los hombres e incluso proporciones de sexos en poblaciones adultas.

Este fenómeno que ha sido bautizado como el "síndrome del lémur".

Un estudio de 2014 sobre la masculinización de Eulemur propuso que la masculinización conductual y morfológica en las hembras lemuriformes es un rasgo ancestral que probablemente surgió después de su separación de los lorisiformes.


=== hienas manchadas ===


Mientras que las hienas manchadas hembra a veces se denominan hermafroditas o intersexuales, y los científicos de la antigüedad y de épocas históricas posteriores creían que eran hermafroditas, los científicos modernos no se refieren a ellas como tales.

Esa designación generalmente se reserva para aquellos que exhiben simultáneamente características de ambos sexos; la composición genética de las hienas manchadas hembra "son claramente distintas" de las hienas manchadas macho. la formación del pene parece en gran medida independiente de los andrógenos porque aparece en el feto femenino antes de la diferenciación del ovario fetal y la glándula suprarrenal.

Las hienas manchadas tienen un clítoris altamente eréctil, completo con un escroto falso; autor Juan C.

Wingfield afirmó que "el parecido con los genitales masculinos es tan cercano que el sexo puede determinarse con confianza solo mediante la palpación del escroto".

El pseudopene también se diferencia de los genitales masculinos por su mayor grosor y glande más redondeado.

La hembra no posee vagina externa, ya que los labios están fusionados para formar un pseudoescroto.

En las hembras, este escroto consiste en tejido adiposo blando.

Al igual que los machos de las hienas manchadas con respecto a sus penes, las hienas manchadas hembras tienen pequeñas espinas peneanas en la cabeza del clítoris, lo que, según la estudiosa Catherine Blackledge, hace que "la punta del clítoris se sienta como papel de lija suave".

Agregó que el clítoris "se extiende lejos del cuerpo en un arco elegante y delgado, midiendo, en promedio, más de 17 cm desde la raíz hasta la punta.

Al igual que un pene, [es] completamente eréctil, levantando la cabeza en ceremonias de saludo de hiena, demostraciones sociales, juegos de rudo y volteretas o cuando olfatea a sus compañeros".

Debido a sus niveles más altos de exposición a los andrógenos durante el desarrollo fetal, las hienas hembras son significativamente más musculosas y agresivas que sus contrapartes machos; socialmente, tienen un rango más alto que los hombres, siendo dominantes o dominantes y alfa, y las mujeres que han estado expuestas a niveles más altos de andrógenos que el promedio alcanzan un rango más alto que sus pares femeninas.

Las hembras subordinadas lamen el clítoris de las hembras de mayor rango como señal de sumisión y obediencia, pero las hembras también se lamen el clítoris entre sí como saludo o para fortalecer los lazos sociales; por el contrario, mientras que todos los machos lamen el clítoris de las hembras dominantes, las hembras no lamerán los penes de los machos porque se considera que los machos tienen el rango más bajo. La uretra y la vagina de la hiena manchada hembra salen a través del clítoris, lo que permite a las hembras orinar, copular y dar a luz a través de este órgano.

Este rasgo hace que el apareamiento sea más laborioso para el macho que en otros mamíferos, y también hace que los intentos de coaccionar sexualmente (forzar físicamente la actividad sexual) a las hembras sean inútiles.

Joan Roughgarden, ecologista y bióloga evolutiva, dijo que debido a que el clítoris de la hiena está más alto en el vientre que la vagina en la mayoría de los mamíferos, la hiena macho "debe deslizar su trasero debajo de la hembra cuando se aparea para que su pene se alinee con [su clítoris ]".

En una acción similar a levantarse la manga de una camisa, la "mujer retrae el [pseudo-pene] sobre sí misma y crea una abertura en la que el hombre inserta su propio pene".

El macho debe practicar este acto, que puede tardar un par de meses en realizarse con éxito.

Las hienas manchadas hembras expuestas a dosis más altas de andrógenos tienen ovarios significativamente dañados, lo que dificulta la concepción.

Después de dar a luz, el pseudopene se estira y pierde gran parte de sus aspectos originales; se convierte en un prepucio reducido y de paredes flojas con un orificio agrandado con labios partidos.

Aproximadamente el 15% de las hembras mueren durante su primer parto, y más del 60% de las crías primogénitas de su especie mueren. A 2006 Baskin et al. El estudio concluyó: "Las estructuras anatómicas básicas de los cuerpos corpóreos en ambos sexos de humanos y hienas manchadas eran similares.

Al igual que en los humanos, la distribución del nervio dorsal era única porque carecía de nervios en la posición de las 12 en punto en el pene y el clítoris de la hiena manchada" y que "los nervios dorsales del pene/clítoris en humanos y machos manchados las hienas rastrearon a lo largo de ambos lados del cuerpo corporal hasta el cuerpo esponjoso en las posiciones de las 5 y las 7 en punto.

Los nervios dorsales penetraron el cuerpo corpóreo y distalmente el glande en la hiena", y en las hienas hembras, "los nervios dorsales se desplegaron lateralmente en el cuerpo del clítoris.

La morfología del glande era diferente en apariencia en ambos sexos, siendo ancha y roma en la hembra y cónica en el macho".


=== lunares ===

Muchas especies de lunares talpidos exhiben clítoris peneiformes que están canalizados por la uretra y se encuentra que tienen tejido eréctil, sobre todo especies del género Talpa que se encuentran en Europa.

Único en este clado es la presencia de ovotestes, donde el ovario femenino también está compuesto principalmente de tejido testicular estéril que secreta testosterona con solo una pequeña porción de la gónada que contiene tejido ovárico.

Los estudios genéticos han revelado que las hembras tienen un genotipo XX y no tienen ningún gen ligado al Y translocado.

Los estudios de desarrollo detallados de Talpa occidentalis han revelado que las gónadas femeninas se desarrollan en un "patrón similar a los testículos".

Se descubrió que DMRT1, un gen que regula el desarrollo de las células de Sertoli, se expresaba en las células germinales femeninas antes de la meiosis; sin embargo, no había células de Sertoli presentes en los ovotestículos completamente desarrollados.

Además, las células germinales femeninas solo entran en meiosis después del nacimiento, un fenómeno que no se ha encontrado en ningún otro mamífero euterio.

Los análisis filogenéticos han sugerido que, como en los lemuroides, este rasgo debe haber evolucionado en un ancestro común del clado, y se ha "apagado y encendido" en diferentes linajes talpidos. Las hembras topo europeas son muy territoriales y no permitirán que los machos entren su territorio fuera de la temporada de reproducción, siendo la causa probable de este comportamiento los altos niveles de testosterona secretada por las hembras ovotestes.

Durante la temporada de no reproducción, su abertura vaginal está cubierta por piel, similar a la condición que se observa en el ratón y los lémures enanos.


=== Gatos, ovejas y ratones ===

Los investigadores que estudiaron las vías aferentes periféricas y centrales del clítoris felino concluyeron que "las neuronas aferentes que se proyectan al clítoris del gato se identificaron mediante el rastreo WGA-HRP en los ganglios de la raíz dorsal S1 y S2.

Se identificaron un promedio de 433 células en cada lado del animal. El 85 por ciento y el 15 por ciento de las células marcadas se ubicaron en los ganglios de la raíz dorsal S1 y S2, respectivamente.

El área de sección transversal promedio de los perfiles de neuronas aferentes del clítoris fue de 1,479 ± 627 μm2". disparo sostenido (máximo 40 Hz), que se mantuvo durante la estimulación" y que un examen más detenido del disparo tónico "indica que el clítoris está inervado por fibras aferentes mielinizadas mecanosensibles en el nervio pudental que se proyectan centralmente a la región de la comisura dorsal en la médula espinal L7-S1”. Se registró el fenotipo externo y el comportamiento reproductivo de 21 ovejas freemartin y dos ovejas macho pseudohermafroditas con el objetivo de identificar cualquier característica que pudiera predecir una falla reproductiva.

La longitud de la vagina y el tamaño y forma de la vulva y el clítoris fueron algunos de los aspectos analizados.

Si bien el estudio informó que "se detectaron varias anomalías físicas y de comportamiento", también concluyó que "el único hallazgo consistente en los 23 animales fue una vagina corta que variaba en longitud de 3,1 a 7,0 cm, en comparación con 10 a 14 cm en animales normales". En un estudio sobre la estructura del clítoris de ratones, se documentó que la uretra perineal del ratón estaba rodeada de tejido eréctil que forma los bulbos del clítoris.

Los investigadores afirmaron: "En el ratón, como en las hembras humanas, la organización del tejido en los cuerpos cavernosos del clítoris es esencialmente similar a la del pene, excepto por la ausencia de una capa subalbugínea interpuesta entre la túnica albugínea y el tejido eréctil".


== Notas ==



=== Bibliografía ===




https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clítoris

;;;PT;;;



CLITÓRIS


O clitóris ((ouvir) ou (ouvir)) é um órgão sexual feminino presente em mamíferos, avestruzes e um número limitado de outros animais.

Nos humanos, a porção visível – a glande – está na junção frontal dos pequenos lábios (lábios internos), acima da abertura da uretra.

Ao contrário do pênis, o homólogo masculino (equivalente) ao clitóris, geralmente não contém a porção distal (ou abertura) da uretra e, portanto, não é usado para urinar.

Na maioria das espécies, o clitóris carece de qualquer função reprodutiva.

Enquanto poucos animais urinam pelo clitóris ou o usam reprodutivamente, a hiena-malhada, que tem um clitóris especialmente grande, urina, acasala e dá à luz pelo órgão.

Alguns outros mamíferos, como lêmures e macacos-aranha, também têm um clitóris grande. O clitóris é a zona erógena mais sensível da fêmea humana e geralmente a fonte anatômica primária do prazer sexual feminino humano.

Em humanos e outros mamíferos, desenvolve-se a partir de um crescimento no embrião chamado tubérculo genital.

Inicialmente indiferenciado, o tubérculo se desenvolve em um pênis ou um clitóris durante o desenvolvimento do sistema reprodutivo, dependendo da exposição aos andrógenos (que são principalmente hormônios masculinos).

O clitóris é uma estrutura complexa, e seu tamanho e sensibilidade podem variar.

A glande (cabeça) do clitóris humano tem aproximadamente o tamanho e a forma de uma ervilha e estima-se que tenha cerca de 8.000 terminações nervosas sensoriais. análises e estudos.

Tais discussões vão desde precisão anatômica, desigualdade de gênero, mutilação genital feminina e fatores orgásmicos e sua explicação fisiológica para o ponto G.

Embora, em humanos, o único propósito conhecido do clitóris seja proporcionar prazer sexual, tem sido debatido se o clitóris é vestigial, uma adaptação ou serve a uma função reprodutiva.

As percepções sociais do clitóris incluem o significado de seu papel no prazer sexual feminino, suposições sobre seu verdadeiro tamanho e profundidade e crenças variadas sobre modificação genital, como aumento do clitóris, piercing no clitóris e clitoridectomia.

A modificação genital pode ser por razões estéticas, médicas ou culturais. O conhecimento do clitóris é significativamente afetado pelas percepções culturais do órgão.

Estudos sugerem que o conhecimento de sua existência e anatomia é escasso em comparação com outros órgãos sexuais e que mais educação sobre ele poderia ajudar a aliviar estigmas sociais associados ao corpo feminino e ao prazer sexual feminino, por exemplo, que o clitóris e a vulva em geral são visualmente desagradáveis, que a masturbação feminina é um tabu, ou que se espera que os homens dominem e controlem os orgasmos das mulheres.


== Etimologia ==

O Oxford English Dictionary afirma que a palavra clitóris provavelmente tem sua origem no grego antigo κλειτορίς, kleitoris, talvez derivado do verbo κλείειν, kleiein, "fechar".

O clitóris também é grego para a palavra chave, "indicando que os antigos anatomistas a consideravam a chave" para a sexualidade feminina.

Além de chave, o Dicionário de Etimologia Online sugere que outros candidatos gregos para a etimologia da palavra incluem um substantivo que significa "trava" ou "gancho"; um verbo que significa "tocar ou excitar lascivamente", "fazer cócegas" (um sinônimo alemão para o clitóris é der Kitzler, "o cócegas"), embora este verbo seja mais provavelmente derivado de "clitóris"; e uma palavra que significa "lado de uma colina", da mesma raiz que "clímax".

O Oxford English Dictionary também afirma que a forma abreviada "clit", cuja primeira ocorrência foi notada nos Estados Unidos, tem sido usada impressa desde 1958: até então, a abreviação comum era "clitty". em inglês e clitóris em latim.

O genitivo latino é clitoridis, como em "glans clitoridis".

Na literatura médica e sexológica, o clitóris às vezes é referido como "o pênis feminino" ou pseudo-pênis, e o termo clitóris é comumente usado para se referir apenas à glande; em parte por causa disso, existem vários termos para o órgão que historicamente confundiram sua anatomia.


== Estrutura ==



=== Desenvolvimento ===


Nos mamíferos, a diferenciação sexual é determinada pelo esperma que carrega um cromossomo X ou Y (masculino).

O cromossomo Y contém um gene determinante do sexo (SRY) que codifica um fator de transcrição para a proteína TDF (fator determinante do testículo) e desencadeia a criação de testosterona e hormônio anti-Mülleriano para o desenvolvimento do embrião em um macho.

Essa diferenciação começa cerca de oito ou nove semanas após a concepção.

Algumas fontes afirmam que continua até a décima segunda semana, enquanto outras afirmam que é claramente evidente na décima terceira semana e que os órgãos sexuais estão totalmente desenvolvidos na décima sexta semana. .

Inicialmente indiferenciado, o tubérculo se desenvolve em um clitóris ou pênis durante o desenvolvimento do sistema reprodutivo, dependendo da exposição aos andrógenos (que são principalmente hormônios masculinos).

O clitóris se forma a partir dos mesmos tecidos que formam a glande e a haste do pênis, e essa origem embrionária compartilhada torna esses dois órgãos homólogos (versões diferentes da mesma estrutura). Se exposto à testosterona, o tubérculo genital se alonga para formar o pênis.

Pela fusão das pregas urogenitais – estruturas fusiformes alongadas que contribuem para a formação do sulco uretral na face do ventre do tubérculo genital – o seio urogenital fecha-se completamente e forma a uretra esponjosa, e os inchaços labioscrotais unem-se para formar o escroto .

Na ausência de testosterona, o tubérculo genital permite a formação do clitóris; o crescimento inicialmente rápido do falo diminui gradualmente e o clitóris é formado.

O seio urogenital persiste como o vestíbulo da vagina, as duas pregas urogenitais formam os pequenos lábios e as tumefações labioescrotais aumentam para formar os grandes lábios, completando a genitália feminina.

Uma condição rara que pode se desenvolver a partir da exposição androgênica acima da média é o clitoromegalia.


=== Anatomia macroscópica e histologia ===



==== Geral ====

O clitóris contém componentes externos e internos.

Consiste na glande, o corpo (que é composto de duas estruturas eréteis conhecidas como corpos cavernosos) e duas cruras ("pernas").

Possui capuz formado pelos pequenos lábios (lábios internos).

Também possui bulbos vestibulares ou clitóricos.

O freio do clitóris é um freio na superfície inferior da glande e é criado pelas duas partes mediais dos pequenos lábios.

O corpo do clitóris pode ser referido como o eixo (ou eixo interno), enquanto o comprimento do clitóris entre a glande e o corpo também pode ser referido como o eixo.

A haste suporta a glande, e sua forma pode ser vista e sentida através do capuz do clitóris. Pesquisas indicam que o tecido do clitóris se estende até a parede anterior da vagina. Şenaylı et al. disse que a avaliação histológica do clitóris, "especialmente dos corpos cavernosos, é incompleta porque por muitos anos o clitóris foi considerado um órgão rudimentar e não funcional". Eles acrescentaram que Baskin e colegas examinaram a masculinização do clitóris após a dissecção e usando software de imagem após a coloração com cromo de Masson, juntaram as amostras dissecadas em série; isso revelou que os nervos do clitóris circundam todo o corpo do clitóris (corpus). O clitóris, bulbos vestibulares, pequenos lábios e uretra envolvem dois tipos histologicamente distintos de tecido vascular (tecido relacionado aos vasos sanguíneos),

O tecido trabeculado tem aspecto esponjoso; junto com o sangue, preenche os grandes espaços vasculares dilatados do clitóris e dos bulbos.

Abaixo do epitélio das áreas vasculares está o músculo liso.

Conforme indicado pela pesquisa de Yang et al., também pode ser que o lúmen uretral (o espaço aberto interno ou cavidade da uretra), que é cercado por tecido esponjoso, tenha tecido que "é grosseiramente distinto do tecido vascular da o clitóris e os bulbos, e na observação macroscópica, é mais pálido que o tecido escuro" do clitóris e dos bulbos.

O segundo tipo de tecido vascular é o não erétil, que pode consistir em vasos sanguíneos que estão dispersos dentro de uma matriz fibrosa e possuem apenas uma quantidade mínima de músculo liso.


==== Glande e corpo ====

Altamente inervada, a glande existe na ponta do corpo do clitóris como uma capa fibrovascular e geralmente tem o tamanho e a forma de uma ervilha, embora às vezes seja muito maior ou menor.

Estima-se que a glande do clitóris, ou todo o clitóris, tenha cerca de 8.000 terminações nervosas sensoriais.

A pesquisa conflita se a glande é composta de tecido erétil ou não erétil.

Embora o corpo do clitóris fique ingurgitado de sangue na excitação sexual, erigindo a glande do clitóris, algumas fontes descrevem a glande do clitóris e os pequenos lábios como compostos de tecido não erétil; este é especialmente o caso da glande.

Eles afirmam que a glande do clitóris e os pequenos lábios têm vasos sanguíneos dispersos dentro de uma matriz fibrosa e têm apenas uma quantidade mínima de músculo liso, ou que a glande do clitóris é "uma estrutura não erétil de linha média, densamente neural". Outras descrições da glande afirmam que ela é composta de tecido erétil e que o tecido erétil está presente nos pequenos lábios.

A glande pode ser notada como tendo espaços vasculares glandulares que não são tão proeminentes quanto os do corpo do clitóris, sendo os espaços mais separados por músculo liso do que no corpo e crura.

O tecido adiposo está ausente nos pequenos lábios, mas o órgão pode ser descrito como sendo composto de tecido conjuntivo denso, tecido erétil e fibras elásticas.

O corpo do clitóris forma uma estrutura em forma de fúrcula contendo os corpos cavernosos – um par de regiões esponjosas de tecido erétil que contêm a maior parte do sangue no clitóris durante a ereção do clitóris.

Os dois corpos que formam o corpo do clitóris são circundados por uma espessa túnica albugínea fibroelástica, que significa literalmente "cobertura branca", tecido conjuntivo.

Esses corpos são separados de forma incompleta um do outro na linha média por um septo pectiniforme fibroso – uma faixa de tecido conjuntivo semelhante a um pente que se estende entre os corpos cavernosos. forma que se estende como um par de crura ("pernas").

Os crura são as porções proximais dos braços da fúrcula.

Terminando na glande do clitóris, a ponta do corpo se inclina anteriormente para longe do púbis.

Cada crus (forma singular de crura) está ligado ao ramo isquiático correspondente – extensões da copora abaixo dos ramos púbicos descendentes.

Escondidos atrás dos pequenos lábios, os pilares terminam com fixação no meio do arco púbico ou logo abaixo.

Associados estão a esponja uretral, a esponja perineal, uma rede de nervos e vasos sanguíneos, o ligamento suspensor do clitóris, os músculos e o assoalho pélvico. idade, altura, peso da mulher, uso de contracepção hormonal ou estar na pós-menopausa, embora as mulheres que deram à luz possam ter medidas do clitóris significativamente maiores.

As medidas em centímetros (cm) e milímetros (mm) do clitóris mostram variações em seu tamanho.

A glande do clitóris tem sido citada como tipicamente variando de 2 mm a 1 cm e geralmente sendo estimada em 4 a 5 mm nos planos transversal e longitudinal. Um estudo de 1992 concluiu que o comprimento total do clitóris, incluindo glande e corpo, é de 16,0 ± 4,3 mm (0,63 ± 0,17 pol), onde 16 mm (0,63 pol) é a média e 4,3 mm (0,17 pol) é o desvio padrão.

Em relação a outros estudos, pesquisadores do Elizabeth Garrett Anderson and Obstetric Hospital de Londres mediram os lábios e outras estruturas genitais de 50 mulheres de 18 a 50 anos, com média de idade de 35,6, de 2003 a 2004, e os resultados apresentados para a glande do clitóris foram 3-10 mm para o intervalo e 5,5 [1,7] mm para a média.

Outras pesquisas indicam que o corpo do clitóris pode medir de 5 a 7 centímetros (2,0 a 2,8 polegadas) de comprimento, enquanto o corpo do clitóris e os pilares juntos podem ter 10 centímetros (3,9 polegadas) ou mais de comprimento.


==== Capuz ====

O capuz do clitóris se projeta na frente da comissura dos lábios, onde as bordas dos grandes lábios (lábios externos) se encontram na base do monte púbico; é parcialmente formado pela fusão da parte superior das pregas externas dos pequenos lábios (lábios internos) e cobre a glande e a diáfise externa.

Há uma variação considerável em quanto da glande se projeta do capuz e quanto é coberto por ele, variando de completamente coberto a totalmente exposto, e o tecido dos pequenos lábios também circunda a base da glande.


==== Lâmpadas ====
Os bulbos vestibulares estão mais intimamente relacionados com o clitóris do que o vestíbulo devido à semelhança do tecido trabecular e erétil dentro do clitóris e dos bulbos, e a ausência de tecido trabecular em outros órgãos genitais, com a natureza trabecular do tecido erétil permitindo ingurgitamento e expansão durante a excitação sexual.

Os bulbos vestibulares são tipicamente descritos como próximos aos pilares em ambos os lados da abertura vaginal; internamente, eles estão abaixo dos grandes lábios.

Quando ingurgitadas de sangue, elas prendem a abertura vaginal e fazem com que a vulva se expanda para fora.

Embora vários textos afirmem que circundam a abertura vaginal, Ginger et al. afirmam que isso não parece ser o caso e a túnica albugínea não envolve o tecido erétil dos bulbos.

Na avaliação de Yang et al. da anatomia dos bulbos, eles concluem que os bulbos "arqueiam sobre a uretra distal, delineando o que pode ser apropriadamente chamado de 'uretra bulbar' nas mulheres".


=== Homologia ===

O clitóris e o pênis são geralmente a mesma estrutura anatômica, embora a porção distal (ou abertura) da uretra esteja ausente no clitóris de humanos e da maioria dos outros animais.

A ideia de que os machos têm clitóris foi sugerida em 1987 pela pesquisadora Josephine Lowndes Sevely, que teorizou que os corpos cavernosos masculinos (um par de regiões esponjosas de tecido erétil que contêm a maior parte do sangue no pênis durante a ereção peniana) são o verdadeiro contrapartida do clitóris.

Ela argumentou que "o clitóris masculino" está diretamente abaixo da borda da glande do pênis, onde o frênulo do prepúcio do pênis (uma dobra do prepúcio) está localizado, e propôs que essa área fosse chamada de "coroa de Lownde".

Sua teoria e proposta, embora reconhecidas na literatura anatômica, não se materializaram nos livros de anatomia.

Textos anatômicos modernos mostram que o clitóris apresenta um capuz equivalente ao prepúcio do pênis, que cobre a glande.

Ele também tem um eixo que é preso à glande.

Os corpos cavernosos masculinos são homólogos ao corpo cavernoso do clitóris (a fêmea cavernosa), o bulbo do pênis é homólogo aos bulbos vestibulares abaixo dos pequenos lábios, o escroto é homólogo aos grandes lábios e a uretra peniana e parte da pele do pênis é homólogo aos pequenos lábios. Após o estudo anatômico, o pênis pode ser descrito como um clitóris que foi puxado principalmente para fora do corpo e enxertado em cima de um pedaço significativamente menor de esponjoso contendo a uretra.

No que diz respeito às terminações nervosas, os clitóris humanos estimados em 8.000 ou mais (para sua glande ou corpo clitoriano como um todo) são comumente citados como sendo o dobro das terminações nervosas encontradas no pênis humano (para sua glande ou corpo como um todo) ) e mais do que qualquer outra parte do corpo humano.

Esses relatos às vezes entram em conflito com outras fontes sobre a anatomia do clitóris ou aquelas relativas às terminações nervosas do pênis humano.

Por exemplo, enquanto algumas fontes estimam que o pênis humano tem 4.000 terminações nervosas, outras fontes afirmam que a glande ou toda a estrutura peniana tem a mesma quantidade de terminações nervosas que a glande do clitóris ou discutem se o pênis não circuncidado tem milhares a mais do que o circuncidado pênis ou geralmente é mais sensível. Algumas fontes afirmam que, em contraste com a glande do pênis, a glande do clitóris não possui músculo liso dentro de sua capa fibrovascular e, portanto, é diferenciada dos tecidos eréteis do clitóris e bulbos; além disso, o tamanho do bulbo varia e pode depender da idade e da estrogenização.

Embora os bulbos sejam considerados equivalentes ao esponjoso masculino, eles não circundam completamente a uretra.

Contribui parcialmente para a ereção, que é causada principalmente pelos dois corpos cavernosos que compõem a maior parte do eixo; como a cavernosa feminina, a cavernosa masculina absorve sangue e fica ereta quando sexualmente excitada.

Os corpos cavernosos masculinos afunilam internamente ao atingir a cabeça esponjosa.

No que diz respeito à forma em Y da cavernosa – coroa, corpo e pernas – o corpo responde por muito mais da estrutura nos homens, e as pernas são mais atarracadas; tipicamente, as cavernosas são mais longas e espessas nos machos do que nas fêmeas.


== Função ==



=== Atividade sexual ===



==== Geral ====
O clitóris tem uma abundância de terminações nervosas e é a zona erógena mais sensível da fêmea humana e geralmente a fonte anatômica primária do prazer sexual feminino humano.

Quando estimulado sexualmente, pode incitar a excitação sexual feminina.

A estimulação sexual, incluindo a excitação, pode resultar de estimulação mental, preliminares com um parceiro sexual ou masturbação, e pode levar ao orgasmo.

A estimulação sexual mais eficaz do órgão é geralmente manual ou oral (cunnilingus), que é muitas vezes referida como estimulação direta do clitóris; em casos envolvendo penetração sexual, essas atividades também podem ser referidas como estimulação clitoridiana adicional ou assistida. A estimulação clitoridiana direta envolve estimulação física para a anatomia externa do clitóris – glande, capuz e eixo externo.

A estimulação dos pequenos lábios (lábios internos), devido à sua conexão externa com a glande e o capuz, pode ter o mesmo efeito que a estimulação direta do clitóris.

Embora essas áreas também possam receber estimulação física indireta durante a atividade sexual, como quando em atrito com os lábios maiores (lábios externos), a estimulação clitoridiana indireta é mais comumente atribuída à penetração peniano-vaginal.

A penetração peniano-anal também pode estimular indiretamente o clitóris pelos nervos sensoriais compartilhados (especialmente o nervo pudendo, que emite os nervos anais inferiores e se divide em dois ramos terminais: o nervo perineal e o nervo dorsal do clitóris). a alta sensibilidade da glande, a estimulação direta a ela nem sempre é prazerosa; em vez disso, a estimulação direta no capuz ou nas áreas próximas à glande costuma ser mais prazerosa, com a maioria das mulheres preferindo usar o capuz para estimular a glande ou enrolar a glande entre os lábios dos lábios, para toque indireto.

Também é comum que as mulheres gostem do eixo do clitóris sendo suavemente acariciado em conjunto com ocasionais movimentos circulares da glande do clitóris.

Isso pode ser com ou sem penetração manual da vagina, enquanto outras mulheres gostam de ter toda a área da vulva acariciada.

Ao contrário do uso de dedos secos, a estimulação de dedos bem lubrificados, seja por lubrificação vaginal ou lubrificante pessoal, geralmente é mais prazerosa para a anatomia externa do clitóris. pela penetração sexual, qualquer estimulação externa do clitóris na posição missionária geralmente resulta da região do osso púbico, o movimento das virilhas quando em contato.

Assim, alguns casais podem se engajar na posição de mulher por cima ou na técnica de alinhamento coital, uma posição sexual que combina a variação "cavalgando alto" da posição do missionário com movimentos de pressão-contrapressão realizados por cada parceiro no ritmo da penetração sexual, para maximizar a estimulação do clitóris.

Casais de lésbicas podem se envolver em tribadismo para ampla estimulação do clitóris ou para estimulação mútua do clitóris durante o contato com todo o corpo.

Pressionar o pênis em um movimento deslizante ou circular contra o clitóris (sexo intercrural), ou estimulá-lo por movimento contra outra parte do corpo, também pode ser praticado.

Um vibrador (como um vibrador do clitóris), vibrador ou outro brinquedo sexual pode ser usado.

Outras mulheres estimulam o clitóris usando um travesseiro ou outro objeto inanimado, por um jato de água da torneira de uma banheira ou chuveiro, ou fechando as pernas e balançando. e mudam de cor à medida que os tecidos eréteis se enchem de sangue (vasocongestão), e o indivíduo experimenta contrações vaginais.

Os músculos isquiocavernoso e bulbocavernoso, que se inserem nos corpos cavernosos, contraem e comprimem a veia dorsal do clitóris (única veia que drena o sangue dos espaços dos corpos cavernosos), e o sangue arterial continua em fluxo constante e sem forma de drenar, preenche os espaços venosos até ficarem túrgidos e ingurgitados de sangue.

Isso é o que leva à ereção do clitóris. A glande do clitóris dobra de diâmetro com a excitação e com a estimulação adicional, torna-se menos visível, pois é coberta pelo inchaço dos tecidos do capuz do clitóris.

O inchaço protege a glande do contato direto, pois o contato direto nesta fase pode ser mais irritante do que prazeroso.

A vasocongestão eventualmente desencadeia um reflexo muscular, que expele o sangue que estava preso nos tecidos circundantes e leva ao orgasmo.

Pouco tempo após a interrupção da estimulação, especialmente se o orgasmo foi alcançado, a glande torna-se visível novamente e retorna ao seu estado normal, com alguns segundos (geralmente 5 a 10) para retornar à sua posição normal e 5 a 10 minutos para retornar. ao seu tamanho original.

Se o orgasmo não for alcançado, o clitóris pode permanecer ingurgitado por algumas horas, o que muitas vezes as mulheres acham desconfortável.

Além disso, o clitóris é muito sensível após o orgasmo, tornando a estimulação adicional inicialmente dolorosa para algumas mulheres.


==== Fatores orgásmicos do clitóris e vaginais ====

Estatísticas gerais indicam que 70-80 por cento das mulheres necessitam de estimulação direta do clitóris (manual consistente, oral ou outro atrito concentrado contra as partes externas do clitóris) para atingir o orgasmo.

A estimulação indireta do clitóris (por exemplo, via penetração vaginal) também pode ser suficiente para o orgasmo feminino.

A área próxima à entrada da vagina (o terço inferior) contém quase 90% das terminações nervosas vaginais, e há áreas na parede vaginal anterior e entre a junção superior dos pequenos lábios e a uretra que são especialmente sensíveis, mas o prazer sexual intenso, incluindo o orgasmo, exclusivamente de estimulação vaginal é ocasional ou ausente porque a vagina tem significativamente menos terminações nervosas do que o clitóris. O debate proeminente sobre a quantidade de terminações nervosas vaginais começou com Alfred Kinsey.

Embora a teoria de Sigmund Freud de que os orgasmos do clitóris são um fenômeno pré-puberal ou adolescente e que os orgasmos vaginais (ou ponto G) são algo que apenas mulheres fisicamente maduras experimentam tenha sido criticada antes, Kinsey foi o primeiro pesquisador a criticar duramente a teoria.

Através de suas observações da masturbação feminina e entrevistas com milhares de mulheres, Kinsey descobriu que a maioria das mulheres que ele observou e pesquisou não podia ter orgasmos vaginais, uma descoberta que também foi apoiada por seu conhecimento da anatomia dos órgãos sexuais.

A estudiosa Janice M.

Irvine afirmou que "criticou Freud e outros teóricos por projetar construções masculinas da sexualidade nas mulheres" e "viu o clitóris como o principal centro da resposta sexual".

Ele considerou a vagina "relativamente sem importância" para a satisfação sexual, relatando que "poucas mulheres inseriam dedos ou objetos em suas vaginas quando se masturbavam".

Acreditando que os orgasmos vaginais são "uma impossibilidade fisiológica" porque a vagina tem terminações nervosas insuficientes para o prazer sexual ou clímax, ele "concluiu que a satisfação da penetração peniana [é] principalmente psicológica ou talvez o resultado da referida sensação". assim como as de Shere Hite, geralmente apoiavam as descobertas de Kinsey sobre o orgasmo feminino.

Masters e Johnson foram os primeiros pesquisadores a determinar que as estruturas do clitóris circundam e se estendem ao longo e dentro dos lábios.

Eles observaram que ambos os orgasmos clitóricos e vaginais têm os mesmos estágios de resposta física e descobriram que a maioria de seus sujeitos só conseguia atingir orgasmos clitóricos, enquanto uma minoria alcançava orgasmos vaginais.

Com base nisso, eles argumentaram que a estimulação do clitóris é a fonte de ambos os tipos de orgasmos, argumentando que o clitóris é estimulado durante a penetração pela fricção contra seu capuz.

A pesquisa surgiu na época da segunda onda do movimento feminista, que inspirou as feministas a rejeitar a distinção feita entre orgasmos clitorianos e vaginais.

A feminista Anne Koedt argumentou que, como os homens "têm orgasmos essencialmente por fricção com a vagina" e não com a área do clitóris, é por isso que a biologia das mulheres não foi analisada adequadamente. "Hoje, com amplo conhecimento de anatomia, com [C.

Lombard Kelly], Kinsey, Masters e Johnson, para mencionar apenas algumas fontes, não há ignorância sobre o assunto [do orgasmo feminino]", afirmou em seu artigo de 1970 The Myth of the Vaginal Orgasm.

Ela acrescentou: "Existem, no entanto, razões sociais pelas quais esse conhecimento não foi popularizado.

Estamos vivendo em uma sociedade masculina que não buscou mudanças no papel da mulher." Apoiar uma relação anatômica entre o clitóris e a vagina é um estudo publicado em 2005, que investigou o tamanho do clitóris; a urologista australiana Helen O'Connell, descrita como tendo iniciado o discurso entre os profissionais médicos tradicionais para reorientar e redefinir o clitóris, notou uma relação direta entre as pernas ou raízes do clitóris e o tecido erétil dos bulbos e corpos clitóricos, e a uretra distal e a vagina durante o uso de ressonância magnética. tecnologia de ressonância magnética).

Enquanto alguns estudos, usando ultra-som, encontraram evidências fisiológicas do ponto G em mulheres que relatam ter orgasmos durante a relação vaginal, O'Connell argumenta que essa relação interconectada é a explicação fisiológica para o ponto G conjecturado e a experiência de orgasmos vaginais. levando em conta a estimulação das partes internas do clitóris durante a penetração vaginal. "A parede vaginal é, na verdade, o clitóris", disse ela. “Se você levantar a pele da vagina nas paredes laterais, você obtém os bulbos do clitóris – massas triangulares e crescentes de tecido erétil”. O'Connell et al., tendo realizado dissecções nos órgãos genitais femininos de cadáveres e utilizado a fotografia para mapear a estrutura dos nervos no clitóris,

Eles concluíram que algumas mulheres têm tecidos e nervos clitóricos mais extensos do que outras, especialmente tendo observado isso em cadáveres jovens em comparação com os idosos e, portanto, enquanto a maioria das mulheres só consegue atingir o orgasmo por estimulação direta das partes externas do clitóris, o a estimulação dos tecidos mais generalizados do clitóris via coito vaginal pode ser suficiente para outros. Os pesquisadores franceses Odile Buisson e Pierre Foldès relataram achados semelhantes aos de O'Connell.

Em 2008, eles publicaram a primeira ultrassonografia 3D completa do clitóris estimulado e a republicaram em 2009 com novas pesquisas, demonstrando as maneiras pelas quais o tecido erétil do clitóris ingurgitou e circunda a vagina.

Com base em suas descobertas, eles argumentaram que as mulheres podem atingir o orgasmo vaginal por meio da estimulação do ponto G, porque o clitóris altamente inervado é puxado para perto da parede anterior da vagina quando a mulher está sexualmente excitada e durante a vagina. penetração.

Eles afirmam que, como a parede frontal da vagina está inextricavelmente ligada às partes internas do clitóris, estimular a vagina sem ativar o clitóris pode ser quase impossível.

Em seu estudo publicado em 2009, os "planos coronais durante a contração perineal e a penetração dos dedos demonstraram uma estreita relação entre a raiz do clitóris e a parede vaginal anterior".

Buisson e Foldès sugeriram "que a sensibilidade especial da parede vaginal anterior inferior poderia ser explicada pela pressão e movimento da raiz do clitóris durante uma penetração vaginal e subsequente contração perineal". prazer sexual feminino e acreditando que não há evidência anatômica do orgasmo vaginal, discorda das descrições terminológicas e anatômicas de O'Connell e outros pesquisadores do clitóris (como se referir aos bulbos vestibulares como os "bulbos clitóricos") e afirma que "o clitóris interno" não existe porque o pênis não pode entrar em contato com a congregação de múltiplos nervos/veias situados até o ângulo do clitóris, detalhado por Kobelt, ou com as raízes do clitóris,que não possuem receptores sensoriais ou sensibilidade erógena, durante o coito vaginal.

A crença de Puppo contrasta com a crença geral entre os pesquisadores de que os orgasmos vaginais são o resultado da estimulação do clitóris; eles reafirmam que o tecido do clitóris se estende, ou pelo menos é estimulado por seus bulbos, mesmo na área mais comumente relatada como o ponto G. O ponto G sendo análogo à base do pênis masculino também foi teorizado, com sentimento do pesquisador Amichai Kilchevsky que, como o desenvolvimento fetal feminino é o estado "padrão" na ausência de exposição substancial aos hormônios masculinos e, portanto, o pênis é essencialmente um clitóris aumentado por esses hormônios, não há razão evolutiva para que as fêmeas tenham uma entidade adicional ao clitóris que pode produzir orgasmos.

A dificuldade geral de atingir orgasmos por via vaginal, que é provavelmente devido à natureza que facilita o processo de gravidez, reduzindo drasticamente o número de terminações nervosas vaginais, desafia os argumentos de que os orgasmos vaginais ajudam a estimular a relação sexual para facilitar a reprodução.

Apoiar um ponto G distinto, no entanto, é um estudo da Universidade Rutgers, publicado em 2011, que foi o primeiro a mapear os órgãos genitais femininos na porção sensorial do cérebro; os exames indicaram que o cérebro registrava sensações distintas entre estimular o clitóris, o colo do útero e a parede vaginal – onde consta o ponto G – quando várias mulheres se estimulavam em uma máquina de ressonância magnética funcional (fMRI).

Barry Komisaruk, chefe dos resultados da pesquisa, afirmou que sente que "a maior parte das evidências mostra que o ponto G não é uma coisa particular" e que é "uma região, é uma convergência de muitas estruturas diferentes".


=== Vestigialidade, visões adaptacionistas e reprodutivas ===

Se o clitóris é vestigial, uma adaptação ou serve a uma função reprodutiva também tem sido debatido.

Geoffrey Miller afirmou que Helen Fisher, Meredith Small e Sarah Blaffer Hrdy "viram o orgasmo clitoriano como uma adaptação legítima em seu próprio direito, com grandes implicações para o comportamento sexual feminino e a evolução sexual".

Como Lynn Margulis e Natalie Angier, Miller acredita: "O clitóris humano não mostra sinais aparentes de ter evoluído diretamente através da escolha do parceiro masculino.

Não é especialmente grande, brilhantemente colorido, especificamente moldado ou exibido seletivamente durante o namoro." Ele contrasta isso com outras espécies femininas, como macacos-aranha e hienas malhadas, que têm clitóris tão longos quanto os machos.

Ele disse que o clitóris humano "poderia ter evoluído para ser muito mais visível se os machos tivessem preferido parceiros sexuais com clitóris maiores e mais brilhantes" e que "seu design discreto combinado com sua sensibilidade requintada sugere que o clitóris é importante não como um objeto de escolha do parceiro masculino. , mas como um mecanismo de escolha feminina. que o orgasmo clitoriano não pode ser uma adaptação porque é muito difícil de alcançar", Gould reconheceu que "a maioria dos orgasmos femininos emanam de um local clitoriano, e não vaginal (ou algum outro)" e que sua crença não adaptativa "tem sido amplamente mal interpretado como uma negação do valor adaptativo do orgasmo feminino em geral, ou mesmo como uma afirmação de que os orgasmos femininos carecem de significado em algum sentido mais amplo".

Ele disse que, embora aceite que "o orgasmo clitoriano desempenha um papel prazeroso e central na sexualidade feminina e suas alegrias", "todos esses atributos favoráveis, no entanto, emergem com a mesma clareza e facilidade, seja o local do orgasmo surgiu como um spandrel ou uma adaptação".

Ele acrescentou que os "biólogos do sexo masculino que se preocupavam com [as questões adaptacionistas] simplesmente assumiram que um local profundamente vaginal, mais próximo da região de fertilização, ofereceria maior benefício seletivo" devido às suas crenças darwinianas summum bonum sobre o sucesso reprodutivo aprimorado. As crenças de Gould sobre as visões adaptacionistas e que "as fêmeas crescem mamilos como adaptações para a amamentação, e os machos crescem mamilos menores não utilizados como um tímpano com base no valor dos canais de desenvolvimento únicos", Elisabeth Lloyd sugeriu que há pouca evidência para apoiar um relato adaptacionista do feminino. orgasmo.

Meredith L.

Chivers afirmou que "Lloyd vê o orgasmo feminino como uma sobra ontogenética; as mulheres têm orgasmos porque a neurofisiologia urogenital para o orgasmo é tão fortemente selecionada para os homens que esse modelo de desenvolvimento é expresso nas mulheres sem afetar a aptidão" e isso é semelhante a "os homens têm ing] mamilos que não servem a nenhuma função relacionada à aptidão." Na conferência de 2002 para a Sociedade Canadense de Mulheres em Filosofia, Nancy Tuana argumentou que o clitóris é desnecessário na reprodução; ela afirmou que foi ignorado por causa de "um medo do prazer.

É o prazer separado da reprodução.

Esse é o medo." Ela raciocinou que esse medo causa ignorância, que vela a sexualidade feminina.

O'Connell afirmou: "Tudo se resume à rivalidade entre os sexos: a ideia de que um sexo é sexual e o outro reprodutivo.

A verdade é que ambos são sexuais e ambos são reprodutivos." Ela reiterou que os bulbos vestibulares parecem fazer parte do clitóris e que a uretra distal e a vagina são estruturas intimamente relacionadas, embora não sejam de caráter erétil, formando um aglomerado de tecidos com o clitóris que parece ser o local da função sexual feminina e do orgasmo.


== Significado clínico ==



=== Modificação ===


As modificações no clitóris podem ser intencionais ou não.

Eles incluem mutilação genital feminina (MGF), cirurgia de mudança de sexo (para homens trans como parte da transição, que também pode incluir aumento do clitóris), cirurgia intersexual e piercings genitais.

O uso de esteróides anabolizantes por fisiculturistas e outros atletas pode resultar em aumento significativo do clitóris em conjunto com outros efeitos masculinizantes em seus corpos.

O aumento anormal do clitóris também pode ser referido como clitoromegalia, mas a clitoromegalia é mais comumente vista como uma anomalia congênita da genitália. Aqueles que tomam hormônios ou outros medicamentos como parte de uma transição transgênero geralmente experimentam um crescimento dramático do clitóris; os desejos individuais e as dificuldades da faloplastia (construção de um pênis) muitas vezes resultam na retenção da genitália original com o clitóris aumentado como análogo do pênis (metoidioplastia).

No entanto, o clitóris não pode atingir o tamanho do pênis por meio de hormônios.

Uma cirurgia para adicionar função ao clitóris, como a metoidioplastia, é uma alternativa à faloplastia que permite a retenção da sensação sexual no clitóris. ; no entanto, os tratamentos modernos favorecem abordagens mais conservadoras, pois a cirurgia invasiva pode ter consequências psicossexuais.

A clitoridectomia mais frequentemente envolve partes do clitóris sendo parcial ou completamente removidas durante a MGF, o que pode ser adicionalmente conhecido como circuncisão feminina ou corte genital feminino (FGC).

A remoção da glande do clitóris não significa que toda a estrutura seja perdida, pois o clitóris atinge profundamente os genitais.

Os problemas com esta técnica incluem perda de sensibilidade, perda da função sexual e descamação da glande.

Uma forma de preservar o clitóris com suas inervações e função é imbricar e enterrar a glande do clitóris; no entanto, Şenaylı et al. afirmam que "dor durante o estímulo por causa do tecido preso sob a cicatriz é quase rotina.

Em outro método, 50 por cento do clitóris ventral é removido através da base nivelada da haste do clitóris, e é relatado que boa sensação e função clitoridiana são observadas no acompanhamento"; além disso, "foi relatado que as complicações são de as mesmas que nos procedimentos mais antigos para este método. Em relação às mulheres que têm a condição hiperplasia adrenal congênita, o maior grupo que requer correção genital cirúrgica, a pesquisadora Atilla Şenaylı afirmou: "As principais expectativas para as operações são criar um anatomia feminina, com complicações mínimas e melhora da qualidade de vida." Şenaylı acrescentou que "[c]osmesis, integridade estrutural e capacidade coital da vagina, e ausência de dor durante a atividade sexual são os parâmetros a serem julgados pelo cirurgião."(Cosmesis geralmente se refere à correção cirúrgica de um defeito desfigurante.) Ele afirmou que embora "as expectativas possam ser padronizadas dentro desses poucos parâmetros, as técnicas operatórias ainda não se tornaram homogêneas.

Os investigadores preferiram diferentes operações para diferentes idades dos pacientes. A avaliação do gênero e o tratamento cirúrgico são as duas etapas principais nas operações intersexuais. "Os primeiros tratamentos para o clitoromegalia eram simplesmente a ressecção do clitóris.

Mais tarde, entendeu-se que a glande do clitóris e a entrada sensorial são importantes para facilitar o orgasmo", afirmou Atilla.

O epitélio da glande do clitóris "tem alta sensibilidade cutânea, o que é importante nas respostas sexuais", e é por isso que "a clitoroplastia recessiva foi posteriormente idealizada como alternativa, mas a clitoroplastia redutora é o método realizado atualmente". como "piercing do clitóris" é o piercing no capuz do clitóris mais comum (e significativamente menos complicado).

Como a perfuração do clitóris é difícil e muito dolorosa, a perfuração do capuz do clitóris é mais comum do que a perfuração do eixo do clitóris, devido à pequena porcentagem de pessoas anatomicamente adequadas para isso.

Os piercings no capuz do clitóris geralmente são canalizados na forma de piercings verticais e, em menor grau, piercings horizontais.

O piercing triangular é um piercing de capuz horizontal muito profundo e é feito atrás do clitóris, em oposição à frente dele.

Para estilos como o Isabella, que passam pelo eixo do clitóris, mas são colocados profundamente na base, eles fornecem estimulação única e ainda exigem a construção genital adequada.

A Isabella começa entre a glande do clitóris e a uretra, saindo no topo do capuz do clitóris; este piercing é altamente arriscado em relação aos danos que podem ocorrer devido à intersecção dos nervos.


=== Distúrbios sexuais ===

O transtorno da excitação genital persistente (PGAD) resulta em uma excitação genital espontânea, persistente e incontrolável em mulheres, não relacionada a quaisquer sentimentos de desejo sexual.

O priapismo clitoriano, também conhecido como clitorismo, é uma condição médica rara e potencialmente dolorosa e às vezes é descrito como um aspecto do PGAD.

Com o PGAD, a excitação dura por um período de tempo extraordinariamente longo (variando de horas a dias); também pode estar associada a modificações morfométricas e vasculares do clitóris. As drogas podem causar ou afetar o priapismo clitoriano.

A droga trazodona é conhecida por causar priapismo masculino como efeito colateral, mas há apenas um relato documentado de que pode ter causado priapismo clitoriano, caso em que a descontinuação da medicação pode ser um remédio.

Além disso, está documentado que a nefazodona causou ingurgitamento do clitóris, diferentemente do priapismo do clitóris, em um caso, e o priapismo do clitóris às vezes pode começar como resultado ou somente após a descontinuação de antipsicóticos ou inibidores seletivos de recaptação de serotonina (ISRSs). Porque O PGAD é relativamente raro e, como seu próprio conceito, além do priapismo clitoriano, só foi pesquisado desde 2001, há poucas pesquisas sobre o que pode curar ou remediar o distúrbio.

Em alguns casos registrados, o PGAD foi causado ou causado por uma malformação arteriovenosa pélvica com ramos arteriais para o clitóris; o tratamento cirúrgico foi eficaz nesses casos.


== Sociedade e cultura ==



=== Conhecimento e vernáculo do grego antigo – século XVI ===

No que diz respeito às percepções históricas e modernas do clitóris, o clitóris e o pênis foram considerados equivalentes pelos estudiosos por mais de 2.500 anos em todos os aspectos, exceto em sua disposição.

Por ser frequentemente omitido ou deturpado em textos anatômicos históricos e contemporâneos, também foi sujeito a um ciclo contínuo de estudiosos do sexo masculino alegando tê-lo descoberto.

Os antigos gregos, antigos romanos e gerações gregas e romanas até e durante o Renascimento, estavam cientes de que os órgãos sexuais masculinos e femininos são anatomicamente semelhantes, mas anatomistas proeminentes como Galeno (129 – c. 200 d. 1564) considerava a vagina o equivalente estrutural do pênis, exceto por ser invertido; Vesalius argumentou contra a existência do clitóris em mulheres normais, e seu modelo anatômico descreveu como o pênis corresponde à vagina, sem um papel para o clitóris. A sexualidade grega e romana antiga também designava a penetração como sexualidade "definida pelo homem".

O termo tribas, ou tribade, foi usado para se referir a uma mulher ou indivíduo intersexo que penetrava ativamente em outra pessoa (homem ou mulher) através do uso do clitóris ou de um vibrador.

Como se acreditava que qualquer ato sexual exigia que um dos parceiros fosse "fálico" e que, portanto, a atividade sexual entre mulheres era impossível sem esse recurso, a mitologia popularmente associava as lésbicas a ter clitóris aumentado ou incapazes de desfrutar da atividade sexual sem a substituição de um falo.

Em 1545, Charles Estienne foi o primeiro escritor a identificar o clitóris em um trabalho baseado na dissecação, mas concluiu que ele tinha uma função urinária.

Após este estudo, Realdo Colombo (também conhecido como Matteo Renaldo Colombo), professor de cirurgia na Universidade de Pádua, Itália, publicou um livro chamado De re anatomica em 1559, no qual descreve a "sede do prazer da mulher".

Em seu papel de pesquisador, Colombo concluiu: "Como ninguém discerniu essas projeções e seu funcionamento, se é permitido dar nomes às coisas descobertas por mim, deve ser chamado de amor ou doçura de Vênus.", em referência a a mitológica Vênus, deusa do amor erótico.

A afirmação de Colombo foi contestada por seu sucessor em Pádua, Gabriele Falloppio (descobridor da trompa de Falópio), que afirmou que ele foi o primeiro a descobrir o clitóris.

Em 1561, Falloppio declarou: "Os anatomistas modernos o negligenciaram inteiramente ... e não dizem uma palavra sobre isso ... e se outros falaram sobre isso, saibam que eles o tiraram de mim ou de meus alunos". Isso causou um transtorno na comunidade médica européia e, tendo lido as descrições detalhadas de Colombo e Falloppio sobre o clitóris, Vesalius declarou: "Não é razoável culpar os outros por incompetência com base em algum esporte da natureza que você observou em algumas mulheres e dificilmente você pode atribuir essa parte nova e inútil, como se fosse um órgão, a mulheres saudáveis." Ele concluiu: "Eu acho que tal estrutura aparece em hermafroditas que de outra forma têm genitais bem formados, como Paulo de Egina descreve,

Além de Avicena chamá-lo de albaratha ou virga ("vara") e Colombo chamá-lo de doçura de Vênus, Hipócrates usou o termo columela ("pequeno pilar"), e Albucasis, uma autoridade médica árabe, chamou-o de tentigo ("tensão ").

Os nomes indicavam que cada descrição das estruturas era sobre o corpo e a glande do clitóris, mas geralmente a glande.

Além disso, era conhecido pelos romanos, que o chamaram (gíria vulgar) de landica.

No entanto, Albertus Magnus, um dos escritores mais prolíficos da Idade Média, sentiu que era importante destacar "homologias entre estruturas e funções masculinas e femininas", acrescentando "uma psicologia da excitação sexual" que Aristóteles não havia usado para detalhar a clitóris.

Enquanto no tratado de Constantino Liber de coitu, o clitóris é referido algumas vezes, Magnus deu igual atenção aos órgãos masculinos e femininos. genitais femininos; apesar de seus esforços para igualar o clitóris, o ciclo de supressão e redescoberta do órgão continuou, e uma justificativa do século XVI para a clitoridectomia parece ter sido confundida pelo hermafroditismo e pela imprecisão criada pela palavra nymphae substituída pela palavra clitóris .

A ninfotomia era uma operação médica para extirpar um clitóris extraordinariamente grande, mas o que era considerado "extraordinariamente grande" era muitas vezes uma questão de percepção.

O procedimento era realizado rotineiramente em mulheres egípcias, devido a médicos como Jacques Daléchamps que acreditavam que essa versão do clitóris era "uma característica inusitada que ocorria em quase todas as mulheres egípcias [e] algumas das nossas, de modo que quando se encontravam em a companhia de outras mulheres, ou suas roupas as esfregam enquanto caminham ou seus maridos desejam se aproximar delas, ereto como um pênis masculino e de fato elas o usam para brincar com outras mulheres, como fariam seus maridos ...

Assim as peças são cortadas".


=== Século XVII – conhecimento e vernáculo atuais ===


Caspar Bartholin, um anatomista dinamarquês do século XVII, rejeitou as alegações de Colombo e Falloppio de que descobriram o clitóris, argumentando que o clitóris era amplamente conhecido pela ciência médica desde o século II.

Embora as parteiras do século XVII recomendassem a homens e mulheres que as mulheres aspirassem ao orgasmo para ajudá-los a engravidar para a saúde e o bem-estar geral e para manter seus relacionamentos saudáveis, o debate sobre a importância do clitóris persistiu, notadamente no trabalho de Regnier de Graaf no século XVII e Georg Ludwig Kobelt no século XIX. Como Falloppio e Bartholin, De Graaf criticou a afirmação de Colombo de ter descoberto o clitóris; seu trabalho parece ter fornecido o primeiro relato abrangente da anatomia do clitóris. "Estamos extremamente surpresos que alguns anatomistas não façam mais menção a essa parte do que se ela não existisse no universo da natureza", afirmou. "Em todos os cadáveres que dissecamos até agora, descobrimos que é bastante perceptível à vista e ao toque." De Graaf enfatizou a necessidade de distinguir ninfa de clitóris, optando por "sempre dar [ao clitóris] o nome de clitóris" para evitar confusão; isso resultou no uso frequente do nome correto para o órgão entre os anatomistas, mas considerando que ninfa também foi variado em seu uso e acabou se tornando o termo específico para os pequenos lábios, mais confusão se seguiu.

O debate sobre se o orgasmo era mesmo necessário para as mulheres começou na era vitoriana, e a teoria de Freud de 1905 sobre a imaturidade dos orgasmos do clitóris (veja acima) afetou negativamente a sexualidade das mulheres durante a maior parte do século XX. O deputado britânico Noel Pemberton Billing publicou um artigo intitulado "O Culto do Clítoris", aprofundando suas teorias da conspiração e atacando a atriz Maud Allan e Margot Asquith, esposa do primeiro-ministro.

As acusações levaram a um julgamento por difamação sensacional, que Billing acabou vencendo; Philip Hoare relata que Billing argumentou que "como um termo médico, 'clitóris' só seria conhecido pelos 'iniciados' e era incapaz de corromper as mentes morais".

Jodie Medd argumenta a respeito de "O Culto do Clítoris" que "o corpo feminino não reprodutivo, mas desejante [...] simultaneamente exige e recusa a atenção interpretativa, incitando o escândalo por sua própria resistência à representação". especialmente durante o século 20, detalhes do clitóris de vários diagramas genitais apresentados em séculos anteriores foram omitidos em textos posteriores.

A extensão total do clitóris foi mencionada por Masters e Johnson em 1966, mas de uma forma tão confusa que o significado de sua descrição ficou obscurecido; em 1981, a Federação de Clínicas Feministas de Saúde da Mulher (FFWHC) deu continuidade a esse processo com ilustrações anatomicamente precisas identificando 18 estruturas do clitóris.

Apesar das ilustrações do FFWHC, Josephine Lowndes Sevely, em 1987, descreveu a vagina como mais a contrapartida do pênis. Sobre outras crenças sobre o clitóris, Hite (1976 e 1981) descobriu que, durante a intimidade sexual com um parceiro, a estimulação do clitóris era mais frequentemente descrito pelas mulheres como preliminares do que como um método primário de atividade sexual, incluindo o orgasmo.

Além disso, embora o trabalho do FFWHC tenha impulsionado significativamente a reforma feminista de textos anatômicos, não teve um impacto geral.

A pesquisa de Helen O'Connell no final da década de 1990 motivou a comunidade médica a começar a mudar a forma como o clitóris é definido anatomicamente.

O'Connell descreve descrições típicas de livros didáticos do clitóris como carentes de detalhes e incluindo imprecisões, como descrições anatômicas mais antigas e modernas da anatomia uretral e genital feminina humana tendo sido baseadas em dissecções realizadas em cadáveres idosos cujo tecido erétil (clitóris) havia encolhido.

Em vez disso, ela credita o trabalho de Georg Ludwig Kobelt como a descrição mais abrangente e precisa da anatomia do clitóris.

As medições de ressonância magnética, que fornecem um método de exame ao vivo e multiplanar, agora complementam os esforços de pesquisa do FFWHC, bem como de O'Connell, sobre o clitóris, mostrando que o volume de tecido erétil do clitóris é dez vezes o que é mostrado nos médicos Na pesquisa de Bruce Bagemihl do The Zoological Record (1978–1997) – que contém mais de um milhão de documentos de mais de 6.000 revistas científicas – foram encontrados 539 artigos com foco no pênis, enquanto 7 foram encontrados com foco no clitóris.

Em 2000, os pesquisadores Shirley Ogletree e Harvey Ginsberg concluíram que há uma negligência geral da palavra clitóris no vernáculo comum.

Eles analisaram os termos usados ​​para descrever a genitália no banco de dados PsycINFO de 1887 a 2000 e descobriram que o pênis foi usado em 1.482 fontes, a vagina em 409, enquanto o clitóris foi mencionado apenas em 83.

Eles também analisaram 57 livros listados em um banco de dados de computador para instrução sexual.

Na maioria dos livros, o pênis era a parte do corpo mais discutida – mais mencionada do que clitóris, vagina e útero juntos.

Eles investigaram a terminologia usada por estudantes universitários, variando de euro-americano (76%/76%), hispânico (18%/14%) e afro-americano (4%/7%), em relação às crenças dos estudantes sobre sexualidade e conhecimento sobre o assunto.

Os alunos foram predominantemente educados a acreditar que a vagina é a contraparte feminina do pênis.

Os autores descobriram que a crença dos alunos de que a parte interna da vagina é a parte sexualmente mais sensível do corpo feminino se correlacionou com atitudes negativas em relação à masturbação e forte apoio a mitos sexuais.

Um estudo de 2005 relatou que, em uma amostra de estudantes de graduação, as fontes de conhecimento sobre o clitóris mais citadas foram a escola e os amigos, e que isso foi associado ao conhecimento menos testado.

O conhecimento do clitóris por autoexploração foi o menos citado, mas "os entrevistados acertaram, em média, três das cinco medidas de conhecimento do clitóris".

Os autores afirmaram que "o conhecimento se correlacionou significativamente com a frequência do orgasmo das mulheres na masturbação, mas não no sexo em parceria" e que seus "resultados são discutidos à luz da desigualdade de gênero e de uma construção social da sexualidade, endossada por homens e mulheres, que privilegia o prazer sexual dos homens sobre o das mulheres, de tal forma que o orgasmo para as mulheres é agradável, mas em última análise incidental." Eles concluíram que parte da solução para remediar "este problema" requer que homens e mulheres aprendam mais sobre o clitóris do que se pratica atualmente. .

A porta-voz do Clitoraid, Nadine Gary, afirmou que a missão do grupo é conscientizar o público sobre o clitóris porque "foi ignorado, vilipendiado, tornado tabu e considerado pecaminoso e vergonhoso por séculos". , modelo em tamanho real do clitóris, para uso em um conjunto de vídeos anti-sexista que ela havia sido contratada para produzir.

Fillod foi entrevistado por Stephanie Theobald, cujo artigo no The Guardian afirmava que o modelo 3D seria usado para educação sexual nas escolas francesas, do ensino fundamental ao ensino médio, a partir de setembro de 2016; este não foi o caso, mas a história se tornou viral em todo o mundo.

Os autores relataram que cerca de dois terços dos alunos não conseguiram nomear os órgãos genitais femininos externos, como o clitóris e os lábios, mesmo depois que fotos detalhadas foram fornecidas a eles.

Uma análise de 2022 relatou que o clitóris é mencionado em apenas um dos 113 livros didáticos gregos do ensino médio usados ​​nas aulas de biologia desde a década de 1870 até o presente.


=== Arte contemporânea ===


Em 2012, a artista nova-iorquina Sophia Wallace começou a trabalhar em um projeto multimídia para desafiar equívocos sobre o clitóris.

Com base na pesquisa de O'Connell de 1998, o trabalho de Wallace enfatiza o alcance e o tamanho do clitóris humano.

Ela diz que a ignorância disso ainda parece ser generalizada na sociedade moderna. "É um dilema curioso observar o paradoxo de que, por um lado, o corpo feminino é a metáfora primária da sexualidade, seu uso satura a publicidade, a arte e o imaginário erótico dominante", disse ela. "No entanto, o clitóris, o verdadeiro órgão sexual feminino, é praticamente invisível." O projeto chama-se Cliteracy e inclui um "rodeio do clitóris", que é um modelo interativo de um clitóris dourado gigante, incluindo suas partes internas, produzido com a ajuda do escultor Kenneth Thomas. "Tem sido um espetáculo onde quer que tenha sido mostrado.

As pessoas estão famintas para poder falar sobre isso", disse Wallace. "Adoro ver homens defendendo o clitóris [...] A alfabetização é sobre não ter o corpo controlado ou legislado [...] Não ter acesso ao prazer que é seu direito de nascença é um ato profundamente político."Em 2016, outro projeto começou em Nova York, arte de rua que desde então se espalhou para quase 100 cidades: Clitorosity, um "esforço comunitário para celebrar a estrutura completa do clitóris" , combinando desenhos de giz e palavras para estimular a interação e a conversa com os transeuntes, que a equipe documenta nas mídias sociais.

Em 2016, Lori-Malépart Traversy fez um documentário animado sobre a anatomia não reconhecida do clitóris. logo se tornará tão incontroverso que fazer arte sobre eles seria tão irrelevante quanto fazer arte sobre pênis. Outros projetos listados pela BBC incluem Clito Clito, joalheria positiva para o corpo feita em Berlim; Clitorissima, documentário destinado a normalizar as conversas entre mãe e filha sobre o clitóris; e um festival ClitArt em Londres, abrangendo performances de palavras faladas, bem como artes visuais.

O coletivo de arte francês Les Infemmes (um trocadilho com "infame" e "mulher") publicou um fanzine cujo título pode ser traduzido como "The Clit Cheatsheet".


=== Influência na mutilação genital feminina ===


Controvérsia significativa envolve a mutilação genital feminina (MGF), sendo a Organização Mundial da Saúde (OMS) uma das muitas organizações de saúde que fizeram campanha contra os procedimentos em nome dos direitos humanos, afirmando que "a MGF não traz benefícios à saúde" e que é " uma violação dos direitos humanos de meninas e mulheres" e "reflete a desigualdade profundamente enraizada entre os sexos".

A prática existiu em um ponto ou outro em quase todas as civilizações humanas, mais comumente para exercer controle sobre o comportamento sexual, incluindo a masturbação, de meninas e mulheres, mas também para mudar a aparência do clitóris.

Costume e tradição são as razões mais citadas para a MGF, com algumas culturas acreditando que não realizá-la tem a possibilidade de romper a coesão de seus sistemas sociais e políticos, como a MGF também fazer parte da iniciação de uma menina na idade adulta.

Muitas vezes, uma menina não é considerada adulta em uma sociedade que pratica a MGF, a menos que tenha sido submetida à MGF, e a "remoção do clitóris e dos lábios - vistos por alguns como as partes masculinas do corpo de uma mulher - é pensado para aumentar a feminilidade da menina , muitas vezes sinônimo de docilidade e obediência". A mutilação genital feminina é realizada em várias sociedades, especialmente na África, com 85 por cento das mutilações genitais realizadas na África consistindo em clitoridectomia ou excisão, e em menor grau em outras partes do Oriente Médio e no Sudeste Asiático, em meninas de poucos dias até a adolescência, muitas vezes para reduzir o desejo sexual em um esforço para preservar a virgindade vaginal.

A prática da MGF se espalhou globalmente, pois imigrantes da Ásia, África e Oriente Médio trazem o costume com eles.

Nos Estados Unidos, às vezes é praticado em meninas nascidas com um clitóris maior que o normal.

Comfort Momoh, especializado no tema da MGF, afirma que a MGF pode ter sido "praticada no antigo Egito como um sinal de distinção entre a aristocracia"; há relatos de que vestígios de infibulação estão em múmias egípcias.

A MGF ainda é praticada rotineiramente no Egito.

Greenberg et ai. relatam que "um estudo descobriu que 97% das mulheres casadas no Egito tiveram alguma forma de mutilação genital realizada". A Anistia Internacional estimou em 1997 que mais de dois milhões de procedimentos de MGF são realizados todos os anos.


== Outros animais ==



=== Geral ===

Embora o clitóris exista em todas as espécies de mamíferos, existem poucos estudos detalhados da anatomia do clitóris em não humanos.

O clitóris é especialmente desenvolvido em fossas, macacos, lêmures, toupeiras e, como o pênis em muitos mamíferos placentários não humanos, geralmente contém um pequeno osso.

Nas mulheres, este osso é conhecido como os clitoridis.

O clitóris existe em tartarugas, avestruzes, crocodilos e em espécies de aves nas quais a contraparte masculina tem um pênis.

Algumas ursas intersexuais acasalam e dão à luz pela ponta do clitóris; essas espécies são ursos pardos, ursos marrons, ursos negros americanos e ursos polares.

Embora os ursos tenham sido descritos como tendo "um canal de parto que atravessa o clitóris em vez de formar uma vagina separada" (uma característica que é estimada em 10 a 20 por cento da população dos ursos), os cientistas afirmam que as hienas-malhadas fêmeas são os únicos mamíferos femininos não hermafroditas desprovidos de abertura vaginal externa, e cuja anatomia sexual é distinta dos casos usuais de intersexo.


=== Primatas não humanos ===

Nos macacos-aranha, o clitóris é especialmente desenvolvido e tem uma passagem interior, ou uretra, que o torna quase idêntico ao pênis, e retém e distribui as gotículas de urina à medida que a macaca se move.

O estudioso Alan F.

Dixson afirmou que essa urina "é eliminada nas bases do clitóris, flui para baixo no sulco raso em sua superfície perineal e é mantida pelas dobras cutâneas de cada lado do sulco".

Como os macacos-aranha da América do Sul têm clitóris pendentes e eréteis longos o suficiente para serem confundidos com um pênis, pesquisadores e observadores da espécie procuram um escroto para determinar o sexo do animal; uma abordagem semelhante é identificar glândulas de marcação de cheiro que também podem estar presentes no clitóris. a maioria dos mamíferos; Natalie Angier disse que uma jovem adolescente "bonobo fêmea tem talvez metade do peso de uma adolescente humana, mas seu clitóris é três vezes maior que o equivalente humano, e visível o suficiente para balançar inconfundivelmente enquanto anda".

Os bonobos femininos geralmente se envolvem na prática de fricção genital-genital (GG), que é a forma não humana de tribadismo em que as fêmeas humanas se envolvem.

O etólogo Jonathan Balcombe afirmou que as bonobos fêmeas esfregam seus clitóris rapidamente por dez a vinte segundos, e esse comportamento, "que pode ser repetido em rápida sucessão, geralmente é acompanhado por ranger, gritar e ingurgitamento do clitóris"; ele acrescentou que, em média, eles se envolvem nessa prática "cerca de uma vez a cada duas horas", e como os bonobos às vezes acasalam cara a cara, "a bióloga evolucionária Marlene Zuk sugeriu que a posição do clitóris em bonobos e alguns outros primatas evoluiu para maximizar a estimulação durante a relação sexual". Muitas espécies de estrepsirrina exibem clitóris alongados que são total ou parcialmente tunelados pela uretra, incluindo lêmures de camundongo, lêmures anões, todas as espécies de Eulemur, lóris e galagos.

Algumas dessas espécies também exibem um selo de membrana na vagina que fecha a abertura vaginal durante as épocas de não acasalamento, principalmente camundongos e lêmures anões.

A morfologia do clitóris do lêmure de cauda anelada é a mais bem estudada.

Eles são descritos como tendo "clitóris alongados e pendentes que são [totalmente] tunelados por uma uretra".

A uretra é cercada por tecido erétil, o que permite um inchaço significativo durante as épocas de reprodução, mas esse tecido erétil difere do corpo esponjoso masculino típico.

As fêmeas de cauda anelada adultas não grávidas não apresentam níveis de testosterona mais altos do que os machos, mas exibem níveis mais altos de A4 e estrogênio durante a agressão sazonal.

Durante a gravidez, os níveis de estrogênio, A4 e testosterona aumentam, mas os fetos femininos ainda estão "protegidos" do excesso de testosterona.

Essas genitálias "masculinizadas" são frequentemente encontradas ao lado de outros traços, como grupos sociais dominados por mulheres, dimorfismo sexual reduzido que torna as fêmeas do mesmo tamanho que os machos e até proporções de sexos em populações adultas.

Este fenômeno que foi apelidado de "síndrome do lêmure".

Um estudo de masculinização de Eulemur de 2014 propôs que a masculinização comportamental e morfológica em lemuriformes femininos é um traço ancestral que provavelmente surgiu após sua separação dos lorisiformes.


=== Hienas malhadas ===


Enquanto as hienas-malhadas fêmeas são às vezes chamadas de hermafroditas ou intersexuais, e os cientistas dos tempos históricos antigos e posteriores acreditavam que eram hermafroditas, os cientistas modernos não se referem a elas como tal.

Essa designação é tipicamente reservada para aqueles que exibem simultaneamente características de ambos os sexos; a composição genética das hienas-malhadas fêmeas "são claramente distintas" das hienas-malhadas machos. a formação do pênis parece em grande parte independente de andrógenos porque aparece no feto feminino antes da diferenciação do ovário fetal e da glândula adrenal.

As hienas malhadas têm um clitóris altamente erétil, completo com um falso escroto; autor João C.

Wingfield afirmou que "a semelhança com a genitália masculina é tão próxima que o sexo pode ser determinado com confiança apenas pela palpação do escroto".

O pseudo-pênis também pode ser distinguido da genitália dos machos por sua maior espessura e glande mais arredondada.

A fêmea não possui vagina externa, pois os lábios se fundem para formar um pseudo-escroto.

Nas fêmeas, este escroto consiste em tecido adiposo mole.

Como hienas-malhadas machos em relação a seus pênis, as hienas-malhadas fêmeas têm pequenos espinhos penianos na cabeça de seus clitóris, que a estudiosa Catherine Blackledge disse que "a ponta do clitóris parece uma lixa macia".

Ela acrescentou que o clitóris "se estende para longe do corpo em um arco fino e elegante, medindo, em média, mais de 17 cm da raiz às pontas.

Assim como um pênis, [ele] é totalmente erétil, levantando a cabeça em cerimônias de saudação de hienas, exibições sociais, jogos de luta ou ao farejar colegas".

Devido aos seus níveis mais elevados de exposição ao andrógeno durante o desenvolvimento fetal, as hienas fêmeas são significativamente mais musculosas e agressivas do que os machos; em termos sociais, eles são de classificação mais alta do que os machos, sendo dominantes ou dominantes e alfa, e as fêmeas que foram expostas a níveis mais altos de andrógenos do que a média tornam-se mais altas do que suas colegas do sexo feminino.

Fêmeas subordinadas lambem o clitóris de mulheres de alto escalão como sinal de submissão e obediência, mas as fêmeas também lambem o clitóris umas das outras como uma saudação ou para fortalecer os laços sociais; em contraste, enquanto todos os machos lambem o clitóris das fêmeas dominantes, as fêmeas não lambem os pênis dos machos porque os machos são considerados de classificação mais baixa. urinar, copular e dar à luz através deste órgão.

Essa característica torna o acasalamento mais trabalhoso para o macho do que em outros mamíferos, e também torna fúteis as tentativas de coagir sexualmente (forçar fisicamente a atividade sexual) as fêmeas.

Joan Roughgarden, ecologista e bióloga evolutiva, disse que, como o clitóris da hiena é mais alto na barriga do que a vagina na maioria dos mamíferos, a hiena macho "deve deslizar o traseiro sob a fêmea ao acasalar para que seu pênis se alinhe com [seu clitóris ]".

Em uma ação semelhante a levantar a manga de uma camisa, a "fêmea retrai o [pseudo-pênis] sobre si mesma e cria uma abertura na qual o macho insere seu próprio pênis".

O macho deve praticar esse ato, que pode levar alguns meses para ser realizado com sucesso.

As hienas-malhadas fêmeas expostas a doses maiores de andrógenos danificaram significativamente os ovários, dificultando a concepção.

Após o parto, o pseudo-pênis se alonga e perde muito de seus aspectos originais; torna-se um prepúcio de paredes frouxas e reduzido com um orifício alargado com lábios fendidos.

Aproximadamente 15% das fêmeas morrem durante o primeiro parto e mais de 60% dos primogênitos de sua espécie morrem.A 2006 Baskin et al. O estudo concluiu: "As estruturas anatômicas básicas dos corpos corpóreos em ambos os sexos de humanos e hienas-malhadas eram semelhantes.

Como em humanos, a distribuição do nervo dorsal foi única em ser desprovida de nervos na posição de 12 horas no pênis e clitóris da hiena-malhada" e que "nervos [d]orsal do pênis/clitóris em humanos e machos as hienas seguiram ao longo de ambos os lados do corpo corpóreo até o corpo esponjoso nas posições de 5 e 7 horas.

Os nervos dorsais penetraram no corpo corpóreo e distalmente na glande na hiena", e nas hienas fêmeas, "os nervos dorsais se espalharam lateralmente no corpo do clitóris.

A morfologia da glande era diferente na aparência em ambos os sexos, sendo larga e romba na fêmea e afilada no macho".


=== Mol ===

Muitas espécies de moles Talpid exibem clitóris peniformes que são tunelados pela uretra e apresentam tecido erétil, principalmente espécies do gênero Talpa encontrados na Europa.

Exclusivo para este clado é a presença de ovotestes, em que o ovário feminino também é composto principalmente de tecido testicular estéril que secreta testosterona com apenas uma pequena porção da gônada contendo tecido ovariano.

Estudos genéticos revelaram que as fêmeas têm um genótipo XX e não possuem genes ligados ao Y translocados.

Estudos detalhados de desenvolvimento de Talpa occidentalis revelaram que as gônadas femininas se desenvolvem em um "padrão semelhante ao testículo".

DMRT1, um gene que regula o desenvolvimento das células de Sertoli, foi expresso em células germinativas femininas antes da meiose, no entanto, nenhuma célula de Sertoli estava presente nos ovotestículos totalmente desenvolvidos.

Além disso, as células germinativas femininas só entram em meiose após o nascimento, um fenômeno que não foi encontrado em nenhum outro mamífero eutério.

Análises filogenéticas sugeriram que, como nos lemuróides, esta característica deve ter evoluído em um ancestral comum do clado, e foi "desligado e ligado" em diferentes linhagens Talpid. seu território fora da época de reprodução, sendo a provável causa desse comportamento os altos níveis de testosterona secretados pelos ovotestes femininos.

Durante a estação não reprodutiva, sua abertura vaginal é coberta por pele, semelhante à condição observada em ratos e lêmures anões.


=== Gatos, ovelhas e ratos ===

Pesquisadores que estudam as vias aferentes periféricas e centrais do clitóris felino concluíram que "neurônios aferentes que se projetam para o clitóris do gato foram identificados pelo traçado WGA-HRP nos gânglios da raiz dorsal S1 e S2.

Uma média de 433 células foram identificadas em cada lado do animal. 85 por cento e 15 por cento das células marcadas estavam localizadas nos gânglios da raiz dorsal S1 e S2, respectivamente.

A área transversal média dos perfis de neurônios aferentes do clitóris foi de 1,479 ± 627 μm2." Eles também afirmaram que a "pressão constante leve no clitóris produziu uma explosão inicial de disparo de unidade única (frequências máximas 170-255 Hz), seguido de adaptação rápida e um disparo sustentado (máximo de 40 Hz), que foi mantido durante a estimulação" e que um exame mais aprofundado do disparo tônico "indica que o clitóris é inervado por fibras aferentes mielinizadas mecanossensíveis no nervo pudendo que se projetam centralmente para a região da comissura dorsal na medula espinhal L7-S1. O fenótipo externo e o comportamento reprodutivo de 21 ovelhas freemartin e dois ovinos pseudohermafroditas machos foram registrados com o objetivo de identificar quaisquer características que pudessem prever uma falha na reprodução.

O comprimento da vagina e o tamanho e formato da vulva e do clitóris estavam entre os aspectos analisados.

Embora o estudo tenha relatado que "foram detectadas várias anormalidades físicas e comportamentais", também concluiu que "o único achado consistente em todos os 23 animais foi uma vagina curta que variou em comprimento de 3,1 a 7,0 cm, em comparação com 10 a 14 cm. em animais normais." Em um estudo sobre a estrutura do clitóris de camundongos, a uretra perineal do camundongo foi documentada como sendo cercada por tecido erétil formando os bulbos do clitóris.

Os pesquisadores afirmaram: "No camundongo, como nas fêmeas humanas, a organização do tecido nos corpos cavernosos do clitóris é essencialmente semelhante à do pênis, exceto pela ausência de uma camada subalbugínea interposta entre a túnica albugínea e o tecido erétil".


== Notas ==



=== Bibliografia ===




https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clitoris

;;;FR;;;



CLITORIS


Le clitoris ((écouter) ou (écouter)) est un organe sexuel féminin présent chez les mammifères, les autruches et un nombre limité d'autres animaux.

Chez l'homme, la partie visible - le gland - se situe à la jonction avant des petites lèvres (lèvres internes), au-dessus de l'ouverture de l'urètre.

Contrairement au pénis, l'homologue masculin (équivalent) du clitoris, il ne contient généralement pas la partie distale (ou ouverture) de l'urètre et n'est donc pas utilisé pour la miction.

Chez la plupart des espèces, le clitoris est dépourvu de toute fonction reproductrice.

Alors que peu d'animaux urinent à travers le clitoris ou l'utilisent pour se reproduire, la hyène tachetée, qui a un clitoris particulièrement grand, urine, s'accouple et donne naissance via l'organe.

Certains autres mammifères, tels que les lémuriens et les singes araignées, ont également un grand clitoris. Le clitoris est la zone érogène la plus sensible de la femme humaine et généralement la principale source anatomique du plaisir sexuel féminin humain.

Chez l'homme et d'autres mammifères, il se développe à partir d'une excroissance de l'embryon appelée tubercule génital.

Initialement indifférencié, le tubercule se développe en pénis ou en clitoris au cours du développement du système reproducteur en fonction de l'exposition aux androgènes (qui sont principalement des hormones mâles).

Le clitoris est une structure complexe, et sa taille et sa sensibilité peuvent varier.

Le gland (tête) du clitoris humain a à peu près la taille et la forme d'un pois et on estime qu'il a environ 8 000 terminaisons nerveuses sensorielles. Les débats sexologiques, médicaux et psychologiques se sont concentrés sur le clitoris, et il a fait l'objet de constructions sociales. analyses et études.

Ces discussions vont de la précision anatomique, de l'inégalité entre les sexes, des mutilations génitales féminines et des facteurs orgasmiques et de leur explication physiologique pour le point G.

Bien que, chez l'homme, le seul but connu du clitoris soit de procurer du plaisir sexuel, la question de savoir si le clitoris est vestigial, une adaptation ou sert une fonction de reproduction a été débattue.

Les perceptions sociales du clitoris incluent l'importance de son rôle dans le plaisir sexuel féminin, des hypothèses sur sa taille et sa profondeur réelles et diverses croyances concernant les modifications génitales telles que l'élargissement du clitoris, le perçage du clitoris et la clitoridectomie.

La modification génitale peut être pour des raisons esthétiques, médicales ou culturelles. La connaissance du clitoris est significativement impactée par les perceptions culturelles de l'organe.

Des études suggèrent que la connaissance de son existence et de son anatomie est limitée par rapport à celle des autres organes sexuels et qu'une meilleure éducation à ce sujet pourrait aider à atténuer les stigmates sociaux associés au corps féminin et au plaisir sexuel féminin, par exemple, que le clitoris et la vulve en général sont visuellement désagréables, que la masturbation féminine est taboue ou que les hommes devraient être censés maîtriser et contrôler les orgasmes féminins.


== Etymologie ==

L'Oxford English Dictionary déclare que le mot clitoris a probablement son origine dans le grec ancien κλειτορίς, kleitoris, peut-être dérivé du verbe κλείειν, kleiein, "fermer".

Clitoris est aussi grec pour le mot clé, "indiquant que les anciens anatomistes le considéraient comme la clé" de la sexualité féminine.

En plus de la clé, le dictionnaire d'étymologie en ligne suggère que d'autres candidats grecs pour l'étymologie du mot incluent un nom signifiant «loquet» ou «crochet»; un verbe signifiant "toucher ou titiller lascivement", "chatouiller" (un synonyme allemand du clitoris est der Kitzler, "le chatouilleur"), bien que ce verbe soit plus probablement dérivé de "clitoris" ; et un mot signifiant "côté d'une colline", de la même racine que "climax".

L'Oxford English Dictionary indique également que la forme abrégée "clit", dont la première occurrence a été notée aux États-Unis, est utilisée dans la presse écrite depuis 1958 : jusqu'alors, l'abréviation commune était "clitty". Les formes plurielles sont des clitoris. en anglais et clitoris en latin.

Le génitif latin est clitoridis, comme dans "glans clitoridis".

Dans la littérature médicale et sexologique, le clitoris est parfois appelé «le pénis féminin» ou pseudo-pénis, et le terme clitoris est couramment utilisé pour désigner le gland seul; en partie à cause de cela, il y a eu divers termes pour l'organe qui ont historiquement confondu son anatomie.


== Structure ==



=== Développement ===


Chez les mammifères, la différenciation sexuelle est déterminée par le sperme qui porte un chromosome X ou Y (mâle).

Le chromosome Y contient un gène déterminant le sexe (SRY) qui code un facteur de transcription pour la protéine TDF (facteur déterminant du testicule) et déclenche la création de testostérone et d'hormone anti-müllerienne pour le développement de l'embryon en mâle.

Cette différenciation commence environ huit ou neuf semaines après la conception.

Certaines sources affirment qu'il se poursuit jusqu'à la douzième semaine, tandis que d'autres affirment qu'il est clairement évident à la treizième semaine et que les organes sexuels sont complètement développés à la seizième semaine. Le clitoris se développe à partir d'une excroissance phallique de l'embryon appelée tubercule génital. .

Initialement indifférencié, le tubercule se développe en clitoris ou en pénis au cours du développement du système reproducteur en fonction de l'exposition aux androgènes (qui sont principalement des hormones mâles).

Le clitoris se forme à partir des mêmes tissus qui deviennent le gland et la tige du pénis, et cette origine embryonnaire commune rend ces deux organes homologues (différentes versions de la même structure). S'il est exposé à la testostérone, le tubercule génital s'allonge pour former le pénis.

Par fusion des plis urogénitaux - structures allongées en forme de fuseau qui contribuent à la formation du sillon urétral sur la face ventrale du tubercule génital - le sinus urogénital se ferme complètement et forme l'urètre spongieux, et les gonflements labioscrotaux s'unissent pour former le scrotum .

En l'absence de testostérone, le tubercule génital permet la formation du clitoris ; la croissance initialement rapide du phallus ralentit progressivement et le clitoris se forme.

Le sinus urogénital persiste en tant que vestibule du vagin, les deux plis urogénitaux forment les petites lèvres et les gonflements labioscrotaux s'élargissent pour former les grandes lèvres, complétant les organes génitaux féminins.

Une affection rare qui peut se développer à la suite d'une exposition aux androgènes supérieure à la moyenne est la clitoromégalie.


=== Anatomie brute et histologie ===



==== Général ====

Le clitoris contient des composants externes et internes.

Il se compose du gland, du corps (qui est composé de deux structures érectiles connues sous le nom de corps caverneux) et de deux piliers ("jambes").

Il a un capuchon formé par les petites lèvres (lèvres intérieures).

Il possède également des bulbes vestibulaires ou clitoridiens.

Le frein du clitoris est un frein sur la surface inférieure du gland et est créé par les deux parties médiales des petites lèvres.

Le corps clitoridien peut être appelé tige (ou tige interne), tandis que la longueur du clitoris entre le gland et le corps peut également être appelée tige.

La tige soutient le gland et sa forme peut être vue et ressentie à travers le capuchon clitoridien. Les recherches indiquent que le tissu clitoridien s'étend dans la paroi antérieure du vagin. Şenaylı et al. a déclaré que l'évaluation histologique du clitoris, "en particulier des corps caverneux, est incomplète car pendant de nombreuses années, le clitoris a été considéré comme un organe rudimentaire et non fonctionnel". Ils ont ajouté que Baskin et ses collègues ont examiné la masculinisation du clitoris après la dissection et, à l'aide d'un logiciel d'imagerie après la coloration au chrome de Masson, ont rassemblé les spécimens disséqués en série ; cela a révélé que les nerfs du clitoris entourent tout le corps clitoridien (corpus). Le clitoris, les bulbes vestibulaires, les petites lèvres et l'urètre impliquent deux types histologiquement distincts de tissu vasculaire (tissu lié aux vaisseaux sanguins),

Le tissu trabéculé a un aspect spongieux ; avec le sang, il remplit les grands espaces vasculaires dilatés du clitoris et des bulbes.

Sous l'épithélium des zones vasculaires se trouve le muscle lisse.

Comme indiqué par les recherches de Yang et al., il se peut également que la lumière urétrale (l'espace intérieur ouvert ou la cavité de l'urètre), qui est entourée de tissu spongieux, ait un tissu qui « est nettement distinct du tissu vasculaire de le clitoris et les bulbes, et à l'observation macroscopique, est plus pâle que le tissu foncé" du clitoris et des bulbes.

Le deuxième type de tissu vasculaire est non érectile, qui peut consister en des vaisseaux sanguins qui sont dispersés dans une matrice fibreuse et n'ont qu'une quantité minimale de muscle lisse.


==== Gland et corps ====

Très innervé, le gland existe à l'extrémité du corps clitoridien sous la forme d'une coiffe fibro-vasculaire et a généralement la taille et la forme d'un pois, bien qu'il soit parfois beaucoup plus gros ou plus petit.

On estime que le gland clitoridien, ou l'ensemble du clitoris, compte environ 8 000 terminaisons nerveuses sensorielles.

Conflits de recherche sur la question de savoir si le gland est composé ou non de tissu érectile ou non érectile.

Bien que le corps clitoridien se gorge de sang lors de l'excitation sexuelle, érigeant le gland clitoridien, certaines sources décrivent le gland clitoridien et les petites lèvres comme composés de tissu non érectile; c'est notamment le cas du gland.

Ils déclarent que le gland clitoridien et les petites lèvres ont des vaisseaux sanguins qui sont dispersés dans une matrice fibreuse et n'ont qu'une quantité minimale de muscle lisse, ou que le gland clitoridien est "une structure médiane, densément neurale et non érectile". Autres descriptions du gland affirment qu'il est composé de tissu érectile et que le tissu érectile est présent dans les petites lèvres.

Le gland peut être noté comme ayant des espaces vasculaires glandulaires qui ne sont pas aussi proéminents que ceux du corps clitoridien, les espaces étant davantage séparés par des muscles lisses que dans le corps et les piliers.

Le tissu adipeux est absent des petites lèvres, mais l'organe peut être décrit comme étant composé de tissu conjonctif dense, de tissu érectile et de fibres élastiques.

Le corps clitoridien forme une structure en forme de triangle contenant les corps caverneux - une paire de régions ressemblant à une éponge de tissu érectile qui contiennent la majeure partie du sang dans le clitoris pendant l'érection clitoridienne.

Les deux corpus formant le corps clitoridien sont entourés d'une épaisse tunique fibro-élastique albuginée, signifiant littéralement « couverture blanche », tissu conjonctif.

Ces corps sont séparés les uns des autres de manière incomplète sur la ligne médiane par un septum fibreux pectiniforme - une bande en forme de peigne de tissu conjonctif s'étendant entre les corps caverneux. forme qui s'étend comme une paire de crura ("jambes").

Les piliers sont les parties proximales des bras du triangle.

Se terminant au gland du clitoris, la pointe du corps se plie vers l'avant à l'opposé du pubis.

Chaque crus (forme singulière de crura) est attaché à la branche ischiatique correspondante - extensions des copora sous les branches pubiennes descendantes.

Dissimulées derrière les petites lèvres, les crura se terminent par une attache au niveau ou juste en dessous du milieu de l'arc pubien.

Sont associés l'éponge urétrale, l'éponge périnéale, un réseau de nerfs et de vaisseaux sanguins, le ligament suspenseur du clitoris, les muscles et le plancher pelvien. Il n'y a pas de corrélation identifiée entre la taille du gland clitoridien, ou du clitoris dans son ensemble, et l'âge, la taille, le poids, l'utilisation d'une contraception hormonale ou la post-ménopause d'une femme, bien que les femmes qui ont accouché puissent avoir des mesures clitoridiennes significativement plus grandes.

Les mesures en centimètres (cm) et millimètres (mm) du clitoris montrent des variations dans sa taille.

Le gland clitoridien a été cité comme variant généralement de 2 mm à 1 cm et étant généralement estimé à 4 à 5 mm dans les plans transversal et longitudinal. Une étude de 1992 a conclu que la longueur totale du clitoris, y compris le gland et le corps, est de 16,0 ± 4,3 mm (0,63 ± 0,17 po), où 16 mm (0,63 po) est la moyenne et 4,3 mm (0,17 po) est l'écart type.

Concernant d'autres études, des chercheurs de l'Elizabeth Garrett Anderson and Obstetric Hospital de Londres ont mesuré les lèvres et autres structures génitales de 50 femmes âgées de 18 à 50 ans, avec un âge moyen de 35,6 ans, de 2003 à 2004, et les résultats donnés pour le gland clitoridien étaient de 3 à 10 mm pour la plage et de 5,5 [1,7] mm pour la moyenne.

D'autres recherches indiquent que le corps clitoridien peut mesurer 5 à 7 centimètres (2,0 à 2,8 pouces) de longueur, tandis que le corps clitoridien et les piliers ensemble peuvent mesurer 10 centimètres (3,9 pouces) ou plus de longueur.


==== Capuche ====

Le capuchon clitoridien fait saillie à l'avant de la commissure des lèvres, où les bords des grandes lèvres (lèvres externes) se rejoignent à la base du monticule pubien; il est partiellement formé par la fusion de la partie supérieure des plis externes des petites lèvres (lèvres internes) et recouvre le gland et la tige externe.

Il existe des variations considérables dans la quantité de gland dépassant de la cagoule et la quantité couverte par celle-ci, allant de complètement couverte à entièrement exposée, et le tissu des petites lèvres encercle également la base du gland.


==== Ampoules ====
Les bulbes vestibulaires sont plus étroitement liés au clitoris qu'au vestibule en raison de la similitude du tissu trabéculaire et érectile dans le clitoris et les bulbes, et de l'absence de tissu trabéculaire dans d'autres organes génitaux, la nature trabéculaire du tissu érectile permettant l'engorgement et l'expansion. lors de l'excitation sexuelle.

Les bulbes vestibulaires sont généralement décrits comme se trouvant près de la crura de chaque côté de l'ouverture vaginale; à l'intérieur, ils sont sous les grandes lèvres.

Lorsqu'ils sont engorgés de sang, ils bouchent l'ouverture vaginale et provoquent l'expansion de la vulve vers l'extérieur.

Bien qu'un certain nombre de textes mentionnent qu'ils entourent l'ouverture vaginale, Ginger et al. précisent que cela ne semble pas être le cas et que la tunique albuginée n'enveloppe pas le tissu érectile des bulbes.

Dans l'évaluation de l'anatomie des bulbes par Yang et al., ils concluent que les bulbes "s'arquent au-dessus de l'urètre distal, décrivant ce que l'on pourrait appeler à juste titre" l'urètre bulbaire "chez la femme".


=== Homologie ===

Le clitoris et le pénis ont généralement la même structure anatomique, bien que la partie distale (ou ouverture) de l'urètre soit absente du clitoris des humains et de la plupart des autres animaux.

L'idée que les mâles ont des clitoris a été suggérée en 1987 par la chercheuse Josephine Lowndes Sevely, qui a émis l'hypothèse que les corps caverneux mâles (une paire de régions ressemblant à une éponge de tissu érectile qui contiennent la majeure partie du sang dans le pénis pendant l'érection du pénis) sont le vrai homologue du clitoris.

Elle a fait valoir que «le clitoris masculin» se trouve directement sous le bord du gland du pénis, où se trouve le frein du prépuce du pénis (un pli du prépuce), et a proposé que cette zone soit appelée la «couronne de Lownde».

Sa théorie et sa proposition, bien que reconnues dans la littérature anatomique, ne se sont pas concrétisées dans les livres d'anatomie.

Les textes anatomiques modernes montrent que le clitoris présente un capuchon qui est l'équivalent du prépuce du pénis, qui recouvre le gland.

Il a également une tige qui est attachée au gland.

Les corps caverneux masculins sont homologues au corpus cavernosum clitoridis (le caverneux féminin), le bulbe du pénis est homologue aux bulbes vestibulaires sous les petites lèvres, le scrotum est homologue aux grandes lèvres, et l'urètre pénien et une partie de la peau du pénis est homologue aux petites lèvres. Lors d'une étude anatomique, le pénis peut être décrit comme un clitoris qui a été principalement extrait du corps et greffé sur un morceau de spongieux beaucoup plus petit contenant l'urètre.

En ce qui concerne les terminaisons nerveuses, les 8 000 ou plus du clitoris humain (pour son gland ou son corps clitoridien dans son ensemble) sont communément cités comme étant deux fois plus nombreux que les terminaisons nerveuses trouvées dans le pénis humain (pour son gland ou son corps dans son ensemble). ) et plus que toute autre partie du corps humain.

Ces rapports entrent parfois en conflit avec d'autres sources sur l'anatomie clitoridienne ou celles concernant les terminaisons nerveuses du pénis humain.

Par exemple, alors que certaines sources estiment que le pénis humain a 4 000 terminaisons nerveuses, d'autres sources affirment que le gland ou l'ensemble de la structure pénienne ont la même quantité de terminaisons nerveuses que le gland clitoridien ou discutent si le pénis non circoncis en a des milliers de plus que le circoncis. pénis ou est généralement plus sensible. Certaines sources affirment que contrairement au gland du pénis, le gland du clitoris manque de muscle lisse dans sa calotte fibrovasculaire et se différencie ainsi des tissus érectiles du clitoris et des bulbes ; de plus, la taille du bulbe varie et peut dépendre de l'âge et de l'œstrogénisation.

Bien que les bulbes soient considérés comme l'équivalent du spongieux masculin, ils n'encerclent pas complètement l'urètre. Le mince corps spongieux du pénis s'étend le long de la face inférieure de la tige du pénis, enveloppant l'urètre et se dilate à l'extrémité pour former le gland.

Il contribue partiellement à l'érection, qui est principalement causée par les deux corps caverneux qui constituent la majeure partie de l'arbre ; comme la femelle cavernosa, la cavernosa mâle absorbe le sang et devient érigée lorsqu'elle est sexuellement excitée.

Les corps caverneux mâles se rétrécissent à l'intérieur en atteignant la tête spongieuse.

En ce qui concerne la forme en Y de la caverne - couronne, corps et jambes - le corps représente beaucoup plus de structure chez l'homme, et les jambes sont plus trapues ; généralement, les cavernes sont plus longues et plus épaisses chez les mâles que chez les femelles.


== Fonction ==



=== Activité sexuelle ===



==== Général ====
Le clitoris a une abondance de terminaisons nerveuses et est la zone érogène la plus sensible de la femme humaine et généralement la principale source anatomique du plaisir sexuel féminin humain.

Lorsqu'il est stimulé sexuellement, il peut inciter l'excitation sexuelle féminine.

La stimulation sexuelle, y compris l'excitation, peut résulter d'une stimulation mentale, de préliminaires avec un partenaire sexuel ou de la masturbation, et peut conduire à l'orgasme.

La stimulation sexuelle la plus efficace de l'organe est généralement manuelle ou orale (cunnilingus), souvent appelée stimulation clitoridienne directe ; dans les cas impliquant une pénétration sexuelle, ces activités peuvent également être appelées stimulation clitoridienne supplémentaire ou assistée. La stimulation clitoridienne directe implique une stimulation physique de l'anatomie externe du clitoris - gland, capuchon et tige externe.

La stimulation des petites lèvres (lèvres internes), en raison de sa connexion externe avec le gland et le capuchon, peut avoir le même effet qu'une stimulation directe du clitoris.

Bien que ces zones puissent également recevoir une stimulation physique indirecte pendant l'activité sexuelle, par exemple en cas de friction avec les grandes lèvres (lèvres externes), la stimulation clitoridienne indirecte est plus souvent attribuée à la pénétration pénienne-vaginale.

La pénétration péno-anale peut également stimuler indirectement le clitoris par les nerfs sensitifs communs (en particulier le nerf pudendal, qui dégage les nerfs anaux inférieurs et se divise en deux branches terminales : le nerf périnéal et le nerf dorsal du clitoris). la grande sensibilité du gland, sa stimulation directe n'est pas toujours agréable ; au lieu de cela, la stimulation directe de la cagoule ou des zones proches du gland est souvent plus agréable, la majorité des femmes préférant utiliser la cagoule pour stimuler le gland, ou faire rouler le gland entre les lèvres des lèvres, pour un toucher indirect.

Il est également courant que les femmes apprécient que la tige du clitoris soit doucement caressée de concert avec des cercles occasionnels du gland clitoridien.

Cela peut être avec ou sans pénétration manuelle du vagin, tandis que d'autres femmes aiment se faire caresser toute la zone de la vulve.

Contrairement à l'utilisation de doigts secs, la stimulation par des doigts bien lubrifiés, soit par une lubrification vaginale, soit par un lubrifiant personnel, est généralement plus agréable pour l'anatomie externe du clitoris. Comme l'emplacement externe du clitoris ne permet pas une stimulation directe par pénétration sexuelle, toute stimulation clitoridienne externe en position missionnaire résulte généralement de la zone de l'os pubien, le mouvement des aines au contact.

Ainsi, certains couples peuvent s'engager dans la position femme au-dessus ou la technique d'alignement coïtal, une position sexuelle combinant la variation "montée haute" de la position missionnaire avec des mouvements de pression-contre-pression effectués par chaque partenaire au rythme de la pénétration sexuelle, pour maximiser la stimulation clitoridienne.

Les couples lesbiens peuvent s'engager dans le tribadisme pour une stimulation clitoridienne suffisante ou pour une stimulation clitoridienne mutuelle lors d'un contact avec tout le corps.

Appuyer le pénis dans un mouvement glissant ou circulaire contre le clitoris (sexe intercrural), ou le stimuler par un mouvement contre une autre partie du corps, peut également être pratiqué.

Un vibromasseur (tel qu'un vibromasseur clitoridien), un gode ou un autre jouet sexuel peut être utilisé.

D'autres femmes stimulent le clitoris en utilisant un oreiller ou un autre objet inanimé, par un jet d'eau du robinet d'une baignoire ou d'une douche, ou en fermant les jambes et en se balançant. Lors de l'excitation sexuelle, le clitoris et l'ensemble des organes génitaux s'engorgent et changent de couleur lorsque les tissus érectiles se remplissent de sang (vasocongestion) et que l'individu éprouve des contractions vaginales.

Les muscles ischiocavernosus et bulbocavernosus, qui s'insèrent dans les corps caverneux, contractent et compriment la veine dorsale du clitoris (la seule veine qui draine le sang des espaces des corps caverneux), et le sang artériel continue à circuler régulièrement et n'ayant pas moyen de s'écouler, remplit les espaces veineux jusqu'à ce qu'ils deviennent turgescents et gorgés de sang.

C'est ce qui conduit à l'érection clitoridienne. Le gland clitoridien double de diamètre lors de l'excitation et lors d'une stimulation supplémentaire, devient moins visible car il est recouvert par le gonflement des tissus du capuchon clitoridien.

Le gonflement protège le gland du contact direct, car le contact direct à ce stade peut être plus irritant qu'agréable.

La vasocongestion déclenche finalement un réflexe musculaire, qui expulse le sang emprisonné dans les tissus environnants, et conduit à un orgasme.

Peu de temps après l'arrêt de la stimulation, surtout si l'orgasme a été atteint, le gland redevient visible et revient à son état normal, avec quelques secondes (généralement 5 à 10) pour revenir à sa position normale et 5 à 10 minutes pour revenir à sa taille d'origine.

Si l'orgasme n'est pas atteint, le clitoris peut rester engorgé pendant quelques heures, ce que les femmes trouvent souvent inconfortable.

De plus, le clitoris est très sensible après l'orgasme, ce qui rend la stimulation supplémentaire initialement douloureuse pour certaines femmes.


==== Facteurs orgasmiques clitoridiens et vaginaux ====

Les statistiques générales indiquent que 70 à 80 % des femmes ont besoin d'une stimulation clitoridienne directe (frottement manuel, oral ou autre concentré constant contre les parties externes du clitoris) pour atteindre l'orgasme.

La stimulation clitoridienne indirecte (par exemple, via la pénétration vaginale) peut également être suffisante pour l'orgasme féminin.

La zone près de l'entrée du vagin (le tiers inférieur) contient près de 90 % des terminaisons nerveuses vaginales, et il y a des zones dans la paroi vaginale antérieure et entre la jonction supérieure des petites lèvres et l'urètre qui sont particulièrement sensibles, mais le plaisir sexuel intense, y compris l'orgasme, uniquement à partir de la stimulation vaginale est occasionnel ou absent parce que le vagin a beaucoup moins de terminaisons nerveuses que le clitoris. Un débat important sur la quantité de terminaisons nerveuses vaginales a commencé avec Alfred Kinsey.

Bien que la théorie de Sigmund Freud selon laquelle les orgasmes clitoridiens sont un phénomène prépubère ou adolescent et que les orgasmes vaginaux (ou point G) sont quelque chose que seules les femmes physiquement matures expérimentent avait été critiquée auparavant, Kinsey a été le premier chercheur à critiquer sévèrement la théorie.

Grâce à ses observations de la masturbation féminine et à des entretiens avec des milliers de femmes, Kinsey a découvert que la plupart des femmes qu'il a observées et interrogées ne pouvaient pas avoir d'orgasmes vaginaux, une découverte également étayée par sa connaissance de l'anatomie des organes sexuels.

La chercheuse Janice M.

Irvine a déclaré qu'il "critiquait Freud et d'autres théoriciens pour avoir projeté des constructions masculines de la sexualité sur les femmes" et "considérait le clitoris comme le principal centre de la réponse sexuelle".

Il considérait le vagin comme "relativement sans importance" pour la satisfaction sexuelle, relayant que "peu de femmes inséraient des doigts ou des objets dans leur vagin lorsqu'elles se masturbaient".

Estimant que les orgasmes vaginaux sont "une impossibilité physiologique" parce que le vagin n'a pas suffisamment de terminaisons nerveuses pour le plaisir sexuel ou l'orgasme, il "a conclu que la satisfaction de la pénétration pénienne [est] principalement psychologique ou peut-être le résultat d'une sensation référée". Les recherches de Masters et Johnson, ainsi que Shere Hite, ont généralement soutenu les conclusions de Kinsey sur l'orgasme féminin.

Masters et Johnson ont été les premiers chercheurs à déterminer que les structures clitoridiennes entourent et s'étendent le long et à l'intérieur des lèvres.

Ils ont observé que les orgasmes clitoridiens et vaginaux ont les mêmes stades de réponse physique et ont constaté que la majorité de leurs sujets ne pouvaient atteindre que des orgasmes clitoridiens, tandis qu'une minorité atteignait des orgasmes vaginaux.

Sur cette base, ils ont soutenu que la stimulation clitoridienne est la source des deux types d'orgasmes, estimant que le clitoris est stimulé lors de la pénétration par frottement contre son capuchon.

La recherche est intervenue au moment du mouvement féministe de la deuxième vague, qui a inspiré les féministes à rejeter la distinction faite entre les orgasmes clitoridiens et vaginaux.

La féministe Anne Koedt a fait valoir que parce que les hommes "ont des orgasmes essentiellement par friction avec le vagin" et non la zone clitoridienne, c'est pourquoi la biologie des femmes n'a pas été correctement analysée. "Aujourd'hui, avec une connaissance approfondie de l'anatomie, avec [C.

Lombard Kelly], Kinsey et Masters et Johnson, pour ne citer que quelques sources, il n'y a aucune ignorance sur le sujet [de l'orgasme féminin]", a-t-elle déclaré dans son article de 1970 Le mythe de l'orgasme vaginal.

Elle a ajouté : « Il y a cependant des raisons sociales pour lesquelles ce savoir n'a pas été popularisé.

Nous vivons dans une société masculine qui n'a pas cherché à changer le rôle des femmes. ayant initié un discours parmi les professionnels de la santé traditionnels pour se recentrer sur et redéfinir le clitoris, a noté une relation directe entre les jambes ou les racines du clitoris et le tissu érectile des bulbes et corps clitoridiens, et l'urètre distal et le vagin lors de l'utilisation de l'imagerie par résonance magnétique ( technologie IRM).

Alors que certaines études, utilisant des ultrasons, ont trouvé des preuves physiologiques du point G chez les femmes qui déclarent avoir des orgasmes pendant les rapports vaginaux, O'Connell soutient que cette relation interconnectée est l'explication physiologique du point G conjecturé et de l'expérience des orgasmes vaginaux, en tenant compte de la stimulation des parties internes du clitoris lors de la pénétration vaginale. "La paroi vaginale est, en fait, le clitoris", a-t-elle déclaré. "Si vous soulevez la peau du vagin sur les parois latérales, vous obtenez les bulbes du clitoris - des masses triangulaires en croissant de tissu érectile." O'Connell et al., ayant effectué des dissections sur les organes génitaux féminins de cadavres et utilisé la photographie pour cartographier la structure des nerfs dans le clitoris,

Ils ont conclu que certaines femmes ont des tissus et des nerfs clitoridiens plus étendus que d'autres, surtout après avoir observé cela chez les jeunes cadavres par rapport aux personnes âgées, et donc alors que la majorité des femmes ne peuvent atteindre l'orgasme que par stimulation directe des parties externes du clitoris, le la stimulation des tissus plus généralisés du clitoris via des rapports vaginaux peut être suffisante pour d'autres. Les chercheurs français Odile Buisson et Pierre Foldès ont rapporté des résultats similaires à ceux d'O'Connell.

En 2008, ils ont publié la première échographie 3D complète du clitoris stimulé et l'ont republiée en 2009 avec de nouvelles recherches, démontrant la manière dont le tissu érectile du clitoris engorge et entoure le vagin.

Sur la base de leurs découvertes, ils ont fait valoir que les femmes pourraient être capables d'atteindre l'orgasme vaginal via la stimulation du point G, car le clitoris hautement innervé est tiré étroitement contre la paroi antérieure du vagin lorsque la femme est excitée sexuellement et pendant l'excitation vaginale. pénétration.

Ils affirment que puisque la paroi avant du vagin est inextricablement liée aux parties internes du clitoris, stimuler le vagin sans activer le clitoris peut être presque impossible.

Dans leur étude publiée en 2009, les "plans coronaux lors de la contraction périnéale et de la pénétration des doigts ont démontré une relation étroite entre la racine du clitoris et la paroi vaginale antérieure".

Buisson et Foldès ont suggéré "que la sensibilité particulière de la paroi vaginale antérieure inférieure pourrait s'expliquer par la pression et le mouvement de la racine du clitoris lors d'une pénétration vaginale et de la contraction périnéale qui s'ensuit". Le chercheur Vincenzo Puppo, qui, tout en convenant que le clitoris est le centre de plaisir sexuel féminin et estimant qu'il n'y a aucune preuve anatomique de l'orgasme vaginal, n'est pas d'accord avec les descriptions terminologiques et anatomiques du clitoris d'O'Connell et d'autres chercheurs (comme la référence aux bulbes vestibulaires comme les «bulbes clitoridiens») et déclare que "le clitoris interne" n'existe pas car le pénis ne peut entrer en contact avec l'ensemble des multiples nerfs/veines situés jusqu'à l'angle du clitoris, détaillé par Kobelt, ou avec les racines du clitoris,qui n'ont pas de récepteurs sensoriels ou de sensibilité érogène, lors de rapports vaginaux.

La croyance de Puppo contraste avec la croyance générale des chercheurs selon laquelle les orgasmes vaginaux sont le résultat d'une stimulation clitoridienne ; ils réaffirment que le tissu clitoridien s'étend, ou est au moins stimulé par ses bulbes, même dans la zone la plus communément signalée comme étant le point G. Le point G étant analogue à la base du pénis masculin a également été théorisé, avec sentiment du chercheur Amichai Kilchevsky que parce que le développement fœtal féminin est l'état "par défaut" en l'absence d'exposition substantielle aux hormones mâles et que le pénis est donc essentiellement un clitoris agrandi par de telles hormones, il n'y a aucune raison évolutive pour laquelle les femelles auraient une entité en plus au clitoris qui peut produire des orgasmes.

La difficulté générale d'atteindre des orgasmes par voie vaginale, qui est probablement due au fait que la nature facilite le processus de procréation en réduisant considérablement le nombre de terminaisons nerveuses vaginales, remet en question les arguments selon lesquels les orgasmes vaginaux aident à encourager les rapports sexuels afin de faciliter la reproduction.

Soutenir un point G distinct, cependant, est une étude de l'Université Rutgers, publiée en 2011, qui a été la première à cartographier les organes génitaux féminins sur la partie sensorielle du cerveau; les scans ont indiqué que le cerveau enregistrait des sensations distinctes entre la stimulation du clitoris, du col de l'utérus et de la paroi vaginale - où se trouverait le point G - lorsque plusieurs femmes se sont stimulées dans une machine à résonance magnétique fonctionnelle (fMRI).

Barry Komisaruk, responsable des résultats de la recherche, a déclaré qu'il estimait que "la majeure partie des preuves montre que le point G n'est pas une chose particulière" et que c'est "une région, c'est une convergence de nombreuses structures différentes".


=== Visions vestigiales, adaptationnistes et reproductrices ===

La question de savoir si le clitoris est vestigial, une adaptation ou remplit une fonction de reproduction a également été débattue.

Geoffrey Miller a déclaré qu'Helen Fisher, Meredith Small et Sarah Blaffer Hrdy "ont considéré l'orgasme clitoridien comme une adaptation légitime à part entière, avec des implications majeures pour le comportement sexuel féminin et l'évolution sexuelle".

Comme Lynn Margulis et Natalie Angier, Miller estime que "le clitoris humain ne montre aucun signe apparent d'avoir évolué directement par le choix d'un partenaire masculin.

Il n'est pas particulièrement grand, de couleur vive, de forme spécifique ou affiché de manière sélective pendant la parade nuptiale." Il contraste cela avec d'autres espèces femelles telles que les singes araignées et les hyènes tachetées qui ont des clitoris aussi longs que leurs homologues mâles.

Il a déclaré que le clitoris humain "aurait pu évoluer pour être beaucoup plus visible si les hommes avaient préféré des partenaires sexuels avec des clitoris plus grands et plus brillants" et que "sa conception discrète combinée à sa sensibilité exquise suggère que le clitoris n'est pas important en tant qu'objet de choix de partenaire masculin. , mais comme un mécanisme de choix féminin. " Alors que Miller a déclaré que des scientifiques masculins tels que Stephen Jay Gould et Donald Symons " ont considéré l'orgasme clitoridien féminin comme un effet secondaire évolutif de la capacité masculine à l'orgasme du pénis " et qu'ils " ont suggéré que l'orgasme clitoridien ne peut pas être une adaptation parce qu'il est trop difficile à atteindre", Gould a reconnu que "la plupart des orgasmes féminins émanent d'un site clitoridien, plutôt que vaginal (ou autre)," et que sa croyance non adaptative "a été largement mal interprété comme un déni de la valeur adaptative de l'orgasme féminin en général, ou même comme une affirmation selon laquelle les orgasmes féminins manquent de signification dans un sens plus large ».

Il a dit que bien qu'il accepte que "l'orgasme clitoridien joue un rôle agréable et central dans la sexualité féminine et ses joies", "[t]ous ces attributs favorables, cependant, émergent tout aussi clairement et aussi facilement, que le site clitoridien de l'orgasme est apparu comme un tympan ou une adaptation ».

Il a ajouté que "les biologistes masculins qui s'inquiétaient [des questions adaptatives] supposaient simplement qu'un site profondément vaginal, plus proche de la région de fécondation, offrirait un plus grand avantage sélectif" en raison de leurs croyances darwiniennes summum bonum sur l'amélioration du succès de la reproduction. Similaire à Les croyances de Gould sur les vues adaptionnistes et que "les femelles développent des mamelons comme des adaptations pour l'allaitement, et les mâles développent des mamelons inutilisés plus petits comme un tympan basé sur la valeur des canaux de développement uniques", Elisabeth Lloyd a suggéré qu'il y a peu de preuves pour soutenir un récit adaptatif de la femelle orgasme.

Meredith L.

Chivers a déclaré que "Lloyd considère l'orgasme féminin comme un reste ontogénétique; les femmes ont des orgasmes parce que la neurophysiologie urogénitale pour l'orgasme est si fortement sélectionnée chez les hommes que ce schéma de développement s'exprime chez les femmes sans affecter la forme physique" et cela est similaire à "les hommes ont [ ing] mamelons qui n'ont aucune fonction liée à la condition physique. " Lors de la conférence de 2002 de la Société canadienne des femmes de philosophie, Nancy Tuana a soutenu que le clitoris n'est pas nécessaire à la reproduction; elle a déclaré qu'il avait été ignoré à cause de "la peur du plaisir".

C'est le plaisir séparé de la reproduction.

C'est la peur." Elle a estimé que cette peur provoque l'ignorance, qui voile la sexualité féminine.

O'Connell a déclaré: "Cela se résume à la rivalité entre les sexes: l'idée qu'un sexe est sexuel et l'autre reproductif.

La vérité est que les deux sont sexuels et les deux sont reproducteurs." Elle a réitéré que les bulbes vestibulaires semblent faire partie du clitoris et que l'urètre distal et le vagin sont des structures intimement liées, bien qu'ils ne soient pas de caractère érectile, formant un amas de tissus. avec le clitoris qui semble être le siège de la fonction sexuelle féminine et de l'orgasme.


== Signification clinique ==



=== Modifier ===


Les modifications du clitoris peuvent être intentionnelles ou non.

Ils comprennent les mutilations génitales féminines (MGF), la chirurgie de changement de sexe (pour les hommes trans dans le cadre de la transition, qui peut également inclure l'élargissement du clitoris), la chirurgie intersexuée et les piercings génitaux.

L'utilisation de stéroïdes anabolisants par les culturistes et d'autres athlètes peut entraîner un élargissement significatif du clitoris de concert avec d'autres effets masculinisants sur leur corps.

L'élargissement anormal du clitoris peut également être appelé clitoromégalie, mais la clitoromégalie est plus souvent considérée comme une anomalie congénitale des organes génitaux. Ceux qui prennent des hormones ou d'autres médicaments dans le cadre d'une transition transgenre connaissent généralement une croissance clitoridienne spectaculaire; les désirs individuels et les difficultés de la phalloplastie (construction d'un pénis) entraînent souvent la rétention des organes génitaux d'origine avec le clitoris agrandi comme analogue du pénis (métoïdioplastie).

Cependant, le clitoris ne peut pas atteindre la taille du pénis grâce aux hormones.

Une chirurgie pour ajouter une fonction au clitoris, telle que la métoïdioplastie, est une alternative à la phalloplastie qui permet la rétention de la sensation sexuelle dans le clitoris. Dans la clitoridectomie, le clitoris peut être retiré dans le cadre d'une vulvectomie radicale pour traiter un cancer tel que la néoplasie intraépithéliale vulvaire. ; cependant, les traitements modernes favorisent des approches plus conservatrices, car la chirurgie invasive peut avoir des conséquences psychosexuelles.

La clitoridectomie implique plus souvent que des parties du clitoris soient partiellement ou complètement enlevées pendant la MGF, qui peut également être connue sous le nom de circoncision féminine ou d'excision génitale féminine (MGF).

Enlever le gland du clitoris ne signifie pas que toute la structure est perdue, puisque le clitoris pénètre profondément dans les organes génitaux. Dans la clitoroplastie de réduction, une chirurgie intersexuée courante, le gland est préservé et des parties des corps érectiles sont excisées.

Les problèmes liés à cette technique comprennent la perte de sensation, la perte de la fonction sexuelle et la desquamation du gland.

Une façon de préserver le clitoris avec ses innervations et sa fonction est d'imbriquer et d'enterrer le gland clitoridien ; cependant, Şenaylı et al. déclarent que "la douleur pendant le stimulus à cause du tissu piégé sous la cicatrisation est presque courante.

Dans une autre méthode, 50 % du clitoris ventral sont retirés à travers la base de niveau de la tige clitoridienne, et il est rapporté qu'une bonne sensation et une bonne fonction clitoridienne sont observées lors du suivi » ; en outre, il a « été rapporté que les complications proviennent de les mêmes que celles des procédures plus anciennes pour cette méthode". En ce qui concerne les femmes atteintes d'hyperplasie congénitale des surrénales, le plus grand groupe nécessitant une correction génitale chirurgicale, le chercheur Atilla Şenaylı a déclaré : "Les principales attentes pour les opérations sont de créer un état normal anatomie féminine, avec un minimum de complications et une amélioration de la qualité de vie." Şenaylı a ajouté que "[c] osmesis, l'intégrité structurelle et la capacité coïtale du vagin, et l'absence de douleur pendant l'activité sexuelle sont les paramètres à juger par le chirurgien."(La cosmétique fait généralement référence à la correction chirurgicale d'un défaut défigurant.) Il a déclaré que bien que "les attentes puissent être standardisées dans ces quelques paramètres, les techniques opératoires ne sont pas encore devenues homogènes.

Les enquêteurs ont préféré différentes opérations pour différents âges des patients". L'évaluation du genre et le traitement chirurgical sont les deux principales étapes des opérations intersexuées. "Les premiers traitements de la clitoromégalie étaient simplement la résection du clitoris.

Plus tard, on a compris que le gland du clitoris et les entrées sensorielles sont importantes pour faciliter l'orgasme", a déclaré Atilla.

L'épithélium du gland clitoridien "a une sensibilité cutanée élevée, ce qui est important dans les réponses sexuelles", et c'est pour cette raison que "la clitoroplastie de récession a ensuite été conçue comme une alternative, mais la clitoroplastie de réduction est la méthode actuellement pratiquée". car le "perçage du clitoris" est le perçage du capuchon clitoridien le plus courant (et nettement moins compliqué).

Le perçage du clitoris étant difficile et très douloureux, le perçage du capuchon clitoridien est plus courant que le perçage de la tige du clitoris, en raison du faible pourcentage de personnes qui y sont anatomiquement adaptées.

Les piercings du capuchon clitoridien sont généralement canalisés sous la forme de piercings verticaux et, dans une moindre mesure, de piercings horizontaux.

Le piercing triangle est un piercing de capot horizontal très profond, et se fait derrière le clitoris plutôt que devant.

Pour les styles tels que l'Isabella, qui traversent la tige clitoridienne mais sont placés profondément à la base, ils offrent une stimulation unique et nécessitent toujours la construction génitale appropriée.

L'Isabella commence entre le gland clitoridien et l'urètre, sortant au sommet du capuchon clitoridien ; ce piercing est très risqué en ce qui concerne les dommages pouvant survenir à cause des nerfs croisés.


=== Troubles sexuels ===

Le trouble de l'excitation génitale persistante (PGAD) se traduit par une excitation génitale spontanée, persistante et incontrôlable chez les femmes, sans rapport avec tout sentiment de désir sexuel.

Le priapisme clitoridien, également connu sous le nom de clitorisme, est une affection médicale rare et potentiellement douloureuse et est parfois décrit comme un aspect de la PGAD.

Avec PGAD, l'excitation dure pendant une période de temps inhabituellement prolongée (allant de quelques heures à plusieurs jours); il peut également être associé à des modifications morphométriques et vasculaires du clitoris. Les médicaments peuvent provoquer ou affecter le priapisme clitoridien.

Le médicament trazodone est connu pour provoquer le priapisme masculin en tant qu'effet secondaire, mais il n'y a qu'un seul rapport documenté selon lequel il pourrait avoir causé le priapisme clitoridien, auquel cas l'arrêt du médicament peut être un remède.

De plus, il a été documenté que la néfazodone a provoqué un engorgement clitoridien, distinct du priapisme clitoridien, dans un cas, et le priapisme clitoridien peut parfois commencer à la suite ou seulement après l'arrêt des antipsychotiques ou des inhibiteurs sélectifs du recaptage de la sérotonine (ISRS). La PGAD est relativement rare et, comme son propre concept en dehors du priapisme clitoridien, n'a fait l'objet de recherches que depuis 2001, il existe peu de recherches sur ce qui peut guérir ou remédier au trouble.

Dans certains cas enregistrés, la PGAD a été causée par, ou a causé, une malformation artério-veineuse pelvienne avec des branches artérielles vers le clitoris ; le traitement chirurgical a été efficace dans ces cas.


== Société et culture ==



=== Connaissances et vernaculaires de la Grèce antique du XVIe siècle ===

En ce qui concerne les perceptions historiques et modernes du clitoris, le clitoris et le pénis ont été considérés comme équivalents par les érudits pendant plus de 2 500 ans à tous égards sauf leur disposition.

En raison du fait qu'il est fréquemment omis ou mal représenté dans les textes anatomiques historiques et contemporains, il a également fait l'objet d'un cycle continu d'érudits masculins prétendant l'avoir découvert.

Les anciens Grecs, les anciens Romains et les générations grecques et romaines jusqu'à et tout au long de la Renaissance savaient que les organes sexuels masculins et féminins sont anatomiquement similaires, mais des anatomistes éminents tels que Galien (129 - vers 200 après JC) et Vésale (1514- 1564) considérait le vagin comme l'équivalent structurel du pénis, sauf qu'il était inversé ; Vesalius s'est opposé à l'existence du clitoris chez les femmes normales et son modèle anatomique a décrit comment le pénis correspond au vagin, sans rôle pour le clitoris. La sexualité grecque et romaine antique désignait en outre la pénétration comme une sexualité «définie par les hommes».

Le terme tribas, ou tribade, était utilisé pour désigner une femme ou un individu intersexué qui pénétrait activement une autre personne (homme ou femme) en utilisant le clitoris ou un gode.

Comme on croyait que tout acte sexuel exigeait que l'un des partenaires soit " phallique " et que, par conséquent, l'activité sexuelle entre femmes était impossible sans cette caractéristique, la mythologie associait généralement les lesbiennes soit à des clitoris élargis, soit à l'incapacité de jouir d'une activité sexuelle sans la substitution de un phallus.

En 1545, Charles Estienne est le premier écrivain à identifier le clitoris dans un ouvrage basé sur la dissection, mais il en conclut qu'il a une fonction urinaire.

Suite à cette étude, Realdo Colombo (également connu sous le nom de Matteo Renaldo Colombo), maître de conférences en chirurgie à l'Université de Padoue, en Italie, a publié un livre intitulé De re anatomica en 1559, dans lequel il décrit le "siège du plaisir de la femme".

Dans son rôle de chercheur, Colombo a conclu : "Puisque personne n'a discerné ces projections et leur fonctionnement, s'il est permis de donner des noms aux choses que j'ai découvertes, cela devrait s'appeler l'amour ou la douceur de Vénus.", en référence à la Vénus mythologique, déesse de l'amour érotique.

La revendication de Colombo a été contestée par son successeur à Padoue, Gabriele Falloppio (découvreur de la trompe de Fallope), qui a affirmé qu'il était le premier à découvrir le clitoris.

En 1561, Falloppio a déclaré: "Les anatomistes modernes l'ont entièrement négligé ... et n'en disent pas un mot ... et si d'autres en ont parlé, sachez qu'ils l'ont pris à moi ou à mes étudiants." Cela a provoqué un bouleversement dans la communauté médicale européenne et, après avoir lu les descriptions détaillées du clitoris de Colombo et Falloppio, Vésale a déclaré: "Il est déraisonnable de blâmer les autres pour leur incompétence sur la base d'un sport de la nature que vous avez observé chez certaines femmes et vous pouvez difficilement attribuer cette partie nouvelle et inutile, comme s'il s'agissait d'un organe, à des femmes en bonne santé." Il a conclu: "Je pense qu'une telle structure apparaît chez les hermaphrodites qui ont par ailleurs des organes génitaux bien formés, comme le décrit Paul d'Égine,

En plus du nom d'Avicenne l'albaratha ou virga ("verge") et de Colombo l'appelant douceur de Vénus, Hippocrate a utilisé le terme columelle ("petit pilier"), et Albucasis, une autorité médicale arabe, l'a nommé tentigo ("tension ").

Les noms indiquaient que chaque description des structures concernait le corps et le gland du clitoris, mais généralement le gland.

Il était également connu des Romains, qui le nommaient (argot vulgaire) landica.

Cependant, Albertus Magnus, l'un des écrivains les plus prolifiques du Moyen Âge, a estimé qu'il était important de mettre en évidence "les homologies entre les structures et les fonctions masculines et féminines" en ajoutant "une psychologie de l'excitation sexuelle" qu'Aristote n'avait pas utilisée pour détailler les clitoris.

Alors que dans le traité de Constantin Liber de coitu, le clitoris est mentionné à quelques reprises, Magnus a accordé une attention égale aux organes masculins et féminins. Comme Avicenne, Magnus a également utilisé le mot virga pour le clitoris, mais l'a employé pour le mâle et organes génitaux féminins; malgré ses efforts pour donner un terrain égal au clitoris, le cycle de suppression et de redécouverte de l'organe s'est poursuivi, et une justification de la clitoridectomie au XVIe siècle semble avoir été confuse par l'hermaphrodisme et l'imprécision créée par le mot nymphae substitué au mot clitoris .

La nymphotomie était une opération médicale visant à exciser un clitoris anormalement gros, mais ce qui était considéré comme "anormalement gros" était souvent une question de perception.

La procédure était pratiquée de manière routinière sur des femmes égyptiennes, en raison de médecins tels que Jacques Daléchamps qui pensaient que cette version du clitoris était "une caractéristique inhabituelle qui s'est produite chez presque toutes les femmes égyptiennes [et] certaines des nôtres, de sorte que lorsqu'elles se retrouvent dans la compagnie d'autres femmes, ou leurs vêtements les frottent pendant qu'elles marchent ou que leurs maris souhaitent s'approcher d'elles, il s'érige comme un pénis masculin et en effet elles s'en servent pour jouer avec d'autres femmes, comme le feraient leurs maris...

Ainsi les pièces sont découpées".


=== Connaissances et vernaculaires du XVIIe siècle à nos jours ===


Caspar Bartholin , un anatomiste danois du XVIIe siècle, a rejeté les affirmations de Colombo et Falloppio selon lesquelles ils avaient découvert le clitoris, arguant que le clitoris était largement connu de la science médicale depuis le deuxième siècle.

Bien que les sages-femmes du 17ème siècle recommandaient aux hommes et aux femmes que les femmes aspirent à atteindre des orgasmes pour les aider à tomber enceinte pour la santé et le bien-être général et pour maintenir leurs relations saines, le débat sur l'importance du clitoris a persisté, notamment dans le travail de Regnier de Graaf au 17e siècle et Georg Ludwig Kobelt au 19e. Comme Falloppio et Bartholin, De Graaf a critiqué l'affirmation de Colombo d'avoir découvert le clitoris ; son travail semble avoir fourni le premier compte rendu complet de l'anatomie clitoridienne. "Nous sommes extrêmement surpris que certains anatomistes ne fassent pas plus mention de cette partie que si elle n'existait pas du tout dans l'univers de la nature", a-t-il déclaré. "Dans chaque cadavre que nous avons disséqué jusqu'à présent, nous l'avons trouvé tout à fait perceptible à la vue et au toucher." De Graaf a souligné la nécessité de distinguer la nymphe du clitoris, choisissant de «toujours donner [au clitoris] le nom de clitoris» pour éviter toute confusion; cela a entraîné une utilisation fréquente du nom correct de l'organe parmi les anatomistes, mais étant donné que la nympha était également variée dans son utilisation et est finalement devenue le terme spécifique aux petites lèvres, plus de confusion s'est ensuivie.

Le débat sur la question de savoir si l'orgasme était même nécessaire pour les femmes a commencé à l'époque victorienne, et la théorie de Freud de 1905 sur l'immaturité des orgasmes clitoridiens (voir ci-dessus) a affecté négativement la sexualité des femmes pendant la majeure partie du XXe siècle. Vers la fin de la Première Guerre mondiale, un non-conformiste Le député britannique nommé Noel Pemberton Billing a publié un article intitulé "Le culte du clitoris", approfondissant ses théories du complot et attaquant l'actrice Maud Allan et Margot Asquith, épouse du premier ministre.

Les accusations ont conduit à un procès en diffamation sensationnel, que Billing a finalement remporté; Philip Hoare rapporte que Billing a fait valoir que "en tant que terme médical, le" clitoris "ne serait connu que des" initiés "et était incapable de corrompre les esprits moraux".

Jodie Medd soutient à propos de "Le culte du clitoris" que "le corps féminin non reproducteur mais désirant [...] demande et refuse à la fois une attention interprétative, provoquant le scandale par sa résistance même à la représentation". Du 18e au 20e siècle, en particulier au XXe siècle, les détails du clitoris de divers schémas génitaux présentés au cours des siècles précédents ont été omis des textes ultérieurs.

L'étendue complète du clitoris a été évoquée par Masters et Johnson en 1966, mais d'une manière si confuse que la signification de leur description est devenue obscurcie; en 1981, la Fédération des cliniques féministes pour la santé des femmes (FFWHC) a poursuivi ce processus avec des illustrations anatomiquement précises identifiant 18 structures du clitoris.

Malgré les illustrations de la FFWHC, Josephine Lowndes Sevely, en 1987, décrivait le vagin comme davantage le pendant du pénis. Concernant d'autres croyances sur le clitoris, Hite (1976 et 1981) a constaté que, lors d'une intimité sexuelle avec un partenaire, la stimulation clitoridienne était plus souvent décrit par les femmes comme des préliminaires que comme une méthode principale d'activité sexuelle, y compris l'orgasme.

De plus, bien que le travail de la FFWHC ait considérablement propulsé la réforme féministe des textes anatomiques, il n'a pas eu d'impact général.

Les recherches d'Helen O'Connell à la fin des années 1990 ont motivé la communauté médicale à commencer à changer la façon dont le clitoris est défini anatomiquement.

O'Connell décrit les descriptions typiques du clitoris dans les manuels scolaires comme manquant de détails et comprenant des inexactitudes, telles que des descriptions anatomiques plus anciennes et modernes de l'anatomie urétrale et génitale humaine féminine ayant été basées sur des dissections effectuées sur des cadavres âgés dont le tissu érectile (clitoral) avait rétréci.

Elle attribue plutôt le travail de Georg Ludwig Kobelt comme la description la plus complète et la plus précise de l'anatomie clitoridienne.

Les mesures IRM, qui fournissent une méthode d'examen en direct et multiplanaire, complètent désormais les efforts de recherche de la FFWHC, ainsi que ceux d'O'Connell, concernant le clitoris, montrant que le volume de tissu érectile clitoridien est dix fois celui qui est montré chez les médecins ' bureaux et dans les manuels d'anatomie. clitoris.

En 2000, les chercheurs Shirley Ogletree et Harvey Ginsberg ont conclu qu'il y a une négligence générale du mot clitoris dans la langue vernaculaire commune.

Ils ont examiné les termes utilisés pour décrire les organes génitaux dans la base de données PsycINFO de 1887 à 2000 et ont constaté que le pénis était utilisé dans 1 482 sources, le vagin dans 409, tandis que le clitoris n'était mentionné que dans 83.

Ils ont en outre analysé 57 livres répertoriés dans une base de données informatique pour l'instruction sexuelle.

Dans la majorité des livres, le pénis était la partie du corps la plus discutée - mentionnée plus que le clitoris, le vagin et l'utérus réunis.

Ils ont enquêté pour la dernière fois sur la terminologie utilisée par les étudiants, allant de l'euro-américain (76 %/76 %), l'hispanique (18 %/14 %) et l'afro-américain (4 %/7 %), concernant les croyances des étudiants sur la sexualité et connaissances sur le sujet.

Les étudiants ont été massivement éduqués à croire que le vagin est la contrepartie féminine du pénis.

Les auteurs ont constaté que la croyance des étudiants selon laquelle la partie interne du vagin est la partie la plus sexuellement sensible du corps féminin était corrélée à des attitudes négatives envers la masturbation et à un fort soutien aux mythes sexuels.

Une étude de 2005 a rapporté que, parmi un échantillon d'étudiants de premier cycle, les sources de connaissances sur le clitoris les plus fréquemment citées étaient l'école et les amis, et que cela était associé aux connaissances les moins testées.

La connaissance du clitoris par auto-exploration est la moins citée, mais "les répondants ont répondu correctement, en moyenne, à trois des cinq mesures de connaissance clitoridienne".

Les auteurs ont déclaré que « [l]es connaissances étaient significativement corrélées à la fréquence de l'orgasme des femmes lors de la masturbation, mais pas de relations sexuelles en couple » et que leurs « résultats sont discutés à la lumière de l'inégalité entre les sexes et d'une construction sociale de la sexualité, approuvée à la fois par les hommes et les femmes, qui privilégie le plaisir sexuel des hommes sur celui des femmes, de sorte que l'orgasme pour les femmes est agréable, mais finalement accessoire." Ils ont conclu qu'une partie de la solution pour remédier à "ce problème" nécessite que les hommes et les femmes apprennent davantage sur le clitoris que ce qui est actuellement pratiqué. En mai 2013, le groupe humanitaire Clitoraid a lancé la première semaine internationale de sensibilisation au clitoris, du 6 au 12 mai .

La porte-parole de Clitoraid, Nadine Gary, a déclaré que la mission du groupe est de sensibiliser le public au clitoris car il a "été ignoré, vilipendé, tabou et considéré comme un péché et honteux pendant des siècles". En 2016, Odile Fillod a créé un document open source imprimable en 3D. , modèle grandeur nature du clitoris, à utiliser dans une série de vidéos antisexistes qu'elle avait été chargée de produire.

Fillod a été interviewé par Stephanie Theobald, dont l'article dans The Guardian indiquait que le modèle 3D serait utilisé pour l'éducation sexuelle dans les écoles françaises, du primaire au secondaire, à partir de septembre 2016 ; ce n'était pas le cas, mais l'histoire est devenue virale à travers le monde. Dans une étude de 2019, un questionnaire a été administré à un échantillon d'étudiants de troisième cycle en sciences de l'éducation pour retracer le niveau de leurs connaissances concernant les organes de l'appareil reproducteur féminin et masculin.

Les auteurs ont rapporté qu'environ les deux tiers des étudiants n'ont pas nommé les organes génitaux féminins externes, tels que le clitoris et les lèvres, même après que des images détaillées leur aient été fournies.

Une analyse de 2022 a rapporté que le clitoris n'est mentionné que dans un seul des 113 manuels scolaires grecs de l'enseignement secondaire utilisés dans les cours de biologie des années 1870 à nos jours.


=== Art contemporain ===


En 2012, l'artiste new-yorkaise Sophia Wallace a commencé à travailler sur un projet multimédia pour remettre en question les idées fausses sur le clitoris.

Basé sur les recherches d'O'Connell en 1998, le travail de Wallace met l'accent sur la portée et la taille du clitoris humain.

Elle dit que l'ignorance de cela semble encore être omniprésente dans la société moderne. "C'est un curieux dilemme d'observer le paradoxe que d'une part le corps féminin est la métaphore principale de la sexualité, son utilisation sature la publicité, l'art et l'imaginaire érotique dominant", a-t-elle déclaré. "Pourtant, le clitoris, le véritable organe sexuel féminin, est pratiquement invisible." Le projet s'appelle Cliteracy et comprend un "rodéo clitoris", qui est un modèle interactif à grimper d'un clitoris doré géant, y compris ses parties internes, réalisé avec l'aide du sculpteur Kenneth Thomas. "Cela a été un spectacle partout où il a été montré.

Les gens ont soif de pouvoir en parler", a déclaré Wallace. "J'adore voir des hommes défendre le clitoris [...] L'alphabétisation, c'est ne pas avoir son corps contrôlé ou légiféré [...] Ne pas avoir accès au clitoris le plaisir qui est votre droit de naissance est un acte profondément politique." En 2016, un autre projet a démarré à New York, l'art de la rue qui s'est depuis répandu dans près de 100 villes : Clitorosity, un "effort communautaire pour célébrer la structure complète du clitoris" , combinant dessins à la craie et mots pour susciter l'interaction et la conversation avec les passants, que l'équipe documente sur les réseaux sociaux.

En 2016, Lori-Malépart Traversy a réalisé un documentaire d'animation sur l'anatomie méconnue du clitoris. En 2017, Alli Sebastian Wolf a créé un modèle anatomique doré à l'échelle 100:1 d'un clitoris, appelé le Glitoris et dit, elle espère la connaissance du clitoris deviendront bientôt si peu controversés que faire de l'art à leur sujet serait aussi hors de propos que faire de l'art sur les pénis. D'autres projets répertoriés par la BBC incluent Clito Clito, des bijoux corporels fabriqués à Berlin ; Clitorissima, un documentaire destiné à normaliser les conversations mère-fille sur le clitoris ; et un festival ClitArt à Londres, englobant des performances de créations orales ainsi que des arts visuels.

Le collectif artistique français Les Infemmes (un jeu de mots sur "infâme" et "femmes") a publié un fanzine dont le titre peut être traduit par "The Clit Cheatsheet".


=== Influence sur les mutilations génitales féminines ===


Une controverse importante entoure les mutilations génitales féminines (MGF), l'Organisation mondiale de la santé (OMS) étant l'une des nombreuses organisations de santé qui ont fait campagne contre les procédures au nom des droits de l'homme, déclarant que « les MGF n'ont aucun avantage pour la santé » et qu'elles sont « une violation des droits fondamentaux des filles et des femmes » et « reflète une inégalité profondément enracinée entre les sexes ».

La pratique a existé à un moment ou à un autre dans presque toutes les civilisations humaines, le plus souvent pour exercer un contrôle sur le comportement sexuel, y compris la masturbation, des filles et des femmes, mais aussi pour modifier l'apparence du clitoris.

La coutume et la tradition sont les raisons les plus fréquemment citées pour les MGF, certaines cultures estimant que ne pas les pratiquer peut perturber la cohésion de leurs systèmes sociaux et politiques, comme les MGF faisant également partie de l'initiation d'une fille à l'âge adulte.

Souvent, une fille n'est pas considérée comme une adulte dans une société pratiquant les MGF à moins qu'elle n'ait subi une MGF, et « l'ablation du clitoris et des lèvres - considérées par certains comme les parties masculines du corps d'une femme - est censée renforcer la féminité de la fille , souvent synonyme de docilité et d'obéissance". Les mutilations génitales féminines sont pratiquées dans plusieurs sociétés, notamment en Afrique, avec 85 % des mutilations génitales pratiquées en Afrique consistant en une clitoridectomie ou une excision, et dans une moindre mesure dans d'autres régions du Moyen-Orient. et en Asie du Sud-Est, sur des filles âgées de quelques jours à mi-adolescentes, souvent pour réduire le désir sexuel dans le but de préserver la virginité vaginale.

La pratique des MGF s'est répandue dans le monde, car les immigrants d'Asie, d'Afrique et du Moyen-Orient apportent la coutume avec eux.

Aux États-Unis, elle est parfois pratiquée sur des filles nées avec un clitoris plus gros que d'habitude.

Comfort Momoh, spécialiste du sujet des MGF, déclare que les MGF auraient pu être « pratiquées dans l'Égypte ancienne comme un signe de distinction au sein de l'aristocratie » ; on rapporte que des traces d'infibulation se trouvent sur des momies égyptiennes.

Les mutilations génitales féminines sont encore couramment pratiquées en Égypte.

Greenberg et al. rapportent qu'"une étude a révélé que 97% des femmes mariées en Égypte avaient subi une forme quelconque de mutilation génitale". Amnesty International a estimé en 1997 que plus de deux millions de procédures de MGF sont pratiquées chaque année.


== Autres animaux ==



=== Général ===

Bien que le clitoris existe chez toutes les espèces de mammifères, peu d'études détaillées de l'anatomie du clitoris chez les non-humains existent.

Le clitoris est particulièrement développé chez les fosses, les singes, les lémuriens, les taupes et, comme le pénis chez de nombreux mammifères placentaires non humains, contient souvent un petit os.

Chez les femmes, cet os est connu sous le nom d'os clitoridis.

Le clitoris existe chez les tortues, les autruches, les crocodiles et chez les espèces d'oiseaux dont l'homologue mâle a un pénis.

Certaines femelles ourses intersexuées s'accouplent et donnent naissance par le bout du clitoris ; ces espèces sont les grizzlis, les ours bruns, les ours noirs américains et les ours polaires.

Bien que les ours aient été décrits comme ayant "un canal de naissance qui traverse le clitoris plutôt que de former un vagin séparé" (une caractéristique qui représenterait 10 à 20% de la population des ours), les scientifiques affirment que les hyènes tachetées femelles sont les seuls mammifères femelles non hermaphrodites dépourvus d'ouverture vaginale externe, et dont l'anatomie sexuelle est distincte des cas intersexués habituels.


=== Primates non humains ===

Chez les singes araignées, le clitoris est particulièrement développé et possède un passage intérieur, ou urètre, qui le rend presque identique au pénis, et il retient et distribue les gouttelettes d'urine lorsque la femelle singe araignée se déplace.

Le chercheur Alan F.

Dixson a déclaré que cette urine "est vidée à la base du clitoris, coule dans la rainure peu profonde sur sa surface périnéale et est retenue par les plis cutanés de chaque côté de la rainure".

Parce que les singes araignées d'Amérique du Sud ont des clitoris pendants et érectiles assez longs pour être confondus avec un pénis, les chercheurs et les observateurs de l'espèce recherchent un scrotum pour déterminer le sexe de l'animal; une approche similaire consiste à identifier les glandes de marquage olfactif qui peuvent également être présentes sur le clitoris. la plupart des mammifères ; Natalie Angier a déclaré qu'une jeune adolescente "la femelle bonobo pèse peut-être la moitié du poids d'un adolescent humain, mais son clitoris est trois fois plus gros que l'équivalent humain, et suffisamment visible pour remuer sans équivoque pendant qu'elle marche".

Les bonobos femelles se livrent souvent à la pratique du frottement génital-génital (GG), qui est la forme non humaine de tribadisme dans laquelle les femelles humaines se livrent.

L'éthologue Jonathan Balcombe a déclaré que les bonobos femelles frottent rapidement leurs clitoris pendant dix à vingt secondes, et ce comportement, "qui peut être répété en succession rapide, s'accompagne généralement de grincements, de cris et d'engorgement clitoridien"; il a ajouté qu'en moyenne, ils se livrent à cette pratique "environ une fois toutes les deux heures", et comme les bonobos s'accouplent parfois face à face, "la biologiste évolutionniste Marlene Zuk a suggéré que la position du clitoris chez les bonobos et certains autres primates a évolué pour maximiser la stimulation pendant les rapports sexuels ". De nombreuses espèces de strepsirrhine présentent des clitoris allongés qui sont entièrement ou partiellement tunnelisés par l'urètre, y compris les lémuriens souris, les lémuriens nains, toutes les espèces d'Eulemur, les loris et les galagos.

Certaines de ces espèces présentent également un joint à membrane à travers le vagin qui ferme l'ouverture vaginale pendant les saisons sans accouplement, notamment les lémuriens souris et nains.

La morphologie clitoridienne du lémur catta est la plus étudiée.

Ils sont décrits comme ayant "des clitoris allongés et pendants qui sont [entièrement] tunnelisés par un urètre".

L'urètre est entouré de tissu érectile, ce qui permet un gonflement important pendant les saisons de reproduction, mais ce tissu érectile diffère du corps spongieux masculin typique.

Les femelles adultes non enceintes à queue annelée ne présentent pas de taux de testostérone plus élevés que les mâles, mais elles présentent des taux d'A4 et d'œstrogènes plus élevés pendant l'agression saisonnière.

Pendant la grossesse, les niveaux d'œstrogène, d'A4 et de testostérone sont élevés, mais les fœtus féminins sont toujours «protégés» contre l'excès de testostérone.

Ces organes génitaux «masculinisés» se retrouvent souvent aux côtés d'autres traits, tels que les groupes sociaux à prédominance féminine, le dimorphisme sexuel réduit qui fait que les femmes ont la même taille que les hommes, et même les rapports des sexes dans les populations adultes.

Ce phénomène qui a été surnommé le "syndrome des lémuriens".

Une étude de 2014 sur la masculinisation d'Eulemur a proposé que la masculinisation comportementale et morphologique chez les lémuriformes femelles est un trait ancestral qui a probablement émergé après leur séparation des lorisiformes.


=== Hyènes tachetées ===


Alors que les hyènes tachetées femelles sont parfois appelées hermaphrodites ou intersexuées, et que les scientifiques des temps anciens et ultérieurs pensaient qu'elles étaient hermaphrodites, les scientifiques modernes ne les appellent pas comme telles.

Cette désignation est généralement réservée à ceux qui présentent simultanément des caractéristiques des deux sexes; la constitution génétique des hyènes tachetées femelles « est clairement distincte » des hyènes tachetées mâles. La formation du pénis semble largement indépendante des androgènes car elle apparaît chez le fœtus féminin avant la différenciation de l'ovaire fœtal et de la glande surrénale.

Les hyènes tachetées ont un clitoris très érectile, complet avec un faux scrotum ; l'auteur Jean C.

Wingfield a déclaré que "la ressemblance avec les organes génitaux masculins est si proche que le sexe ne peut être déterminé avec confiance que par la palpation du scrotum".

Le pseudo-pénis se distingue également des organes génitaux des mâles par sa plus grande épaisseur et son gland plus arrondi.

La femelle ne possède pas de vagin externe, car les lèvres sont fusionnées pour former un pseudo-scrotum.

Chez les femelles, ce scrotum est constitué de tissu adipeux mou.

Comme les hyènes tachetées mâles en ce qui concerne leur pénis, les hyènes tachetées femelles ont de petites épines péniennes sur la tête de leurs clitoris, ce qui, selon la spécialiste Catherine Blackledge, fait que "la pointe du clitoris ressemble à du papier de verre doux".

Elle a ajouté que le clitoris "s'étend loin du corps en un arc élégant et élancé, mesurant en moyenne plus de 17 cm de la racine à la pointe.

Tout comme un pénis, [il] est complètement érectile, levant la tête lors des cérémonies de salutation des hyènes, des parades sociales, des jeux de bagarre ou lorsqu'il renifle des pairs".

En raison de leurs niveaux plus élevés d'exposition aux androgènes pendant le développement fœtal, les hyènes femelles sont nettement plus musclées et agressives que leurs homologues mâles; sur le plan social, elles sont d'un rang plus élevé que les hommes, étant dominantes ou dominantes et alpha, et les femmes qui ont été exposées à des niveaux d'androgènes plus élevés que la moyenne deviennent plus élevées que leurs homologues féminines.

Les femelles subordonnées lèchent les clitoris des femelles de rang supérieur en signe de soumission et d'obéissance, mais les femelles se lèchent également les clitoris les unes des autres en guise de salutation ou pour renforcer les liens sociaux; en revanche, alors que tous les mâles lèchent les clitoris des femelles dominantes, les femelles ne lèchent pas les pénis des mâles car les mâles sont considérés comme étant du rang le plus bas. L'urètre et le vagin de la femelle hyène tachetée sortent par le clitoris, permettant aux femelles de uriner, copuler et accoucher par cet organe.

Ce trait rend l'accouplement plus laborieux pour le mâle que chez les autres mammifères, et rend également vaines les tentatives de contraindre sexuellement (forcer physiquement l'activité sexuelle) sur les femelles.

Joan Roughgarden, écologiste et biologiste de l'évolution, a déclaré que parce que le clitoris de l'hyène est plus haut sur le ventre que le vagin chez la plupart des mammifères, l'hyène mâle "doit glisser son arrière sous la femelle lors de l'accouplement afin que son pénis s'aligne avec [son clitoris ]".

Dans une action similaire à remonter une manche de chemise, la "femme rétracte le [pseudo-pénis] sur lui-même et crée une ouverture dans laquelle le mâle insère son propre pénis".

Le mâle doit pratiquer cet acte, qui peut prendre quelques mois pour réussir.

Les hyènes tachetées femelles exposées à de plus fortes doses d'androgènes ont des ovaires considérablement endommagés, ce qui rend difficile la conception.

Après l'accouchement, le pseudo-pénis est étiré et perd une grande partie de ses aspects d'origine ; il devient un prépuce à parois lâches et réduit avec un orifice élargi aux lèvres fendues.

Environ 15 % des femelles meurent lors de leur premier accouchement et plus de 60 % des premiers-nés de leur espèce meurent. A 2006 Baskin et al. L'étude a conclu : "Les structures anatomiques de base des corps corporels chez les humains et les hyènes tachetées étaient similaires.

Comme chez les humains, la distribution des nerfs dorsaux était unique en ce qu'elle était dépourvue de nerfs à la position 12 heures dans le pénis et le clitoris de la hyène tachetée » et que « [d] nerfs orsaux du pénis/clitoris chez les humains et les mâles tachetés les hyènes suivaient les deux côtés du corps corporel jusqu'au corps spongieux aux positions 5 et 7 heures.

Les nerfs dorsaux ont pénétré le corps corporel et distalement le gland de l'hyène », et chez les hyènes femelles, « les nerfs dorsaux se sont déployés latéralement sur le corps clitoridien.

La morphologie du gland était différente en apparence chez les deux sexes, étant large et émoussée chez la femelle et effilée chez le mâle ».


=== Taupes ===

De nombreuses espèces de taupes talpid présentent des clitoris péniformes qui sont tunnelisés par l'urètre et se révèlent avoir du tissu érectile, notamment des espèces du genre Talpa trouvées en Europe.

La présence d'ovotestes est unique à ce clade, dans lequel l'ovaire féminin est également principalement composé de tissu testiculaire stérile qui sécrète de la testostérone avec seulement une petite partie de la gonade contenant du tissu ovarien.

Des études génétiques ont révélé que les femelles ont un génotype XX et n'ont pas de gènes liés à l'Y transloqués.

Des études détaillées sur le développement de Talpa occidentalis ont révélé que les gonades femelles se développent selon un «modèle semblable à un testicule».

DMRT1, un gène qui régule le développement des cellules de Sertoli, s'est avéré être exprimé dans les cellules germinales femelles avant la méiose, mais aucune cellule de Sertoli n'était présente dans les ovotestes pleinement développés.

De plus, les cellules germinales femelles n'entrent dans la méiose qu'après la naissance, un phénomène qui n'a été trouvé chez aucun autre mammifère euthérien.

Des analyses phylogénétiques ont suggéré que, comme chez les lémuroïdes, ce trait doit avoir évolué chez un ancêtre commun du clade, et a été « désactivé et activé » dans différentes lignées Talpid. Les taupes européennes femelles sont très territoriales et ne permettent pas aux mâles d'entrer leur territoire en dehors de la saison de reproduction, la cause probable de ce comportement étant les niveaux élevés de testostérone sécrétés par les ovotestes femelles.

Pendant la saison de non-reproduction, leur ouverture vaginale est recouverte de peau, semblable à la condition observée chez les souris et les lémuriens nains.


=== Chats, moutons et souris ===

Les chercheurs étudiant les voies afférentes périphériques et centrales du clitoris félin ont conclu que "les neurones afférents se projetant vers le clitoris du chat ont été identifiés par le traçage WGA-HRP dans les ganglions de la racine dorsale S1 et S2.

Une moyenne de 433 cellules ont été identifiées de chaque côté de l'animal. 85 % et 15 % des cellules marquées étaient situées respectivement dans les ganglions de la racine dorsale S1 et S2.

La section transversale moyenne des profils de neurones afférents clitoridiens était de 1,479 ± 627 μm2. » Ils ont également déclaré qu'une légère « pression constante sur le clitoris produisait une rafale initiale de déclenchement d'une seule unité (fréquences maximales de 170 à 255 Hz) suivie d'une adaptation rapide et d'une un tir soutenu (maximum 40 Hz), qui a été maintenu pendant la stimulation" et qu'un examen plus approfondi du tir tonique "indique que le clitoris est innervé par des fibres afférentes myélinisées mécano-sensibles dans le nerf pudental qui se projettent au centre de la région de la commissure dorsale dans la moelle épinière L7-S1". Le phénotype externe et le comportement reproducteur de 21 moutons freemartin et de deux moutons mâles pseudohermaphrodites ont été enregistrés dans le but d'identifier d'éventuelles caractéristiques pouvant prédire un échec à la reproduction.

La longueur du vagin ainsi que la taille et la forme de la vulve et du clitoris faisaient partie des aspects analysés.

Alors que l'étude a rapporté qu'"un certain nombre d'anomalies physiques et comportementales ont été détectées", elle a également conclu que "la seule découverte cohérente chez les 23 animaux était un vagin court dont la longueur variait de 3,1 à 7,0 cm, contre 10 à 14 cm chez les animaux normaux. "Dans une étude concernant la structure clitoridienne des souris, l'urètre périnéal de la souris a été documenté comme étant entouré de tissu érectile formant les bulbes du clitoris.

Les chercheurs ont déclaré: "Chez la souris, comme chez les femmes humaines, l'organisation des tissus dans les corps caverneux du clitoris est essentiellement similaire à celle du pénis, à l'exception de l'absence d'une couche sous-albuginée interposée entre la tunique albuginée et le tissu érectile. "


== Remarques ==



=== Bibliographie ===




https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clitoris
