

COELIAC DISEASE


Coeliac disease (celiac disease in American English) is a long-term autoimmune disorder, primarily affecting the small intestine, where individuals develop intolerance to gluten, present in foods such as wheat, rye and barley. 

Classic symptoms include gastrointestinal problems such as chronic diarrhoea, abdominal distention, malabsorption, loss of appetite, and among children failure to grow normally. 

This often begins between six months and two years of age. 

Non-classic symptoms are more common, especially in people older than two years. 

There may be mild or absent gastrointestinal symptoms, a wide number of symptoms involving any part of the body, or no obvious symptoms. 

Coeliac disease was first described in childhood; however, it may develop at any age. 

It is associated with other autoimmune diseases, such as Type 1 diabetes mellitus and Hashimoto's thyroiditis, among others.Coeliac disease is caused by a reaction to gluten, a group of various proteins found in wheat and in other grains such as barley and rye. 

Moderate quantities of oats, free of contamination with other gluten-containing grains, are usually tolerated. 

The occurrence of problems may depend on the variety of oat. 

It occurs in people who are genetically predisposed. 

Upon exposure to gluten, an abnormal immune response may lead to the production of several different autoantibodies that can affect a number of different organs. 

In the small bowel, this causes an inflammatory reaction and may produce shortening of the villi lining the small intestine (villous atrophy). 

This affects the absorption of nutrients, frequently leading to anaemia.Diagnosis is typically made by a combination of blood antibody tests and intestinal biopsies, helped by specific genetic testing. 

Making the diagnosis is not always straightforward. 

About 10% of the time, the autoantibodies in the blood are negative, and many people have only minor intestinal changes with normal villi. 

People may have severe symptoms and they may be investigated for years before a diagnosis is achieved. 

Increasingly, the diagnosis is being made in people without symptoms, as a result of screening. 

Evidence regarding the effects of screening, however, is not sufficient to determine its usefulness. 

While the disease is caused by a permanent intolerance to gluten proteins, it is distinct from wheat allergy, which is much more rare.The only known effective treatment is a strict lifelong gluten-free diet, which leads to recovery of the intestinal lining (mucous membrane), improves symptoms, and reduces the risk of developing complications in most people. 

If untreated, it may result in cancers such as intestinal lymphoma, and a slightly increased risk of early death. 

Rates vary between different regions of the world, from as few as 1 in 300 to as many as 1 in 40, with an average of between 1 in 100 and 1 in 170 people. 

It is estimated that 80% of cases remain undiagnosed, usually because of minimal or absent gastrointestinal complaints and lack of knowledge of symptoms and diagnostic criteria. 

Coeliac disease is slightly more common in women than in men.


== Signs and symptoms ==

The classic symptoms of untreated coeliac disease include pale, loose, or greasy stools (steatorrhoea), and weight loss or failure to gain weight. 

Other common symptoms may be subtle or primarily occur in organs other than the bowel itself. 

It is also possible to have coeliac disease without any of the classic symptoms at all. 

This has been shown to comprise at least 43% of presentations in children. 

Further, many adults with subtle disease may only present with fatigue or anaemia. 

Many undiagnosed individuals who consider themselves asymptomatic are in fact not, but rather have become accustomed to living in a state of chronically compromised health. 

Indeed, after starting a gluten-free diet and subsequent improvement becomes evident, such individuals are often able to retrospectively recall and recognise prior symptoms of their untreated disease that they had mistakenly ignored.


=== Gastrointestinal ===

Diarrhoea that is characteristic of coeliac disease is chronic, sometimes pale, of large volume, and abnormally foul in odor. 

Abdominal pain, cramping, bloating with abdominal distension (thought to be the result of fermentative production of bowel gas), and mouth ulcers may be present. 

As the bowel becomes more damaged, a degree of lactose intolerance may develop. 

Frequently, the symptoms are ascribed to irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), only later to be recognised as coeliac disease. 

In populations of people with symptoms of IBS, a diagnosis of coeliac disease can be made in about 3.3% of cases, or four times more likely than in general. 

Screening them for coeliac disease is recommended by the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE), the British Society of Gastroenterology and the American College of Gastroenterology, but is of unclear benefit in North America.Coeliac disease leads to an increased risk of both adenocarcinoma and lymphoma of the small bowel (enteropathy-associated T-cell lymphoma (EATL) or other non-Hodgkin lymphomas). 

This risk is also higher in first-degree relatives such as siblings, parents and children. 

Whether a gluten-free diet brings this risk back to baseline is not clear. 

Long-standing and untreated disease may lead to other complications, such as ulcerative jejunitis (ulcer formation of the small bowel) and stricturing (narrowing as a result of scarring with obstruction of the bowel).


=== Malabsorption-related ===

The changes in the bowel reduce its ability to absorb nutrients, minerals, and the fat-soluble vitamins A, D, E, and K.
Malabsorption of carbohydrates and fats may cause weight loss (or failure to thrive or stunted growth in children) and fatigue or lack of energy.
Anaemia may develop in several ways: iron malabsorption may cause iron deficiency anaemia, and folic acid and vitamin B12 malabsorption may give rise to megaloblastic anaemia.
Calcium and vitamin D malabsorption (and compensatory secondary hyperparathyroidism) may cause osteopenia (decreased mineral content of the bone) or osteoporosis (bone weakening and risk of fragility fractures).
Selenium malabsorption in coeliac disease, combined with low selenium content in many gluten-free foods, confers a risk of selenium deficiency.
Copper and zinc deficiencies have also been associated with coeliac disease.
A small proportion have abnormal coagulation because of vitamin K deficiency and are at a slight risk of abnormal bleeding.


=== Miscellaneous ===

Coeliac disease has been linked with many conditions. 

In many cases, it is unclear whether the gluten-induced bowel disease is a causative factor or whether these conditions share a common predisposition.

IgA deficiency is present in 2.3% of people with coeliac disease, and is itself associated with a tenfold increased risk of coeliac disease. 

Other features of this condition are an increased risk of infections and autoimmune disease.
Dermatitis herpetiformis, an itchy cutaneous condition that has been linked to a transglutaminase enzyme in the skin, features small-bowel changes identical to those in coeliac disease and may respond to gluten withdrawal even if no gastrointestinal symptoms are present.
Growth failure and/or pubertal delay in later childhood can occur even without obvious bowel symptoms or severe malnutrition. 

Evaluation of growth failure often includes coeliac screening.
Pregnancy complications can occur if coeliac disease is pre-existing or later acquired, with significant outcomes including miscarriage, intrauterine growth restriction, low birthweight and preterm birth.
Hyposplenism (a small and underactive spleen) occurs in about a third of cases and may predispose to infection given the role of the spleen in protecting against harmful bacteria.
Abnormal liver function tests (randomly detected on blood tests) may be seen.Coeliac disease is associated with several other medical conditions, many of which are autoimmune disorders: diabetes mellitus type 1, hypothyroidism, primary biliary cholangitis, microscopic colitis, gluten ataxia, psoriasis, vitiligo, autoimmune hepatitis, primary sclerosing cholangitis, and more.


== Cause ==

Coeliac disease is caused by an inflammatory reaction to gliadins and glutenins (gluten proteins) found in wheat and to similar proteins found in the crops of the tribe Triticeae (which includes other common grains such as barley and rye) and to the tribe Aveneae (oats). 

Wheat subspecies (such as spelt, durum, and Kamut) and wheat hybrids (such as triticale) also cause symptoms of coeliac disease.A small number of people with coeliac disease react to oats. 

Oat toxicity in coeliac people depends on the oat cultivar consumed because the prolamin genes, protein amino acid sequences, and the immunoreactivities of toxic prolamins are different in different oat varieties. 

Also, oats are frequently cross-contaminated with other grains containing gluten. 

The term "pure oats" refers to oats uncontaminated with other gluten-containing cereals. 

The long-term effects of pure oat consumption are still unclear, and further studies identifying the cultivars used are needed before making final recommendations on their inclusion in a gluten-free diet. 

Coeliac people who choose to consume oats need a more rigorous lifelong follow-up, possibly including periodic intestinal biopsies.


=== Other grains ===

Other cereals such as corn, millet, sorghum, teff, rice, and wild rice are safe for people with coeliac disease to consume, as well as noncereals such as amaranth, quinoa, and buckwheat. 

Noncereal carbohydrate-rich foods such as potatoes and bananas do not contain gluten and do not trigger symptoms.


=== Risk modifiers ===

There are various theories as to what determines whether a genetically susceptible individual will go on to develop coeliac disease. 

Major theories include surgery, pregnancy, infection and emotional stress.The eating of gluten early in a baby's life does not appear to increase the risk of coeliac disease but later introduction after 6 months may increase it. 

There is uncertainty whether being breastfed reduces risk. 

Prolonging breastfeeding until the introduction of gluten-containing grains into the diet appears to be associated with a 50% reduced risk of developing coeliac disease in infancy; whether this persists into adulthood is not clear. 

These factors may just influence the timing of onset.


== Pathophysiology ==

Coeliac disease appears to be multifactorial, both in that more than one genetic factor can cause the disease and in that more than one factor is necessary for the disease to manifest in a person.
Almost all people (95%) with coeliac disease have either the variant HLA-DQ2 allele or (less commonly) the HLA-DQ8 allele. 

However, about 20–30% of people without coeliac disease have also inherited either of these alleles. 

This suggests that additional factors are needed for coeliac disease to develop; that is, the predisposing HLA risk allele is necessary but not sufficient to develop coeliac disease. 

Furthermore, around 5% of those people who do develop coeliac disease do not have typical HLA-DQ2 or HLA-DQ8 alleles (see below).


=== Genetics ===


The vast majority of people with coeliac have one of two types (out of seven) of the HLA-DQ protein. 

HLA-DQ is part of the MHC class II antigen-presenting receptor (also called the human leukocyte antigen) system and distinguishes cells between self and non-self for the purposes of the immune system. 

The two subunits of the HLA-DQ protein are encoded by the HLA-DQA1 and HLA-DQB1 genes, located on the short arm of chromosome 6.
There are seven HLA-DQ variants (DQ2 and DQ4–DQ9). 

Over 95% of people with coeliac have the isoform of DQ2 or DQ8, which is inherited in families. 

The reason these genes produce an increase in the risk of coeliac disease is that the receptors formed by these genes bind to gliadin peptides more tightly than other forms of the antigen-presenting receptor. 

Therefore, these forms of the receptor are more likely to activate T lymphocytes and initiate the autoimmune process.

Most people with coeliac bear a two-gene HLA-DQ2 haplotype referred to as DQ2.5 haplotype. 

This haplotype is composed of two adjacent gene alleles, DQA1*0501 and DQB1*0201, which encode the two subunits, DQ α5 and DQ β2. 

In most individuals, this DQ2.5 isoform is encoded by one of two chromosomes 6 inherited from parents (DQ2.5cis). 

Most coeliacs inherit only one copy of this DQ2.5 haplotype, while some inherit it from both parents; the latter are especially at risk for coeliac disease as well as being more susceptible to severe complications.Some individuals inherit DQ2.5 from one parent and an additional portion of the haplotype (either DQB1*02 or DQA1*05) from the other parent, increasing risk. 

Less commonly, some individuals inherit the DQA1*05 allele from one parent and the DQB1*02 from the other parent (DQ2.5trans) (called a trans-haplotype association), and these individuals are at similar risk for coeliac disease as those with a single DQ2.5-bearing chromosome 6, but in this instance, the disease tends not to be familial. 

Among the 6% of European coeliacs that do not have DQ2.5 (cis or trans) or DQ8 (encoded by the haplotype DQA1*03:DQB1*0302), 4% have the DQ2.2 isoform, and the remaining 2% lack DQ2 or DQ8.The frequency of these genes varies geographically. 

DQ2.5 has high frequency in peoples of North and Western Europe (Basque Country and Ireland with highest frequencies) and portions of Africa and is associated with disease in India, but it is not found along portions of the West Pacific rim. 

DQ8 has a wider global distribution than DQ2.5 and is particularly common in South and Central America; up to 90% of individuals in certain Amerindian populations carry DQ8 and thus may display the coeliac phenotype.Other genetic factors have been repeatedly reported in coeliac disease; however, involvement in disease has variable geographic recognition. 

Only the HLA-DQ loci show a consistent involvement over the global population. 

Many of the loci detected have been found in association with other autoimmune diseases. 

One locus, the LPP or lipoma-preferred partner gene, is involved in the adhesion of extracellular matrix to the cell surface, and a minor variant (SNP = rs1464510) increases the risk of disease by approximately 30%. 

This gene strongly associates with coeliac disease (p < 10−39) in samples taken from a broad area of Europe and the US.The prevalence of coeliac disease genotypes in the modern population is not completely understood. 

Given the characteristics of the disease and its apparent strong heritability, it would normally be expected that the genotypes would undergo negative selection and to be absent in societies where agriculture has been practised the longest (compare with a similar condition, Lactose intolerance, which has been negatively selected so strongly that its prevalence went from ~100% in ancestral populations to less than 5% in some European countries). 

This expectation was first proposed by Simoons (1981). 

By now, however, it is apparent that this is not the case; on the contrary, there is evidence of positive selection in coeliac disease genotypes. 

It is suspected that some of them may have been beneficial by providing protection against bacterial infections.


=== Prolamins ===

The majority of the proteins in food responsible for the immune reaction in coeliac disease are the prolamins. 

These are storage proteins rich in proline (prol-) and glutamine (-amin) that dissolve in alcohols and are resistant to proteases and peptidases of the gut. 

Prolamins are found in cereal grains with different grains having different but related prolamins: wheat (gliadin), barley (hordein), rye (secalin) and oats (avenin). 

One region of α-gliadin stimulates membrane cells, enterocytes, of the intestine to allow larger molecules around the sealant between cells. 

Disruption of tight junctions allow peptides larger than three amino acids to enter the intestinal lining.

Membrane leaking permits peptides of gliadin that stimulate two levels of the immune response: the innate response, and the adaptive (T-helper cell-mediated) response. 

One protease-resistant peptide from α-gliadin contains a region that stimulates lymphocytes and results in the release of interleukin-15. 

This innate response to gliadin results in immune-system signalling that attracts inflammatory cells and increases the release of inflammatory chemicals. 

The strongest and most common adaptive response to gliadin is directed toward an α2-gliadin fragment of 33 amino acids in length.The response to the 33mer occurs in most coeliacs who have a DQ2 isoform. 

This peptide, when altered by intestinal transglutaminase, has a high density of overlapping T-cell epitopes. 

This increases the likelihood that the DQ2 isoform will bind, and stay bound to, peptide when recognised by T-cells. 

Gliadin in wheat is the best-understood member of this family, but other prolamins exist, and hordein (from barley), secalin (from rye), and avenin (from oats) may contribute to coeliac disease. 

Avenins toxicity in people with coeliac disease depends on the oat cultivar consumed because of prolamin genes, protein amino acid sequences, and the immunoreactivities of toxic prolamins, which vary among oat varieties.


=== Tissue transglutaminase ===


Anti-transglutaminase antibodies to the enzyme tissue transglutaminase (tTG) are found in the blood of the majority of people with classic symptoms and complete villous atrophy, but only in 70% of the cases with partial villous atrophy and 30% of the cases with minor mucosal lesions. 

Tissue transglutaminase modifies gluten peptides into a form that may stimulate the immune system more effectively. 

These peptides are modified by tTG in two ways, deamidation or transamidation.Deamidation is the reaction by which a glutamate residue is formed by cleavage of the epsilon-amino group of a glutamine side chain. 

Transamidation, which occurs three times more often than deamidation, is the cross-linking of a glutamine residue from the gliadin peptide to a lysine residue of tTg in a reaction that is catalysed by the transglutaminase. 

Crosslinking may occur either within or outside the active site of the enzyme. 

The latter case yields a permanently covalently linked complex between the gliadin and the tTg. 

This results in the formation of new epitopes believed to trigger the primary immune response by which the autoantibodies against tTg develop.Stored biopsies from people with suspected coeliac disease have revealed that autoantibody deposits in the subclinical coeliacs are detected prior to clinical disease. 

These deposits are also found in people who present with other autoimmune diseases, anaemia, or malabsorption phenomena at a much increased rate over the normal population. 

Endomysial components of antibodies (EMA) to tTG are believed to be directed toward cell-surface transglutaminase, and these antibodies are still used in confirming a coeliac disease diagnosis. 

However, a 2006 study showed that EMA-negative people with coeliac tend to be older males with more severe abdominal symptoms and a lower frequency of "atypical" symptoms, including autoimmune disease. 

In this study, the anti-tTG antibody deposits did not correlate with the severity of villous destruction. 

These findings, coupled with recent work showing that gliadin has an innate response component, suggest that gliadin may be more responsible for the primary manifestations of coeliac disease, whereas tTG is a bigger factor in secondary effects such as allergic responses and secondary autoimmune diseases. 

In a large percentage of people with coeliac, the anti-tTG antibodies also recognise a rotavirus protein called VP7. 

These antibodies stimulate monocyte proliferation, and rotavirus infection might explain some early steps in the cascade of immune cell proliferation.Indeed, earlier studies of rotavirus damage in the gut showed this causes villous atrophy. 

This suggests that viral proteins may take part in the initial flattening and stimulate self-crossreactive anti-VP7 production. 

Antibodies to VP7 may also slow healing until the gliadin-mediated tTG presentation provides a second source of crossreactive antibodies.
Other intestinal disorders may have biopsy that look like coeliac disease including lesions caused by Candida.


=== Villous atrophy and malabsorption ===

The inflammatory process, mediated by T cells, leads to disruption of the structure and function of the small bowel's mucosal lining and causes malabsorption as it impairs the body's ability to absorb nutrients, minerals, and fat-soluble vitamins A, D, E, and K from food. 

Lactose intolerance may be present due to the decreased bowel surface and reduced production of lactase but typically resolves once the condition is treated.
Alternative causes of this tissue damage have been proposed and involve the release of interleukin 15 and activation of the innate immune system by a shorter gluten peptide (p31–43/49). 

This would trigger killing of enterocytes by lymphocytes in the epithelium. 

The villous atrophy seen on biopsy may also be due to unrelated causes, such as tropical sprue, giardiasis and radiation enteritis. 

While positive serology and typical biopsy are highly suggestive of coeliac disease, lack of response to the diet may require these alternative diagnoses to be considered.


== Diagnosis ==

Diagnosis is often difficult and as of 2019, there continues to be a lack of awareness among physicians about the variability of presentations of coeliac disease and the diagnostic criteria, such that most cases are diagnosed with great delay. 

It can take up to 12 years to receive a diagnosis from the onset of symptoms and the majority of those affected in most countries never receive it.Several tests can be used. 

The level of symptoms may determine the order of the tests, but all tests lose their usefulness if the person is already eating a gluten-free diet. 

Intestinal damage begins to heal within weeks of gluten being removed from the diet, and antibody levels decline over months. 

For those who have already started on a gluten-free diet, it may be necessary to perform a rechallenge with some gluten-containing food in one meal a day over 6 weeks before repeating the investigations.


=== Blood tests ===


Serological blood tests are the first-line investigation required to make a diagnosis of coeliac disease. 

Its sensitivity correlates with the degree of histological lesions. 

People who present with minor damage to the small intestine may have seronegative findings so many patients with coeliac disease often are missed. 

In patients with villous atrophy, anti-endomysial (EMA) antibodies of the immunoglobulin A (IgA) type can detect coeliac disease with a sensitivity and specificity of 90% and 99%, respectively. 

Serology for anti-transglutaminase antibodies (anti-tTG) was initially reported to have a higher sensitivity (99%) and specificity (>90%). 

However, it is now thought to have similar characteristics to anti-endomysial antibodies. 

Both anti-transglutaminase and anti-endomysial antibodies have high sensitivity to diagnose people with classic symptoms and complete villous atrophy, but they are only found in 30–89% of the cases with partial villous atrophy and in less than 50% of the people who have minor mucosal lesions (duodenal lymphocytosis) with normal villi.Tissue transglutaminase modifies gluten peptides into a form that may stimulate the immune system more effectively. 

These peptides are modified by tTG in two ways, deamidation or transamidation. 

Modern anti-tTG assays rely on a human recombinant protein as an antigen. tTG testing should be done first as it is an easier test to perform. 

An equivocal result on tTG testing should be followed by anti-endomysial antibodies.Guidelines recommend that a total serum IgA level is checked in parallel, as people with coeliac with IgA deficiency may be unable to produce the antibodies on which these tests depend ("false negative"). 

In those people, IgG antibodies against transglutaminase (IgG-tTG) may be diagnostic.If all these antibodies are negative, then anti-DGP antibodies (antibodies against deamidated gliadin peptides) should be determined. 

IgG class anti-DGP antibodies may be useful in people with IgA deficiency. 

In children younger than two years, anti-DGP antibodies perform better than anti-endomysial and anti-transglutaminase antibodies tests.Because of the major implications of a diagnosis of coeliac disease, professional guidelines recommend that a positive blood test is still followed by an endoscopy/gastroscopy and biopsy. 

A negative serology test may still be followed by a recommendation for endoscopy and duodenal biopsy if clinical suspicion remains high.Historically three other antibodies were measured: anti-reticulin (ARA), anti-gliadin (AGA) and anti-endomysial (EMA) antibodies. 

ARA testing, however, is not accurate enough for routine diagnostic use. 

Serology may be unreliable in young children, with anti-gliadin performing somewhat better than other tests in children under five. 

Serology tests are based on indirect immunofluorescence (reticulin, gliadin and endomysium) or ELISA (gliadin or tissue transglutaminase, tTG).Other antibodies such as anti–Saccharomyces cerevisiae antibodies occur in some people with coeliac disease but also occur in other autoimmune disorders and about 5% of those who donate blood.Antibody testing may be combined with HLA testing if the diagnosis is unclear. 

TGA and EMA testing are the most sensitive serum antibody tests, but as a negative HLA-DQ type excludes the diagnosis of coeliac disease, testing also for HLA-DQ2 or DQ8 maximises sensitivity and negative predictive values. 

In the United Kingdom, the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE) does not (as of 2015) recommend the use of HLA typing to rule out coeliac disease outside of a specialist setting, for example, in children who are not having a biopsy, or in patients who already have limited gluten ingestion and opt not to have a gluten challenge.


=== Endoscopy ===


An upper endoscopy with biopsy of the duodenum (beyond the duodenal bulb) or jejunum is performed to obtain multiple samples (four to eight) from the duodenum. 

Not all areas may be equally affected; if biopsies are taken from healthy bowel tissue, the result would be a false negative. 

Even in the same bioptic fragment, different degrees of
damage may be present.Most people with coeliac disease have a small intestine that appears to be normal on endoscopy before the biopsies are examined. 

However, five findings have been associated with high specificity for coeliac disease: scalloping of the small bowel folds (pictured), paucity in the folds, a mosaic pattern to the mucosa (described as a "cracked-mud" appearance), prominence of the submucosa blood vessels, and a nodular pattern to the mucosa.European guidelines suggest that in children and adolescents with symptoms compatible with coeliac disease, the diagnosis can be made without the need for intestinal biopsy if anti-tTG antibodies titres are very high (10 times the upper limit of normal).Until the 1970s, biopsies were obtained using metal capsules attached to a suction device. 

The capsule was swallowed and allowed to pass into the small intestine. 

After x-ray verification of its position, suction was applied to collect part of the intestinal wall inside the capsule. 

Often-utilised capsule systems were the Watson capsule and the Crosby–Kugler capsule. 

This method has now been largely replaced by fibre-optic endoscopy, which carries a higher sensitivity and a lower frequency of errors.Capsule endoscopy (CE) allows identification of typical mucosal changes observed in coeliac disease but has a lower sensitivity compared to regular endoscopy and histology. 

CE is therefore not the primary diagnostic tool for coeliac disease. 

However, CE can be used for diagnosing T-cell lymphoma, ulcerative jejunoileitis, and adenocarcinoma in refractory or complicated coeliac disease.


=== Pathology ===

The classic pathology changes of coeliac disease in the small bowel are categorised by the "Marsh classification":
Marsh stage 0: normal mucosa
Marsh stage 1: increased number of intra-epithelial lymphocytes (IELs), usually exceeding 20 per 100 enterocytes
Marsh stage 2: a proliferation of the crypts of Lieberkühn
Marsh stage 3: partial or complete villous atrophy and crypt hypertrophy
Marsh stage 4: hypoplasia of the small intestine architectureMarsh's classification, introduced in 1992, was subsequently modified in 1999 to six stages, where the previous stage 3 was split in three substages. 

Further studies demonstrated that this system was not always reliable and that the changes observed in coeliac disease could be described in one of three stages:
A representing lymphocytic infiltration with normal villous appearance;
B1 describing partial villous atrophy; and
B2 describing complete villous atrophy.The changes classically improve or reverse after gluten is removed from the diet. 

However, most guidelines do not recommend a repeat biopsy unless there is no improvement in the symptoms on diet. 

In some cases, a deliberate gluten challenge, followed by a biopsy, may be conducted to confirm or refute the diagnosis. 

A normal biopsy and normal serology after challenge indicates the diagnosis may have been incorrect.In untreated coeliac disease, villous atrophy is more common in children younger than three years, but in older children and adults, it is common to find minor intestinal lesions (duodenal lymphocytosis) with normal intestinal villi.


=== Other diagnostic tests ===

At the time of diagnosis, further investigations may be performed to identify complications, such as iron deficiency (by full blood count and iron studies), folic acid and vitamin B12 deficiency and hypocalcaemia (low calcium levels, often due to decreased vitamin D levels). 

Thyroid function tests may be requested during blood tests to identify hypothyroidism, which is more common in people with coeliac disease.Osteopenia and osteoporosis, mildly and severely reduced bone mineral density, are often present in people with coeliac disease, and investigations to measure bone density may be performed at diagnosis, such as dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA) scanning, to identify the risk of fracture and need for bone protection medication.


=== Gluten withdrawal ===

Although blood antibody tests, biopsies, and genetic tests usually provide a clear diagnosis, occasionally the response to gluten withdrawal on a gluten-free diet is needed to support the diagnosis. 

Currently, gluten challenge is no longer required to confirm the diagnosis in patients with intestinal lesions compatible with coeliac disease and a positive response to a gluten-free diet. 

Nevertheless, in some cases, a gluten challenge with a subsequent biopsy may be useful to support the diagnosis, for example in people with a high suspicion for coeliac disease, without a biopsy confirmation, who have negative blood antibodies and are already on a gluten-free diet. 

Gluten challenge is discouraged before the age of 5 years and during pubertal growth. 

The alternative diagnosis of non-coeliac gluten sensitivity may be made where there is only symptomatic evidence of gluten sensitivity. 

Gastrointestinal and extraintestinal symptoms of people with non-coeliac gluten sensitivity can be similar to those of coeliac disease, and improve when gluten is removed from the diet, after coeliac disease and wheat allergy are reasonably excluded.Up to 30% of people often continue having or redeveloping symptoms after starting a gluten-free diet. 

A careful interpretation of the symptomatic response is needed, as a lack of response in a person with coeliac disease may be due to continued ingestion of small amounts of gluten, either voluntary or inadvertent, or be due to other commonly associated conditions such as small intestinal bacterial overgrowth (SIBO), lactose intolerance, fructose, sucrose, and sorbitol malabsorption, exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, and microscopic colitis, among others. 

In untreated coeliac disease, these are often transient conditions derived from the intestinal damage. 

They normally revert or improve several months after starting a gluten-free diet, but may need temporary interventions such as supplementation with pancreatic enzymes, dietary restrictions of lactose, fructose, sucrose or sorbitol containing foods, or treatment with oral antibiotics in the case of associated bacterial overgrowth. 

In addition to gluten withdrawal, some people need to follow a low-FODMAPs diet or avoid consumption of commercial gluten-free products, which are usually rich in preservatives and additives (such as sulfites, glutamates, nitrates and benzoates) and might have a role in triggering functional gastrointestinal symptoms.


== Screening ==

There is debate as to the benefits of screening. 

As of 2017, the United States Preventive Services Task Force found insufficient evidence to make a recommendation among those without symptoms. 

In the United Kingdom, the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE) recommend testing for coeliac disease in first-degree relatives of those with the disease already confirmed, in people with persistent fatigue, abdominal or gastrointestinal symptoms, faltering growth, unexplained weight loss or iron, vitamin B12 or folate deficiency, severe mouth ulcers, and with diagnoses of type 1 diabetes, autoimmune thyroid disease, and with newly diagnosed chronic fatigue syndrome and irritable bowel syndrome. 

Dermatitis herpetiformis is included in other recommendations. 

The NICE also recommend offering serological testing for coeliac disease in people with metabolic bone disease (reduced bone mineral density or osteomalacia), unexplained neurological disorders (such as peripheral neuropathy and ataxia), fertility problems or recurrent miscarriage, persistently raised liver enzymes with unknown cause, dental enamel defects and with diagnose of Down syndrome or Turner syndrome.Some evidence has found that early detection may decrease the risk of developing health complications, such as osteoporosis, anaemia, and certain types of cancer, neurological disorders, cardiovascular diseases, and reproductive problems. 

They thus recommend screening in people with certain health problems.Serology has been proposed as a screening measure, because the presence of antibodies would detect some previously undiagnosed cases of coeliac disease and prevent its complications in those people. 

However, serologic tests have high sensitivity only in people with total villous atrophy and have a very low ability to detect cases with partial villous atrophy or minor intestinal lesions. 

Testing for coeliac disease may be offered to those with commonly associated conditions.


== Treatment ==



=== Diet ===


At present, the only effective treatment is a lifelong gluten-free diet. 

No medication exists that prevents damage or prevents the body from attacking the gut when gluten is present. 

Strict adherence to the diet helps the intestines heal, leading to resolution of all symptoms in most cases and, depending on how soon the diet is begun, can also eliminate the heightened risk of osteoporosis and intestinal cancer and in some cases sterility. 

The diet can be cumbersome; failure to comply with the diet may cause relapse.
Dietitian input is generally requested to ensure the person is aware which foods contain gluten, which foods are safe, and how to have a balanced diet despite the limitations. 

In many countries, gluten-free products are available on prescription and may be reimbursed by health insurance plans. 

Gluten-free products are usually more expensive and harder to find than common gluten-containing foods. 

Since ready-made products often contain traces of gluten, some coeliacs may find it necessary to cook from scratch.The term "gluten-free" is generally used to indicate a supposed harmless level of gluten rather than a complete absence. 

The exact level at which gluten is harmless is uncertain and controversial. 

A recent systematic review tentatively concluded that consumption of less than 10 mg of gluten per day is unlikely to cause histological abnormalities, although it noted that few reliable studies had been done. 

Regulation of the label "gluten-free" varies. 

In the European Union, the European Commission issued regulations in 2009 limiting the use of "gluten-free" labels for food products to those with less than 20 mg/kg of gluten, and "very low gluten" labels for those with less than 100 mg/kg. 

In the United States, the FDA issued regulations in 2013 limiting the use of "gluten-free" labels for food products to those with less than 20 ppm of gluten. 

The current international Codex Alimentarius standard allows for 20 ppm of gluten in so-called "gluten-free" foods.Gluten-free diet improves healthcare-related quality of life, and strict adherence to the diet gives more benefit than incomplete adherence. 

Nevertheless, gluten-free diet doesn't completely normalise the quality of life.


=== Refractory disease ===

Between 0.3% and 10% of people have refractory disease, which means that they have persistent villous atrophy on a gluten-free diet despite the lack of gluten exposure for more than 12 months. 

Nevertheless, inadvertent exposure to gluten is the main cause of persistent villous atrophy, and must be ruled out before a diagnosis of refractory disease is made. 

People with poor basic education and understanding of gluten-free diet often believe that they are strictly following the diet, but are making regular errors. 

Also, a lack of symptoms is not a reliable indicator of intestinal recuperation.If alternative causes of villous atrophy have been eliminated, steroids or immunosuppressants (such as azathioprine) may be considered in this scenario.Refractory coeliac disease should not be confused with the persistence of symptoms despite gluten withdrawal caused by transient conditions derived from the intestinal damage, which generally revert or improve several months after starting a gluten-free diet, such as small intestinal bacterial overgrowth, lactose intolerance, fructose, sucrose, and sorbitol malabsorption, exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, and microscopic colitis among others.


== Epidemiology ==

Globally coeliac disease affects between 1 in 100 and 1 in 170 people. 

Rates, however, vary between different regions of the world from as few as 1 in 300 to as many as 1 in 40. 

In the United States it is thought to affect between 1 in 1750 (defined as clinical disease including dermatitis herpetiformis with limited digestive tract symptoms) to 1 in 105 (defined by presence of IgA TG in blood donors). 

Due to variable signs and symptoms it is believed that about 85% of people affected are undiagnosed. 

The percentage of people with clinically diagnosed disease (symptoms prompting diagnostic testing) is 0.05–0.27% in various studies. 

However, population studies from parts of Europe, India, South America, Australasia and the USA (using serology and biopsy) indicate that the percentage of people with the disease may be between 0.33 and 1.06% in children (but 5.66% in one study of children of the predisposed Sahrawi people) and 0.18–1.2% in adults. 

Among those in primary care populations who report gastrointestinal symptoms, the rate of coeliac disease is about 3%. 

In Australia, approximately 1 in 70 people have the disease. 

The rate amongst adult blood donors in Iran, Israel, Syria and Turkey is 0.60%, 0.64%, 1.61% and 1.15%, respectively.People of African, Japanese and Chinese descent are rarely diagnosed; this reflects a much lower prevalence of the genetic risk factors, such as HLA-B8. 

People of Indian ancestry seem to have a similar risk to those of Western Caucasian ancestry. 

Population studies also indicate that a large proportion of coeliacs remain undiagnosed; this is due, in part, to many clinicians being unfamiliar with the condition and also due to the fact it can be asymptomatic. 

Coeliac disease is slightly more common in women than in men. 

A large multicentre study in the U.S. found a prevalence of 0.75% in not-at-risk groups, rising to 1.8% in symptomatic people, 2.6% in second-degree relatives (like grandparents, aunt or uncle, grandchildren, etc.) of a person with coeliac disease and 4.5% in first-degree relatives (siblings, parents or children). 

This profile is similar to the prevalence in Europe. 

Other populations at increased risk for coeliac disease, with prevalence rates ranging from 5% to 10%, include individuals with Down and Turner syndromes, type 1 diabetes, and autoimmune thyroid disease, including both hyperthyroidism (overactive thyroid) and hypothyroidism (underactive thyroid).Historically, coeliac disease was thought to be rare, with a prevalence of about 0.02%. 

The reason for the recent increases in the number of reported cases is unclear. 

It may be at least in part due to changes in diagnostic practice. 

There also appears to be an approximately 4.5 fold true increase that may be due to less exposure to bacteria and other pathogens in Western environments. 

In the United States, the median age at diagnosis is 38 years. 

Roughly 20 percent of individuals with coeliac disease are diagnosed after 60 years of age.


== History ==

The term "coeliac" is from the Greek κοιλιακός (koiliakós, "abdominal") and was introduced in the 19th century in a translation of what is generally regarded as an Ancient Greek description of the disease by Aretaeus of Cappadocia.Humans first started to cultivate grains in the Neolithic period (beginning about 9500 BCE) in the Fertile Crescent in Western Asia, and, likely, coeliac disease did not occur before this time. 

Aretaeus of Cappadocia, living in the second century in the same area, recorded a malabsorptive syndrome with chronic diarrhoea, causing a debilitation of the whole body. 

His "Cœliac Affection" (coeliac from Greek κοιλιακός koiliakos, "abdominal") gained the attention of Western medicine when Francis Adams presented a translation of Aretaeus's work at the Sydenham Society in 1856. 

The patient described in Aretaeus' work had stomach pain and was atrophied, pale, feeble, and incapable of work. 

The diarrhoea manifested as loose stools that were white, malodorous, and flatulent, and the disease was intractable and liable to periodic return. 

The problem, Aretaeus believed, was a lack of heat in the stomach necessary to digest the food and a reduced ability to distribute the digestive products throughout the body, this incomplete digestion resulting in diarrhoea. 

He regarded this as an affliction of the old and more commonly affecting women, explicitly excluding children. 

The cause, according to Aretaeus, was sometimes either another chronic disease or even consuming "a copious draught of cold water."The paediatrician Samuel Gee gave the first modern-day description of the condition in children in a lecture at Hospital for Sick Children, Great Ormond Street, London, in 1887. 

Gee acknowledged earlier descriptions and terms for the disease and adopted the same term as Aretaeus (coeliac disease). 

He perceptively stated: "If the patient can be cured at all, it must be by means of diet." Gee recognised that milk intolerance is a problem with coeliac children and that highly starched foods should be avoided. 

However, he forbade rice, sago, fruit, and vegetables, which all would have been safe to eat, and he recommended raw meat as well as thin slices of toasted bread. 

Gee highlighted particular success with a child "who was fed upon a quart of the best Dutch mussels daily." However, the child could not bear this diet for more than one season.Christian Archibald Herter, an American physician, wrote a book in 1908 on children with coeliac disease, which he called "intestinal infantilism". 

He noted their growth was retarded and that fat was better tolerated than carbohydrate. 

The eponym Gee-Herter disease was sometimes used to acknowledge both contributions. 

Sidney V. 

Haas, an American paediatrician, reported positive effects of a diet of bananas in 1924. 

This diet remained in vogue until the actual cause of coeliac disease was determined.While a role for carbohydrates had been suspected, the link with wheat was not made until the 1940s by the Dutch paediatrician Dr Willem Karel Dicke. 

It is likely that clinical improvement of his patients during the Dutch famine of 1944 (during which flour was scarce) may have contributed to his discovery. 

Dicke noticed that the shortage of bread led to a significant drop in the death rate among children affected by coeliac disease from greater than 35% to essentially zero. 

He also reported that once wheat was again available after the conflict, the mortality rate soared to previous levels. 

The link with the gluten component of wheat was made in 1952 by a team from Birmingham, England. 

Villous atrophy was described by British physician John W. 

Paulley in 1954 on samples taken at surgery. 

This paved the way for biopsy samples taken by endoscopy.Throughout the 1960s, other features of coeliac disease were elucidated. 

Its hereditary character was recognised in 1965. 

In 1966, dermatitis herpetiformis was linked to gluten sensitivity.


== Social and culture ==


May has been designated as "Coeliac Awareness Month" by several coeliac organisations.


=== Christian churches and the Eucharist ===

Speaking generally, the various denominations of Christians celebrate a Eucharist in which a wafer or small piece of sacramental bread from wheat bread is blessed and then eaten. 

A typical wafer weighs about half a gram. 

Wheat flour contains around 10 to 13% gluten, so a single communion wafer may have more than 50 mg of gluten, an amount that harms many people with coeliac, especially if consumed every day (see Diet above).
Many Christian churches offer their communicants gluten-free alternatives, usually in the form of a rice-based cracker or gluten-free bread. 

These include the United Methodist, Christian Reformed, Episcopal, the Anglican Church (Church of England, UK) and Lutheran. 

Catholics may receive from the Chalice alone, or ask for gluten-reduced hosts; gluten-free ones however are not considered to still be wheat bread and hence invalid matter.


==== Roman Catholic position ====
Roman Catholic doctrine states that for a valid Eucharist, the bread to be used at Mass must be made from wheat. 

Low-gluten hosts meet all of the Catholic Church's requirements, but they are not entirely gluten free. 

Requests to use rice wafers have been denied.The issue is more complex for priests. 

As a celebrant, a priest is, for the fullness of the sacrifice of the Mass, absolutely required to receive under both species. 

On 24 July 2003, the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith stated, "Given the centrality of the celebration of the Eucharist in the life of a priest, one must proceed with great caution before admitting to Holy Orders those candidates unable to ingest gluten or alcohol without serious harm."By January 2004, extremely low-gluten Church-approved hosts had become available in the United States, Italy and Australia. 

As of July 2017, the Vatican still outlawed the use of gluten-free bread for Holy Communion.


=== Passover ===

The Jewish festival of Pesach (Passover) may present problems with its obligation to eat matzo, which is unleavened bread made in a strictly controlled manner from wheat, barley, spelt, oats, or rye. 

This rules out many other grains that are normally used as substitutes for people with gluten sensitivity, especially for Ashkenazi Jews, who also avoid rice. 

Many kosher-for-Passover products avoid grains altogether and are therefore gluten-free. 

Potato starch is the primary starch used to replace the grains.


=== Spelling ===

Coeliac disease is the preferred spelling in British English, while celiac disease is typically used in North American English.


== Research directions ==

The search for environmental factors that could be responsible for genetically susceptible people becoming intolerant to gluten has resulted in increasing research activity looking at gastrointestinal infections. 

Research published in April 2017 suggests that an often-symptomless infection by a common strain of reovirus can increase sensitivity to foods such as gluten.Various treatment approaches are being studied, including some that would reduce the need for dieting. 

All are still under development, and are not expected to be available to the general public for a while.Three main approaches have been proposed as new therapeutic modalities for coeliac disease: gluten detoxification, modulation of the intestinal permeability, and modulation of the immune response.Using genetically engineered wheat species, or wheat species that have been selectively bred to be minimally immunogenic, may allow the consumption of wheat. 

This, however, could interfere with the effects that gliadin has on the quality of dough. 

Alternatively, gluten exposure can be minimised by the ingestion of a combination of enzymes (prolyl endopeptidase and a barley glutamine-specific cysteine endopeptidase (EP-B2)) that degrade the putative 33-mer peptide in the duodenum.Alternative treatments under investigation include the inhibition of zonulin, an endogenous signalling protein linked to increased permeability of the bowel wall and hence increased presentation of gliadin to the immune system. 

One inhibitor of this pathway is larazotide acetate, which is currently scheduled for phase 3 clinical trials. 

Other modifiers of other well-understood steps in the pathogenesis of coeliac disease, such as the action of HLA-DQ2 or tissue transglutaminase and the MICA/NKG2D interaction that may be involved in the killing of enterocytes.Attempts to modulate the immune response concerning coeliac disease are mostly still in phase I of clinical testing; one agent (CCX282-B) has been evaluated in a phase II clinical trial based on small-intestinal biopsies taken from people with coeliac disease before and after gluten exposure.Although popularly used as an alternative treatment for people with autism, there is no good evidence that a gluten-free diet is of benefit in the treatment of autism. 

In the subset of people who have gluten sensitivity there is limited evidence that suggests that a gluten free diet may improve some autistic behaviors.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coeliac_disease
;;;ES;;;



ENFERMEDAD CELÍACA


La enfermedad celíaca (enfermedad celíaca en inglés americano) es un trastorno autoinmune a largo plazo, que afecta principalmente al intestino delgado, donde las personas desarrollan intolerancia al gluten, presente en alimentos como el trigo, el centeno y la cebada.

Los síntomas clásicos incluyen problemas gastrointestinales como diarrea crónica, distensión abdominal, malabsorción, pérdida de apetito y, entre los niños, falta de crecimiento normal.

Esto a menudo comienza entre los seis meses y los dos años de edad.

Los síntomas no clásicos son más comunes, especialmente en personas mayores de dos años.

Puede haber síntomas gastrointestinales leves o ausentes, una gran cantidad de síntomas que involucran cualquier parte del cuerpo o ningún síntoma evidente.

La enfermedad celíaca se describió por primera vez en la infancia; sin embargo, puede desarrollarse a cualquier edad.

Se asocia con otras enfermedades autoinmunes, como la diabetes mellitus tipo 1 y la tiroiditis de Hashimoto, entre otras. La enfermedad celíaca es causada por una reacción al gluten, un grupo de diversas proteínas que se encuentran en el trigo y en otros cereales como la cebada y el centeno.

Por lo general, se toleran cantidades moderadas de avena, sin contaminación con otros cereales que contengan gluten.

La aparición de problemas puede depender de la variedad de avena.

Ocurre en personas que están genéticamente predispuestas.

Tras la exposición al gluten, una respuesta inmunitaria anormal puede conducir a la producción de varios autoanticuerpos diferentes que pueden afectar a varios órganos diferentes.

En el intestino delgado, esto provoca una reacción inflamatoria y puede producir un acortamiento de las vellosidades que recubren el intestino delgado (atrofia de las vellosidades).

Esto afecta la absorción de nutrientes, lo que con frecuencia conduce a la anemia. El diagnóstico generalmente se realiza mediante una combinación de pruebas de anticuerpos en sangre y biopsias intestinales, con la ayuda de pruebas genéticas específicas.

Hacer el diagnóstico no siempre es sencillo.

Alrededor del 10% de las veces, los autoanticuerpos en la sangre son negativos y muchas personas solo tienen cambios intestinales menores con vellosidades normales.

Las personas pueden tener síntomas graves y pueden ser investigados durante años antes de que se logre un diagnóstico.

Cada vez más, el diagnóstico se realiza en personas sin síntomas, como resultado de la detección.

Sin embargo, la evidencia sobre los efectos de la detección no es suficiente para determinar su utilidad.

Si bien la enfermedad es causada por una intolerancia permanente a las proteínas del gluten, es distinta de la alergia al trigo, que es mucho más rara. El único tratamiento efectivo conocido es una dieta estricta sin gluten de por vida, que conduce a la recuperación del revestimiento intestinal membrana), mejora los síntomas y reduce el riesgo de desarrollar complicaciones en la mayoría de las personas.

Si no se trata, puede provocar cánceres como el linfoma intestinal y un riesgo ligeramente mayor de muerte prematura.

Las tasas varían entre las diferentes regiones del mundo, desde tan solo 1 en 300 hasta 1 en 40, con un promedio de entre 1 en 100 y 1 en 170 personas.

Se estima que el 80% de los casos permanecen sin diagnosticar, generalmente debido a molestias gastrointestinales mínimas o inexistentes y falta de conocimiento de los síntomas y criterios de diagnóstico.

La enfermedad celíaca es ligeramente más común en mujeres que en hombres.


== Signos y síntomas ==

Los síntomas clásicos de la enfermedad celíaca no tratada incluyen heces pálidas, blandas o grasosas (esteatorrea) y pérdida de peso o falta de aumento de peso.

Otros síntomas comunes pueden ser sutiles o presentarse principalmente en órganos distintos del intestino mismo.

También es posible tener la enfermedad celíaca sin ninguno de los síntomas clásicos.

Se ha demostrado que esto comprende al menos el 43% de las presentaciones en niños.

Además, muchos adultos con enfermedad sutil pueden presentar solo fatiga o anemia.

Muchas personas no diagnosticadas que se consideran asintomáticas en realidad no lo son, sino que se han acostumbrado a vivir en un estado de salud crónicamente comprometida.

De hecho, después de comenzar una dieta sin gluten y la mejora posterior se hace evidente, estas personas a menudo pueden recordar y reconocer retrospectivamente los síntomas anteriores de su enfermedad no tratada que habían ignorado por error.


=== Gastrointestinales ===

La diarrea que es característica de la enfermedad celíaca es crónica, a veces pálida, de gran volumen y de olor anormalmente fétido.

Puede haber dolor abdominal, calambres, hinchazón con distensión abdominal (que se cree que es el resultado de la producción fermentativa de gases intestinales) y úlceras en la boca.

A medida que el intestino se daña más, se puede desarrollar un grado de intolerancia a la lactosa.

Con frecuencia, los síntomas se atribuyen al síndrome del intestino irritable (IBS), solo para luego reconocerse como enfermedad celíaca.

En poblaciones de personas con síntomas de SII, se puede realizar un diagnóstico de enfermedad celíaca en alrededor del 3,3 % de los casos, o cuatro veces más probable que en general.

El Instituto Nacional para la Salud y la Excelencia Clínica (NICE), la Sociedad Británica de Gastroenterología y el Colegio Estadounidense de Gastroenterología recomiendan hacerles pruebas de detección de la enfermedad celíaca, pero no está claro el beneficio en América del Norte. La enfermedad celíaca conduce a un mayor riesgo de ambas adenocarcinoma y linfoma del intestino delgado (linfoma de células T asociado a enteropatía (EATL) u otros linfomas no Hodgkin).

Este riesgo también es mayor en familiares de primer grado como hermanos, padres e hijos.

No está claro si una dieta sin gluten devuelve este riesgo a la línea de base.

La enfermedad prolongada y no tratada puede dar lugar a otras complicaciones, como yeyunitis ulcerosa (formación de una úlcera en el intestino delgado) y estenosis (estrechamiento como resultado de la cicatrización con obstrucción del intestino).


=== Relacionado con malabsorción ===

Los cambios en el intestino reducen su capacidad para absorber nutrientes, minerales y las vitaminas liposolubles A, D, E y K.
La malabsorción de carbohidratos y grasas puede causar pérdida de peso (o retraso en el crecimiento o retraso en el crecimiento en los niños) y fatiga o falta de energía.
La anemia puede desarrollarse de varias maneras: la malabsorción de hierro puede causar anemia por deficiencia de hierro, y la malabsorción de ácido fólico y vitamina B12 puede dar lugar a anemia megaloblástica.
La malabsorción de calcio y vitamina D (e hiperparatiroidismo secundario compensatorio) puede causar osteopenia (disminución del contenido mineral del hueso) u osteoporosis (debilitamiento de los huesos y riesgo de fracturas por fragilidad).
La malabsorción de selenio en la enfermedad celíaca, combinada con el bajo contenido de selenio en muchos alimentos sin gluten, confiere un riesgo de deficiencia de selenio.
Las deficiencias de cobre y zinc también se han asociado con la enfermedad celíaca.
Una pequeña proporción tiene una coagulación anormal debido a la deficiencia de vitamina K y tiene un ligero riesgo de sangrado anormal.


=== Varios ===

La enfermedad celíaca se ha relacionado con muchas condiciones.

En muchos casos, no está claro si la enfermedad intestinal inducida por el gluten es un factor causal o si estas condiciones comparten una predisposición común.

La deficiencia de IgA está presente en el 2,3 % de las personas con enfermedad celíaca y, en sí misma, se asocia con un riesgo diez veces mayor de enfermedad celíaca.

Otras características de esta condición son un mayor riesgo de infecciones y enfermedades autoinmunes.
La dermatitis herpetiforme, una afección cutánea con picazón que se ha relacionado con una enzima transglutaminasa en la piel, presenta cambios en el intestino delgado idénticos a los de la enfermedad celíaca y puede responder a la abstinencia del gluten incluso si no hay síntomas gastrointestinales presentes.
La falla del crecimiento y/o el retraso de la pubertad en la niñez posterior pueden ocurrir incluso sin síntomas intestinales obvios o desnutrición severa.

La evaluación del retraso del crecimiento a menudo incluye la detección de celiacos.
Las complicaciones del embarazo pueden ocurrir si la enfermedad celíaca es preexistente o se adquiere más tarde, con resultados significativos que incluyen aborto espontáneo, restricción del crecimiento intrauterino, bajo peso al nacer y parto prematuro.
El hipoesplenismo (un bazo pequeño e hipoactivo) ocurre en aproximadamente un tercio de los casos y puede predisponer a una infección dada la función del bazo en la protección contra bacterias dañinas.
Se pueden observar pruebas de función hepática anormales (detectadas aleatoriamente en análisis de sangre). La enfermedad celíaca está asociada con varias otras afecciones médicas, muchas de las cuales son trastornos autoinmunes: diabetes mellitus tipo 1, hipotiroidismo, colangitis biliar primaria, colitis microscópica, ataxia por gluten, psoriasis. , vitíligo, hepatitis autoinmune, colangitis esclerosante primaria y más.


== Causa ==

La enfermedad celíaca es causada por una reacción inflamatoria a las gliadinas y gluteninas (proteínas del gluten) que se encuentran en el trigo y a proteínas similares que se encuentran en los cultivos de la tribu Triticeae (que incluye otros cereales comunes como la cebada y el centeno) y a la tribu Aveneae (avena ).

Las subespecies de trigo (como la espelta, el trigo duro y el Kamut) y los híbridos de trigo (como el triticale) también causan síntomas de la enfermedad celíaca. Un pequeño número de personas con enfermedad celíaca reaccionan a la avena.

La toxicidad de la avena en las personas celíacas depende del cultivar de avena consumido porque los genes de prolamina, las secuencias de aminoácidos de las proteínas y las inmunorreactividades de las prolaminas tóxicas son diferentes en las diferentes variedades de avena.

Además, la avena se contamina con frecuencia con otros cereales que contienen gluten.

El término "avena pura" se refiere a avena no contaminada con otros cereales que contienen gluten.

Los efectos a largo plazo del consumo de avena pura aún no están claros, y se necesitan más estudios que identifiquen los cultivares utilizados antes de hacer recomendaciones finales sobre su inclusión en una dieta sin gluten.

Las personas celíacas que eligen consumir avena necesitan un seguimiento más riguroso de por vida, que posiblemente incluya biopsias intestinales periódicas.


=== Otros granos ===

Otros cereales como el maíz, el mijo, el sorgo, el teff, el arroz y el arroz salvaje son seguros para que los consuman las personas con enfermedad celíaca, así como los que no son cereales como el amaranto, la quinua y el trigo sarraceno.

Los alimentos ricos en carbohidratos no cereales, como las papas y los plátanos, no contienen gluten y no desencadenan síntomas.


=== Modificadores de riesgo ===

Hay varias teorías sobre lo que determina si un individuo genéticamente susceptible desarrollará la enfermedad celíaca.

Las principales teorías incluyen la cirugía, el embarazo, la infección y el estrés emocional. El consumo de gluten en las primeras etapas de la vida de un bebé no parece aumentar el riesgo de enfermedad celíaca, pero la introducción posterior después de los 6 meses puede aumentarlo.

Existe incertidumbre sobre si ser amamantado reduce el riesgo.

Prolongar la lactancia materna hasta la introducción de cereales que contienen gluten en la dieta parece estar asociado con un 50% menos de riesgo de desarrollar enfermedad celíaca en la infancia; si esto persiste en la edad adulta no está claro.

Estos factores pueden influir en el momento del inicio.


== Fisiopatología ==

La enfermedad celíaca parece ser multifactorial, tanto porque más de un factor genético puede causar la enfermedad como porque se necesita más de un factor para que la enfermedad se manifieste en una persona.
Casi todas las personas (95 %) con enfermedad celíaca tienen la variante del alelo HLA-DQ2 o (con menos frecuencia) el alelo HLA-DQ8.

Sin embargo, alrededor del 20 al 30 % de las personas sin enfermedad celíaca también han heredado alguno de estos alelos.

Esto sugiere que se necesitan factores adicionales para que se desarrolle la enfermedad celíaca; es decir, el alelo de riesgo HLA predisponente es necesario pero no suficiente para desarrollar la enfermedad celíaca.

Además, alrededor del 5% de las personas que desarrollan la enfermedad celíaca no tienen los alelos HLA-DQ2 o HLA-DQ8 típicos (ver más abajo).


=== Genética ===


La gran mayoría de las personas celíacas tienen uno de los dos tipos (de siete) de la proteína HLA-DQ.

HLA-DQ es parte del sistema del receptor presentador de antígeno MHC de clase II (también llamado antígeno leucocitario humano) y distingue las células entre propias y no propias para los fines del sistema inmunitario.

Las dos subunidades de la proteína HLA-DQ están codificadas por los genes HLA-DQA1 y HLA-DQB1, ubicados en el brazo corto del cromosoma 6.
Hay siete variantes de HLA-DQ (DQ2 y DQ4–DQ9).

Más del 95% de las personas celíacas tienen la isoforma DQ2 o DQ8, que se hereda en las familias.

La razón por la que estos genes producen un aumento en el riesgo de enfermedad celíaca es que los receptores formados por estos genes se unen a los péptidos de gliadina con más fuerza que otras formas del receptor presentador de antígenos.

Por lo tanto, es más probable que estas formas del receptor activen los linfocitos T e inicien el proceso autoinmune.

La mayoría de las personas celíacas tienen un haplotipo HLA-DQ2 de dos genes denominado haplotipo DQ2.5.

Este haplotipo está compuesto por dos alelos de genes adyacentes, DQA1*0501 y DQB1*0201, que codifican las dos subunidades, DQ α5 y DQ β2.

En la mayoría de los individuos, esta isoforma DQ2.5 está codificada por uno de los dos cromosomas 6 heredados de los padres (DQ2.5cis).

La mayoría de los celíacos heredan solo una copia de este haplotipo DQ2.5, mientras que algunos lo heredan de ambos padres; estos últimos tienen un riesgo especial de enfermedad celíaca, además de ser más susceptibles a complicaciones graves. Algunas personas heredan DQ2.5 de uno de los padres y una porción adicional del haplotipo (ya sea DQB1*02 o DQA1*05) del otro padre, aumento del riesgo.

Con menos frecuencia, algunas personas heredan el alelo DQA1*05 de uno de los padres y el DQB1*02 del otro padre (DQ2.5trans) (lo que se denomina asociación trans-haplotípica), y estas personas tienen un riesgo similar de enfermedad celíaca que las personas con un solo cromosoma 6 portador de DQ2.5, pero en este caso, la enfermedad tiende a no ser familiar.

Del 6% de celíacos europeos que no tienen DQ2.5 (cis o trans) ni DQ8 (codificado por el haplotipo DQA1*03:DQB1*0302), el 4% tiene la isoforma DQ2.2 y el 2% restante carece DQ2 o DQ8. La frecuencia de estos genes varía geográficamente.

DQ2.5 tiene una alta frecuencia en pueblos del norte y oeste de Europa (País Vasco e Irlanda con las frecuencias más altas) y partes de África y está asociado con enfermedades en India, pero no se encuentra a lo largo de partes del borde del Pacífico occidental.

DQ8 tiene una distribución global más amplia que DQ2.5 y es particularmente común en América del Sur y Central; hasta el 90% de los individuos en ciertas poblaciones amerindias portan DQ8 y, por lo tanto, pueden mostrar el fenotipo celíaco. Se han informado repetidamente otros factores genéticos en la enfermedad celíaca; sin embargo, la participación en la enfermedad tiene un reconocimiento geográfico variable.

Solo los loci HLA-DQ muestran una implicación constante sobre la población mundial.

Muchos de los loci detectados se han encontrado en asociación con otras enfermedades autoinmunes.

Un locus, el LPP o gen asociado preferido por lipoma, está involucrado en la adhesión de la matriz extracelular a la superficie celular, y una variante menor (SNP = rs1464510) aumenta el riesgo de enfermedad en aproximadamente un 30 %.

Este gen se asocia fuertemente con la enfermedad celíaca (p < 10−39) en muestras tomadas de una amplia zona de Europa y los EE. UU. La prevalencia de los genotipos de la enfermedad celíaca en la población moderna no se comprende por completo.

Dadas las características de la enfermedad y su aparente fuerte heredabilidad, normalmente se esperaría que los genotipos sufrieran una selección negativa y que estuvieran ausentes en sociedades donde la agricultura se ha practicado por más tiempo (comparar con una condición similar, la intolerancia a la lactosa, que ha sido seleccionado negativamente con tanta fuerza que su prevalencia pasó de ~100% en poblaciones ancestrales a menos del 5% en algunos países europeos).

Esta expectativa fue propuesta por primera vez por Simoons (1981).

A estas alturas, sin embargo, es evidente que este no es el caso; por el contrario, existe evidencia de selección positiva en genotipos de enfermedad celíaca.

Se sospecha que algunos de ellos pueden haber sido beneficiosos al brindar protección contra infecciones bacterianas.


=== Prolaminas ===

La mayoría de las proteínas de los alimentos responsables de la reacción inmunitaria en la enfermedad celíaca son las prolaminas.

Se trata de proteínas de almacenamiento ricas en prolina (prol-) y glutamina (-amina) que se disuelven en alcoholes y son resistentes a las proteasas y peptidasas del intestino.

Las prolaminas se encuentran en los granos de cereales con diferentes granos que tienen prolaminas diferentes pero relacionadas: trigo (gliadina), cebada (hordeína), centeno (secalina) y avena (avenina).

Una región de α-gliadina estimula las células de la membrana, los enterocitos, del intestino para permitir que moléculas más grandes rodeen el sellador entre las células.

La interrupción de las uniones estrechas permite que los péptidos de más de tres aminoácidos ingresen al revestimiento intestinal.

La fuga de membrana permite la formación de péptidos de gliadina que estimulan dos niveles de la respuesta inmunitaria: la respuesta innata y la respuesta adaptativa (mediada por células T colaboradoras).

Un péptido resistente a la proteasa de α-gliadina contiene una región que estimula los linfocitos y da como resultado la liberación de interleucina-15.

Esta respuesta innata a la gliadina da como resultado una señalización del sistema inmunitario que atrae a las células inflamatorias y aumenta la liberación de sustancias químicas inflamatorias.

La respuesta adaptativa más fuerte y más común a la gliadina se dirige hacia un fragmento de gliadina α2 de 33 aminoácidos de longitud. La respuesta al 33mer ocurre en la mayoría de los celíacos que tienen una isoforma DQ2.

Este péptido, cuando es alterado por la transglutaminasa intestinal, tiene una alta densidad de epítopos de células T superpuestos.

Esto aumenta la probabilidad de que la isoforma DQ2 se una y permanezca unida al péptido cuando sea reconocida por las células T.

La gliadina del trigo es el miembro mejor comprendido de esta familia, pero existen otras prolaminas, y la hordeína (de la cebada), la secalina (del centeno) y la avenina (de la avena) pueden contribuir a la enfermedad celíaca.

La toxicidad de las aveninas en personas con enfermedad celíaca depende del cultivar de avena consumido debido a los genes de prolamina, las secuencias de aminoácidos de las proteínas y las inmunorreactividades de las prolaminas tóxicas, que varían entre las variedades de avena.


=== Transglutaminasa tisular ===


Los anticuerpos antitransglutaminasa de la enzima transglutaminasa tisular (tTG) se encuentran en la sangre de la mayoría de las personas con síntomas clásicos y atrofia de las vellosidades completa, pero solo en el 70 % de los casos con atrofia de las vellosidades parcial y en el 30 % de los casos con atrofia de las vellosidades menor. lesiones mucosas.

La transglutaminasa tisular modifica los péptidos del gluten en una forma que puede estimular el sistema inmunitario con mayor eficacia.

Estos péptidos son modificados por tTG de dos maneras, desamidación o transamidación. La desamidación es la reacción mediante la cual se forma un residuo de glutamato mediante la escisión del grupo épsilon-amino de una cadena lateral de glutamina.

La transamidación, que ocurre tres veces más a menudo que la desamidación, es el entrecruzamiento de un residuo de glutamina del péptido de gliadina a un residuo de lisina de tTg en una reacción catalizada por la transglutaminasa.

El entrecruzamiento puede ocurrir dentro o fuera del sitio activo de la enzima.

El último caso produce un complejo permanentemente unido covalentemente entre la gliadina y la tTg.

Esto da como resultado la formación de nuevos epítopos que se cree desencadenan la respuesta inmunitaria primaria mediante la cual se desarrollan los autoanticuerpos contra la tTg. Las biopsias almacenadas de personas con sospecha de enfermedad celíaca han revelado que los depósitos de autoanticuerpos en los celíacos subclínicos se detectan antes de la enfermedad clínica.

Estos depósitos también se encuentran en personas que presentan otras enfermedades autoinmunes, anemia o fenómenos de malabsorción a un ritmo mucho mayor que el de la población normal.

Se cree que los componentes del endomisio de los anticuerpos (EMA) contra la tTG se dirigen hacia la transglutaminasa de la superficie celular, y estos anticuerpos aún se usan para confirmar el diagnóstico de enfermedad celíaca.

Sin embargo, un estudio de 2006 mostró que las personas celíacas con EMA negativo tienden a ser hombres mayores con síntomas abdominales más graves y una menor frecuencia de síntomas "atípicos", incluida la enfermedad autoinmune.

En este estudio, los depósitos de anticuerpos anti-tTG no se correlacionaron con la gravedad de la destrucción de las vellosidades.

Estos hallazgos, junto con un trabajo reciente que muestra que la gliadina tiene un componente de respuesta innato, sugieren que la gliadina puede ser más responsable de las manifestaciones primarias de la enfermedad celíaca, mientras que la tTG es un factor más importante en los efectos secundarios, como las respuestas alérgicas y las enfermedades autoinmunes secundarias.

En un gran porcentaje de personas celíacas, los anticuerpos anti-tTG también reconocen una proteína de rotavirus llamada VP7.

Estos anticuerpos estimulan la proliferación de monocitos, y la infección por rotavirus podría explicar algunos de los primeros pasos en la cascada de proliferación de células inmunitarias. De hecho, estudios anteriores sobre el daño por rotavirus en el intestino mostraron que esto causa atrofia de las vellosidades.

Esto sugiere que las proteínas virales pueden participar en el aplanamiento inicial y estimular la producción de anti-VP7 con reacción cruzada.

Los anticuerpos contra VP7 también pueden retrasar la cicatrización hasta que la presentación de tTG mediada por gliadina proporcione una segunda fuente de anticuerpos de reacción cruzada.
Otros trastornos intestinales pueden tener una biopsia que se parece a la enfermedad celíaca, incluidas las lesiones causadas por Candida.


=== Atrofia de las vellosidades y malabsorción ===

El proceso inflamatorio, mediado por las células T, conduce a la alteración de la estructura y la función del revestimiento de la mucosa del intestino delgado y provoca malabsorción, ya que afecta la capacidad del cuerpo para absorber nutrientes, minerales y vitaminas liposolubles A, D, E y K de la comida.

La intolerancia a la lactosa puede estar presente debido a la disminución de la superficie intestinal y la producción reducida de lactasa, pero generalmente se resuelve una vez que se trata la afección.
Se han propuesto causas alternativas de este daño tisular e implican la liberación de interleucina 15 y la activación del sistema inmunitario innato por un péptido de gluten más corto (p31–43/49).

Esto provocaría la muerte de los enterocitos por parte de los linfocitos en el epitelio.

La atrofia de las vellosidades que se observa en la biopsia también puede deberse a causas no relacionadas, como esprúe tropical, giardiasis y enteritis por radiación.

Si bien la serología positiva y la biopsia típica son altamente sugestivas de enfermedad celíaca, la falta de respuesta a la dieta puede requerir que se consideren estos diagnósticos alternativos.


== Diagnóstico ==

El diagnóstico suele ser difícil y, a partir de 2019, sigue habiendo una falta de conciencia entre los médicos sobre la variabilidad de las presentaciones de la enfermedad celíaca y los criterios de diagnóstico, por lo que la mayoría de los casos se diagnostican con gran retraso.

Puede tomar hasta 12 años recibir un diagnóstico desde el inicio de los síntomas y la mayoría de los afectados en la mayoría de los países nunca lo reciben. Se pueden usar varias pruebas.

El nivel de los síntomas puede determinar el orden de las pruebas, pero todas las pruebas pierden su utilidad si la persona ya lleva una dieta sin gluten.

El daño intestinal comienza a sanar a las pocas semanas de eliminar el gluten de la dieta y los niveles de anticuerpos disminuyen durante meses.

Para aquellos que ya han comenzado con una dieta sin gluten, puede ser necesario realizar una nueva provocación con algún alimento que contenga gluten en una comida al día durante 6 semanas antes de repetir las investigaciones.


=== Análisis de sangre ===


Los análisis de sangre serológicos son la investigación de primera línea requerida para hacer un diagnóstico de la enfermedad celíaca.

Su sensibilidad se correlaciona con el grado de lesiones histológicas.

Las personas que presentan daños menores en el intestino delgado pueden tener resultados seronegativos, por lo que a menudo se pasan por alto muchos pacientes con enfermedad celíaca.

En pacientes con atrofia de las vellosidades, los anticuerpos antiendomisio (EMA) del tipo inmunoglobulina A (IgA) pueden detectar la enfermedad celíaca con una sensibilidad y especificidad del 90% y 99%, respectivamente.

Inicialmente, se informó que la serología para anticuerpos antitransglutaminasa (anti-tTG) tenía una mayor sensibilidad (99%) y especificidad (>90%).

Sin embargo, ahora se cree que tiene características similares a los anticuerpos antiendomisio.

Tanto los anticuerpos antitransglutaminasa como antiendomisio tienen una alta sensibilidad para diagnosticar a las personas con síntomas clásicos y atrofia de las vellosidades completa, pero solo se encuentran en el 30-89% de los casos con atrofia de las vellosidades parcial y en menos del 50% de las personas con atrofia de las vellosidades. tiene lesiones mucosas menores (linfocitosis duodenal) con vellosidades normales. La transglutaminasa tisular modifica los péptidos del gluten en una forma que puede estimular el sistema inmunitario con mayor eficacia.

Estos péptidos son modificados por tTG de dos maneras, desamidación o transamidación.

Los ensayos anti-tTG modernos se basan en una proteína recombinante humana como antígeno. La prueba de tTG debe realizarse primero, ya que es una prueba más fácil de realizar.

Un resultado equívoco en la prueba de tTG debe ir seguido de anticuerpos antiendomisio. Las pautas recomiendan que se verifique el nivel total de IgA en suero en paralelo, ya que las personas celíacas con deficiencia de IgA pueden ser incapaces de producir los anticuerpos de los que dependen estas pruebas ("falso negativo").

En esas personas, los anticuerpos IgG contra la transglutaminasa (IgG-tTG) pueden ser diagnósticos. Si todos estos anticuerpos son negativos, entonces se deben determinar los anticuerpos anti-DGP (anticuerpos contra los péptidos de gliadina desamidados).

Los anticuerpos anti-DGP de clase IgG pueden ser útiles en personas con deficiencia de IgA.

En niños menores de dos años, los anticuerpos anti-DGP funcionan mejor que las pruebas de anticuerpos antiendomisio y antitransglutaminasa. Debido a las importantes implicaciones de un diagnóstico de enfermedad celíaca, las pautas profesionales recomiendan que un análisis de sangre positivo sea seguido de una endoscopia. /gastroscopia y biopsia.

Una prueba de serología negativa aún puede ser seguida por una recomendación de endoscopia y biopsia duodenal si la sospecha clínica sigue siendo alta. Históricamente, se midieron otros tres anticuerpos: anticuerpos anti-reticulina (ARA), anti-gliadina (AGA) y anti-endomisio (EMA). .

Sin embargo, las pruebas de ARA no son lo suficientemente precisas para el uso de diagnóstico de rutina.

La serología puede no ser confiable en niños pequeños, ya que la antigliadina tiene un desempeño algo mejor que otras pruebas en niños menores de cinco años.

Las pruebas serológicas se basan en inmunofluorescencia indirecta (reticulina, gliadina y endomisio) o ELISA (gliadina o transglutaminasa tisular, tTG). Otros anticuerpos, como los anticuerpos anti-Saccharomyces cerevisiae, se presentan en algunas personas con enfermedad celíaca, pero también se presentan en otros trastornos autoinmunes y alrededor de 5% de los que donan sangre. Las pruebas de anticuerpos se pueden combinar con las pruebas de HLA si el diagnóstico no está claro.

Las pruebas TGA y EMA son las pruebas de anticuerpos séricos más sensibles, pero como un tipo HLA-DQ negativo excluye el diagnóstico de enfermedad celíaca, las pruebas también para HLA-DQ2 o DQ8 maximizan la sensibilidad y los valores predictivos negativos.

En el Reino Unido, el Instituto Nacional para la Salud y la Excelencia Clínica (NICE) no recomienda (a partir de 2015) el uso de la tipificación HLA para descartar la enfermedad celíaca fuera de un entorno especializado, por ejemplo, en niños que no tienen un biopsia, o en pacientes que ya tienen una ingesta limitada de gluten y optan por no tener un desafío con gluten.


=== Endoscopia ===


Se realiza una endoscopia superior con biopsia del duodeno (más allá del bulbo duodenal) o del yeyuno para obtener múltiples muestras (de cuatro a ocho) del duodeno.

No todas las áreas pueden verse igualmente afectadas; si se toman biopsias de tejido intestinal sano, el resultado sería un falso negativo.

Incluso en el mismo fragmento bióptico, diferentes grados de
puede haber daño. La mayoría de las personas con enfermedad celíaca tienen un intestino delgado que parece ser normal en la endoscopia antes de que se examinen las biopsias.

Sin embargo, cinco hallazgos se han asociado con una alta especificidad para la enfermedad celíaca: festoneado de los pliegues del intestino delgado (en la imagen), escasez en los pliegues, un patrón de mosaico en la mucosa (descrito como una apariencia de "barro agrietado"), prominencia de la vasos sanguíneos de la submucosa y un patrón nodular en la mucosa. Las guías europeas sugieren que en niños y adolescentes con síntomas compatibles con la enfermedad celíaca, el diagnóstico se puede hacer sin necesidad de biopsia intestinal si los títulos de anticuerpos anti-tTG son muy altos (10 veces el límite superior de lo normal). Hasta la década de 1970, las biopsias se obtenían utilizando cápsulas de metal conectadas a un dispositivo de succión.

La cápsula se tragó y se dejó pasar al intestino delgado.

Después de verificar con rayos X su posición, se aplicó succión para recoger parte de la pared intestinal dentro de la cápsula.

Los sistemas de cápsulas más utilizados fueron la cápsula de Watson y la cápsula de Crosby-Kugler.

Este método ahora ha sido reemplazado en gran medida por la endoscopia de fibra óptica, que tiene una mayor sensibilidad y una menor frecuencia de errores. La endoscopia con cápsula (CE) permite identificar los cambios típicos de la mucosa observados en la enfermedad celíaca, pero tiene una sensibilidad más baja en comparación con la endoscopia regular y histología.

Por lo tanto, la CE no es la principal herramienta de diagnóstico para la enfermedad celíaca.

Sin embargo, la CE se puede utilizar para diagnosticar linfoma de células T, yeyunoileítis ulcerosa y adenocarcinoma en la enfermedad celíaca refractaria o complicada.


=== Patología ===

Los cambios patológicos clásicos de la enfermedad celíaca en el intestino delgado se clasifican según la "clasificación de Marsh":
Marsh estadio 0: mucosa normal
Estadio 1 de Marsh: aumento del número de linfocitos intraepiteliales (IEL), que suele superar los 20 por cada 100 enterocitos
Marsh etapa 2: una proliferación de las criptas de Lieberkühn
Marsh estadio 3: atrofia de las vellosidades parcial o completa e hipertrofia de las criptas
Etapa 4 de Marsh: hipoplasia de la arquitectura del intestino delgado La clasificación de Marsh, introducida en 1992, se modificó posteriormente en 1999 a seis etapas, donde la etapa 3 anterior se dividió en tres subetapas.

Estudios posteriores demostraron que este sistema no siempre era fiable y que los cambios observados en la enfermedad celíaca podían describirse en una de tres etapas:
A que representa una infiltración linfocítica con aspecto velloso normal;
B1 que describe la atrofia parcial de las vellosidades; y
B2 que describe la atrofia vellositaria completa. Los cambios clásicamente mejoran o se revierten después de que se elimina el gluten de la dieta.

Sin embargo, la mayoría de las guías no recomiendan repetir la biopsia a menos que no mejoren los síntomas con la dieta.

En algunos casos, se puede realizar una provocación deliberada con gluten, seguida de una biopsia, para confirmar o refutar el diagnóstico.

Una biopsia normal y una serología normal después del desafío indican que el diagnóstico puede haber sido incorrecto. En la enfermedad celíaca no tratada, la atrofia de las vellosidades es más común en niños menores de tres años, pero en niños mayores y adultos, es común encontrar lesiones intestinales menores (enfermedad duodenal). linfocitosis) con vellosidades intestinales normales.


=== Otras pruebas diagnósticas ===

En el momento del diagnóstico, se pueden realizar más investigaciones para identificar complicaciones, como deficiencia de hierro (mediante hemograma completo y estudios de hierro), deficiencia de ácido fólico y vitamina B12 e hipocalcemia (niveles bajos de calcio, a menudo debido a la disminución de los niveles de vitamina D) .

Es posible que se soliciten pruebas de la función tiroidea durante los análisis de sangre para identificar el hipotiroidismo, que es más común en personas con enfermedad celíaca. La osteopenia y la osteoporosis, densidad mineral ósea leve o severamente reducida, a menudo están presentes en personas con enfermedad celíaca, y las investigaciones para medir la densidad ósea se puede realizar en el momento del diagnóstico, como una exploración de absorciometría de rayos X de energía dual (DXA), para identificar el riesgo de fractura y la necesidad de medicación para la protección ósea.


=== Abstinencia de gluten ===

Aunque las pruebas de anticuerpos en sangre, las biopsias y las pruebas genéticas suelen proporcionar un diagnóstico claro, en ocasiones se necesita la respuesta a la abstinencia de gluten en una dieta sin gluten para respaldar el diagnóstico.

Actualmente, la provocación con gluten ya no es necesaria para confirmar el diagnóstico en pacientes con lesiones intestinales compatibles con enfermedad celíaca y respuesta positiva a una dieta sin gluten.

No obstante, en algunos casos, una provocación con gluten con biopsia posterior puede ser útil para apoyar el diagnóstico, por ejemplo en personas con alta sospecha de enfermedad celíaca, sin confirmación por biopsia, que tienen anticuerpos en sangre negativos y ya están en tratamiento con gluten. dieta libre.

Se desaconseja la provocación con gluten antes de los 5 años y durante el crecimiento puberal.

El diagnóstico alternativo de sensibilidad al gluten no celíaca se puede realizar cuando solo hay evidencia sintomática de sensibilidad al gluten.

Los síntomas gastrointestinales y extraintestinales de las personas con sensibilidad al gluten no celíaca pueden ser similares a los de la enfermedad celíaca y mejorar cuando se elimina el gluten de la dieta, después de descartar razonablemente la enfermedad celíaca y la alergia al trigo. o volver a desarrollar síntomas después de comenzar una dieta sin gluten.

Se necesita una interpretación cuidadosa de la respuesta sintomática, ya que la falta de respuesta en una persona con enfermedad celíaca puede deberse a la ingestión continua de pequeñas cantidades de gluten, ya sea voluntaria o inadvertidamente, o a otras afecciones comúnmente asociadas, como trastornos del intestino delgado. sobrecrecimiento bacteriano (SIBO), intolerancia a la lactosa, malabsorción de fructosa, sacarosa y sorbitol, insuficiencia pancreática exocrina y colitis microscópica, entre otros.

En la enfermedad celíaca no tratada, estas son a menudo condiciones transitorias derivadas del daño intestinal.

Normalmente revierten o mejoran varios meses después de iniciar una dieta sin gluten, pero pueden necesitar intervenciones temporales como la suplementación con enzimas pancreáticas, restricciones dietéticas de alimentos que contengan lactosa, fructosa, sacarosa o sorbitol, o tratamiento con antibióticos orales en el caso de enfermedades asociadas. sobrecrecimiento bacteriano.

Además de la abstinencia del gluten, algunas personas deben seguir una dieta baja en FODMAP o evitar el consumo de productos comerciales sin gluten, que suelen ser ricos en conservantes y aditivos (como sulfitos, glutamatos, nitratos y benzoatos) y podrían tener un papel en el desencadenamiento de síntomas gastrointestinales funcionales.


== Proyección ==

Existe un debate sobre los beneficios de la detección.

A partir de 2017, el Grupo de Trabajo de Servicios Preventivos de los Estados Unidos encontró evidencia insuficiente para hacer una recomendación entre aquellos sin síntomas.

En el Reino Unido, el Instituto Nacional para la Salud y la Excelencia Clínica (NICE) recomienda realizar pruebas para la enfermedad celíaca en familiares de primer grado de personas con la enfermedad ya confirmada, en personas con fatiga persistente, síntomas abdominales o gastrointestinales, retraso en el crecimiento, peso inexplicable. pérdida de hierro, vitamina B12 o deficiencia de folato, úlceras bucales graves y con diagnósticos de diabetes tipo 1, enfermedad tiroidea autoinmune y con síndrome de fatiga crónica y síndrome del intestino irritable recién diagnosticados.

La dermatitis herpetiforme está incluida en otras recomendaciones.

El NICE también recomienda ofrecer pruebas serológicas para la enfermedad celíaca en personas con enfermedad ósea metabólica (densidad mineral ósea reducida u osteomalacia), trastornos neurológicos inexplicables (como neuropatía periférica y ataxia), problemas de fertilidad o aborto espontáneo recurrente, enzimas hepáticas persistentemente elevadas sin causa desconocida , defectos del esmalte dental y con diagnóstico de síndrome de Down o síndrome de Turner. Cierta evidencia ha encontrado que la detección temprana puede disminuir el riesgo de desarrollar complicaciones de salud, como osteoporosis, anemia y ciertos tipos de cáncer, trastornos neurológicos, enfermedades cardiovasculares y reproductivas. problemas.

Por ello, recomiendan el cribado en personas con determinados problemas de salud. Se ha propuesto la serología como medida de cribado, porque la presencia de anticuerpos permitiría detectar algunos casos de enfermedad celíaca no diagnosticados previamente y prevenir sus complicaciones en esas personas.

Sin embargo, las pruebas serológicas tienen una alta sensibilidad solo en personas con atrofia total de las vellosidades y tienen una capacidad muy baja para detectar casos con atrofia parcial de las vellosidades o lesiones intestinales menores.

Se pueden ofrecer pruebas para la enfermedad celíaca a aquellos con condiciones comúnmente asociadas.


== Tratamiento ==



=== Dieta ===


En la actualidad, el único tratamiento eficaz es una dieta libre de gluten de por vida.

No existe ningún medicamento que prevenga el daño o evite que el cuerpo ataque el intestino cuando el gluten está presente.

El cumplimiento estricto de la dieta ayuda a sanar los intestinos, lo que lleva a la resolución de todos los síntomas en la mayoría de los casos y, dependiendo de qué tan pronto se comience la dieta, también puede eliminar el mayor riesgo de osteoporosis y cáncer intestinal y, en algunos casos, la esterilidad.

La dieta puede ser engorrosa; el incumplimiento de la dieta puede causar una recaída.
Por lo general, se solicita la opinión del dietista para asegurarse de que la persona sepa qué alimentos contienen gluten, qué alimentos son seguros y cómo tener una dieta equilibrada a pesar de las limitaciones.

En muchos países, los productos sin gluten están disponibles con receta médica y pueden ser reembolsados ​​por los planes de seguro médico.

Los productos sin gluten suelen ser más caros y más difíciles de encontrar que los alimentos comunes que contienen gluten.

Dado que los productos preparados a menudo contienen trazas de gluten, algunos celíacos pueden necesitar cocinar desde cero. El término "sin gluten" generalmente se usa para indicar un nivel supuestamente inofensivo de gluten en lugar de una ausencia total.

El nivel exacto en el que el gluten es inofensivo es incierto y controvertido.

Una revisión sistemática reciente concluyó tentativamente que es poco probable que el consumo de menos de 10 mg de gluten por día cause anomalías histológicas, aunque señaló que se han realizado pocos estudios confiables.

La regulación de la etiqueta "sin gluten" varía.

En la Unión Europea, la Comisión Europea emitió regulaciones en 2009 que limitan el uso de etiquetas "sin gluten" para productos alimenticios a aquellos con menos de 20 mg/kg de gluten, y etiquetas de "muy bajo contenido de gluten" para aquellos con menos de 100 mg/kg. mg/kg.

En los Estados Unidos, la FDA emitió regulaciones en 2013 que limitan el uso de etiquetas "sin gluten" para productos alimenticios a aquellos con menos de 20 ppm de gluten.

El estándar internacional actual del Codex Alimentarius permite 20 ppm de gluten en los llamados alimentos "sin gluten".

Sin embargo, la dieta sin gluten no normaliza completamente la calidad de vida.


=== Enfermedad refractaria ===

Entre el 0,3% y el 10% de las personas tienen enfermedad refractaria, lo que significa que tienen atrofia de las vellosidades persistente con una dieta sin gluten a pesar de la falta de exposición al gluten durante más de 12 meses.

Sin embargo, la exposición inadvertida al gluten es la causa principal de la atrofia persistente de las vellosidades y debe descartarse antes de realizar un diagnóstico de enfermedad refractaria.

Las personas con poca educación básica y comprensión de la dieta sin gluten a menudo creen que están siguiendo estrictamente la dieta, pero cometen errores regulares.

Además, la falta de síntomas no es un indicador fiable de la recuperación intestinal. Si se han eliminado las causas alternativas de la atrofia de las vellosidades, se pueden considerar esteroides o inmunosupresores (como la azatioprina) en este escenario. La enfermedad celíaca refractaria no debe confundirse con la persistencia de los síntomas a pesar de la abstinencia del gluten causada por condiciones transitorias derivadas del daño intestinal, que generalmente revierten o mejoran varios meses después de iniciar una dieta libre de gluten, tales como sobrecrecimiento bacteriano en el intestino delgado, intolerancia a la lactosa, malabsorción de fructosa, sacarosa y sorbitol, páncreas exocrino insuficiencia, y colitis microscópica entre otros.


== Epidemiología ==

A nivel mundial, la enfermedad celíaca afecta a entre 1 de cada 100 y 1 de cada 170 personas.

Sin embargo, las tasas varían entre las diferentes regiones del mundo desde tan solo 1 en 300 hasta 1 en 40.

En los Estados Unidos se cree que afecta entre 1 en 1750 (definido como enfermedad clínica que incluye dermatitis herpetiforme con síntomas limitados del tracto digestivo) a 1 en 105 (definido por la presencia de IgA TG en donantes de sangre).

Debido a los signos y síntomas variables, se cree que alrededor del 85 % de las personas afectadas no están diagnosticadas.

El porcentaje de personas con enfermedad clínicamente diagnosticada (síntomas que requieren pruebas de diagnóstico) es del 0,05 al 0,27 % en varios estudios.

Sin embargo, estudios de población de partes de Europa, India, América del Sur, Australasia y EE. UU. (usando serología y biopsia) indican que el porcentaje de personas con la enfermedad puede estar entre 0,33 y 1,06 % en niños (pero 5,66 % en un estudio de hijos de saharauis predispuestos) y 0,18-1,2% en adultos.

Entre aquellos en poblaciones de atención primaria que informan síntomas gastrointestinales, la tasa de enfermedad celíaca es de alrededor del 3%.

En Australia, aproximadamente 1 de cada 70 personas tiene la enfermedad.

La tasa entre los donantes de sangre adultos en Irán, Israel, Siria y Turquía es del 0,60 %, 0,64 %, 1,61 % y 1,15 %, respectivamente. Las personas de ascendencia africana, japonesa y china rara vez son diagnosticadas; esto refleja una prevalencia mucho más baja de los factores de riesgo genéticos, como HLA-B8.

Las personas de ascendencia india parecen tener un riesgo similar al de las personas de ascendencia caucásica occidental.

Los estudios de población también indican que una gran proporción de celíacos permanecen sin diagnosticar; esto se debe, en parte, a que muchos médicos no están familiarizados con la afección y también al hecho de que puede ser asintomática.

La enfermedad celíaca es ligeramente más común en mujeres que en hombres.

Un gran estudio multicéntrico en EE. UU. encontró una prevalencia del 0,75 % en grupos sin riesgo, que aumenta al 1,8 % en personas sintomáticas, al 2,6 % en familiares de segundo grado (como abuelos, tía o tío, nietos, etc.) de una persona con enfermedad celíaca y un 4,5% en familiares de primer grado (hermanos, padres o hijos).

Este perfil es similar a la prevalencia en Europa.

Otras poblaciones con mayor riesgo de enfermedad celíaca, con tasas de prevalencia que oscilan entre el 5 % y el 10 %, incluyen personas con síndromes de Down y Turner, diabetes tipo 1 y enfermedad tiroidea autoinmune, incluidos hipertiroidismo (tiroides hiperactiva) e hipotiroidismo (tiroides poco activa) Históricamente, se pensaba que la enfermedad celíaca era rara, con una prevalencia de alrededor del 0,02%.

La razón de los recientes aumentos en el número de casos notificados no está clara.

Puede deberse, al menos en parte, a cambios en la práctica diagnóstica.

También parece haber un aumento real de aproximadamente 4,5 veces que puede deberse a una menor exposición a bacterias y otros patógenos en entornos occidentales.

En los Estados Unidos, la mediana de edad en el momento del diagnóstico es de 38 años.

Aproximadamente el 20 por ciento de las personas con enfermedad celíaca son diagnosticadas después de los 60 años de edad.


== Historia ==

El término "celíaco" proviene del griego κοιλιακός (koiliakós, "abdominal") y se introdujo en el siglo XIX en una traducción de lo que generalmente se considera una descripción griega antigua de la enfermedad por parte de Areteo de Capadocia. Los humanos comenzaron a cultivar granos en el período Neolítico (comenzando alrededor de 9500 a. C.) en la Media Luna Fértil en Asia occidental y, probablemente, la enfermedad celíaca no ocurrió antes de este tiempo.

Areteo de Capadocia, que vivía en el siglo II en la misma zona, registró un síndrome de malabsorción con diarrea crónica, que provocaba un debilitamiento de todo el cuerpo.

Su "afecto celíaco" (celíaco del griego κοιλιακός koiliakos, "abdominal") llamó la atención de la medicina occidental cuando Francis Adams presentó una traducción del trabajo de Aretaeus en la Sydenham Society en 1856.

El paciente descrito en el trabajo de Areteo tenía dolor de estómago y estaba atrofiado, pálido, débil e incapaz de trabajar.

La diarrea se manifestaba como heces sueltas que eran blancas, malolientes y flatulentas, y la enfermedad era intratable y propensa a reaparecer periódicamente.

El problema, creía Areteo, era la falta de calor en el estómago necesario para digerir la comida y una capacidad reducida para distribuir los productos digestivos por todo el cuerpo, esta digestión incompleta resultaba en diarrea.

Consideró esto como una aflicción de los ancianos y que afectaba más comúnmente a las mujeres, excluyendo explícitamente a los niños.

La causa, según Aretaeus, a veces era otra enfermedad crónica o incluso consumir "un copioso trago de agua fría". El pediatra Samuel Gee dio la primera descripción moderna de la condición en niños en una conferencia en el Hospital for Sick Children, Great Ormond Street, Londres, en 1887.

Gee reconoció descripciones y términos anteriores para la enfermedad y adoptó el mismo término que Aretaeus (enfermedad celíaca).

Declaró perspicazmente: "Si el paciente puede curarse, debe ser por medio de la dieta". Gee reconoció que la intolerancia a la leche es un problema con los niños celíacos y que se deben evitar los alimentos con alto contenido de almidón.

Sin embargo, prohibió el arroz, el sagú, las frutas y las verduras, que habrían sido seguras para comer, y recomendó carne cruda y finas rebanadas de pan tostado.

Gee destacó el éxito particular con un niño "que fue alimentado diariamente con un litro de los mejores mejillones holandeses". Sin embargo, el niño no pudo soportar esta dieta por más de una temporada. Christian Archibald Herter, un médico estadounidense, escribió un libro en 1908 sobre niños con enfermedad celíaca, al que llamó "infantilismo intestinal".

Observó que su crecimiento estaba retrasado y que la grasa se toleraba mejor que los carbohidratos.

El epónimo enfermedad de Gee-Herter se utilizó a veces para reconocer ambas contribuciones.

sidney v.

Haas, un pediatra estadounidense, reportó efectos positivos de una dieta de plátanos en 1924.

Esta dieta permaneció en boga hasta que se determinó la causa real de la enfermedad celíaca. Si bien se sospechaba que los carbohidratos tenían un papel, el vínculo con el trigo no se estableció hasta la década de 1940 por el pediatra holandés Dr. Willem Karel Dicke.

Es probable que la mejora clínica de sus pacientes durante la hambruna holandesa de 1944 (durante la cual escaseaba la harina) haya contribuido a su descubrimiento.

Dicke notó que la escasez de pan condujo a una caída significativa en la tasa de mortalidad entre los niños afectados por la enfermedad celíaca de más del 35 % a prácticamente cero.

También informó que una vez que el trigo volvió a estar disponible después del conflicto, la tasa de mortalidad se disparó a los niveles anteriores.

El vínculo con el componente de gluten del trigo fue realizado en 1952 por un equipo de Birmingham, Inglaterra.

La atrofia de las vellosidades fue descrita por el médico británico John W.

Paulley en 1954 sobre muestras tomadas en una cirugía.

Esto allanó el camino para las muestras de biopsia tomadas por endoscopia. A lo largo de la década de 1960, se dilucidaron otras características de la enfermedad celíaca.

Su carácter hereditario fue reconocido en 1965.

En 1966, la dermatitis herpetiforme se relacionó con la sensibilidad al gluten.


== Sociales y culturales ==


Mayo ha sido designado como el "Mes de la conciencia celíaca" por varias organizaciones celíacas.


=== Iglesias cristianas y la Eucaristía ===

Hablando en general, las diversas denominaciones de cristianos celebran una Eucaristía en la que se bendice una hostia o un pequeño trozo de pan sacramental de pan de trigo y luego se come.

Una oblea típica pesa alrededor de medio gramo.

La harina de trigo contiene alrededor de 10 a 13 % de gluten, por lo que una sola oblea de comunión puede tener más de 50 mg de gluten, una cantidad que perjudica a muchas personas celíacas, especialmente si se consume todos los días (ver Dieta más arriba).
Muchas iglesias cristianas ofrecen a sus comulgantes alternativas sin gluten, generalmente en forma de galleta a base de arroz o pan sin gluten.

Estos incluyen a los metodistas unidos, los cristianos reformados, los episcopales, la iglesia anglicana (Iglesia de Inglaterra, Reino Unido) y la luterana.

Los católicos pueden recibir solo del cáliz o pedir hostias reducidas en gluten; sin embargo, los que no contienen gluten no se consideran pan de trigo y, por lo tanto, no son válidos.


==== Posición católica romana ====
La doctrina católica romana establece que para una Eucaristía válida, el pan que se usará en la Misa debe estar hecho de trigo.

Las hostias bajas en gluten cumplen con todos los requisitos de la Iglesia Católica, pero no están completamente libres de gluten.

Las solicitudes para usar obleas de arroz han sido denegadas. El tema es más complejo para los sacerdotes.

Como celebrante, un sacerdote es, para la plenitud del sacrificio de la Misa, absolutamente requerido para recibir bajo ambas especies.

El 24 de julio de 2003, la Congregación para la Doctrina de la Fe afirmó: "Dada la centralidad de la celebración de la Eucaristía en la vida de un sacerdote, se debe proceder con mucha cautela antes de admitir a las Sagradas Órdenes a aquellos candidatos que no pueden ingerir gluten o alcohol sin daño grave". En enero de 2004, las hostias aprobadas por la Iglesia con un contenido extremadamente bajo de gluten estaban disponibles en los Estados Unidos, Italia y Australia.

A partir de julio de 2017, el Vaticano todavía prohibió el uso de pan sin gluten para la Sagrada Comunión.


=== Pascua ===

La festividad judía de Pesaj (Pascua) puede presentar problemas con su obligación de comer matzá, que es pan sin levadura hecho de forma estrictamente controlada con trigo, cebada, espelta, avena o centeno.

Esto descarta muchos otros cereales que normalmente se utilizan como sustitutos para las personas con sensibilidad al gluten, especialmente para los judíos asquenazíes, que también evitan el arroz.

Muchos productos kosher para Pesaj evitan los granos por completo y, por lo tanto, no contienen gluten.

La fécula de patata es el almidón principal que se utiliza para reemplazar los cereales.


=== Ortografía ===

La enfermedad celíaca es la ortografía preferida en inglés británico, mientras que la enfermedad celíaca se usa típicamente en inglés norteamericano.


== Direcciones de investigación ==

La búsqueda de factores ambientales que podrían ser responsables de que las personas genéticamente susceptibles se vuelvan intolerantes al gluten ha dado como resultado una mayor actividad de investigación que analiza las infecciones gastrointestinales.

La investigación publicada en abril de 2017 sugiere que una infección a menudo asintomática por una cepa común de reovirus puede aumentar la sensibilidad a alimentos como el gluten. Se están estudiando varios enfoques de tratamiento, incluidos algunos que reducirían la necesidad de hacer dieta.

Todos están todavía en desarrollo y no se espera que estén disponibles para el público en general por un tiempo. Se han propuesto tres enfoques principales como nuevas modalidades terapéuticas para la enfermedad celíaca: desintoxicación del gluten, modulación de la permeabilidad intestinal y modulación de la respuesta inmune. El uso de especies de trigo modificadas genéticamente, o especies de trigo que han sido criadas selectivamente para ser mínimamente inmunogénicas, puede permitir el consumo de trigo.

Esto, sin embargo, podría interferir con los efectos que tiene la gliadina en la calidad de la masa.

Alternativamente, la exposición al gluten se puede minimizar mediante la ingestión de una combinación de enzimas (prolil endopeptidasa y una cisteína endopeptidasa específica de glutamina de cebada (EP-B2)) que degradan el péptido putativo 33-mer en el duodeno. Los tratamientos alternativos bajo investigación incluyen el inhibición de la zonulina, una proteína de señalización endógena relacionada con una mayor permeabilidad de la pared intestinal y, por lo tanto, una mayor presentación de gliadina al sistema inmunitario.

Un inhibidor de esta vía es el acetato de larazotida, que actualmente está programado para ensayos clínicos de fase 3.

Otros modificadores de otros pasos bien conocidos en la patogenia de la enfermedad celíaca, como la acción de HLA-DQ2 o transglutaminasa tisular y la interacción MICA/NKG2D que puede estar implicada en la destrucción de los enterocitos. la mayoría de las enfermedades aún se encuentran en la fase I de las pruebas clínicas; un agente (CCX282-B) ha sido evaluado en un ensayo clínico de fase II basado en biopsias del intestino delgado tomadas de personas con enfermedad celíaca antes y después de la exposición al gluten. Aunque popularmente se usa como un tratamiento alternativo para personas con autismo, no es bueno evidencia de que una dieta libre de gluten es beneficiosa en el tratamiento del autismo.

En el subgrupo de personas que tienen sensibilidad al gluten, existe evidencia limitada que sugiere que una dieta libre de gluten puede mejorar algunos comportamientos autistas.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Celiac_disease

;;;PT;;;



DOENÇA CELÍACA


A doença celíaca (doença celíaca em inglês americano) é um distúrbio autoimune de longa duração, que afeta principalmente o intestino delgado, onde os indivíduos desenvolvem intolerância ao glúten, presente em alimentos como trigo, centeio e cevada.

Os sintomas clássicos incluem problemas gastrointestinais, como diarreia crônica, distensão abdominal, má absorção, perda de apetite e, entre as crianças, falha no crescimento normal.

Isso geralmente começa entre seis meses e dois anos de idade.

Os sintomas não clássicos são mais comuns, especialmente em pessoas com mais de dois anos.

Pode haver sintomas gastrointestinais leves ou ausentes, um grande número de sintomas envolvendo qualquer parte do corpo ou nenhum sintoma óbvio.

A doença celíaca foi descrita pela primeira vez na infância; no entanto, pode desenvolver-se em qualquer idade.

Está associada a outras doenças autoimunes, como diabetes mellitus tipo 1 e tireoidite de Hashimoto, entre outras. A doença celíaca é causada por uma reação ao glúten, um grupo de várias proteínas encontradas no trigo e em outros grãos, como cevada e centeio.

Quantidades moderadas de aveia, livres de contaminação com outros grãos contendo glúten, geralmente são toleradas.

A ocorrência de problemas pode depender da variedade de aveia.

Ocorre em pessoas geneticamente predispostas.

Após a exposição ao glúten, uma resposta imune anormal pode levar à produção de vários autoanticorpos diferentes que podem afetar vários órgãos diferentes.

No intestino delgado, isso causa uma reação inflamatória e pode produzir encurtamento das vilosidades que revestem o intestino delgado (atrofia das vilosidades).

Isso afeta a absorção de nutrientes, muitas vezes levando à anemia. O diagnóstico geralmente é feito por uma combinação de testes de anticorpos no sangue e biópsias intestinais, auxiliados por testes genéticos específicos.

Fazer o diagnóstico nem sempre é simples.

Cerca de 10% das vezes, os autoanticorpos no sangue são negativos e muitas pessoas têm apenas pequenas alterações intestinais com vilosidades normais.

As pessoas podem ter sintomas graves e podem ser investigadas por anos antes que um diagnóstico seja alcançado.

Cada vez mais, o diagnóstico está sendo feito em pessoas sem sintomas, como resultado do rastreamento.

As evidências sobre os efeitos da triagem, no entanto, não são suficientes para determinar sua utilidade.

Embora a doença seja causada por uma intolerância permanente às proteínas do glúten, é diferente da alergia ao trigo, que é muito mais rara. membrana), melhora os sintomas e reduz o risco de desenvolver complicações na maioria das pessoas.

Se não for tratada, pode resultar em cânceres como linfoma intestinal e um risco ligeiramente aumentado de morte precoce.

As taxas variam entre as diferentes regiões do mundo, de apenas 1 em 300 a 1 em 40, com uma média entre 1 em 100 e 1 em 170 pessoas.

Estima-se que 80% dos casos permaneçam sem diagnóstico, geralmente por queixas gastrointestinais mínimas ou ausentes e desconhecimento dos sintomas e critérios diagnósticos.

A doença celíaca é ligeiramente mais comum em mulheres do que em homens.


== Sinais e sintomas ==

Os sintomas clássicos da doença celíaca não tratada incluem fezes pálidas, soltas ou gordurosas (esteatorreia) e perda de peso ou falha no ganho de peso.

Outros sintomas comuns podem ser sutis ou ocorrer principalmente em outros órgãos além do próprio intestino.

Também é possível ter doença celíaca sem nenhum dos sintomas clássicos.

Demonstrou-se que isso compreende pelo menos 43% das apresentações em crianças.

Além disso, muitos adultos com doença sutil podem apresentar apenas fadiga ou anemia.

Muitos indivíduos não diagnosticados que se consideram assintomáticos de fato não o são, mas se acostumaram a viver em um estado de saúde cronicamente comprometido.

De fato, depois de iniciar uma dieta sem glúten e a melhora subsequente torna-se evidente, esses indivíduos geralmente são capazes de recordar retrospectivamente e reconhecer sintomas anteriores de sua doença não tratada que eles ignoraram erroneamente.


=== Gastrointestinal ===

A diarreia característica da doença celíaca é crônica, às vezes pálida, de grande volume e com odor anormalmente fétido.

Dor abdominal, cólicas, inchaço com distensão abdominal (que se acredita ser o resultado da produção fermentativa de gases intestinais) e úlceras na boca podem estar presentes.

À medida que o intestino se torna mais danificado, pode desenvolver-se um grau de intolerância à lactose.

Frequentemente, os sintomas são atribuídos à síndrome do intestino irritável (SII), só mais tarde sendo reconhecidos como doença celíaca.

Em populações de pessoas com sintomas de SII, o diagnóstico de doença celíaca pode ser feito em cerca de 3,3% dos casos, ou quatro vezes mais provável do que em geral.

A triagem para doença celíaca é recomendada pelo National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE), pela British Society of Gastroenterology e pelo American College of Gastroenterology, mas não tem benefício claro na América do Norte. adenocarcinoma e linfoma do intestino delgado (linfoma de células T associado à enteropatia (EATL) ou outros linfomas não Hodgkin).

Esse risco também é maior em parentes de primeiro grau, como irmãos, pais e filhos.

Não está claro se uma dieta sem glúten traz esse risco de volta à linha de base.

Doença de longa duração e não tratada pode levar a outras complicações, como jejunite ulcerativa (formação de úlcera do intestino delgado) e estenose (estreitamento como resultado de cicatrização com obstrução do intestino).


=== Relacionado à má absorção ===

As mudanças no intestino reduzem sua capacidade de absorver nutrientes, minerais e as vitaminas lipossolúveis A, D, E e K.
A má absorção de carboidratos e gorduras pode causar perda de peso (ou déficit de crescimento ou crescimento atrofiado em crianças) e fadiga ou falta de energia.
A anemia pode se desenvolver de várias maneiras: a má absorção de ferro pode causar anemia por deficiência de ferro, e a má absorção de ácido fólico e vitamina B12 pode causar anemia megaloblástica.
A má absorção de cálcio e vitamina D (e hiperparatireoidismo secundário compensatório) pode causar osteopenia (diminuição do conteúdo mineral do osso) ou osteoporose (enfraquecimento ósseo e risco de fraturas por fragilidade).
A má absorção de selênio na doença celíaca, combinada com o baixo teor de selênio em muitos alimentos sem glúten, confere risco de deficiência de selênio.
As deficiências de cobre e zinco também foram associadas à doença celíaca.
Uma pequena proporção tem coagulação anormal devido à deficiência de vitamina K e tem um pequeno risco de sangramento anormal.


=== Diversos ===

A doença celíaca tem sido associada a muitas condições.

Em muitos casos, não está claro se a doença intestinal induzida pelo glúten é um fator causal ou se essas condições compartilham uma predisposição comum.

A deficiência de IgA está presente em 2,3% das pessoas com doença celíaca e está associada a um risco dez vezes maior de doença celíaca.

Outras características desta condição são um risco aumentado de infecções e doenças autoimunes.
A dermatite herpetiforme, uma condição cutânea pruriginosa que tem sido associada a uma enzima transglutaminase na pele, apresenta alterações no intestino delgado idênticas às da doença celíaca e pode responder à retirada do glúten, mesmo que não haja sintomas gastrointestinais.
Falha no crescimento e/ou atraso puberal na infância tardia podem ocorrer mesmo sem sintomas intestinais óbvios ou desnutrição grave.

A avaliação da falha de crescimento geralmente inclui triagem celíaca.
Complicações na gravidez podem ocorrer se a doença celíaca for pré-existente ou adquirida posteriormente, com resultados significativos, incluindo aborto espontâneo, restrição de crescimento intrauterino, baixo peso ao nascer e parto prematuro.
O hipoesplenismo (um baço pequeno e hipoativo) ocorre em cerca de um terço dos casos e pode predispor à infecção devido ao papel do baço na proteção contra bactérias nocivas.
Testes de função hepática anormais (detectados aleatoriamente em exames de sangue) podem ser observados. A doença celíaca está associada a várias outras condições médicas, muitas das quais são doenças autoimunes: diabetes mellitus tipo 1, hipotireoidismo, colangite biliar primária, colite microscópica, ataxia por glúten, psoríase , vitiligo, hepatite autoimune, colangite esclerosante primária e muito mais.


== Causa ==

A doença celíaca é causada por uma reação inflamatória às gliadinas e gluteninas (proteínas do glúten) encontradas no trigo e a proteínas semelhantes encontradas nas culturas da tribo Triticeae (que inclui outros grãos comuns, como cevada e centeio) e da tribo Aveneae (aveia ).

Subespécies de trigo (como espelta, durum e Kamut) e híbridos de trigo (como triticale) também causam sintomas de doença celíaca. Um pequeno número de pessoas com doença celíaca reage à aveia.

A toxicidade da aveia em celíacos depende da cultivar de aveia consumida porque os genes da prolamina, as sequências de aminoácidos das proteínas e as imunorreatividades das prolaminas tóxicas são diferentes em diferentes variedades de aveia.

Além disso, a aveia é frequentemente contaminada com outros grãos que contêm glúten.

O termo "aveia pura" refere-se a aveia não contaminada com outros cereais contendo glúten.

Os efeitos a longo prazo do consumo de aveia pura ainda não são claros, e mais estudos identificando as cultivares utilizadas são necessários antes de fazer recomendações finais sobre sua inclusão em uma dieta sem glúten.

Os celíacos que optam por consumir aveia precisam de um acompanhamento mais rigoroso ao longo da vida, possivelmente incluindo biópsias intestinais periódicas.


=== Outros grãos ===

Outros cereais, como milho, milheto, sorgo, teff, arroz e arroz selvagem são seguros para o consumo de pessoas com doença celíaca, bem como não-cereais, como amaranto, quinoa e trigo sarraceno.

Alimentos ricos em carboidratos não-cereais, como batatas e bananas, não contêm glúten e não desencadeiam sintomas.


=== Modificadores de risco ===

Existem várias teorias sobre o que determina se um indivíduo geneticamente suscetível irá desenvolver a doença celíaca.

As principais teorias incluem cirurgia, gravidez, infecção e estresse emocional. A ingestão de glúten no início da vida de um bebê não parece aumentar o risco de doença celíaca, mas a introdução posterior após 6 meses pode aumentá-lo.

Há incerteza se ser amamentado reduz o risco.

Prolongar a amamentação até a introdução de grãos contendo glúten na dieta parece estar associado a uma redução de 50% no risco de desenvolver doença celíaca na infância; se isso persiste na idade adulta não está claro.

Esses fatores podem apenas influenciar o momento do início.


== Fisiopatologia ==

A doença celíaca parece ser multifatorial, tanto porque mais de um fator genético pode causar a doença quanto porque mais de um fator é necessário para que a doença se manifeste em uma pessoa.
Quase todas as pessoas (95%) com doença celíaca têm o alelo HLA-DQ2 variante ou (menos comumente) o alelo HLA-DQ8.

No entanto, cerca de 20 a 30% das pessoas sem doença celíaca também herdaram um desses alelos.

Isso sugere que fatores adicionais são necessários para o desenvolvimento da doença celíaca; ou seja, o alelo de risco HLA predisponente é necessário, mas não suficiente para desenvolver a doença celíaca.

Além disso, cerca de 5% das pessoas que desenvolvem doença celíaca não têm alelos HLA-DQ2 ou HLA-DQ8 típicos (veja abaixo).


=== Genética ===


A grande maioria das pessoas com doença celíaca tem um dos dois tipos (de sete) da proteína HLA-DQ.

O HLA-DQ faz parte do sistema do receptor apresentador de antígeno do MHC de classe II (também chamado de antígeno leucocitário humano) e distingue as células entre as próprias e as não próprias para fins do sistema imunológico.

As duas subunidades da proteína HLA-DQ são codificadas pelos genes HLA-DQA1 e HLA-DQB1, localizados no braço curto do cromossomo 6.
Existem sete variantes HLA-DQ (DQ2 e DQ4-DQ9).

Mais de 95% das pessoas com doença celíaca têm a isoforma de DQ2 ou DQ8, que é herdada nas famílias.

A razão pela qual esses genes produzem um aumento no risco de doença celíaca é que os receptores formados por esses genes se ligam aos peptídeos de gliadina com mais força do que outras formas do receptor apresentador de antígeno.

Portanto, essas formas do receptor são mais propensas a ativar os linfócitos T e iniciar o processo autoimune.

A maioria das pessoas com doença celíaca possui um haplótipo HLA-DQ2 de dois genes conhecido como haplótipo DQ2.5.

Este haplótipo é composto por dois alelos de genes adjacentes, DQA1*0501 e DQB1*0201, que codificam as duas subunidades, DQ α5 e DQ β2.

Na maioria dos indivíduos, esta isoforma DQ2.5 é codificada por um dos dois cromossomos 6 herdados dos pais (DQ2.5cis).

A maioria dos celíacos herda apenas uma cópia desse haplótipo DQ2.5, enquanto alguns o herdam de ambos os pais; estes últimos estão especialmente em risco de doença celíaca, além de serem mais suscetíveis a complicações graves. Alguns indivíduos herdam DQ2.5 de um dos pais e uma porção adicional do haplótipo (DQB1*02 ou DQA1*05) do outro pai, risco crescente.

Menos comumente, alguns indivíduos herdam o alelo DQA1*05 de um dos pais e o DQB1*02 do outro genitor (DQ2.5trans) (chamado de associação de haplótipo trans), e esses indivíduos apresentam risco semelhante de doença celíaca como aqueles com um único cromossomo 6 com DQ2.5, mas, neste caso, a doença tende a não ser familiar.

Entre os 6% dos celíacos europeus que não possuem DQ2.5 (cis ou trans) ou DQ8 (codificado pelo haplótipo DQA1*03:DQB1*0302), 4% possuem a isoforma DQ2.2 e os 2% restantes não possuem DQ2 ou DQ8. A frequência desses genes varia geograficamente.

DQ2.5 tem alta frequência em povos do Norte e Europa Ocidental (País Basco e Irlanda com as frequências mais altas) e partes da África e está associado a doenças na Índia, mas não é encontrado ao longo de porções da orla do Pacífico Ocidental.

O DQ8 tem uma distribuição global mais ampla do que o DQ2.5 e é particularmente comum na América do Sul e Central; até 90% dos indivíduos em certas populações ameríndias carregam DQ8 e, portanto, podem apresentar o fenótipo celíaco. Outros fatores genéticos têm sido relatados repetidamente na doença celíaca; no entanto, o envolvimento na doença tem reconhecimento geográfico variável.

Apenas os loci HLA-DQ mostram um envolvimento consistente sobre a população global.

Muitos dos loci detectados foram encontrados em associação com outras doenças autoimunes.

Um locus, o LPP ou gene parceiro preferido do lipoma, está envolvido na adesão da matriz extracelular à superfície celular, e uma variante menor (SNP = rs1464510) aumenta o risco de doença em aproximadamente 30%.

Este gene está fortemente associado à doença celíaca (p < 10-39) em amostras retiradas de uma ampla área da Europa e dos EUA. A prevalência de genótipos de doença celíaca na população moderna não é completamente compreendida.

Dadas as características da doença e sua aparente forte herdabilidade, normalmente seria esperado que os genótipos sofressem seleção negativa e estivessem ausentes em sociedades onde a agricultura é praticada há mais tempo (compare com uma condição semelhante, intolerância à lactose, que tem sido selecionado negativamente com tanta força que sua prevalência passou de ~100% em populações ancestrais para menos de 5% em alguns países europeus).

Essa expectativa foi proposta pela primeira vez por Simoons (1981).

Até agora, no entanto, é evidente que este não é o caso; pelo contrário, há evidências de seleção positiva em genótipos de doença celíaca.

Suspeita-se que alguns deles podem ter sido benéficos, fornecendo proteção contra infecções bacterianas.


=== Prolaminas ===

A maioria das proteínas dos alimentos responsáveis ​​pela reação imune na doença celíaca são as prolaminas.

São proteínas de armazenamento ricas em prolina (prol-) e glutamina (-amina) que se dissolvem em álcoois e são resistentes às proteases e peptidases do intestino.

As prolaminas são encontradas em grãos de cereais com diferentes grãos com prolaminas diferentes, mas relacionadas: trigo (gliadina), cevada (hordeína), centeio (secalina) e aveia (avenina).

Uma região da α-gliadina estimula as células da membrana, enterócitos, do intestino para permitir moléculas maiores ao redor do selante entre as células.

A ruptura das junções apertadas permite que peptídeos maiores que três aminoácidos entrem no revestimento intestinal.

O vazamento de membrana permite peptídeos de gliadina que estimulam dois níveis da resposta imune: a resposta inata e a resposta adaptativa (mediada por células T auxiliares).

Um peptídeo resistente à protease da α-gliadina contém uma região que estimula os linfócitos e resulta na liberação de interleucina-15.

Essa resposta inata à gliadina resulta na sinalização do sistema imunológico que atrai células inflamatórias e aumenta a liberação de substâncias químicas inflamatórias.

A resposta adaptativa mais forte e mais comum à gliadina é direcionada a um fragmento de α2-gliadina de 33 aminoácidos de comprimento. A resposta ao 33mer ocorre na maioria dos celíacos que possuem uma isoforma DQ2.

Este peptídeo, quando alterado pela transglutaminase intestinal, tem uma alta densidade de epítopos de células T sobrepostos.

Isso aumenta a probabilidade de que a isoforma DQ2 se ligue e permaneça ligada ao peptídeo quando reconhecida pelas células T.

A gliadina no trigo é o membro mais bem compreendido desta família, mas existem outras prolaminas, e a hordeína (da cevada), a secalina (do centeio) e a avenina (da aveia) podem contribuir para a doença celíaca.

A toxicidade das aveninas em pessoas com doença celíaca depende da cultivar de aveia consumida devido aos genes da prolamina, sequências de aminoácidos das proteínas e as imunorreatividades das prolaminas tóxicas, que variam entre as variedades de aveia.


=== Transglutaminase tecidual ===


Anticorpos antitransglutaminase para a enzima transglutaminase tecidual (tTG) são encontrados no sangue da maioria das pessoas com sintomas clássicos e atrofia completa das vilosidades, mas apenas em 70% dos casos com atrofia parcial das vilosidades e 30% dos casos com menor lesões mucosas.

A transglutaminase tecidual modifica os peptídeos de glúten em uma forma que pode estimular o sistema imunológico de forma mais eficaz.

Esses peptídeos são modificados por tTG de duas maneiras, desamidação ou transamidação. A desamidação é a reação pela qual um resíduo de glutamato é formado pela clivagem do grupo épsilon-amino de uma cadeia lateral de glutamina.

A transamidação, que ocorre três vezes mais frequentemente do que a desamidação, é a reticulação de um resíduo de glutamina do peptídeo de gliadina a um resíduo de lisina de tTg em uma reação que é catalisada pela transglutaminase.

A reticulação pode ocorrer dentro ou fora do sítio ativo da enzima.

O último caso produz um complexo permanentemente ligado covalentemente entre a gliadina e a tTg.

Isso resulta na formação de novos epítopos que se acredita desencadearem a resposta imune primária pela qual os autoanticorpos contra tTg se desenvolvem. Biópsias armazenadas de pessoas com suspeita de doença celíaca revelaram que depósitos de autoanticorpos nos celíacos subclínicos são detectados antes da doença clínica.

Esses depósitos também são encontrados em pessoas que apresentam outras doenças autoimunes, anemia ou fenômenos de má absorção em uma taxa muito maior em relação à população normal.

Acredita-se que os componentes endomísio de anticorpos (EMA) para tTG sejam direcionados para a transglutaminase de superfície celular, e esses anticorpos ainda são usados ​​para confirmar um diagnóstico de doença celíaca.

No entanto, um estudo de 2006 mostrou que as pessoas EMA-negativas com doença celíaca tendem a ser homens mais velhos com sintomas abdominais mais graves e uma menor frequência de sintomas "atípicos", incluindo doença autoimune.

Neste estudo, os depósitos de anticorpos anti-tTG não se correlacionaram com a gravidade da destruição das vilosidades.

Esses achados, juntamente com trabalhos recentes mostrando que a gliadina tem um componente de resposta inata, sugerem que a gliadina pode ser mais responsável pelas manifestações primárias da doença celíaca, enquanto o tTG é um fator maior em efeitos secundários, como respostas alérgicas e doenças autoimunes secundárias.

Em uma grande porcentagem de pessoas com doença celíaca, os anticorpos anti-tTG também reconhecem uma proteína de rotavírus chamada VP7.

Esses anticorpos estimulam a proliferação de monócitos, e a infecção por rotavírus pode explicar alguns passos iniciais na cascata de proliferação de células imunes. De fato, estudos anteriores de danos por rotavírus no intestino mostraram que isso causa atrofia das vilosidades.

Isso sugere que as proteínas virais podem participar do achatamento inicial e estimular a produção de anti-VP7 de auto-reação cruzada.

Anticorpos para VP7 também podem retardar a cicatrização até que a apresentação de tTG mediada por gliadina forneça uma segunda fonte de anticorpos de reação cruzada.
Outros distúrbios intestinais podem ter biópsia que se parece com doença celíaca, incluindo lesões causadas por Candida.


=== Atrofia e má absorção das vilosidades ===

O processo inflamatório, mediado pelas células T, leva à ruptura da estrutura e função da mucosa do intestino delgado e causa má absorção, pois prejudica a capacidade do organismo de absorver nutrientes, minerais e vitaminas lipossolúveis A, D, E e K da comida.

A intolerância à lactose pode estar presente devido à diminuição da superfície intestinal e à redução da produção de lactase, mas normalmente desaparece quando a condição é tratada.
Causas alternativas desse dano tecidual foram propostas e envolvem a liberação de interleucina 15 e ativação do sistema imune inato por um peptídeo de glúten mais curto (p31-43/49).

Isso desencadearia a morte de enterócitos por linfócitos no epitélio.

A atrofia das vilosidades observada na biópsia também pode ser devido a causas não relacionadas, como espru tropical, giardíase e enterite por radiação.

Embora a sorologia positiva e a biópsia típica sejam altamente sugestivas de doença celíaca, a falta de resposta à dieta pode exigir que esses diagnósticos alternativos sejam considerados.


== Diagnóstico ==

O diagnóstico é muitas vezes difícil e, a partir de 2019, continua a haver falta de conscientização dos médicos sobre a variabilidade das apresentações da doença celíaca e os critérios diagnósticos, de modo que a maioria dos casos é diagnosticada com grande atraso.

Pode levar até 12 anos para receber um diagnóstico desde o início dos sintomas e a maioria das pessoas afetadas na maioria dos países nunca o recebe. Vários testes podem ser usados.

O nível dos sintomas pode determinar a ordem dos exames, mas todos os exames perdem a utilidade se a pessoa já estiver ingerindo uma dieta sem glúten.

Os danos intestinais começam a cicatrizar dentro de semanas após a remoção do glúten da dieta, e os níveis de anticorpos diminuem ao longo dos meses.

Para aqueles que já iniciaram uma dieta sem glúten, pode ser necessário realizar um novo desafio com algum alimento contendo glúten em uma refeição por dia durante 6 semanas antes de repetir as investigações.


=== Exames de sangue ===


Os exames de sangue sorológicos são a investigação de primeira linha necessária para fazer o diagnóstico da doença celíaca.

Sua sensibilidade se correlaciona com o grau de lesões histológicas.

As pessoas que apresentam danos menores no intestino delgado podem ter achados soronegativos, de modo que muitos pacientes com doença celíaca geralmente são perdidos.

Em pacientes com atrofia das vilosidades, os anticorpos antiendomísio (EMA) do tipo imunoglobulina A (IgA) podem detectar a doença celíaca com sensibilidade e especificidade de 90% e 99%, respectivamente.

A sorologia para anticorpos antitransglutaminase (anti-tTG) foi inicialmente relatada como tendo maior sensibilidade (99%) e especificidade (>90%).

No entanto, pensa-se agora que tem características semelhantes aos anticorpos anti-endomísio.

Os anticorpos antitransglutaminase e antiendomísio têm alta sensibilidade para diagnosticar pessoas com sintomas clássicos e atrofia vilosa completa, mas são encontrados apenas em 30-89% dos casos com atrofia vilosa parcial e em menos de 50% das pessoas que têm lesões mucosas menores (linfocitose duodenal) com vilosidades normais. A transglutaminase tecidual modifica os peptídeos do glúten para uma forma que pode estimular o sistema imunológico de forma mais eficaz.

Esses peptídeos são modificados por tTG de duas maneiras, desamidação ou transamidação.

Os ensaios anti-tTG modernos contam com uma proteína recombinante humana como antígeno. O teste tTG deve ser feito primeiro, pois é um teste mais fácil de executar.

Um resultado duvidoso no teste de tTG deve ser seguido por anticorpos anti-endomísio. As diretrizes recomendam que um nível sérico total de IgA seja verificado em paralelo, pois pessoas com doença celíaca com deficiência de IgA podem ser incapazes de produzir os anticorpos dos quais esses testes dependem ("falso negativo").

Nessas pessoas, os anticorpos IgG contra a transglutaminase (IgG-tTG) podem ser diagnósticos. Se todos esses anticorpos forem negativos, os anticorpos anti-DGP (anticorpos contra peptídeos de gliadina desamidados) devem ser determinados.

Os anticorpos anti-DGP da classe IgG podem ser úteis em pessoas com deficiência de IgA.

Em crianças com menos de dois anos, os anticorpos anti-DGP apresentam melhor desempenho do que os testes de anticorpos antiendomísio e antitransglutaminase. /gastroscopia e biópsia.

Um teste sorológico negativo ainda pode ser seguido por uma recomendação para endoscopia e biópsia duodenal se a suspeita clínica permanecer alta. Historicamente, outros três anticorpos foram medidos: anticorpos anti-reticulina (ARA), antigliadina (AGA) e antiendomísio (EMA) .

O teste de ARA, no entanto, não é preciso o suficiente para uso diagnóstico de rotina.

A sorologia pode não ser confiável em crianças pequenas, com a antigliadina tendo um desempenho um pouco melhor do que outros testes em crianças menores de cinco anos.

Os testes sorológicos são baseados em imunofluorescência indireta (reticulina, gliadina e endomísio) ou ELISA (gliadina ou transglutaminase tecidual, tTG). Outros anticorpos, como anticorpos anti-Saccharomyces cerevisiae, ocorrem em algumas pessoas com doença celíaca, mas também ocorrem em outras doenças autoimunes e cerca 5% dos que doam sangue. O teste de anticorpos pode ser combinado com o teste de HLA se o diagnóstico não for claro.

Os testes de TGA e EMA são os testes de anticorpos séricos mais sensíveis, mas como um tipo HLA-DQ negativo exclui o diagnóstico de doença celíaca, o teste também para HLA-DQ2 ou DQ8 maximiza a sensibilidade e os valores preditivos negativos.

No Reino Unido, o Instituto Nacional de Saúde e Excelência Clínica (NICE) não recomenda (desde 2015) o uso da tipagem HLA para descartar a doença celíaca fora de um ambiente especializado, por exemplo, em crianças que não estão tendo um biópsia, ou em pacientes que já têm ingestão limitada de glúten e optam por não ter um desafio de glúten.


=== Endoscopia ===


Uma endoscopia digestiva alta com biópsia do duodeno (além do bulbo duodenal) ou jejuno é realizada para obter múltiplas amostras (quatro a oito) do duodeno.

Nem todas as áreas podem ser igualmente afetadas; se as biópsias forem feitas de tecido intestinal saudável, o resultado será um falso negativo.

Mesmo no mesmo fragmento biótico, diferentes graus de
danos podem estar presentes. A maioria das pessoas com doença celíaca tem um intestino delgado que parece estar normal na endoscopia antes das biópsias serem examinadas.

No entanto, cinco achados foram associados à alta especificidade para a doença celíaca: recortar das dobras do intestino delgado (foto), escassez nas dobras, um padrão de mosaico para a mucosa (descrito como uma aparência de "lama rachada"), proeminência do vasos sanguíneos da submucosa e padrão nodular para a mucosa. As diretrizes europeias sugerem que em crianças e adolescentes com sintomas compatíveis com doença celíaca, o diagnóstico pode ser feito sem a necessidade de biópsia intestinal se os títulos de anticorpos anti-tTG forem muito elevados (10 vezes limite superior da normalidade). Até a década de 1970, as biópsias eram obtidas por meio de cápsulas metálicas acopladas a um aspirador.

A cápsula foi engolida e deixada passar para o intestino delgado.

Após a verificação radiográfica de sua posição, aplicou-se sucção para coletar parte da parede intestinal dentro da cápsula.

Os sistemas de cápsulas frequentemente utilizados eram a cápsula Watson e a cápsula Crosby-Kugler.

Este método foi amplamente substituído pela endoscopia de fibra óptica, que possui maior sensibilidade e menor frequência de erros. A cápsula endoscópica (CE) permite a identificação de alterações mucosas típicas observadas na doença celíaca, mas tem uma sensibilidade menor em comparação com a endoscopia regular e histologia.

A CE não é, portanto, a principal ferramenta diagnóstica para a doença celíaca.

No entanto, o CE pode ser usado para diagnosticar linfoma de células T, jejunoileíte ulcerativa e adenocarcinoma na doença celíaca refratária ou complicada.


=== Patologia ===

As alterações patológicas clássicas da doença celíaca no intestino delgado são categorizadas pela "classificação de Marsh":
Estágio 0 de Marsh: mucosa normal
Marsh estágio 1: aumento do número de linfócitos intra-epiteliais (IELs), geralmente superior a 20 por 100 enterócitos
Marsh estágio 2: uma proliferação das criptas de Lieberkühn
Fase 3 de Marsh: atrofia parcial ou completa das vilosidades e hipertrofia das criptas
Estágio 4 de Marsh: arquitetura de hipoplasia do intestino delgado A classificação de Marsh, introduzida em 1992, foi posteriormente modificada em 1999 para seis estágios, onde o estágio 3 anterior foi dividido em três subestágios.

Outros estudos demonstraram que esse sistema nem sempre era confiável e que as alterações observadas na doença celíaca poderiam ser descritas em um dos três estágios:
A representando infiltração linfocítica com aparência vilosa normal;
B1 descrevendo atrofia parcial das vilosidades; e
B2 descrevendo atrofia completa das vilosidades. As alterações classicamente melhoram ou revertem após a retirada do glúten da dieta.

No entanto, a maioria das diretrizes não recomenda a repetição da biópsia, a menos que não haja melhora dos sintomas com a dieta.

Em alguns casos, um desafio deliberado de glúten, seguido por uma biópsia, pode ser realizado para confirmar ou refutar o diagnóstico.

Uma biópsia normal e sorologia normal após provocação indicam que o diagnóstico pode ter sido incorreto. linfocitose) com vilosidades intestinais normais.


=== Outros testes de diagnóstico ===

No momento do diagnóstico, investigações adicionais podem ser realizadas para identificar complicações, como deficiência de ferro (por hemograma completo e estudos de ferro), deficiência de ácido fólico e vitamina B12 e hipocalcemia (baixos níveis de cálcio, muitas vezes devido à diminuição dos níveis de vitamina D) .

Testes de função da tireoide podem ser solicitados durante exames de sangue para identificar hipotireoidismo, que é mais comum em pessoas com doença celíaca. Osteopenia e osteoporose, densidade mineral óssea leve e severamente reduzida, estão frequentemente presentes em pessoas com doença celíaca e investigações para medir a densidade óssea podem ser realizados no momento do diagnóstico, como a absorciometria de raios X de dupla energia (DXA), para identificar o risco de fratura e a necessidade de medicação de proteção óssea.


=== Abstinência de glúten ===

Embora testes de anticorpos no sangue, biópsias e testes genéticos geralmente forneçam um diagnóstico claro, ocasionalmente a resposta à retirada do glúten em uma dieta sem glúten é necessária para apoiar o diagnóstico.

Atualmente, a provocação com glúten não é mais necessária para confirmar o diagnóstico em pacientes com lesões intestinais compatíveis com doença celíaca e resposta positiva a uma dieta isenta de glúten.

No entanto, em alguns casos, um teste de glúten com uma biópsia subsequente pode ser útil para apoiar o diagnóstico, por exemplo, em pessoas com alta suspeita de doença celíaca, sem confirmação de biópsia, que têm anticorpos negativos no sangue e já estão em dieta de glúten. dieta livre.

A provocação com glúten é desencorajada antes dos 5 anos de idade e durante o crescimento puberal.

O diagnóstico alternativo de sensibilidade ao glúten não celíaca pode ser feito quando houver apenas evidência sintomática de sensibilidade ao glúten.

Os sintomas gastrointestinais e extraintestinais de pessoas com sensibilidade ao glúten não celíaca podem ser semelhantes aos da doença celíaca e melhorar quando o glúten é removido da dieta, após a doença celíaca e a alergia ao trigo serem razoavelmente excluídas. ou redesenvolvimento de sintomas após iniciar uma dieta sem glúten.

É necessária uma interpretação cuidadosa da resposta sintomática, pois a falta de resposta em uma pessoa com doença celíaca pode ser devido à ingestão contínua de pequenas quantidades de glúten, voluntária ou inadvertida, ou devido a outras condições comumente associadas, como intestino delgado. supercrescimento bacteriano (SIBO), intolerância à lactose, má absorção de frutose, sacarose e sorbitol, insuficiência pancreática exócrina e colite microscópica, entre outros.

Na doença celíaca não tratada, estas são frequentemente condições transitórias derivadas do dano intestinal.

Eles normalmente revertem ou melhoram vários meses após o início de uma dieta sem glúten, mas podem necessitar de intervenções temporárias, como suplementação com enzimas pancreáticas, restrições alimentares de lactose, frutose, sacarose ou alimentos contendo sorbitol, ou tratamento com antibióticos orais no caso de supercrescimento bacteriano.

Além da retirada do glúten, algumas pessoas precisam seguir uma dieta com baixo teor de FODMAPs ou evitar o consumo de produtos comerciais sem glúten, que geralmente são ricos em conservantes e aditivos (como sulfitos, glutamatos, nitratos e benzoatos) e podem ter um papel no desencadeamento de sintomas gastrointestinais funcionais.


== Triagem ==

Há um debate sobre os benefícios da triagem.

A partir de 2017, a Força-Tarefa de Serviços Preventivos dos Estados Unidos encontrou evidências insuficientes para fazer uma recomendação entre aqueles sem sintomas.

No Reino Unido, o Instituto Nacional de Saúde e Excelência Clínica (NICE) recomenda o teste para doença celíaca em parentes de primeiro grau de pessoas com a doença já confirmada, em pessoas com fadiga persistente, sintomas abdominais ou gastrointestinais, crescimento vacilante, peso inexplicável perda ou ferro, vitamina B12 ou deficiência de folato, úlceras na boca graves e com diagnóstico de diabetes tipo 1, doença autoimune da tireoide e com síndrome da fadiga crônica recém-diagnosticada e síndrome do intestino irritável.

A dermatite herpetiforme está incluída em outras recomendações.

O NICE também recomenda oferecer testes sorológicos para doença celíaca em pessoas com doença óssea metabólica (densidade mineral óssea reduzida ou osteomalácia), distúrbios neurológicos inexplicáveis ​​(como neuropatia periférica e ataxia), problemas de fertilidade ou aborto recorrente, enzimas hepáticas persistentemente elevadas com causa desconhecida , defeitos do esmalte dentário e com diagnóstico de síndrome de Down ou síndrome de Turner. Algumas evidências descobriram que a detecção precoce pode diminuir o risco de desenvolver complicações de saúde, como osteoporose, anemia e certos tipos de câncer, distúrbios neurológicos, doenças cardiovasculares e problemas reprodutivos problemas.

Assim, recomendam a triagem em pessoas com determinados problemas de saúde. A sorologia foi proposta como medida de triagem, porque a presença de anticorpos detectaria alguns casos de doença celíaca não diagnosticados anteriormente e preveniria suas complicações nessas pessoas.

No entanto, os testes sorológicos têm alta sensibilidade apenas em pessoas com atrofia vilosa total e têm uma capacidade muito baixa de detectar casos com atrofia vilosa parcial ou lesões intestinais menores.

Testes para doença celíaca podem ser oferecidos àqueles com condições comumente associadas.


== Tratamento ==



=== Dieta ===


Atualmente, o único tratamento eficaz é uma dieta sem glúten ao longo da vida.

Não existe nenhum medicamento que previna danos ou impeça o corpo de atacar o intestino quando o glúten está presente.

A adesão estrita à dieta ajuda a curar os intestinos, levando à resolução de todos os sintomas na maioria dos casos e, dependendo de quão cedo a dieta é iniciada, também pode eliminar o risco aumentado de osteoporose e câncer intestinal e, em alguns casos, esterilidade.

A dieta pode ser complicada; o não cumprimento da dieta pode causar recaídas.
A opinião do nutricionista geralmente é solicitada para garantir que a pessoa esteja ciente de quais alimentos contêm glúten, quais alimentos são seguros e como ter uma dieta equilibrada, apesar das limitações.

Em muitos países, produtos sem glúten estão disponíveis mediante receita médica e podem ser reembolsados ​​por planos de saúde.

Os produtos sem glúten geralmente são mais caros e mais difíceis de encontrar do que os alimentos comuns que contêm glúten.

Como os produtos prontos geralmente contêm traços de glúten, alguns celíacos podem achar necessário cozinhar do zero. O termo "sem glúten" é geralmente usado para indicar um nível supostamente inofensivo de glúten, em vez de uma ausência completa.

O nível exato em que o glúten é inofensivo é incerto e controverso.

Uma revisão sistemática recente concluiu provisoriamente que é improvável que o consumo de menos de 10 mg de glúten por dia cause anormalidades histológicas, embora tenha observado que poucos estudos confiáveis ​​foram feitos.

A regulamentação do rótulo "sem glúten" varia.

Na União Européia, a Comissão Européia emitiu regulamentos em 2009 limitando o uso de rótulos "sem glúten" para produtos alimentícios para aqueles com menos de 20 mg/kg de glúten, e rótulos de "glúten muito baixo" para aqueles com menos de 100 mg/kg.

Nos Estados Unidos, o FDA emitiu regulamentos em 2013 limitando o uso de rótulos "sem glúten" para produtos alimentícios àqueles com menos de 20 ppm de glúten.

O padrão internacional atual do Codex Alimentarius permite 20 ppm de glúten nos chamados alimentos "sem glúten".

No entanto, a dieta sem glúten não normaliza completamente a qualidade de vida.


=== Doença refratária ===

Entre 0,3% e 10% das pessoas têm doença refratária, o que significa que eles têm atrofia vilositária persistente em uma dieta sem glúten, apesar da falta de exposição ao glúten por mais de 12 meses.

No entanto, a exposição inadvertida ao glúten é a principal causa de atrofia vilosa persistente e deve ser descartada antes que o diagnóstico de doença refratária seja feito.

Pessoas com pouca educação básica e compreensão da dieta sem glúten muitas vezes acreditam que estão seguindo estritamente a dieta, mas estão cometendo erros regulares.

Além disso, a ausência de sintomas não é um indicador confiável de recuperação intestinal. Se as causas alternativas de atrofia das vilosidades foram eliminadas, esteróides ou imunossupressores (como azatioprina) podem ser considerados neste cenário. A doença celíaca refratária não deve ser confundida com a persistência de sintomas apesar da retirada do glúten causada por condições transitórias derivadas do dano intestinal, que geralmente revertem ou melhoram vários meses após o início de uma dieta sem glúten, como supercrescimento bacteriano do intestino delgado, intolerância à lactose, má absorção de frutose, sacarose e sorbitol, pâncreas exócrino insuficiência e colite microscópica, entre outros.


== Epidemiologia ==

Globalmente, a doença celíaca afeta entre 1 em 100 e 1 em 170 pessoas.

As taxas, no entanto, variam entre as diferentes regiões do mundo, de apenas 1 em 300 a até 1 em 40.

Nos Estados Unidos, acredita-se que afete entre 1 em 1.750 (definida como doença clínica, incluindo dermatite herpetiforme com sintomas limitados do trato digestivo) a 1 em 105 (definida pela presença de IgA TG em doadores de sangue).

Devido a sinais e sintomas variáveis, acredita-se que cerca de 85% das pessoas afetadas não sejam diagnosticadas.

A porcentagem de pessoas com doença diagnosticada clinicamente (sintomas que levam a testes diagnósticos) é de 0,05 a 0,27% em vários estudos.

No entanto, estudos populacionais de partes da Europa, Índia, América do Sul, Australásia e EUA (usando sorologia e biópsia) indicam que a porcentagem de pessoas com a doença pode estar entre 0,33 e 1,06% em crianças (mas 5,66% em um estudo de filhos do povo sarauí predisposto) e 0,18–1,2% em adultos.

Entre aqueles em populações de cuidados primários que relatam sintomas gastrointestinais, a taxa de doença celíaca é de cerca de 3%.

Na Austrália, aproximadamente 1 em cada 70 pessoas tem a doença.

A taxa entre doadores de sangue adultos no Irã, Israel, Síria e Turquia é de 0,60%, 0,64%, 1,61% e 1,15%, respectivamente. Pessoas de ascendência africana, japonesa e chinesa raramente são diagnosticadas; isso reflete uma prevalência muito menor dos fatores de risco genéticos, como HLA-B8.

Pessoas de ascendência indiana parecem ter um risco semelhante aos de ascendência caucasiana ocidental.

Estudos populacionais também indicam que uma grande proporção de celíacos permanece sem diagnóstico; isso se deve, em parte, ao fato de muitos médicos não estarem familiarizados com a condição e também ao fato de ela poder ser assintomática.

A doença celíaca é ligeiramente mais comum em mulheres do que em homens.

Um grande estudo multicêntrico nos EUA encontrou uma prevalência de 0,75% em grupos sem risco, subindo para 1,8% em pessoas sintomáticas, 2,6% em parentes de segundo grau (como avós, tia ou tio, netos, etc.) uma pessoa com doença celíaca e 4,5% em parentes de primeiro grau (irmãos, pais ou filhos).

Este perfil é semelhante à prevalência na Europa.

Outras populações com risco aumentado para doença celíaca, com taxas de prevalência que variam de 5% a 10%, incluem indivíduos com síndromes de Down e Turner, diabetes tipo 1 e doença autoimune da tireoide, incluindo hipertireoidismo (tireoide hiperativa) e hipotireoidismo (tireoide hipoativa) .Historicamente, a doença celíaca era considerada rara, com prevalência de cerca de 0,02%.

A razão para os recentes aumentos no número de casos notificados não é clara.

Pode ser pelo menos em parte devido a mudanças na prática diagnóstica.

Também parece haver um aumento real de aproximadamente 4,5 vezes que pode ser devido à menor exposição a bactérias e outros patógenos em ambientes ocidentais.

Nos Estados Unidos, a idade média ao diagnóstico é de 38 anos.

Aproximadamente 20% dos indivíduos com doença celíaca são diagnosticados após os 60 anos de idade.


== História ==

O termo "celíaco" vem do grego κοιλιακός (koiliakós, "abdominal") e foi introduzido no século 19 em uma tradução do que é geralmente considerado como uma descrição grega antiga da doença por Aretaeus da Capadócia. grãos no período neolítico (começando por volta de 9500 aC) no Crescente Fértil na Ásia Ocidental e, provavelmente, a doença celíaca não ocorreu antes dessa época.

Aretaeus da Capadócia, vivendo no século II na mesma área, registrou uma síndrome de má absorção com diarréia crônica, causando uma debilitação de todo o corpo.

Seu "Cœliac Affection" (celíaco do grego κοιλιακός koiliakos, "abdominal") ganhou a atenção da medicina ocidental quando Francis Adams apresentou uma tradução do trabalho de Aretaeus na Sydenham Society em 1856.

O paciente descrito no trabalho de Aretaeus tinha dores de estômago e estava atrofiado, pálido, fraco e incapaz de trabalhar.

A diarréia se manifestava como fezes moles, brancas, fétidas e flatulentas, e a doença era intratável e passível de retorno periódico.

O problema, acreditava Aretaeus, era a falta de calor no estômago necessário para digerir os alimentos e uma capacidade reduzida de distribuir os produtos digestivos por todo o corpo, esta digestão incompleta resultando em diarréia.

Ele considerava isso uma aflição dos velhos e afetava mais comumente as mulheres, excluindo explicitamente as crianças.

A causa, de acordo com Aretaeus, às vezes era outra doença crônica ou até mesmo consumir "um grande gole de água fria". Great Ormond Street, Londres, em 1887.

Gee reconheceu descrições e termos anteriores para a doença e adotou o mesmo termo que Aretaeus (doença celíaca).

Ele afirmou com perspicácia: "Se o paciente pode ser curado, deve ser por meio de dieta." Gee reconheceu que a intolerância ao leite é um problema com crianças celíacas e que os alimentos com alto teor de amido devem ser evitados.

No entanto, ele proibiu arroz, sagu, frutas e legumes, que todos seriam seguros para comer, e recomendou carne crua, bem como fatias finas de pão torrado.

Gee destacou o sucesso particular com uma criança "que era alimentada diariamente com um litro dos melhores mexilhões holandeses". No entanto, a criança não poderia suportar esta dieta por mais de uma temporada. Christian Archibald Herter, um médico americano, escreveu um livro em 1908 sobre crianças com doença celíaca, que ele chamou de "infantilismo intestinal".

Ele observou que seu crescimento era retardado e que a gordura era melhor tolerada do que o carboidrato.

O epônimo doença de Gee-Herter às vezes era usado para reconhecer ambas as contribuições.

Sidney V.

Haas, um pediatra americano, relatou efeitos positivos de uma dieta de bananas em 1924.

Esta dieta permaneceu em voga até que a causa real da doença celíaca fosse determinada. Embora houvesse suspeita de um papel para os carboidratos, a ligação com o trigo não foi feita até a década de 1940 pelo pediatra holandês Dr Willem Karel Dicke.

É provável que a melhora clínica de seus pacientes durante a fome holandesa de 1944 (durante a qual a farinha era escassa) possa ter contribuído para sua descoberta.

Dicke notou que a escassez de pão levou a uma queda significativa na taxa de mortalidade entre as crianças afetadas pela doença celíaca de mais de 35% para praticamente zero.

Ele também relatou que uma vez que o trigo estava novamente disponível após o conflito, a taxa de mortalidade disparou para os níveis anteriores.

A ligação com o componente glúten do trigo foi feita em 1952 por uma equipe de Birmingham, Inglaterra.

A atrofia das vilosidades foi descrita pelo médico britânico John W.

Paulley em 1954 em amostras colhidas na cirurgia.

Isso abriu o caminho para amostras de biópsia colhidas por endoscopia. Ao longo da década de 1960, outras características da doença celíaca foram elucidadas.

Seu caráter hereditário foi reconhecido em 1965.

Em 1966, a dermatite herpetiforme foi associada à sensibilidade ao glúten.


== Social e cultura ==


Maio foi designado como "Mês da Consciência Celíaca" por várias organizações de celíacos.


=== Igrejas cristãs e a Eucaristia ===

Falando em geral, as várias denominações de cristãos celebram uma Eucaristia na qual uma hóstia ou um pequeno pedaço de pão sacramental de pão de trigo é abençoado e depois comido.

Uma bolacha típica pesa cerca de meio grama.

A farinha de trigo contém cerca de 10 a 13% de glúten, portanto, uma única bolacha de comunhão pode ter mais de 50 mg de glúten, quantidade que prejudica muitas pessoas com celíacos, principalmente se consumida todos os dias (veja Dieta acima).
Muitas igrejas cristãs oferecem aos seus comungantes alternativas sem glúten, geralmente na forma de biscoito à base de arroz ou pão sem glúten.

Estes incluem a Igreja Metodista Unida, Cristã Reformada, Episcopal, a Igreja Anglicana (Igreja da Inglaterra, Reino Unido) e Luterana.

Os católicos podem receber somente do Cálice, ou pedir hóstias sem glúten; os sem glúten, no entanto, não são considerados ainda pão de trigo e, portanto, matéria inválida.


==== posição católica romana ====
A doutrina católica romana afirma que, para uma Eucaristia válida, o pão a ser usado na Missa deve ser feito de trigo.

Os anfitriões com baixo teor de glúten atendem a todos os requisitos da Igreja Católica, mas não são totalmente isentos de glúten.

Os pedidos de uso de bolachas de arroz foram negados. A questão é mais complexa para os padres.

Como celebrante, um sacerdote é, para a plenitude do sacrifício da Missa, absolutamente obrigado a receber sob ambas as espécies.

Em 24 de julho de 2003, a Congregação para a Doutrina da Fé declarou: "Dada a centralidade da celebração da Eucaristia na vida de um sacerdote, deve-se proceder com muita cautela antes de admitir à Ordem os candidatos incapazes de ingerir glúten ou álcool sem danos graves." Em janeiro de 2004, anfitriões aprovados pela Igreja com baixo teor de glúten tornaram-se disponíveis nos Estados Unidos, Itália e Austrália.

Em julho de 2017, o Vaticano ainda proibia o uso de pão sem glúten para a Sagrada Comunhão.


=== Páscoa ===

O festival judaico de Pessach (Páscoa) pode apresentar problemas com sua obrigação de comer matzo, que é pão sem fermento feito de maneira estritamente controlada de trigo, cevada, espelta, aveia ou centeio.

Isso exclui muitos outros grãos que normalmente são usados ​​como substitutos para pessoas com sensibilidade ao glúten, especialmente para judeus Ashkenazi, que também evitam o arroz.

Muitos produtos kosher para a Páscoa evitam completamente os grãos e, portanto, são isentos de glúten.

O amido de batata é o amido primário usado para substituir os grãos.


=== Ortografia ===

A doença celíaca é a grafia preferida no inglês britânico, enquanto a doença celíaca é normalmente usada no inglês norte-americano.


== Orientações de pesquisa ==

A busca por fatores ambientais que possam ser responsáveis ​​por pessoas geneticamente suscetíveis se tornarem intolerantes ao glúten resultou no aumento da atividade de pesquisa sobre infecções gastrointestinais.

Pesquisa publicada em abril de 2017 sugere que uma infecção muitas vezes assintomática por uma cepa comum de reovírus pode aumentar a sensibilidade a alimentos como o glúten. Várias abordagens de tratamento estão sendo estudadas, incluindo algumas que reduziriam a necessidade de fazer dieta.

Todos ainda estão em desenvolvimento e não devem estar disponíveis ao público em geral por um tempo. Três abordagens principais foram propostas como novas modalidades terapêuticas para a doença celíaca: desintoxicação do glúten, modulação da permeabilidade intestinal e modulação da resposta imune .O uso de espécies de trigo geneticamente modificadas, ou espécies de trigo que foram criadas seletivamente para serem minimamente imunogênicas, pode permitir o consumo de trigo.

Isso, no entanto, pode interferir nos efeitos que a gliadina tem na qualidade da massa.

Alternativamente, a exposição ao glúten pode ser minimizada pela ingestão de uma combinação de enzimas (prolil endopeptidase e uma cisteína endopeptidase específica de glutamina de cevada (EP-B2)) que degradam o suposto peptídeo 33-mer no duodeno. inibição da zonulina, uma proteína de sinalização endógena ligada ao aumento da permeabilidade da parede intestinal e, portanto, aumento da apresentação da gliadina ao sistema imunológico.

Um inibidor dessa via é o acetato de larazotida, que está atualmente programado para os ensaios clínicos de fase 3.

Outros modificadores de outras etapas bem conhecidas na patogênese da doença celíaca, como a ação de HLA-DQ2 ou transglutaminase tecidual e a interação MICA/NKG2D que podem estar envolvidas na morte de enterócitos. doença ainda estão na fase I de testes clínicos; um agente (CCX282-B) foi avaliado em um ensaio clínico de fase II baseado em biópsias do intestino delgado de pessoas com doença celíaca antes e depois da exposição ao glúten. evidências de que uma dieta sem glúten é benéfica no tratamento do autismo.

No subconjunto de pessoas que têm sensibilidade ao glúten, há evidências limitadas que sugerem que uma dieta sem glúten pode melhorar alguns comportamentos autistas.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coeliac_disease

;;;FR;;;



LA MALADIE COELIAQUE


La maladie coeliaque (maladie cœliaque en anglais américain) est une maladie auto-immune de longue durée, affectant principalement l'intestin grêle, où les individus développent une intolérance au gluten, présent dans des aliments tels que le blé, le seigle et l'orge.

Les symptômes classiques comprennent des problèmes gastro-intestinaux tels que la diarrhée chronique, la distension abdominale, la malabsorption, la perte d'appétit et, chez les enfants, un retard de croissance.

Cela commence souvent entre six mois et deux ans.

Les symptômes non classiques sont plus fréquents, en particulier chez les personnes âgées de plus de deux ans.

Il peut y avoir des symptômes gastro-intestinaux légers ou absents, un grand nombre de symptômes impliquant n'importe quelle partie du corps, ou aucun symptôme évident.

La maladie coeliaque a été décrite pour la première fois dans l'enfance; cependant, il peut se développer à tout âge.

Elle est associée à d'autres maladies auto-immunes, telles que le diabète sucré de type 1 et la thyroïdite de Hashimoto, entre autres. La maladie cœliaque est causée par une réaction au gluten, un groupe de diverses protéines présentes dans le blé et dans d'autres céréales telles que l'orge et le seigle.

Des quantités modérées d'avoine, exemptes de contamination par d'autres céréales contenant du gluten, sont généralement tolérées.

L'apparition de problèmes peut dépendre de la variété d'avoine.

Il survient chez les personnes génétiquement prédisposées.

Lors d'une exposition au gluten, une réponse immunitaire anormale peut conduire à la production de plusieurs auto-anticorps différents qui peuvent affecter un certain nombre d'organes différents.

Dans l'intestin grêle, cela provoque une réaction inflammatoire et peut produire un raccourcissement des villosités tapissant l'intestin grêle (atrophie villositaire).

Cela affecte l'absorption des nutriments, entraînant fréquemment une anémie. Le diagnostic repose généralement sur une combinaison de tests d'anticorps sanguins et de biopsies intestinales, aidés par des tests génétiques spécifiques.

Poser le diagnostic n'est pas toujours simple.

Environ 10 % du temps, les auto-anticorps dans le sang sont négatifs et de nombreuses personnes ne présentent que des modifications intestinales mineures avec des villosités normales.

Les personnes peuvent présenter des symptômes graves et être examinées pendant des années avant qu'un diagnostic ne soit posé.

De plus en plus, le diagnostic est posé chez des personnes asymptomatiques, à la suite d'un dépistage.

Cependant, les preuves concernant les effets du dépistage ne sont pas suffisantes pour déterminer son utilité.

Si la maladie est causée par une intolérance permanente aux protéines de gluten, elle se distingue de l'allergie au blé, qui est beaucoup plus rare. Le seul traitement efficace connu est un régime sans gluten strict à vie, qui entraîne une récupération de la muqueuse intestinale membrane), améliore les symptômes et réduit le risque de développer des complications chez la plupart des gens.

Si elle n'est pas traitée, elle peut entraîner des cancers tels que le lymphome intestinal et un risque légèrement accru de décès prématuré.

Les taux varient entre les différentes régions du monde, allant d'aussi peu que 1 sur 300 à 1 sur 40, avec une moyenne comprise entre 1 sur 100 et 1 sur 170 personnes.

On estime que 80% des cas restent non diagnostiqués, généralement en raison de troubles gastro-intestinaux minimes ou absents et d'un manque de connaissance des symptômes et des critères de diagnostic.

La maladie cœliaque est légèrement plus fréquente chez les femmes que chez les hommes.


== Signes et symptômes ==

Les symptômes classiques de la maladie coeliaque non traitée comprennent des selles pâles, molles ou graisseuses (stéatorrhée) et une perte de poids ou une incapacité à prendre du poids.

D'autres symptômes courants peuvent être subtils ou se produire principalement dans des organes autres que l'intestin lui-même.

Il est également possible d'avoir la maladie cœliaque sans aucun des symptômes classiques.

Il a été démontré que cela comprend au moins 43% des présentations chez les enfants.

De plus, de nombreux adultes atteints d'une maladie subtile peuvent ne présenter que de la fatigue ou de l'anémie.

De nombreuses personnes non diagnostiquées qui se considèrent comme asymptomatiques ne le sont en fait pas, mais se sont plutôt habituées à vivre dans un état de santé chroniquement compromis.

En effet, après avoir commencé un régime sans gluten et qu'une amélioration ultérieure devient évidente, ces personnes sont souvent capables de se rappeler rétrospectivement et de reconnaître les symptômes antérieurs de leur maladie non traitée qu'elles avaient ignorées par erreur.


=== Gastro-intestinal ===

La diarrhée caractéristique de la maladie coeliaque est chronique, parfois pâle, de volume important et d'odeur anormalement nauséabonde.

Des douleurs abdominales, des crampes, des ballonnements avec distension abdominale (que l'on pense être le résultat de la production fermentative de gaz intestinaux) et des aphtes peuvent être présents.

À mesure que l'intestin devient plus endommagé, un degré d'intolérance au lactose peut se développer.

Fréquemment, les symptômes sont attribués au syndrome du côlon irritable (IBS), qui n'est reconnu que plus tard comme une maladie coeliaque.

Dans les populations de personnes présentant des symptômes du SCI, un diagnostic de maladie coeliaque peut être posé dans environ 3,3 % des cas, soit quatre fois plus de chances qu'en général.

Le dépistage de la maladie cœliaque est recommandé par le National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE), la British Society of Gastroenterology et l'American College of Gastroenterology, mais ses avantages ne sont pas clairs en Amérique du Nord. La maladie cœliaque entraîne un risque accru de adénocarcinome et lymphome de l'intestin grêle (lymphome à cellules T associé à une entéropathie (EATL) ou autres lymphomes non hodgkiniens).

Ce risque est également plus élevé chez les parents au premier degré tels que les frères et sœurs, les parents et les enfants.

Il n'est pas clair si un régime sans gluten ramène ce risque à son niveau de référence.

Une maladie de longue date et non traitée peut entraîner d'autres complications, telles qu'une jéjunite ulcéreuse (formation d'ulcères de l'intestin grêle) et une sténose (rétrécissement résultant d'une cicatrisation avec obstruction de l'intestin).


=== Lié à la malabsorption ===

Les changements dans l'intestin réduisent sa capacité à absorber les nutriments, les minéraux et les vitamines liposolubles A, D, E et K.
La malabsorption des glucides et des lipides peut entraîner une perte de poids (ou un retard de croissance ou un retard de croissance chez les enfants) et de la fatigue ou un manque d'énergie.
L'anémie peut se développer de plusieurs manières : la malabsorption du fer peut entraîner une anémie ferriprive, et la malabsorption de l'acide folique et de la vitamine B12 peut entraîner une anémie mégaloblastique.
La malabsorption du calcium et de la vitamine D (et l'hyperparathyroïdie secondaire compensatoire) peut entraîner une ostéopénie (diminution de la teneur minérale de l'os) ou une ostéoporose (affaiblissement osseux et risque de fractures de fragilité).
La malabsorption du sélénium dans la maladie coeliaque, associée à une faible teneur en sélénium dans de nombreux aliments sans gluten, confère un risque de carence en sélénium.
Les carences en cuivre et en zinc ont également été associées à la maladie coeliaque.
Une petite proportion a une coagulation anormale en raison d'une carence en vitamine K et présente un léger risque de saignement anormal.


=== Divers ===

La maladie coeliaque a été liée à de nombreuses conditions.

Dans de nombreux cas, il n'est pas clair si la maladie intestinale induite par le gluten est un facteur causal ou si ces conditions partagent une prédisposition commune.

Le déficit en IgA est présent chez 2,3 % des personnes atteintes de la maladie coeliaque, et est lui-même associé à un risque multiplié par dix de maladie coeliaque.

D'autres caractéristiques de cette condition sont un risque accru d'infections et de maladies auto-immunes.
La dermatite herpétiforme, une affection cutanée qui démange qui a été liée à une enzyme transglutaminase dans la peau, présente des modifications de l'intestin grêle identiques à celles de la maladie cœliaque et peut répondre au sevrage du gluten même en l'absence de symptômes gastro-intestinaux.
Un retard de croissance et/ou un retard pubertaire plus tard dans l'enfance peuvent survenir même en l'absence de symptômes intestinaux évidents ou de malnutrition sévère.

L'évaluation du retard de croissance comprend souvent le dépistage coeliaque.
Des complications de la grossesse peuvent survenir si la maladie coeliaque est préexistante ou acquise ultérieurement, avec des résultats significatifs, notamment une fausse couche, un retard de croissance intra-utérin, un faible poids à la naissance et une naissance prématurée.
L'hyposplénisme (une petite rate peu active) survient dans environ un tiers des cas et peut prédisposer à l'infection étant donné le rôle de la rate dans la protection contre les bactéries nocives.
Des tests de la fonction hépatique anormaux (détectés au hasard sur des tests sanguins) peuvent être observés. La maladie cœliaque est associée à plusieurs autres conditions médicales, dont beaucoup sont des troubles auto-immuns : diabète sucré de type 1, hypothyroïdie, cholangite biliaire primitive, colite microscopique, ataxie au gluten, psoriasis , vitiligo, hépatite auto-immune, cholangite sclérosante primitive, etc.


== cause ==

La maladie cœliaque est causée par une réaction inflammatoire aux gliadines et aux gluténines (protéines de gluten) présentes dans le blé et à des protéines similaires présentes dans les cultures de la tribu Triticeae (qui comprend d'autres céréales communes telles que l'orge et le seigle) et à la tribu Aveneae (avoine ).

Les sous-espèces de blé (comme l'épeautre, le blé dur et le kamut) et les hybrides de blé (comme le triticale) provoquent également des symptômes de la maladie coeliaque. Un petit nombre de personnes atteintes de la maladie coeliaque réagissent à l'avoine.

La toxicité de l'avoine chez les personnes coeliaques dépend du cultivar d'avoine consommé car les gènes de la prolamine, les séquences d'acides aminés protéiques et les immunoréactivités des prolamines toxiques sont différentes selon les variétés d'avoine.

De plus, l'avoine est fréquemment contaminée par d'autres céréales contenant du gluten.

Le terme "avoine pure" fait référence à de l'avoine non contaminée par d'autres céréales contenant du gluten.

Les effets à long terme de la consommation d'avoine pure ne sont toujours pas clairs et d'autres études identifiant les cultivars utilisés sont nécessaires avant de formuler des recommandations finales sur leur inclusion dans un régime sans gluten.

Les personnes coeliaques qui choisissent de consommer de l'avoine ont besoin d'un suivi plus rigoureux tout au long de leur vie, comprenant éventuellement des biopsies intestinales périodiques.


=== Autres céréales ===

D'autres céréales telles que le maïs, le millet, le sorgho, le teff, le riz et le riz sauvage sont sans danger pour les personnes atteintes de la maladie coeliaque, ainsi que les non-céréales telles que l'amarante, le quinoa et le sarrasin.

Les aliments riches en glucides non céréaliers tels que les pommes de terre et les bananes ne contiennent pas de gluten et ne déclenchent pas de symptômes.


=== Modificateurs de risque ===

Il existe diverses théories sur ce qui détermine si un individu génétiquement prédisposé développera la maladie coeliaque.

Les principales théories incluent la chirurgie, la grossesse, l'infection et le stress émotionnel. La consommation de gluten au début de la vie d'un bébé ne semble pas augmenter le risque de maladie coeliaque, mais une introduction ultérieure après 6 mois peut l'augmenter.

On ne sait pas si l'allaitement réduit le risque.

La prolongation de l'allaitement jusqu'à l'introduction de céréales contenant du gluten dans l'alimentation semble être associée à une réduction de 50 % du risque de développer la maladie cœliaque pendant la petite enfance ; si cela persiste à l'âge adulte n'est pas clair.

Ces facteurs peuvent simplement influencer le moment de l'apparition.


== Physiopathologie ==

La maladie coeliaque semble être multifactorielle, à la fois en ce que plus d'un facteur génétique peut causer la maladie et en ce que plus d'un facteur est nécessaire pour que la maladie se manifeste chez une personne.
Presque toutes les personnes (95 %) atteintes de la maladie coeliaque ont soit l'allèle variant HLA-DQ2, soit (moins fréquemment) l'allèle HLA-DQ8.

Cependant, environ 20 à 30 % des personnes sans maladie cœliaque ont également hérité de l'un ou l'autre de ces allèles.

Cela suggère que des facteurs supplémentaires sont nécessaires pour que la maladie coeliaque se développe ; c'est-à-dire que l'allèle de risque HLA prédisposant est nécessaire mais pas suffisant pour développer la maladie coeliaque.

De plus, environ 5 % des personnes qui développent la maladie cœliaque n'ont pas d'allèles HLA-DQ2 ou HLA-DQ8 typiques (voir ci-dessous).


=== Génétique ===


La grande majorité des personnes coeliaques ont l'un des deux types (sur sept) de la protéine HLA-DQ.

HLA-DQ fait partie du système du récepteur présentateur d'antigène de classe II du CMH (également appelé antigène leucocytaire humain) et distingue les cellules entre soi et non soi aux fins du système immunitaire.

Les deux sous-unités de la protéine HLA-DQ sont codées par les gènes HLA-DQA1 et HLA-DQB1, situés sur le bras court du chromosome 6.
Il existe sept variantes HLA-DQ (DQ2 et DQ4-DQ9).

Plus de 95 % des personnes coeliaques ont l'isoforme DQ2 ou DQ8, qui est héritée dans les familles.

La raison pour laquelle ces gènes produisent une augmentation du risque de maladie cœliaque est que les récepteurs formés par ces gènes se lient plus étroitement aux peptides de gliadine que d'autres formes du récepteur présentateur d'antigène.

Par conséquent, ces formes du récepteur sont plus susceptibles d'activer les lymphocytes T et d'initier le processus auto-immun.

La plupart des personnes coeliaques portent un haplotype HLA-DQ2 à deux gènes appelé haplotype DQ2.5.

Cet haplotype est composé de deux allèles géniques adjacents, DQA1*0501 et DQB1*0201, qui codent pour les deux sous-unités, DQ α5 et DQ β2.

Chez la plupart des individus, cette isoforme DQ2.5 est codée par l'un des deux chromosomes 6 hérités des parents (DQ2.5cis).

La plupart des coeliaques héritent d'une seule copie de cet haplotype DQ2.5, tandis que certains l'héritent des deux parents; ces derniers sont particulièrement à risque de maladie cœliaque et sont plus susceptibles de complications graves. Certaines personnes héritent de DQ2.5 d'un parent et d'une partie supplémentaire de l'haplotype (soit DQB1 * 02 ou DQA1 * 05) de l'autre parent, risque croissant.

Moins fréquemment, certaines personnes héritent de l'allèle DQA1 * 05 d'un parent et du DQB1 * 02 de l'autre parent (DQ2.5trans) (appelé une association trans-haplotype), et ces personnes présentent un risque similaire de maladie cœliaque que ceux avec un seul chromosome 6 porteur de DQ2.5, mais dans ce cas, la maladie a tendance à ne pas être familiale.

Parmi les 6 % de cœliaques européens qui n'ont pas DQ2.5 (cis ou trans) ou DQ8 (codé par l'haplotype DQA1*03:DQB1*0302), 4 % ont l'isoforme DQ2.2, et les 2 % restants manquent DQ2 ou DQ8. La fréquence de ces gènes varie géographiquement.

Le DQ2.5 a une fréquence élevée chez les peuples d'Europe du Nord et de l'Ouest (Pays basque et Irlande avec les fréquences les plus élevées) et dans certaines parties de l'Afrique et est associé à des maladies en Inde, mais il ne se trouve pas le long de certaines parties du pourtour du Pacifique Ouest.

DQ8 a une distribution mondiale plus large que DQ2.5 et est particulièrement courant en Amérique du Sud et centrale ; jusqu'à 90 % des individus de certaines populations amérindiennes sont porteurs de DQ8 et peuvent donc présenter le phénotype cœliaque. D'autres facteurs génétiques ont été rapportés à plusieurs reprises dans la maladie cœliaque ; cependant, l'implication dans la maladie a une reconnaissance géographique variable.

Seuls les loci HLA-DQ montrent une implication constante sur la population globale.

De nombreux locus détectés ont été trouvés en association avec d'autres maladies auto-immunes.

Un locus, le gène partenaire préféré du LPP ou du lipome, est impliqué dans l'adhésion de la matrice extracellulaire à la surface cellulaire, et une variante mineure (SNP = rs1464510) augmente le risque de maladie d'environ 30 %.

Ce gène est fortement associé à la maladie cœliaque (p < 10−39) dans des échantillons prélevés dans une vaste zone d'Europe et des États-Unis. La prévalence des génotypes de la maladie cœliaque dans la population moderne n'est pas complètement comprise.

Compte tenu des caractéristiques de la maladie et de sa forte héritabilité apparente, on s'attendrait normalement à ce que les génotypes subissent une sélection négative et soient absents dans les sociétés où l'agriculture est pratiquée depuis le plus longtemps (comparer avec une affection similaire, l'intolérance au lactose, qui a été négativement sélectionné si fortement que sa prévalence est passée de ~100% dans les populations ancestrales à moins de 5% dans certains pays européens).

Cette attente a été proposée pour la première fois par Simoons (1981).

À l'heure actuelle, cependant, il est évident que ce n'est pas le cas; au contraire, il existe des preuves de sélection positive dans les génotypes de la maladie cœliaque.

On soupçonne que certains d'entre eux peuvent avoir été bénéfiques en offrant une protection contre les infections bactériennes.


=== Prolamines ===

La majorité des protéines alimentaires responsables de la réaction immunitaire dans la maladie coeliaque sont les prolamines.

Ce sont des protéines de stockage riches en proline (prol-) et en glutamine (-amin) qui se dissolvent dans les alcools et résistent aux protéases et peptidases de l'intestin.

Les prolamines se trouvent dans les grains de céréales avec différents grains ayant des prolamines différentes mais apparentées : le blé (gliadine), l'orge (hordéine), le seigle (sécaline) et l'avoine (avénine).

Une région de l'α-gliadine stimule les cellules membranaires, les entérocytes, de l'intestin pour permettre à de plus grosses molécules autour du scellant entre les cellules.

La perturbation des jonctions serrées permet aux peptides de plus de trois acides aminés de pénétrer dans la muqueuse intestinale.

La fuite membranaire permet aux peptides de gliadine de stimuler deux niveaux de la réponse immunitaire : la réponse innée et la réponse adaptative (médiée par les cellules T auxiliaires).

Un peptide résistant aux protéases de l'α-gliadine contient une région qui stimule les lymphocytes et entraîne la libération d'interleukine-15.

Cette réponse innée à la gliadine entraîne une signalisation du système immunitaire qui attire les cellules inflammatoires et augmente la libération de produits chimiques inflammatoires.

La réponse adaptative la plus forte et la plus courante à la gliadine est dirigée vers un fragment α2-gliadine de 33 acides aminés de long. La réponse au 33mer se produit chez la plupart des coeliaques qui ont une isoforme DQ2.

Ce peptide, lorsqu'il est altéré par la transglutaminase intestinale, a une densité élevée d'épitopes de lymphocytes T qui se chevauchent.

Cela augmente la probabilité que l'isoforme DQ2 se lie et reste liée au peptide lorsqu'il est reconnu par les lymphocytes T.

La gliadine dans le blé est le membre le mieux compris de cette famille, mais d'autres prolamines existent, et l'hordéine (de l'orge), la sécaline (du seigle) et l'avénine (de l'avoine) peuvent contribuer à la maladie coeliaque.

La toxicité des avenines chez les personnes atteintes de la maladie coeliaque dépend du cultivar d'avoine consommé en raison des gènes de la prolamine, des séquences d'acides aminés protéiques et des immunoréactivités des prolamines toxiques, qui varient selon les variétés d'avoine.


=== Transglutaminase tissulaire ===


Les anticorps anti-transglutaminase dirigés contre l'enzyme transglutaminase tissulaire (tTG) sont présents dans le sang de la majorité des personnes présentant des symptômes classiques et une atrophie villositaire complète, mais seulement dans 70 % des cas d'atrophie villositaire partielle et 30 % des cas d'atrophie villositaire mineure. lésions muqueuses.

La transglutaminase tissulaire modifie les peptides de gluten en une forme qui peut stimuler plus efficacement le système immunitaire.

Ces peptides sont modifiés par tTG de deux manières, désamidation ou transamidation. La désamidation est la réaction par laquelle un résidu glutamate est formé par clivage du groupe epsilon-amino d'une chaîne latérale de glutamine.

La transamidation, qui se produit trois fois plus souvent que la désamidation, est la réticulation d'un résidu glutamine du peptide gliadine à un résidu lysine de tTg dans une réaction qui est catalysée par la transglutaminase.

La réticulation peut se produire à l'intérieur ou à l'extérieur du site actif de l'enzyme.

Ce dernier cas donne un complexe lié de manière covalente permanente entre la gliadine et la tTg.

Cela se traduit par la formation de nouveaux épitopes censés déclencher la réponse immunitaire primaire par laquelle les auto-anticorps dirigés contre tTg se développent.

Ces dépôts se retrouvent également chez les personnes qui présentent d'autres maladies auto-immunes, une anémie ou des phénomènes de malabsorption à un taux beaucoup plus élevé que la population normale.

On pense que les composants endomysiaux des anticorps (EMA) anti-tTG sont dirigés vers la transglutaminase de surface cellulaire, et ces anticorps sont toujours utilisés pour confirmer un diagnostic de maladie cœliaque.

Cependant, une étude de 2006 a montré que les personnes coeliaques EMA-négatives ont tendance à être des hommes plus âgés présentant des symptômes abdominaux plus graves et une fréquence plus faible de symptômes "atypiques", y compris les maladies auto-immunes.

Dans cette étude, les dépôts d'anticorps anti-tTG n'étaient pas corrélés à la sévérité de la destruction villositaire.

Ces résultats, associés à des travaux récents montrant que la gliadine a une composante de réponse innée, suggèrent que la gliadine pourrait être plus responsable des manifestations primaires de la maladie coeliaque, alors que la tTG est un facteur plus important dans les effets secondaires tels que les réponses allergiques et les maladies auto-immunes secondaires.

Chez un grand pourcentage de personnes atteintes de cœliaque, les anticorps anti-tTG reconnaissent également une protéine de rotavirus appelée VP7.

Ces anticorps stimulent la prolifération des monocytes et l'infection à rotavirus pourrait expliquer certaines étapes précoces de la cascade de prolifération des cellules immunitaires. En effet, des études antérieures sur les dommages causés par le rotavirus dans l'intestin ont montré que cela provoque une atrophie villositaire.

Cela suggère que les protéines virales peuvent participer à l'aplatissement initial et stimuler la production d'anti-VP7 à auto-réaction croisée.

Les anticorps dirigés contre VP7 peuvent également ralentir la guérison jusqu'à ce que la présentation de tTG médiée par la gliadine fournisse une deuxième source d'anticorps à réaction croisée.
D'autres troubles intestinaux peuvent avoir une biopsie qui ressemble à la maladie coeliaque, y compris des lésions causées par Candida.


=== Atrophie villeuse et malabsorption ===

Le processus inflammatoire, médié par les cellules T, entraîne une perturbation de la structure et de la fonction de la muqueuse de l'intestin grêle et provoque une malabsorption car il altère la capacité du corps à absorber les nutriments, les minéraux et les vitamines liposolubles A, D, E et K de la nourriture.

L'intolérance au lactose peut être présente en raison de la diminution de la surface intestinale et de la production réduite de lactase, mais elle disparaît généralement une fois la maladie traitée.
Des causes alternatives de ces lésions tissulaires ont été proposées et impliquent la libération d'interleukine 15 et l'activation du système immunitaire inné par un peptide de gluten plus court (p31–43/49).

Cela déclencherait la destruction des entérocytes par les lymphocytes dans l'épithélium.

L'atrophie villositaire observée à la biopsie peut également être due à des causes non liées, telles que la sprue tropicale, la giardiase et l'entérite radique.

Bien qu'une sérologie positive et une biopsie typique soient fortement évocatrices de la maladie cœliaque, l'absence de réponse au régime alimentaire peut nécessiter l'examen de ces diagnostics alternatifs.


== Diagnostic ==

Le diagnostic est souvent difficile et depuis 2019, les médecins continuent de méconnaître la variabilité des présentations de la maladie cœliaque et des critères de diagnostic, de sorte que la plupart des cas sont diagnostiqués avec beaucoup de retard.

Cela peut prendre jusqu'à 12 ans pour recevoir un diagnostic dès l'apparition des symptômes et la majorité des personnes touchées dans la plupart des pays ne le reçoivent jamais. Plusieurs tests peuvent être utilisés.

Le niveau des symptômes peut déterminer l'ordre des tests, mais tous les tests perdent leur utilité si la personne suit déjà un régime sans gluten.

Les lésions intestinales commencent à guérir quelques semaines après le retrait du gluten de l'alimentation et les niveaux d'anticorps diminuent au fil des mois.

Pour ceux qui ont déjà commencé un régime sans gluten, il peut être nécessaire d'effectuer un rechallenge avec certains aliments contenant du gluten en un repas par jour pendant 6 semaines avant de répéter les investigations.


=== Tests sanguins ===


Les tests sanguins sérologiques sont l'examen de première intention requis pour poser un diagnostic de maladie cœliaque.

Sa sensibilité est corrélée au degré des lésions histologiques.

Les personnes qui présentent des lésions mineures de l'intestin grêle peuvent avoir des résultats séronégatifs, de sorte que de nombreux patients atteints de la maladie cœliaque sont souvent oubliés.

Chez les patients atteints d'atrophie villositaire, les anticorps anti-endomysium (EMA) de type immunoglobuline A (IgA) peuvent détecter la maladie cœliaque avec une sensibilité et une spécificité de 90 % et 99 %, respectivement.

La sérologie pour les anticorps anti-transglutaminase (anti-tTG) a initialement été rapportée comme ayant une sensibilité (99 %) et une spécificité (> 90 %) plus élevées.

Cependant, on pense maintenant qu'il a des caractéristiques similaires aux anticorps anti-endomysium.

Les anticorps anti-transglutaminase et anti-endomysium ont une sensibilité élevée pour diagnostiquer les personnes présentant des symptômes classiques et une atrophie villositaire complète, mais ils ne se trouvent que dans 30 à 89 % des cas d'atrophie villositaire partielle et chez moins de 50 % des personnes qui ont des lésions muqueuses mineures (lymphocytose duodénale) avec des villosités normales. La transglutaminase tissulaire modifie les peptides de gluten en une forme qui peut stimuler le système immunitaire plus efficacement.

Ces peptides sont modifiés par tTG de deux manières, désamidation ou transamidation.

Les tests anti-tTG modernes reposent sur une protéine recombinante humaine comme antigène. Le test tTG doit être effectué en premier car il s'agit d'un test plus facile à réaliser.

Un résultat équivoque au test tTG doit être suivi d'anticorps anti-endomysium. négatif").

Chez ces personnes, les anticorps IgG contre la transglutaminase (IgG-tTG) peuvent être diagnostiques. Si tous ces anticorps sont négatifs, alors les anticorps anti-DGP (anticorps contre les peptides de gliadine désamidée) doivent être déterminés.

Les anticorps anti-DGP de classe IgG peuvent être utiles chez les personnes présentant un déficit en IgA.

Chez les enfants de moins de deux ans, les anticorps anti-DGP sont plus performants que les tests d'anticorps anti-endomysium et anti-transglutaminase. En raison des implications majeures d'un diagnostic de maladie coeliaque, les directives professionnelles recommandent qu'un test sanguin positif soit toujours suivi d'une endoscopie /gastroscopie et biopsie.

Une sérologie négative peut toujours être suivie d'une recommandation d'endoscopie et de biopsie duodénale si la suspicion clinique reste élevée. .

Le test ARA, cependant, n'est pas suffisamment précis pour une utilisation diagnostique de routine.

La sérologie peut ne pas être fiable chez les jeunes enfants, l'anti-gliadine étant un peu plus performante que les autres tests chez les enfants de moins de cinq ans.

Les tests sérologiques sont basés sur l'immunofluorescence indirecte (réticuline, gliadine et endomysium) ou ELISA (gliadine ou transglutaminase tissulaire, tTG). 5 % de ceux qui donnent du sang. Le test d'anticorps peut être combiné avec le test HLA si le diagnostic n'est pas clair.

Les tests TGA et EMA sont les tests d'anticorps sériques les plus sensibles, mais comme un type HLA-DQ négatif exclut le diagnostic de la maladie coeliaque, le test également pour HLA-DQ2 ou DQ8 maximise la sensibilité et les valeurs prédictives négatives.

Au Royaume-Uni, le National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE) ne recommande pas (en date de 2015) l'utilisation du typage HLA pour exclure la maladie coeliaque en dehors d'un cadre spécialisé, par exemple, chez les enfants qui n'ont pas de biopsie, ou chez les patients qui ont déjà une ingestion limitée de gluten et qui choisissent de ne pas subir de provocation au gluten.


=== Endoscopie ===


Une endoscopie haute avec biopsie du duodénum (au-delà du bulbe duodénal) ou du jéjunum est réalisée pour obtenir plusieurs échantillons (quatre à huit) du duodénum.

Tous les domaines ne sont peut-être pas touchés de la même manière; si des biopsies sont prélevées sur des tissus intestinaux sains, le résultat serait un faux négatif.

Même dans le même fragment bioptique, différents degrés de
des dommages peuvent être présents. La plupart des personnes atteintes de la maladie cœliaque ont un intestin grêle qui semble normal à l'endoscopie avant que les biopsies ne soient examinées.

Cependant, cinq résultats ont été associés à une spécificité élevée pour la maladie cœliaque : festonnage des plis de l'intestin grêle (photo), manque de plis, motif en mosaïque de la muqueuse (décrit comme une apparence de « boue fissurée »), proéminence des les vaisseaux sanguins sous-muqueux et un motif nodulaire sur la muqueuse. Les directives européennes suggèrent que chez les enfants et les adolescents présentant des symptômes compatibles avec la maladie coeliaque, le diagnostic peut être posé sans qu'il soit nécessaire de recourir à une biopsie intestinale si les titres d'anticorps anti-tTG sont très élevés (10 fois la limite supérieure de la normale). Jusque dans les années 1970, les biopsies étaient obtenues à l'aide de capsules métalliques fixées à un dispositif d'aspiration.

La capsule a été avalée et laissée passer dans l'intestin grêle.

Après vérification radiographique de sa position, une aspiration a été appliquée pour recueillir une partie de la paroi intestinale à l'intérieur de la capsule.

Les systèmes de capsules souvent utilisés étaient la capsule Watson et la capsule Crosby – Kugler.

Cette méthode a maintenant été largement remplacée par l'endoscopie à fibres optiques, qui présente une sensibilité plus élevée et une fréquence d'erreurs plus faible. histologie.

L'EC n'est donc pas le principal outil de diagnostic de la maladie coeliaque.

Cependant, la CE peut être utilisée pour diagnostiquer le lymphome à cellules T, la jéjunoiléite ulcéreuse et l'adénocarcinome dans la maladie cœliaque réfractaire ou compliquée.


=== Pathologie ===

Les changements pathologiques classiques de la maladie coeliaque dans l'intestin grêle sont classés par la "classification Marsh":
Marsh stade 0 : muqueuse normale
Stade Marsh 1 : augmentation du nombre de lymphocytes intra-épithéliaux (IEL), dépassant généralement 20 pour 100 entérocytes
Marais étape 2 : une prolifération des cryptes de Lieberkühn
Marsh stade 3 : atrophie villositaire partielle ou complète et hypertrophie des cryptes
Stade 4 de Marsh : hypoplasie de l'architecture de l'intestin grêle La classification de Marsh, introduite en 1992, a ensuite été modifiée en 1999 en six stades, le stade 3 précédent étant scindé en trois sous-stades.

D'autres études ont démontré que ce système n'était pas toujours fiable et que les changements observés dans la maladie coeliaque pouvaient être décrits en trois étapes :
A représentant une infiltration lymphocytaire d'aspect villeux normal ;
B1 décrivant une atrophie villositaire partielle ; et
B2 décrivant l'atrophie villositaire complète. Les changements s'améliorent ou s'inversent classiquement après le retrait du gluten de l'alimentation.

Cependant, la plupart des lignes directrices ne recommandent pas une nouvelle biopsie à moins qu'il n'y ait aucune amélioration des symptômes avec le régime alimentaire.

Dans certains cas, une provocation délibérée au gluten, suivie d'une biopsie, peut être effectuée pour confirmer ou infirmer le diagnostic.

Une biopsie normale et une sérologie normale après provocation indiquent que le diagnostic peut avoir été incorrect. Dans la maladie cœliaque non traitée, l'atrophie villositaire est plus fréquente chez les enfants de moins de trois ans, mais chez les enfants plus âgés et les adultes, il est fréquent de trouver des lésions intestinales mineures lymphocytose) avec des villosités intestinales normales.


=== Autres tests diagnostiques ===

Au moment du diagnostic, d'autres examens peuvent être effectués pour identifier les complications, telles qu'une carence en fer (par numération globulaire complète et études sur le fer), une carence en acide folique et en vitamine B12 et une hypocalcémie (faibles taux de calcium, souvent dus à une diminution des taux de vitamine D) .

Des tests de la fonction thyroïdienne peuvent être demandés lors de tests sanguins pour identifier l'hypothyroïdie, qui est plus fréquente chez les personnes atteintes de la maladie cœliaque.L'ostéopénie et l'ostéoporose, une densité minérale osseuse légèrement et sévèrement réduite, sont souvent présentes chez les personnes atteintes de la maladie cœliaque, et des investigations pour mesurer la densité osseuse peuvent être réalisées au moment du diagnostic, comme l'absorptiométrie biénergétique à rayons X (DXA), pour identifier le risque de fracture et le besoin de médicaments de protection osseuse.


=== Retrait de gluten ===

Bien que les tests d'anticorps sanguins, les biopsies et les tests génétiques fournissent généralement un diagnostic clair, la réponse au sevrage du gluten dans le cadre d'un régime sans gluten est parfois nécessaire pour étayer le diagnostic.

Actuellement, la provocation au gluten n'est plus nécessaire pour confirmer le diagnostic chez les patients présentant des lésions intestinales compatibles avec la maladie coeliaque et une réponse positive à un régime sans gluten.

Néanmoins, dans certains cas, une provocation au gluten avec une biopsie ultérieure peut être utile pour étayer le diagnostic, par exemple chez les personnes avec une forte suspicion de maladie cœliaque, sans confirmation de biopsie, qui ont des anticorps sanguins négatifs et sont déjà sous gluten- alimentation gratuite.

Le challenge gluten est déconseillé avant l'âge de 5 ans et pendant la croissance pubertaire.

Le diagnostic alternatif de sensibilité au gluten non coeliaque peut être posé lorsqu'il n'y a que des signes symptomatiques de sensibilité au gluten.

Les symptômes gastro-intestinaux et extra-intestinaux des personnes sensibles au gluten non cœliaque peuvent être similaires à ceux de la maladie cœliaque et s'améliorer lorsque le gluten est retiré de l'alimentation, après que la maladie cœliaque et l'allergie au blé sont raisonnablement exclues. Jusqu'à 30 % des personnes continuent souvent d'avoir ou redévelopper des symptômes après avoir commencé un régime sans gluten.

Une interprétation prudente de la réponse symptomatique est nécessaire, car l'absence de réponse chez une personne atteinte de la maladie cœliaque peut être due à l'ingestion continue de petites quantités de gluten, volontaire ou par inadvertance, ou être due à d'autres affections couramment associées telles que l'intestin grêle. la prolifération bactérienne (SIBO), l'intolérance au lactose, la malabsorption du fructose, du saccharose et du sorbitol, l'insuffisance pancréatique exocrine et la colite microscopique, entre autres.

Dans la maladie cœliaque non traitée, il s'agit souvent d'affections transitoires dérivées de lésions intestinales.

Ils régressent ou s'améliorent normalement plusieurs mois après le début d'un régime sans gluten, mais peuvent nécessiter des interventions temporaires telles qu'une supplémentation en enzymes pancréatiques, des restrictions alimentaires en aliments contenant du lactose, du fructose, du saccharose ou du sorbitol, ou un traitement avec des antibiotiques oraux en cas d'affections associées. prolifération bactérienne.

En plus du sevrage du gluten, certaines personnes doivent suivre un régime pauvre en FODMAP ou éviter la consommation de produits commerciaux sans gluten, qui sont généralement riches en conservateurs et additifs (tels que les sulfites, les glutamates, les nitrates et les benzoates) et pourraient avoir un rôle dans le déclenchement de symptômes gastro-intestinaux fonctionnels.


== Dépistage ==

Il y a débat sur les avantages du dépistage.

En 2017, le groupe de travail sur les services préventifs des États-Unis a trouvé des preuves insuffisantes pour faire une recommandation parmi les personnes sans symptômes.

Au Royaume-Uni, le National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE) recommande de tester la maladie coeliaque chez les parents au premier degré de ceux dont la maladie est déjà confirmée, chez les personnes souffrant de fatigue persistante, de symptômes abdominaux ou gastro-intestinaux, d'un retard de croissance, d'un poids inexpliqué. perte ou carence en fer, en vitamine B12 ou en acide folique, ulcères buccaux graves et avec des diagnostics de diabète de type 1, de maladie thyroïdienne auto-immune et avec un syndrome de fatigue chronique et un syndrome du côlon irritable nouvellement diagnostiqués.

La dermatite herpétiforme est incluse dans d'autres recommandations.

Le NICE recommande également de proposer des tests sérologiques pour la maladie coeliaque aux personnes atteintes d'une maladie osseuse métabolique (densité minérale osseuse réduite ou ostéomalacie), de troubles neurologiques inexpliqués (tels que la neuropathie périphérique et l'ataxie), de problèmes de fertilité ou de fausses couches récurrentes, d'enzymes hépatiques élevées de manière persistante avec une cause inconnue , des défauts de l'émail dentaire et avec un diagnostic de syndrome de Down ou de syndrome de Turner. Certaines preuves ont montré que la détection précoce peut réduire le risque de développer des complications de santé, telles que l'ostéoporose, l'anémie et certains types de cancer, des troubles neurologiques, des maladies cardiovasculaires et des troubles de la reproduction. problèmes.

Ils recommandent ainsi le dépistage chez les personnes ayant certains problèmes de santé. La sérologie a été proposée comme mesure de dépistage, car la présence d'anticorps permettrait de détecter certains cas de maladie cœliaque jusque-là non diagnostiqués et de prévenir ses complications chez ces personnes.

Cependant, les tests sérologiques n'ont une sensibilité élevée que chez les personnes atteintes d'atrophie villositaire totale et ont une très faible capacité à détecter les cas d'atrophie villositaire partielle ou de lésions intestinales mineures.

Des tests de dépistage de la maladie cœliaque peuvent être proposés aux personnes souffrant de maladies couramment associées.


== Traitement ==



=== Régime ===


À l'heure actuelle, le seul traitement efficace est un régime sans gluten à vie.

Il n'existe aucun médicament qui prévienne les dommages ou empêche le corps d'attaquer l'intestin lorsque le gluten est présent.

Une stricte adhésion au régime alimentaire aide les intestins à guérir, entraînant la résolution de tous les symptômes dans la plupart des cas et, selon la rapidité avec laquelle le régime est commencé, peut également éliminer le risque accru d'ostéoporose et de cancer de l'intestin et, dans certains cas, de stérilité.

Le régime peut être lourd; le non-respect du régime peut entraîner une rechute.
L'apport d'un diététicien est généralement demandé pour s'assurer que la personne sait quels aliments contiennent du gluten, quels aliments sont sans danger et comment avoir une alimentation équilibrée malgré les limitations.

Dans de nombreux pays, les produits sans gluten sont disponibles sur ordonnance et peuvent être remboursés par les mutuelles.

Les produits sans gluten sont généralement plus chers et plus difficiles à trouver que les aliments courants contenant du gluten.

Étant donné que les produits prêts à l'emploi contiennent souvent des traces de gluten, certains cœliaques peuvent trouver nécessaire de cuisiner à partir de zéro. Le terme « sans gluten » est généralement utilisé pour indiquer un niveau supposé inoffensif de gluten plutôt qu'une absence complète.

Le niveau exact auquel le gluten est inoffensif est incertain et controversé.

Une revue systématique récente a provisoirement conclu que la consommation de moins de 10 mg de gluten par jour est peu susceptible de provoquer des anomalies histologiques, bien qu'elle ait noté que peu d'études fiables avaient été réalisées.

La réglementation du label "sans gluten" varie.

Dans l'Union européenne, la Commission européenne a publié en 2009 une réglementation limitant l'utilisation d'étiquettes « sans gluten » pour les produits alimentaires à ceux contenant moins de 20 mg/kg de gluten, et d'étiquettes « à très faible teneur en gluten » pour ceux contenant moins de 100 mg/kg. mg/kg.

Aux États-Unis, la FDA a publié en 2013 une réglementation limitant l'utilisation d'étiquettes « sans gluten » pour les produits alimentaires à ceux contenant moins de 20 ppm de gluten.

La norme internationale actuelle du Codex Alimentarius autorise 20 ppm de gluten dans les aliments dits "sans gluten". Un régime sans gluten améliore la qualité de vie liée aux soins de santé, et une adhésion stricte au régime alimentaire est plus bénéfique qu'une adhésion incomplète.

Néanmoins, le régime sans gluten ne normalise pas complètement la qualité de vie.


=== Maladie réfractaire ===

Entre 0,3% et 10% des personnes ont une maladie réfractaire, ce qui signifie qu'elles ont une atrophie villositaire persistante avec un régime sans gluten malgré l'absence d'exposition au gluten pendant plus de 12 mois.

Néanmoins, l'exposition accidentelle au gluten est la principale cause d'atrophie villositaire persistante et doit être exclue avant qu'un diagnostic de maladie réfractaire ne soit posé.

Les personnes ayant une faible éducation de base et une mauvaise compréhension du régime sans gluten croient souvent qu'elles suivent strictement le régime, mais commettent régulièrement des erreurs.

De plus, l'absence de symptômes n'est pas un indicateur fiable de la récupération intestinale. Si d'autres causes d'atrophie villositaire ont été éliminées, des stéroïdes ou des immunosuppresseurs (tels que l'azathioprine) peuvent être envisagés dans ce scénario. La maladie cœliaque réfractaire ne doit pas être confondue avec la persistance des symptômes malgré le sevrage du gluten causés par des conditions transitoires dérivées des dommages intestinaux, qui régressent ou s'améliorent généralement plusieurs mois après le début d'un régime sans gluten, telles que la prolifération bactérienne de l'intestin grêle, l'intolérance au lactose, la malabsorption du fructose, du saccharose et du sorbitol, le pancréas exocrine l'insuffisance et la colite microscopique entre autres.


== Épidémiologie ==

À l'échelle mondiale, la maladie coeliaque touche entre 1 personne sur 100 et 1 personne sur 170.

Les taux varient cependant entre les différentes régions du monde, allant d'aussi peu que 1 sur 300 à 1 sur 40.

Aux États-Unis, on pense qu'il affecte entre 1 sur 1750 (défini comme une maladie clinique comprenant la dermatite herpétiforme avec des symptômes limités du tube digestif) et 1 sur 105 (défini par la présence d'IgA TG chez les donneurs de sang).

En raison de signes et de symptômes variables, on pense qu'environ 85% des personnes touchées ne sont pas diagnostiquées.

Le pourcentage de personnes atteintes d'une maladie diagnostiquée cliniquement (symptômes incitant à un test de diagnostic) est de 0,05 à 0,27 % dans diverses études.

Cependant, des études de population menées dans certaines parties de l'Europe, de l'Inde, de l'Amérique du Sud, de l'Australasie et des États-Unis (utilisant la sérologie et la biopsie) indiquent que le pourcentage de personnes atteintes de la maladie peut se situer entre 0,33 et 1,06 % chez les enfants (mais 5,66 % dans une étude sur enfants du peuple sahraoui prédisposé) et 0,18–1,2% chez les adultes.

Parmi les personnes faisant partie des populations de soins primaires qui signalent des symptômes gastro-intestinaux, le taux de maladie cœliaque est d'environ 3 %.

En Australie, environ 1 personne sur 70 est atteinte de la maladie.

Le taux parmi les donneurs de sang adultes en Iran, en Israël, en Syrie et en Turquie est de 0,60 %, 0,64 %, 1,61 % et 1,15 %, respectivement. Les personnes d'origine africaine, japonaise et chinoise sont rarement diagnostiquées ; cela reflète une prévalence beaucoup plus faible des facteurs de risque génétiques, tels que HLA-B8.

Les personnes d'ascendance indienne semblent avoir un risque similaire à celles d'ascendance caucasienne occidentale.

Les études de population indiquent également qu'une grande proportion de cœliaques ne sont pas diagnostiqués; cela est dû, en partie, au fait que de nombreux cliniciens ne connaissent pas la maladie et également au fait qu'elle peut être asymptomatique.

La maladie cœliaque est légèrement plus fréquente chez les femmes que chez les hommes.

Une vaste étude multicentrique aux États-Unis a révélé une prévalence de 0,75 % dans les groupes non à risque, passant à 1,8 % chez les personnes symptomatiques, 2,6 % chez les parents au deuxième degré (comme les grands-parents, la tante ou l'oncle, les petits-enfants, etc.) de une personne atteinte de la maladie cœliaque et 4,5 % chez les parents au premier degré (frères et sœurs, parents ou enfants).

Ce profil est similaire à la prévalence en Europe.

D'autres populations à risque accru de maladie coeliaque, avec des taux de prévalence allant de 5 % à 10 %, comprennent les personnes atteintes du syndrome de Down et de Turner, du diabète de type 1 et d'une maladie thyroïdienne auto-immune, y compris l'hyperthyroïdie (thyroïde hyperactive) et l'hypothyroïdie (thyroïde sous-active) .Historiquement, la maladie cœliaque était considérée comme rare, avec une prévalence d'environ 0,02 %.

La raison de la récente augmentation du nombre de cas signalés n'est pas claire.

Cela peut être au moins en partie dû à des changements dans la pratique du diagnostic.

Il semble également y avoir une augmentation réelle d'environ 4,5 fois qui pourrait être due à une moindre exposition aux bactéries et autres agents pathogènes dans les environnements occidentaux.

Aux États-Unis, l'âge médian au moment du diagnostic est de 38 ans.

Environ 20 % des personnes atteintes de la maladie coeliaque sont diagnostiquées après 60 ans.


== Historique ==

Le terme "cœliaque" vient du grec κοιλιακός (koiliakós, "abdominal") et a été introduit au 19ème siècle dans une traduction de ce qui est généralement considéré comme une description grecque antique de la maladie par Aretaeus de Cappadoce. Les humains ont commencé à cultiver céréales au néolithique (à partir d'environ 9500 avant notre ère) dans le Croissant fertile en Asie occidentale, et, probablement, la maladie cœliaque ne s'est pas produite avant cette époque.

Aretaeus de Cappadoce, vivant au IIe siècle dans la même région, a enregistré un syndrome de malabsorption avec diarrhée chronique, provoquant une débilitation de tout le corps.

Son « affection cœliaque » (cœliaque du grec κοιλιακός koiliakos, « abdominale ») a attiré l'attention de la médecine occidentale lorsque Francis Adams a présenté une traduction de l'œuvre d'Aretée à la Société de Sydenham en 1856.

Le patient décrit dans l'ouvrage d'Arétaeus avait des douleurs à l'estomac et était atrophié, pâle, faible et incapable de travailler.

La diarrhée se manifestait par des selles molles blanches, malodorantes et flatulentes, et la maladie était intraitable et susceptible de revenir périodiquement.

Le problème, croyait Aretaeus, était un manque de chaleur dans l'estomac nécessaire pour digérer les aliments et une capacité réduite à distribuer les produits digestifs dans tout le corps, cette digestion incomplète entraînant des diarrhées.

Il considérait cela comme une affliction des personnes âgées et affectant plus souvent les femmes, excluant explicitement les enfants.

La cause, selon Aretaeus, était parfois soit une autre maladie chronique, soit même la consommation "d'une copieuse gorgée d'eau froide". Great Ormond Street, Londres, en 1887.

Gee a reconnu les descriptions et les termes antérieurs de la maladie et a adopté le même terme qu'Aretaeus (maladie cœliaque).

Il a déclaré avec perspicacité : "Si le patient peut être guéri, ce doit être au moyen d'un régime." Gee a reconnu que l'intolérance au lait est un problème chez les enfants coeliaques et que les aliments riches en amidon doivent être évités.

Cependant, il a interdit le riz, le sagou, les fruits et les légumes, qui auraient tous pu être consommés sans danger, et il a recommandé la viande crue ainsi que de fines tranches de pain grillé.

Gee a souligné un succès particulier avec un enfant "qui était nourri quotidiennement avec un litre des meilleures moules hollandaises". Cependant, l'enfant ne pouvait supporter ce régime pendant plus d'une saison. Christian Archibald Herter, médecin américain, écrivit en 1908 un livre sur les enfants atteints de la maladie coeliaque, qu'il appela "l'infantilisme intestinal".

Il a noté que leur croissance était retardée et que les graisses étaient mieux tolérées que les glucides.

La maladie éponyme de Gee-Herter était parfois utilisée pour reconnaître les deux contributions.

Sydney V.

Haas, un pédiatre américain, a rapporté les effets positifs d'un régime à base de bananes en 1924.

Ce régime est resté en vogue jusqu'à ce que la cause réelle de la maladie coeliaque soit déterminée. Alors qu'un rôle des glucides avait été suspecté, le lien avec le blé n'a été fait que dans les années 1940 par le pédiatre néerlandais Dr Willem Karel Dicke.

Il est probable que l'amélioration clinique de ses patients pendant la famine néerlandaise de 1944 (au cours de laquelle la farine était rare) ait contribué à sa découverte.

Dicke a remarqué que la pénurie de pain entraînait une baisse significative du taux de mortalité chez les enfants touchés par la maladie cœliaque de plus de 35 % à pratiquement zéro.

Il a également signalé qu'une fois que le blé était à nouveau disponible après le conflit, le taux de mortalité a grimpé aux niveaux précédents.

Le lien avec le composant gluten du blé a été fait en 1952 par une équipe de Birmingham, en Angleterre.

L'atrophie villeuse a été décrite par le médecin britannique John W.

Paulley en 1954 sur des échantillons prélevés en chirurgie.

Cela a ouvert la voie aux échantillons de biopsie prélevés par endoscopie. Tout au long des années 1960, d'autres caractéristiques de la maladie coeliaque ont été élucidées.

Son caractère héréditaire a été reconnu en 1965.

En 1966, la dermatite herpétiforme était liée à la sensibilité au gluten.


== Social et culturel ==


Le mois de mai a été désigné comme "Mois de la sensibilisation au coeliaque" par plusieurs organisations coeliaques.


=== Les églises chrétiennes et l'Eucharistie ===

D'une manière générale, les différentes confessions chrétiennes célèbrent une Eucharistie au cours de laquelle une gaufrette ou un petit morceau de pain sacramentel à base de pain de blé est béni puis mangé.

Une plaquette typique pèse environ un demi-gramme.

La farine de blé contient environ 10 à 13 % de gluten, de sorte qu'une seule gaufrette de communion peut contenir plus de 50 mg de gluten, une quantité qui nuit à de nombreuses personnes atteintes de cœliaque, surtout si elle est consommée tous les jours (voir Régime ci-dessus).
De nombreuses églises chrétiennes proposent à leurs communiants des alternatives sans gluten, généralement sous la forme d'un cracker à base de riz ou de pain sans gluten.

Il s'agit notamment de l'Église méthodiste unie, chrétienne réformée, épiscopale, anglicane (Église d'Angleterre, Royaume-Uni) et luthérienne.

Les catholiques peuvent recevoir du Calice seul ou demander des hôtes à teneur réduite en gluten; ceux sans gluten ne sont cependant pas considérés comme du pain de blé et donc comme une matière invalide.


==== Position catholique romaine ====
La doctrine catholique romaine stipule que pour une eucharistie valide, le pain à utiliser à la messe doit être fait de blé.

Les hôtes à faible teneur en gluten répondent à toutes les exigences de l'Église catholique, mais ils ne sont pas entièrement sans gluten.

Les demandes d'utilisation de galettes de riz ont été refusées. La question est plus complexe pour les prêtres.

En tant que célébrant, un prêtre est, pour la plénitude du sacrifice de la messe, absolument tenu de recevoir sous les deux espèces.

Le 24 juillet 2003, la Congrégation pour la Doctrine de la Foi a déclaré : « Compte tenu de la centralité de la célébration de l'Eucharistie dans la vie d'un prêtre, il faut procéder avec une grande prudence avant d'admettre aux Ordres sacrés les candidats incapables d'ingérer du gluten ou l'alcool sans danger grave." En janvier 2004, des hôtes approuvés par l'Église à très faible teneur en gluten étaient devenus disponibles aux États-Unis, en Italie et en Australie.

En juillet 2017, le Vatican interdisait toujours l'utilisation de pain sans gluten pour la Sainte Communion.


=== Pâque ===

La fête juive de Pessah (Pâque) peut présenter des problèmes avec son obligation de manger de la matzo, qui est du pain sans levain fabriqué de manière strictement contrôlée à partir de blé, d'orge, d'épeautre, d'avoine ou de seigle.

Cela exclut de nombreuses autres céréales qui sont normalement utilisées comme substituts pour les personnes sensibles au gluten, en particulier pour les juifs ashkénazes, qui évitent également le riz.

De nombreux produits casher pour la Pâque évitent complètement les céréales et sont donc sans gluten.

La fécule de pomme de terre est le principal amidon utilisé pour remplacer les grains.


=== Orthographe ===

La maladie coeliaque est l'orthographe préférée en anglais britannique, tandis que la maladie coeliaque est généralement utilisée en anglais nord-américain.


== Axes de recherche ==

La recherche de facteurs environnementaux qui pourraient être responsables de l'intolérance au gluten chez les personnes génétiquement prédisposées a entraîné une augmentation des activités de recherche sur les infections gastro-intestinales.

Une recherche publiée en avril 2017 suggère qu'une infection souvent asymptomatique par une souche commune de réovirus peut augmenter la sensibilité à des aliments tels que le gluten. Diverses approches de traitement sont à l'étude, dont certaines qui réduiraient le besoin de suivre un régime.

Tous sont encore en cours de développement et ne devraient pas être mis à la disposition du grand public avant un certain temps. .L'utilisation d'espèces de blé génétiquement modifiées, ou d'espèces de blé qui ont été sélectionnées de manière sélective pour être peu immunogènes, peut permettre la consommation de blé.

Ceci, cependant, pourrait interférer avec les effets de la gliadine sur la qualité de la pâte.

Alternativement, l'exposition au gluten peut être minimisée par l'ingestion d'une combinaison d'enzymes (prolyl endopeptidase et une cystéine endopeptidase spécifique de la glutamine d'orge (EP-B2)) qui dégradent le peptide 33-mer putatif dans le duodénum. Les traitements alternatifs à l'étude comprennent le inhibition de la zonuline, une protéine de signalisation endogène liée à une perméabilité accrue de la paroi intestinale et donc à une présentation accrue de la gliadine au système immunitaire.

Un inhibiteur de cette voie est l'acétate de larazotide, qui est actuellement programmé pour des essais cliniques de phase 3.

D'autres modificateurs d'autres étapes bien comprises de la pathogenèse de la maladie coeliaque, telles que l'action de HLA-DQ2 ou de la transglutaminase tissulaire et l'interaction MICA/NKG2D qui peuvent être impliquées dans la destruction des entérocytes. Tentatives de moduler la réponse immunitaire concernant la maladie coeliaque la maladie sont pour la plupart encore en phase I des tests cliniques ; un agent (CCX282-B) a été évalué dans un essai clinique de phase II basé sur des biopsies de l'intestin grêle prélevées sur des personnes atteintes de la maladie coeliaque avant et après une exposition au gluten. preuve qu'un régime sans gluten est bénéfique dans le traitement de l'autisme.

Dans le sous-ensemble de personnes sensibles au gluten, il existe peu de preuves suggérant qu'un régime sans gluten peut améliorer certains comportements autistiques.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coeliac_disease
