

CRANIAL NERVES


Cranial nerves are the nerves that emerge directly from the brain (including the brainstem), of which there are conventionally considered twelve pairs. 

Cranial nerves relay information between the brain and parts of the body, primarily to and from regions of the head and neck, including the special senses of vision, taste, smell, and hearing.

The cranial nerves emerge from the central nervous system above the level of the first vertebrae of the vertebral column. 

Each cranial nerve is paired and is present on both sides. 

There are conventionally twelve pairs of cranial nerves, which are described with Roman numerals I–XII. 

Some considered there to be thirteen pairs of cranial nerves, including cranial nerve zero. 

The numbering of the cranial nerves is based on the order in which they emerge from the brain and brainstem, from front to back.

The terminal nerves (0), olfactory nerves (I) and optic nerves (II) emerge from the cerebrum, and the remaining ten pairs arise from the brainstem, which is the lower part of the brain.

The cranial nerves are considered components of the peripheral nervous system (PNS), although on a structural level the olfactory (I), optic (II), and trigeminal (V) nerves are more accurately considered part of the central nervous system (CNS).The cranial nerves are in contrast to spinal nerves, which emerge from segments of the spinal cord.


== Anatomy ==


Most typically, humans are considered to have twelve pairs of cranial nerves (I–XII), with the terminal nerve (0) more recently canonized. 

The nerves are: the olfactory nerve (I), the optic nerve (II), oculomotor nerve (III), trochlear nerve (IV), trigeminal nerve (V), abducens nerve (VI), facial nerve (VII), vestibulocochlear nerve (VIII), glossopharyngeal nerve (IX), vagus nerve (X), accessory nerve (XI), and the hypoglossal nerve (XII).


=== Terminology ===

Cranial nerves are generally named according to their structure or function. 

For example, the olfactory nerve (I) supplies smell, and the facial nerve (VII) supplies the muscles of the face. 

Because Latin was the lingua franca of the study of anatomy when the nerves were first documented, recorded, and discussed, many nerves maintain Latin or Greek names, including the trochlear nerve (IV), named according to its structure, as it supplies a muscle that attaches to a pulley (Greek: trochlea). 

The trigeminal nerve (V) is named in accordance with its three components (Latin: trigeminus meaning triplets), and the vagus nerve (X) is named for its wandering course (Latin: vagus).

Cranial nerves are numbered based on their position from front to back (rostral-caudal) of their position on the brain, as, when viewing the forebrain and brainstem from below, they are often visible in their numeric order. 

For example, the olfactory nerves (I) and optic nerves (II) arise from the base of the forebrain, and the other nerves, III to XII, arise from the brainstem.

Cranial nerves have paths within and outside the skull. 

The paths within the skull are called "intracranial" and the paths outside the skull are called "extracranial". 

There are many holes in the skull called "foramina" by which the nerves can exit the skull. 

All cranial nerves are paired, which means they occur on both the right and left sides of the body. 

The muscle, skin, or additional function supplied by a nerve, on the same side of the body as the side it originates from, is an ipsilateral function. 

If the function is on the opposite side to the origin of the nerve, this is known as a contralateral function.


=== Intracranial course ===

==== Nuclei ====

Grossly, all cranial nerves have a Nucleus. 

With the exception of the olfactory nerve (I) and optic nerve (II), all the nuclei are present in the brainstem.

The midbrain of the brainstem has the nuclei of the oculomotor nerve (III) and trochlear nerve (IV); the pons has the nuclei of the trigeminal nerve (V), abducens nerve (VI), facial nerve (VII) and vestibulocochlear nerve (VIII); and the medulla has the nuclei of the glossopharyngeal nerve (IX), vagus nerve (X), accessory nerve (XI) and hypoglossal nerve (XII). 

The olfactory nerve (I) emerges from the olfactory bulb, and depending slightly on division the optic nerve (II) is considered to emerge from the lateral geniculate nuclei.Because each nerve may have several functions, the nerve fibres that make up the nerve may collect in more than one nucleus. 

For example, the trigeminal nerve (V), which has a sensory and a motor role, has at least four nuclei.


==== Exiting the brainstem ====

With the exception of the olfactory nerve (I) and optic nerve (II), the cranial nerves emerge from the brainstem. 

The oculomotor nerve (III) and trochlear nerve (IV) emerge from the midbrain, the trigeminal (V), abducens (VI), facial (VII) and vestibulocochlea (VIII) from the pons, and the glossopharyngeal (IX), vagus (X), accessory (XI) and hypoglossal (XII) emerge from the medulla.

The olfactory nerve (I) and optic nerve (II) emerge separately. 

The olfactory nerves emerge from the olfactory bulbs on either side of the crista galli, a bony projection below the frontal lobe, and the optic nerves (II) emerge from the lateral colliculus, swellings on either side of the temporal lobes of the brain.


==== Ganglia ====

The cranial nerves give rise to a number of ganglia, collections of the cell bodies of neurons in the nerves that are outside of the brain. 

These ganglia are both parasympathetic and sensory ganglia.

The sensory ganglia of the cranial nerves, directly correspond to the dorsal root ganglia of spinal nerves and are known as cranial nerve ganglia. 

Sensory ganglia exist for nerves with sensory function: V, VII, VIII, IX, X. 

There are also a number of parasympathetic cranial nerve ganglia. 

Sympathetic ganglia supplying the head and neck reside in the upper regions of the sympathetic trunk, and do not belong to the cranial nerves.

The ganglion of the sensory nerves, which are similar in structure to the dorsal root ganglion of the spinal cord, include:
    
The trigeminal ganglia of the trigeminal nerve (V), which occupies a space in the dura mater called Meckel's cave. 

This ganglion contains only the sensory fibres of the trigeminal nerve.

The geniculate ganglion of the facial nerve (VII), which occurs just after the nerve enters the facial canal.

A superior and inferior ganglia of the glossopharyngeal nerve (IX), which occurs just after it passes through the jugular foramen.

Additional ganglia for nerves with parasympathetic function exist, and include the ciliary ganglion of the oculomotor nerve (III), the pterygopalatine ganglion of the maxillary nerve (V2), the submandibular ganglion of the lingual nerve, a branch of the facial nerve (VII), and the otic ganglion of the glossopharyngeal nerve (IX).


==== Exiting the skull and extracranial course ====
After emerging from the brain, the cranial nerves travel within the skull, and some must leave it in order to reach their destinations. 

Often the nerves pass through holes in the skull, called foramina, as they travel to their destinations. 

Other nerves pass through bony canals, longer pathways enclosed by bone. 

These foramina and canals may contain more than one cranial nerve and may also contain blood vessels.

The terminal nerve (0), is a thin network of fibers associated with the dura and lamina terminalis running rostral to the olfactory nerve, with projections through the cribriform plate.

The olfactory nerve (I), passes through perforations in the cribriform plate part of the ethmoid bone. 

The nerve fibres end in the upper nasal cavity.
The optic nerve (II) passes through the optic foramen in the sphenoid bone as it travels to the eye.

The oculomotor nerve (III), trochlear nerve (IV), abducens nerve (VI) and the ophthalmic branch of the trigeminal nerve (V1) travel through the cavernous sinus into the superior orbital fissure, passing out of the skull into the orbit.

The maxillary division of the trigeminal nerve (V2) passes through foramen rotundum in the sphenoid bone.

The mandibular division of the trigeminal nerve (V3) passes through foramen ovale of the sphenoid bone.
The facial nerve (VII) and vestibulocochlear nerve (VIII) both enter the internal auditory canal in the temporal bone. 

The facial nerve then reaches the side of the face by using the stylomastoid foramen, also in the temporal bone. 

Its fibers then spread out to reach and control all of the muscles of facial expression. 

The vestibulocochlear nerve reaches the organs that control balance and hearing in the temporal bone and therefore does not reach the external surface of the skull.

The glossopharyngeal (IX), vagus (X) and accessory nerve (XI) all leave the skull via the jugular foramen to enter the neck. 

The glossopharyngeal nerve provides sensation to the upper throat and the back of the tongue, the vagus supplies the muscles in the larynx and continues downward to supply parasympathetic supply to the chest and abdomen. 

The accessory nerve controls the trapezius and sternocleidomastoid muscles in the neck and shoulder.

The hypoglossal nerve (XII) exits the skull using the hypoglossal canal in the occipital bone.


== Development ==

The cranial nerves are formed from the contribution of two specialized embryonic cell populations, cranial neural crest and ectodermal placodes. 

The components of the sensory nervous system of the head are derived from the neural crest and from an embryonic cell population developing in close proximity, the cranial sensory placodes (the olfactory, lens, otic, trigeminal, epibranchial and paratympanic placodes). 

The doble-origin cranial nerves are summarized in the following Table:Contributions of neural crest cells and placodes to ganglia and cranial nerves

Abbreviations: CN, Cranial Nerve; m, purely motor nerve; mix, mixed nerve (sensory and motor); NC, neural crest; PA, pharyngeal (branchial) arch; r, rhombomere; s, purely sensory nerve. * There is no known ganglion of the accessory nerve. 

The cranial part of the accessory nerve sends occasional branches to the superior ganglion of the vagus nerve.


== Function ==

The cranial nerves provide motor and sensory supply mainly to the structures within the head and neck. 

The sensory supply includes both "general" sensation such as temperature and touch, and "special" senses such as taste, vision, smell, balance and hearing. 

The vagus nerve (X) provides sensory and autonomic (parasympathetic) supply to structures in the neck and also to most of the organs in the chest and abdomen.


=== Terminal nerve (0) ===

The terminal nerve (0) may not have a role in humans, although it has been implicated in hormonal responses to smell, sexual response and mate selection.


=== Smell (I) ===

The olfactory nerve (I) conveys information giving rise to the sense of smell.Damage to the olfactory nerve (I) can cause an inability to smell (anosmia), a distortion in the sense of smell (parosmia), or a distortion or lack of taste.


=== Vision (II) ===

The optic nerve (II) transmits visual information.Damage to the optic nerve (II) affects specific aspects of vision that depend on the location of the damage. 

A person may not be able to see objects on their left or right sides (homonymous hemianopsia), or may have difficulty seeing objects from their outer visual fields (bitemporal hemianopsia) if the optic chiasm is involved. 

Inflammation (optic neuritis) may impact the sharpness of vision or colour detection


=== Eye movement (III, IV, VI) ===


The oculomotor nerve (III), trochlear nerve (IV) and abducens nerve (VI) coordinate eye movement. 

The oculomotor nerve controls all muscles of the eye except for the superior oblique muscle controlled by the trochlear nerve (IV), and the lateral rectus muscle controlled by the abducens nerve (VI). 

This means the ability of the eye to look down and inwards is controlled by the trochlear nerve (IV), the ability to look outwards is controlled by the abducens nerve (VI), and all other movements are controlled by the oculomotor nerve (III)Damage to these nerves may affect the movement of the eye. 

Damage may result in double vision (diplopia) because the movements of the eyes are not synchronized. 

Abnormalities of visual movement may also be seen on examination, such as jittering (nystagmus).

Damage to the oculomotor nerve (III) can cause double vision and inability to coordinate the movements of both eyes (strabismus), also eyelid drooping (ptosis) and pupil dilation (mydriasis). 

Lesions may also lead to inability to open the eye due to paralysis of the levator palpebrae muscle. 

Individuals suffering from a lesion to the oculomotor nerve may compensate by tilting their heads to alleviate symptoms due to paralysis of one or more of the eye muscles it controls.

Damage to the trochlear nerve (IV) can also cause double vision with the eye adducted and elevated. 

The result will be an eye which can not move downwards properly (especially downwards when in an inward position). 

This is due to impairment in the superior oblique muscle.Damage to the abducens nerve (VI) can also result in double vision. 

This is due to impairment in the lateral rectus muscle, supplied by the abducens nerve.


=== Trigeminal nerve (V) ===

The trigeminal nerve (V) and its three main branches the ophthalmic (V1), maxillary (V2), and mandibular (V3) provide sensation to the skin of the face and also controls the muscles of chewing.

Damage to the trigeminal nerve leads to loss of sensation in an affected area. 

Other conditions affecting the trigeminal nerve (V) include trigeminal neuralgia, herpes zoster, sinusitis pain, presence of a dental abscess, and cluster headaches.


=== Facial expression (VII) ===

The facial nerve (VII) controls most muscles of facial expression, supplies the sensation of taste from the front two-thirds of the tongue, and controls the stapedius muscle. 

Most muscles are supplied by the cortex on the opposite side of the brain; the exception is the frontalis muscle of the forehead, in which the left and the right side of the muscle both receive inputs from both sides of the brain.

Damage to the facial nerve (VII) may cause facial palsy. 

This is where a person is unable to move the muscles on one or both sides of their face. 

The most common cause of this is Bell's palsy, the ultimate cause of which is unknown. 

Patients with Bell's palsy often have a drooping mouth on the affected side and often have trouble chewing because the buccinator muscle is affected. 

The facial nerve is also the most commonly affected cranial nerve in blunt trauma.


=== Hearing and balance (VIII) ===

The vestibulocochlear nerve (VIII) supplies information relating to balance and hearing via its two branches, the vestibular and cochlear nerves. 

The vestibular part is responsible for supplying sensation from the vestibules and semicircular canal of the inner ear, including information about balance, and is an important component of the vestibuloocular reflex, which keeps the head stable and allows the eyes to track moving objects. 

The cochlear nerve transmits information from the cochlea, allowing sound to be heard.

When damaged, the vestibular nerve may give rise to the sensation of spinning and dizziness (vertigo). 

Function of the vestibular nerve may be tested by putting cold and warm water in the ears and watching eye movements caloric stimulation. 

Damage to the vestibulocochlear nerve can also present as repetitive and involuntary eye movements (nystagmus), particularly when the eye is moving horizontally. 

Damage to the cochlear nerve will cause partial or complete deafness in the affected ear.


=== Oral sensation, taste, and salivation (IX) ===

The glossopharyngeal nerve (IX) supplies the stylopharyngeus muscle and provides sensation to the oropharynx and back of the tongue. 

The glossopharyngeal nerve also provides parasympathetic input to the parotid gland.Damage to the nerve may cause failure of the gag reflex; a failure may also be seen in damage to the vagus nerve (X).


=== Vagus nerve (X) ===

The vagus nerve (X) provides sensory and parasympathetic supply to structures in the neck and also to most of the organs in the chest and abdomen.

Loss of function of the vagus nerve (X) will lead to a loss of parasympathetic supply to a very large number of structures. 

Major effects of damage to the vagus nerve may include a rise in blood pressure and heart rate. 

Isolated dysfunction of only the vagus nerve is rare, but - if the lesion is located above the point at which the vagus first branches off - can be indicated by a hoarse voice, due to dysfunction of one of its branches, the recurrent laryngeal nerve.

Damage to this nerve may result in difficulties swallowing.


=== Shoulder elevation and head-turning (XI) ===

The accessory nerve (XI) supplies the sternocleidomastoid and trapezius muscles.

Damage to the accessory nerve (XI) will lead to weakness in the trapezius muscle on the same side as the damage. 

The trapezius lifts the shoulder when shrugging, so the affected shoulder will not be able to shrug and the shoulder blade (scapula) will protrude into a winged position. 

Depending on the location of the lesion there may also be weakness present in the sternocleidomastoid muscle, which acts to turn the head so that the face points to the opposite side.


=== Tongue movement (XII) ===

The hypoglossal nerve (XII) supplies the intrinsic muscles of the tongue, controlling tongue movement. 

The hypoglossal nerve (XII) is unique in that it is supplied by the motor cortices of both hemispheres of the brain.Damage to the nerve may lead to fasciculations or wasting (atrophy) of the muscles of the tongue. 

This will lead to weakness of tongue movement on that side. 

When damaged and extended, the tongue will move towards the weaker or damaged side, as shown in the image. 

The fasciculations of the tongue are sometimes said to look like a "bag of worms". 

Damage to the nerve tract or nucleus will not lead to atrophy or fasciculations, but only weakness of the muscles on the same side as the damage.


== Clinical significance ==

=== Examination ===

Doctors, neurologists and other medical professionals may conduct a cranial nerve examination as part of a neurological examination to examine the cranial nerves. 

This is a highly formalised series of steps involving specific tests for each nerve. 

Dysfunction of a nerve identified during testing may point to a problem with the nerve or of a part of the brain.

A cranial nerve exam starts with observation of the patient, as some cranial nerve lesions may affect the symmetry of the eyes or face. 

Vision may be tested by examining the visual fields, or by examining the retina with an ophthalmoscope, using a process known as funduscopy. 

Visual field testing may be used to pin-point structural lesions in the optic nerve, or further along the visual pathways. 

Eye movement is tested and abnormalities such as nystagmus are observed for. 

The sensation of the face is tested, and patients are asked to perform different facial movements, such as puffing out of the cheeks. 

Hearing is checked by voice and tuning forks. 

The patient's uvula is examined. 

After performing a shrug and head turn, the patient's tongue function is assessed by various tongue movements.

Smell is not routinely tested, but if there is suspicion of a change in the sense of smell, each nostril is tested with substances of known odors such as coffee or soap. 

Intensely smelling substances, for example ammonia, may lead to the activation of pain receptors of the trigeminal nerve (V) located in the nasal cavity and this can confound olfactory testing.


=== Damage ===

==== Compression ====

Nerves may be compressed because of increased intracranial pressure, a mass effect of an intracerebral haemorrhage, or tumour that presses against the nerves and interferes with the transmission of impulses along the nerve. 

Loss of function of a cranial nerve may sometimes be the first symptom of an intracranial or skull base cancer.

An increase in intracranial pressure may lead to impairment of the optic nerves (II) due to compression of the surrounding veins and capillaries, causing swelling of the eyeball (papilloedema). 

A cancer, such as an optic nerve glioma, may also impact the optic nerve (II). 

A pituitary tumour may compress the optic tracts or the optic chiasm of the optic nerve (II), leading to visual field loss. 

A pituitary tumour may also extend into the cavernous sinus, compressing the oculuomotor nerve (III), trochlear nerve (IV) and abducens nerve (VI), leading to double-vision and strabismus. 

These nerves may also be affected by herniation of the temporal lobes of the brain through the falx cerebri.

The cause of trigeminal neuralgia, in which one side of the face is exquisitely painful, is thought to be compression of the nerve by an artery as the nerve emerges from the brain stem. 

An acoustic neuroma, particularly at the junction between the pons and medulla, may compress the facial nerve (VII) and vestibulocochlear nerve (VIII), leading to hearing and sensory loss on the affected side.


==== Stroke ====

Occlusion of blood vessels that supply the nerves or their nuclei, an ischemic stroke, may cause specific signs and symptoms relating to the damaged area. 

If there is a stroke of the midbrain, pons or medulla, various cranial nerves may be damaged, resulting in dysfunction and symptoms of a number of different syndromes. 

Thrombosis, such as a cavernous sinus thrombosis, refers to a clot (thrombus) affecting the venous drainage from the cavernous sinus, affects the optic (II), oculomotor (III), trochlear (IV), opthalamic branch of the trigeminal nerve (V1) and the abducens nerve (VI).


==== Inflammation ====

Inflammation of a cranial nerve can occur as a result of infection, such as viral causes like reactivated herpes simplex virus, or can occur spontaneously. 

Inflammation of the facial nerve (VII) may result in Bell's palsy.

Multiple sclerosis, an inflammatory process resulting in a loss of the myelin sheathes which surround the cranial nerves, may cause a variety of shifting symptoms affecting multiple cranial nerves. 

Inflammation may also affect other cranial nerves. 

Other rarer inflammatory causes affecting the function of multiple cranial nerves include sarcoidosis, miliary tuberculosis, and inflammation of arteries, such as granulomatosis with polyangiitis.


==== Other ====

Trauma to the skull, disease of bone, such as Paget's disease, and injury to nerves during surgery are other causes of nerve damage.


== History ==

The Graeco-Roman anatomist Galen (AD 129–210) named seven pairs of cranial nerves. 

Much later, in 1664, English anatomist Sir Thomas Willis suggested that there were actually 9 pairs of nerves. 

Finally, in 1778, German anatomist Samuel Soemmering named the 12 pairs of nerves that are generally accepted today. 

However, because many of the nerves emerge from the brain stem as rootlets, there is continual debate as to how many nerves there actually are, and how they should be grouped. 

For example, there is reason to consider both the olfactory (I) and optic (II) nerves to be brain tracts, rather than cranial nerves.


== Other animals ==

Cranial nerves are also present in other vertebrates. 

Other amniotes (non-amphibian tetrapods) have cranial nerves similar to those of humans. 

In anamniotes (fishes and amphibians), the accessory nerve (XI) and hypoglossal nerve (XII) do not exist, with the accessory nerve (XI) being an integral part of the vagus nerve (X); the hypoglossal nerve (XII) is represented by a variable number of spinal nerves emerging from vertebral segments fused into the occiput. 

These two nerves only became discrete nerves in the ancestors of amniotes (non-amphibian tetrapods). 

The very small terminal nerve (nerve N or O) exists in humans but may not be functional. 

In other animals, it appears to be important to sexual receptivity based on perceptions of pheromones.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cranial_nerves
;;;ES;;;



NERVIOS CRANEALES


Los nervios craneales son los nervios que emergen directamente del cerebro (incluido el tronco encefálico), de los cuales convencionalmente se consideran doce pares.

Los nervios craneales transmiten información entre el cerebro y partes del cuerpo, principalmente hacia y desde las regiones de la cabeza y el cuello, incluidos los sentidos especiales de la vista, el gusto, el olfato y el oído.

Los nervios craneales emergen del sistema nervioso central por encima del nivel de las primeras vértebras de la columna vertebral.

Cada nervio craneal está emparejado y está presente en ambos lados.

Hay convencionalmente doce pares de nervios craneales, que se describen con números romanos I-XII.

Algunos consideraron que había trece pares de nervios craneales, incluido el nervio craneal cero.

La numeración de los nervios craneales se basa en el orden en que emergen del cerebro y del tronco encefálico, de adelante hacia atrás.

Los nervios terminales (0), los nervios olfatorios (I) y los nervios ópticos (II) emergen del cerebro, y los diez pares restantes surgen del tronco encefálico, que es la parte inferior del cerebro.

Los nervios craneales se consideran componentes del sistema nervioso periférico (SNP), aunque a nivel estructural los nervios olfatorio (I), óptico (II) y trigémino (V) se consideran con mayor precisión parte del sistema nervioso central (SNC) .Los nervios craneales contrastan con los nervios espinales, que emergen de segmentos de la médula espinal.


== Anatomía ==


Por lo general, se considera que los humanos tienen doce pares de nervios craneales (I-XII), con el nervio terminal (0) canonizado más recientemente.

Los nervios son: el nervio olfativo (I), el nervio óptico (II), el nervio oculomotor (III), el nervio troclear (IV), el nervio trigémino (V), el nervio motor ocular externo (VI), el nervio facial (VII), el nervio vestibulococlear (VIII), nervio glosofaríngeo (IX), nervio vago (X), nervio accesorio (XI) y nervio hipogloso (XII).


=== Terminología ===

Los nervios craneales generalmente se nombran de acuerdo con su estructura o función.

Por ejemplo, el nervio olfativo (I) inerva el olfato y el nervio facial (VII) inerva los músculos de la cara.

Debido a que el latín era la lingua franca del estudio de la anatomía cuando los nervios se documentaron, registraron y discutieron por primera vez, muchos nervios mantienen nombres latinos o griegos, incluido el nervio troclear (IV), llamado de acuerdo con su estructura, ya que inerva un músculo. que se une a una polea (griego: trochlea).

El nervio trigémino (V) recibe su nombre de acuerdo con sus tres componentes (en latín: trigeminus que significa trillizos), y el nervio vago (X) recibe su nombre por su curso errante (en latín: vagus).

Los nervios craneales se numeran en función de su posición de adelante hacia atrás (rostral-caudal) de su posición en el cerebro, ya que, al ver el cerebro anterior y el tronco encefálico desde abajo, a menudo son visibles en su orden numérico.

Por ejemplo, los nervios olfatorios (I) y los nervios ópticos (II) se originan en la base del prosencéfalo, y los demás nervios, del III al XII, se originan en el tronco del encéfalo.

Los nervios craneales tienen caminos dentro y fuera del cráneo.

Los caminos dentro del cráneo se llaman "intracraneales" y los caminos fuera del cráneo se llaman "extracraneales".

Hay muchos agujeros en el cráneo llamados "agujeros" por los cuales los nervios pueden salir del cráneo.

Todos los nervios craneales están emparejados, lo que significa que se encuentran tanto en el lado derecho como en el izquierdo del cuerpo.

El músculo, la piel o la función adicional suministrada por un nervio, en el mismo lado del cuerpo en el que se origina, es una función ipsilateral.

Si la función está en el lado opuesto al origen del nervio, se conoce como función contralateral.


=== Curso intracraneal ===

==== Núcleos ====

Groseramente, todos los nervios craneales tienen un Núcleo.

Con la excepción del nervio olfatorio (I) y el nervio óptico (II), todos los núcleos están presentes en el tronco encefálico.

El mesencéfalo del tronco encefálico tiene los núcleos del nervio oculomotor (III) y el nervio troclear (IV); la protuberancia tiene los núcleos del nervio trigémino (V), nervio motor ocular externo (VI), nervio facial (VII) y nervio vestibulococlear (VIII); y la médula tiene los núcleos del nervio glosofaríngeo (IX), nervio vago (X), nervio accesorio (XI) y nervio hipogloso (XII).

El nervio olfatorio (I) emerge del bulbo olfatorio y, dependiendo ligeramente de la división, se considera que el nervio óptico (II) emerge de los núcleos geniculados laterales. Debido a que cada nervio puede tener varias funciones, las fibras nerviosas que forman el nervio pueden acumularse en más de un núcleo.

Por ejemplo, el nervio trigémino (V), que tiene una función sensorial y motora, tiene al menos cuatro núcleos.


==== Saliendo del tronco encefálico ====

Con la excepción del nervio olfativo (I) y el nervio óptico (II), los nervios craneales emergen del tronco encefálico.

El nervio oculomotor (III) y el nervio troclear (IV) emergen del mesencéfalo, el trigémino (V), motor ocular externo (VI), facial (VII) y vestibulococlea (VIII) de la protuberancia, y el glosofaríngeo (IX), vago ( X), accesorio (XI) e hipogloso (XII) emergen de la médula.

El nervio olfativo (I) y el nervio óptico (II) emergen por separado.

Los nervios olfatorios emergen de los bulbos olfatorios a ambos lados de la crista galli, una proyección ósea debajo del lóbulo frontal, y los nervios ópticos (II) emergen del colículo lateral, hinchazones a ambos lados de los lóbulos temporales del cerebro.


==== Ganglios ====

Los nervios craneales dan lugar a una serie de ganglios, conjuntos de cuerpos celulares de neuronas en los nervios que se encuentran fuera del cerebro.

Estos ganglios son tanto ganglios parasimpáticos como sensoriales.

Los ganglios sensoriales de los nervios craneales, se corresponden directamente con los ganglios de la raíz dorsal de los nervios espinales y se conocen como ganglios de los nervios craneales.

Existen ganglios sensoriales para nervios con función sensorial: V, VII, VIII, IX, X.

También hay varios ganglios de los nervios craneales parasimpáticos.

Los ganglios simpáticos que irrigan la cabeza y el cuello residen en las regiones superiores del tronco simpático y no pertenecen a los nervios craneales.

El ganglio de los nervios sensoriales, que son similares en estructura al ganglio de la raíz dorsal de la médula espinal, incluyen:
 
Los ganglios trigéminos del nervio trigémino (V), que ocupa un espacio en la duramadre llamado cueva de Meckel.

Este ganglio contiene sólo las fibras sensoriales del nervio trigémino.

El ganglio geniculado del nervio facial (VII), que se produce justo después de que el nervio entra en el canal facial.

Un ganglio superior e inferior del nervio glosofaríngeo (IX), que se produce justo después de que pasa por el agujero yugular.

Existen ganglios adicionales para nervios con función parasimpática, e incluyen el ganglio ciliar del nervio oculomotor (III), el ganglio pterigopalatino del nervio maxilar (V2), el ganglio submandibular del nervio lingual, una rama del nervio facial (VII) , y el ganglio ótico del nervio glosofaríngeo (IX).


==== Salida del cráneo y curso extracraneal ====
Después de emerger del cerebro, los nervios craneales viajan dentro del cráneo y algunos deben abandonarlo para llegar a sus destinos.

A menudo, los nervios pasan a través de orificios en el cráneo, llamados forámenes, mientras viajan a sus destinos.

Otros nervios pasan a través de canales óseos, vías más largas encerradas por hueso.

Estos forámenes y canales pueden contener más de un nervio craneal y también pueden contener vasos sanguíneos.

El nervio terminal (0), es una red delgada de fibras asociadas con la duramadre y la lámina terminal que corre rostral al nervio olfatorio, con proyecciones a través de la lámina cribosa.

El nervio olfatorio (I) pasa a través de perforaciones en la parte de la placa cribosa del hueso etmoides.

Las fibras nerviosas terminan en la cavidad nasal superior.
El nervio óptico (II) pasa a través del agujero óptico en el hueso esfenoides en su viaje hacia el ojo.

El nervio oculomotor (III), el nervio troclear (IV), el nervio motor ocular externo (VI) y la rama oftálmica del nervio trigémino (V1) viajan a través del seno cavernoso hacia la fisura orbitaria superior, saliendo del cráneo hacia la órbita.

La división maxilar del nervio trigémino (V2) pasa a través del agujero redondo en el hueso esfenoides.

La división mandibular del nervio trigémino (V3) pasa a través del foramen oval del hueso esfenoides.
El nervio facial (VII) y el nervio vestibulococlear (VIII) entran en el canal auditivo interno en el hueso temporal.

El nervio facial luego llega al costado de la cara usando el agujero estilomastoideo, también en el hueso temporal.

Luego, sus fibras se extienden para alcanzar y controlar todos los músculos de la expresión facial.

El nervio vestibulococlear llega a los órganos que controlan el equilibrio y la audición en el hueso temporal y, por lo tanto, no llega a la superficie externa del cráneo.

El nervio glosofaríngeo (IX), vago (X) y accesorio (XI) salen del cráneo a través del agujero yugular para entrar en el cuello.

El nervio glosofaríngeo proporciona sensibilidad a la parte superior de la garganta y la parte posterior de la lengua, el vago inerva los músculos de la laringe y continúa hacia abajo para suministrar suministro parasimpático al tórax y al abdomen.

El nervio accesorio controla los músculos trapecio y esternocleidomastoideo en el cuello y el hombro.

El nervio hipogloso (XII) sale del cráneo utilizando el canal hipogloso en el hueso occipital.


== Desarrollo ==

Los nervios craneales se forman a partir de la contribución de dos poblaciones de células embrionarias especializadas, la cresta neural craneal y las placodas ectodérmicas.

Los componentes del sistema nervioso sensorial de la cabeza se derivan de la cresta neural y de una población de células embrionarias que se desarrollan en estrecha proximidad, las placodas sensoriales craneales (placodas olfatoria, del cristalino, ótica, trigeminal, epibranquial y paratimpánica).

Los nervios craneales de doble origen se resumen en la siguiente tabla: Aportes de las células de la cresta neural y placodas a los ganglios y nervios craneales

Abreviaturas: CN, Nervio Craneal; m, nervio puramente motor; mezcla, nervio mixto (sensorial y motor); NC, cresta neural; PA, arco faríngeo (branquial); r, rombómero; s, nervio puramente sensorial. * No se conoce ganglio del nervio accesorio.

La parte craneal del nervio accesorio envía ramas ocasionales al ganglio superior del nervio vago.


== Función ==

Los nervios craneales proporcionan inervación motora y sensorial principalmente a las estructuras dentro de la cabeza y el cuello.

El suministro sensorial incluye sensaciones "generales" como la temperatura y el tacto, y sentidos "especiales" como el gusto, la vista, el olfato, el equilibrio y el oído.

El nervio vago (X) proporciona inervación sensorial y autonómica (parasimpática) a las estructuras del cuello y también a la mayoría de los órganos del tórax y el abdomen.


=== Nervio terminal (0) ===

Es posible que el nervio terminal (0) no tenga un papel en los humanos, aunque se ha implicado en las respuestas hormonales al olfato, la respuesta sexual y la selección de pareja.


=== Olor (I) ===

El nervio olfativo (I) transmite información que da origen al sentido del olfato. El daño al nervio olfativo (I) puede causar una incapacidad para oler (anosmia), una distorsión en el sentido del olfato (parosmia) o una distorsión o falta del gusto.


=== Visión (II) ===

El nervio óptico (II) transmite información visual. El daño al nervio óptico (II) afecta aspectos específicos de la visión que dependen de la ubicación del daño.

Es posible que una persona no pueda ver objetos en su lado izquierdo o derecho (hemianopsia homónima), o puede tener dificultad para ver objetos desde sus campos visuales externos (hemianopsia bitemporal) si el quiasma óptico está involucrado.

La inflamación (neuritis óptica) puede afectar la nitidez de la visión o la detección de colores


=== Movimiento ocular (III, IV, VI) ===


El nervio oculomotor (III), el nervio troclear (IV) y el nervio motor ocular externo (VI) coordinan el movimiento ocular.

El nervio oculomotor controla todos los músculos del ojo excepto el músculo oblicuo superior controlado por el nervio troclear (IV) y el músculo recto lateral controlado por el nervio motor ocular externo (VI).

Esto significa que la capacidad del ojo para mirar hacia abajo y hacia adentro está controlada por el nervio troclear (IV), la capacidad de mirar hacia afuera está controlada por el nervio motor ocular externo (VI) y todos los demás movimientos están controlados por el nervio oculomotor (III). El daño a estos nervios puede afectar el movimiento del ojo.

El daño puede resultar en visión doble (diplopía) porque los movimientos de los ojos no están sincronizados.

En el examen también se pueden observar anomalías del movimiento visual, como temblores (nistagmo).

El daño al nervio oculomotor (III) puede causar visión doble e incapacidad para coordinar los movimientos de ambos ojos (estrabismo), también caída del párpado (ptosis) y dilatación de la pupila (midriasis).

Las lesiones también pueden provocar la incapacidad para abrir el ojo debido a la parálisis del músculo elevador del párpado.

Las personas que sufren una lesión en el nervio oculomotor pueden compensar inclinando la cabeza para aliviar los síntomas debido a la parálisis de uno o más de los músculos oculares que controla.

El daño al nervio troclear (IV) también puede causar visión doble con el ojo en aducción y elevado.

El resultado será un ojo que no podrá moverse correctamente hacia abajo (especialmente hacia abajo cuando está en una posición hacia adentro).

Esto se debe a un deterioro en el músculo oblicuo superior. El daño al nervio motor ocular externo (VI) también puede provocar visión doble.

Esto se debe a la alteración del músculo recto lateral, inervado por el nervio motor ocular externo.


=== Nervio trigémino (V) ===

El nervio trigémino (V) y sus tres ramas principales, la oftálmica (V1), la maxilar (V2) y la mandibular (V3), proporcionan sensibilidad a la piel de la cara y también controlan los músculos de la masticación.

El daño al nervio trigémino conduce a la pérdida de sensibilidad en el área afectada.

Otras condiciones que afectan el nervio trigémino (V) incluyen neuralgia del trigémino, herpes zoster, dolor de sinusitis, presencia de un absceso dental y dolores de cabeza en racimo.


=== Expresión facial (VII) ===

El nervio facial (VII) controla la mayoría de los músculos de la expresión facial, proporciona la sensación del gusto desde los dos tercios anteriores de la lengua y controla el músculo estapedio.

La mayoría de los músculos están inervados por la corteza del lado opuesto del cerebro; la excepción es el músculo frontal de la frente, en el que tanto el lado izquierdo como el derecho del músculo reciben información de ambos lados del cerebro.

El daño al nervio facial (VII) puede causar parálisis facial.

Aquí es donde una persona no puede mover los músculos de uno o ambos lados de la cara.

La causa más común de esto es la parálisis de Bell, cuya causa última se desconoce.

Los pacientes con parálisis de Bell a menudo tienen la boca caída del lado afectado y, a menudo, tienen problemas para masticar porque el músculo buccinador está afectado.

El nervio facial también es el nervio craneal afectado con mayor frecuencia en los traumatismos cerrados.


=== Audición y equilibrio (VIII) ===

El nervio vestibulococlear (VIII) proporciona información relacionada con el equilibrio y la audición a través de sus dos ramas, los nervios vestibular y coclear.

La parte vestibular es responsable de suministrar la sensación de los vestíbulos y el canal semicircular del oído interno, incluida la información sobre el equilibrio, y es un componente importante del reflejo vestibuloocular, que mantiene la cabeza estable y permite que los ojos sigan objetos en movimiento.

El nervio coclear transmite información desde la cóclea, lo que permite escuchar el sonido.

Cuando se daña, el nervio vestibular puede dar lugar a la sensación de dar vueltas y mareos (vértigo).

La función del nervio vestibular puede evaluarse colocando agua fría y tibia en los oídos y observando los movimientos de los ojos con estimulación calórica.

El daño al nervio vestibulococlear también puede presentarse como movimientos oculares repetitivos e involuntarios (nistagmo), particularmente cuando el ojo se mueve horizontalmente.

El daño al nervio coclear causará sordera parcial o total en el oído afectado.


=== Sensación oral, gusto y salivación (IX) ===

El nervio glosofaríngeo (IX) inerva el músculo estilofaríngeo y proporciona sensibilidad a la orofaringe y la parte posterior de la lengua.

El nervio glosofaríngeo también proporciona información parasimpática a la glándula parótida. El daño al nervio puede provocar la falla del reflejo nauseoso; también se puede ver una falla en el daño del nervio vago (X).


=== Nervio vago (X) ===

El nervio vago (X) proporciona inervación sensorial y parasimpática a las estructuras del cuello y también a la mayoría de los órganos del tórax y el abdomen.

La pérdida de función del nervio vago (X) conducirá a una pérdida de suministro parasimpático a un gran número de estructuras.

Los principales efectos del daño al nervio vago pueden incluir un aumento de la presión arterial y la frecuencia cardíaca.

La disfunción aislada del nervio vago solo es rara, pero, si la lesión se encuentra por encima del punto en el que el vago se bifurca por primera vez, puede indicarse una voz ronca, debido a la disfunción de una de sus ramas, el nervio laríngeo recurrente.

El daño a este nervio puede resultar en dificultades para tragar.


=== Elevación de hombros y giro de cabeza (XI) ===

El nervio accesorio (XI) inerva los músculos esternocleidomastoideo y trapecio.

El daño al nervio accesorio (XI) provocará debilidad en el músculo trapecio del mismo lado del daño.

El trapecio levanta el hombro al encogerse de hombros, por lo que el hombro afectado no podrá encogerse de hombros y el omóplato (omóplato) sobresaldrá en una posición alada.

Dependiendo de la ubicación de la lesión, también puede haber debilidad en el músculo esternocleidomastoideo, que actúa para girar la cabeza de modo que la cara apunte hacia el lado opuesto.


=== Movimiento de la lengua (XII) ===

El nervio hipogloso (XII) inerva los músculos intrínsecos de la lengua y controla el movimiento de la lengua.

El nervio hipogloso (XII) es único porque está inervado por las cortezas motoras de ambos hemisferios del cerebro. El daño al nervio puede provocar fasciculaciones o desgaste (atrofia) de los músculos de la lengua.

Esto conducirá a la debilidad del movimiento de la lengua en ese lado.

Cuando está dañado y extendido, la lengua se moverá hacia el lado más débil o dañado, como se muestra en la imagen.

A veces se dice que las fasciculaciones de la lengua parecen una "bolsa de gusanos".

El daño al tracto nervioso o al núcleo no provocará atrofia o fasciculaciones, sino solo debilidad de los músculos del mismo lado del daño.


== Importancia clínica ==

=== Examen ===

Los médicos, neurólogos y otros profesionales médicos pueden realizar un examen de los nervios craneales como parte de un examen neurológico para examinar los nervios craneales.

Esta es una serie de pasos altamente formalizados que involucran pruebas específicas para cada nervio.

La disfunción de un nervio identificado durante la prueba puede indicar un problema con el nervio o con una parte del cerebro.

Un examen de los nervios craneales comienza con la observación del paciente, ya que algunas lesiones de los nervios craneales pueden afectar la simetría de los ojos o la cara.

La visión se puede evaluar examinando los campos visuales o examinando la retina con un oftalmoscopio, utilizando un proceso conocido como fondo de ojo.

Las pruebas de campo visual se pueden usar para identificar lesiones estructurales en el nervio óptico, o más a lo largo de las vías visuales.

Se prueba el movimiento de los ojos y se observan anomalías como el nistagmo.

Se prueba la sensación de la cara y se les pide a los pacientes que realicen diferentes movimientos faciales, como inflar las mejillas.

La audición se controla mediante la voz y los diapasones.

Se examina la úvula del paciente.

Después de encogerse de hombros y girar la cabeza, la función de la lengua del paciente se evalúa mediante varios movimientos de la lengua.

El olfato no se prueba de forma rutinaria, pero si se sospecha un cambio en el sentido del olfato, se prueba cada fosa nasal con sustancias de olores conocidos, como café o jabón.

Las sustancias que huelen intensamente, por ejemplo, el amoníaco, pueden provocar la activación de los receptores del dolor del nervio trigémino (V) ubicado en la cavidad nasal y esto puede confundir las pruebas olfativas.


=== Daño ===

==== Compresión ====

Los nervios pueden comprimirse debido al aumento de la presión intracraneal, un efecto de masa de una hemorragia intracerebral o un tumor que presiona contra los nervios e interfiere con la transmisión de impulsos a lo largo del nervio.

La pérdida de la función de un nervio craneal a veces puede ser el primer síntoma de un cáncer intracraneal o de la base del cráneo.

Un aumento de la presión intracraneal puede provocar un deterioro de los nervios ópticos (II) debido a la compresión de las venas y capilares circundantes, lo que provoca la inflamación del globo ocular (edema de papila).

Un cáncer, como un glioma del nervio óptico, también puede afectar el nervio óptico (II).

Un tumor hipofisario puede comprimir las vías ópticas o el quiasma óptico del nervio óptico (II), lo que provoca la pérdida del campo visual.

Un tumor hipofisario también puede extenderse al seno cavernoso, comprimiendo el nervio motor ocular externo (III), el nervio troclear (IV) y el nervio motor ocular externo (VI), lo que provoca visión doble y estrabismo.

Estos nervios también pueden verse afectados por la herniación de los lóbulos temporales del cerebro a través de la hoz del cerebro.

Se cree que la causa de la neuralgia del trigémino, en la que un lado de la cara es extremadamente doloroso, es la compresión del nervio por una arteria cuando el nervio emerge del tronco encefálico.

Un neuroma del acústico, particularmente en la unión entre la protuberancia y el bulbo raquídeo, puede comprimir el nervio facial (VII) y el nervio vestibulococlear (VIII), lo que provoca pérdida auditiva y sensorial en el lado afectado.


==== Carrera ====

La oclusión de los vasos sanguíneos que irrigan los nervios o sus núcleos, un accidente cerebrovascular isquémico, puede causar signos y síntomas específicos relacionados con el área dañada.

Si hay una apoplejía en el mesencéfalo, la protuberancia o el bulbo raquídeo, se pueden dañar varios nervios craneales, lo que da como resultado una disfunción y síntomas de varios síndromes diferentes.

La trombosis, como la trombosis del seno cavernoso, se refiere a un coágulo (trombo) que afecta el drenaje venoso del seno cavernoso, afecta el nervio óptico (II), oculomotor (III), troclear (IV), rama oftalámica del nervio trigémino (V1 ) y el nervio motor ocular externo (VI).


==== Inflamación ====

La inflamación de un nervio craneal puede ocurrir como resultado de una infección, como causas virales como el virus del herpes simple reactivado, o puede ocurrir espontáneamente.

La inflamación del nervio facial (VII) puede provocar parálisis de Bell.

La esclerosis múltiple, un proceso inflamatorio que resulta en la pérdida de las vainas de mielina que rodean los nervios craneales, puede causar una variedad de síntomas cambiantes que afectan múltiples nervios craneales.

La inflamación también puede afectar a otros nervios craneales.

Otras causas inflamatorias más raras que afectan la función de múltiples nervios craneales incluyen la sarcoidosis, la tuberculosis miliar y la inflamación de las arterias, como la granulomatosis con poliangitis.


==== Otro ====

Los traumatismos en el cráneo, las enfermedades de los huesos, como la enfermedad de Paget, y las lesiones en los nervios durante la cirugía son otras causas de daño en los nervios.


== Historia ==

El anatomista greco-romano Galeno (129-210 dC) nombró siete pares de nervios craneales.

Mucho más tarde, en 1664, el anatomista inglés Sir Thomas Willis sugirió que en realidad había 9 pares de nervios.

Finalmente, en 1778, el anatomista alemán Samuel Soemmering nombró los 12 pares de nervios generalmente aceptados en la actualidad.

Sin embargo, debido a que muchos de los nervios emergen del tronco encefálico como raicillas, existe un debate continuo sobre cuántos nervios hay en realidad y cómo deben agruparse.

Por ejemplo, hay razones para considerar que los nervios olfatorio (I) y óptico (II) son tractos cerebrales, en lugar de nervios craneales.


== Otros animales ==

Los nervios craneales también están presentes en otros vertebrados.

Otros amniotas (tetrápodos no anfibios) tienen nervios craneales similares a los de los humanos.

En los anamniotas (peces y anfibios), el nervio accesorio (XI) y el nervio hipogloso (XII) no existen, siendo el nervio accesorio (XI) parte integral del nervio vago (X); el nervio hipogloso (XII) está representado por un número variable de nervios espinales que emergen de segmentos vertebrales fusionados en el occipucio.

Estos dos nervios solo se convirtieron en nervios discretos en los ancestros de los amniotas (tetrápodos no anfibios).

El nervio terminal muy pequeño (nervio N u O) existe en humanos pero puede no ser funcional.

En otros animales, parece ser importante la receptividad sexual según las percepciones de las feromonas.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cranial_nerves

;;;PT;;;



NERVOS CRANIANOS


Os nervos cranianos são os nervos que emergem diretamente do cérebro (incluindo o tronco cerebral), dos quais são convencionalmente considerados doze pares.

Os nervos cranianos transmitem informações entre o cérebro e partes do corpo, principalmente de e para regiões da cabeça e pescoço, incluindo os sentidos especiais da visão, paladar, olfato e audição.

Os nervos cranianos emergem do sistema nervoso central acima do nível das primeiras vértebras da coluna vertebral.

Cada nervo craniano é pareado e está presente em ambos os lados.

Existem convencionalmente doze pares de nervos cranianos, que são descritos com algarismos romanos I-XII.

Alguns consideraram que havia treze pares de nervos cranianos, incluindo o nervo craniano zero.

A numeração dos nervos cranianos é baseada na ordem em que emergem do cérebro e do tronco encefálico, da frente para trás.

Os nervos terminais (0), os nervos olfatórios (I) e os nervos ópticos (II) emergem do cérebro, e os dez pares restantes surgem do tronco encefálico, que é a parte inferior do cérebro.

Os nervos cranianos são considerados componentes do sistema nervoso periférico (SNP), embora em nível estrutural os nervos olfatório (I), óptico (II) e trigêmeo (V) sejam mais precisamente considerados parte do sistema nervoso central (SNC). .Os nervos cranianos estão em contraste com os nervos espinhais, que emergem de segmentos da medula espinhal.


== Anatomia ==


Mais tipicamente, os humanos são considerados como tendo doze pares de nervos cranianos (I-XII), com o nervo terminal (0) mais recentemente canonizado.

Os nervos são: nervo olfatório (I), nervo óptico (II), nervo oculomotor (III), nervo troclear (IV), nervo trigêmeo (V), nervo abducente (VI), nervo facial (VII), nervo vestibulococlear (VIII), nervo glossofaríngeo (IX), nervo vago (X), nervo acessório (XI) e nervo hipoglosso (XII).


=== Terminologia ===

Os nervos cranianos são geralmente nomeados de acordo com sua estrutura ou função.

Por exemplo, o nervo olfativo (I) supre o olfato e o nervo facial (VII) supre os músculos da face.

Como o latim era a língua franca do estudo da anatomia quando os nervos foram documentados, registrados e discutidos pela primeira vez, muitos nervos mantêm nomes latinos ou gregos, incluindo o nervo troclear (IV), nomeado de acordo com sua estrutura, pois supre um músculo. que se prende a uma polia (grego: tróclea).

O nervo trigêmeo (V) é nomeado de acordo com seus três componentes (latim: trigeminus significa trigêmeos), e o nervo vago (X) é nomeado por seu curso errante (latim: vago).

Os nervos cranianos são numerados com base em sua posição da frente para trás (rostral-caudal) de sua posição no cérebro, pois, ao visualizar o prosencéfalo e o tronco cerebral de baixo, eles geralmente são visíveis em sua ordem numérica.

Por exemplo, os nervos olfativos (I) e os nervos ópticos (II) originam-se da base do prosencéfalo, e os outros nervos, III a XII, originam-se do tronco encefálico.

Os nervos cranianos têm caminhos dentro e fora do crânio.

Os caminhos dentro do crânio são chamados de "intracranianos" e os caminhos fora do crânio são chamados de "extracranianos".

Existem muitos orifícios no crânio chamados "foraminas" pelos quais os nervos podem sair do crânio.

Todos os nervos cranianos estão emparelhados, o que significa que ocorrem nos lados direito e esquerdo do corpo.

O músculo, pele ou função adicional fornecida por um nervo, no mesmo lado do corpo do lado de onde se origina, é uma função ipsilateral.

Se a função estiver no lado oposto à origem do nervo, isso é conhecido como função contralateral.


=== Curso intracraniano ===

==== Núcleos ====

Macroscopicamente, todos os nervos cranianos têm um Núcleo.

Com exceção do nervo olfatório (I) e do nervo óptico (II), todos os núcleos estão presentes no tronco encefálico.

O mesencéfalo do tronco encefálico tem os núcleos do nervo oculomotor (III) e do nervo troclear (IV); a ponte tem os núcleos do nervo trigêmeo (V), nervo abducente (VI), nervo facial (VII) e nervo vestibulococlear (VIII); e a medula tem os núcleos do nervo glossofaríngeo (IX), nervo vago (X), nervo acessório (XI) e nervo hipoglosso (XII).

O nervo olfatório (I) emerge do bulbo olfatório e, dependendo ligeiramente da divisão, considera-se que o nervo óptico (II) emerge dos núcleos geniculados laterais. coletar em mais de um núcleo.

Por exemplo, o nervo trigêmeo (V), que tem um papel sensitivo e motor, tem pelo menos quatro núcleos.


==== Saindo do tronco cerebral ====

Com exceção do nervo olfatório (I) e nervo óptico (II), os nervos cranianos emergem do tronco encefálico.

O nervo oculomotor (III) e o nervo troclear (IV) emergem do mesencéfalo, o trigêmeo (V), abducente (VI), facial (VII) e vestibulococlear (VIII) da ponte, e o glossofaríngeo (IX), vago ( X), acessório (XI) e hipoglosso (XII) emergem da medula.

O nervo olfatório (I) e o nervo óptico (II) emergem separadamente.

Os nervos olfatórios emergem dos bulbos olfatórios em ambos os lados da crista galli, uma projeção óssea abaixo do lobo frontal, e os nervos ópticos (II) emergem do colículo lateral, inchaços em ambos os lados dos lobos temporais do cérebro.


==== Gânglios ====

Os nervos cranianos dão origem a vários gânglios, coleções de corpos celulares de neurônios nos nervos que estão fora do cérebro.

Esses gânglios são gânglios parassimpáticos e sensoriais.

Os gânglios sensoriais dos nervos cranianos, correspondem diretamente aos gânglios da raiz dorsal dos nervos espinhais e são conhecidos como gânglios dos nervos cranianos.

Existem gânglios sensoriais para nervos com função sensorial: V, VII, VIII, IX, X.

Há também vários gânglios de nervos cranianos parassimpáticos.

Os gânglios simpáticos que suprem a cabeça e o pescoço residem nas regiões superiores do tronco simpático e não pertencem aos nervos cranianos.

O gânglio dos nervos sensoriais, que são semelhantes em estrutura ao gânglio da raiz dorsal da medula espinhal, incluem:
 
O gânglio trigêmeo do nervo trigêmeo (V), que ocupa um espaço na dura-máter chamado caverna de Meckel.

Este gânglio contém apenas as fibras sensoriais do nervo trigêmeo.

O gânglio geniculado do nervo facial (VII), que ocorre logo após o nervo entrar no canal facial.

Gânglios superior e inferior do nervo glossofaríngeo (IX), que ocorre logo após passar pelo forame jugular.

Existem gânglios adicionais para nervos com função parassimpática e incluem o gânglio ciliar do nervo oculomotor (III), o gânglio pterigopalatino do nervo maxilar (V2), o gânglio submandibular do nervo lingual, um ramo do nervo facial (VII) , e o gânglio ótico do nervo glossofaríngeo (IX).


==== Saída do crânio e curso extracraniano ====
Depois de emergir do cérebro, os nervos cranianos viajam dentro do crânio, e alguns devem deixá-lo para chegar a seus destinos.

Muitas vezes, os nervos passam por orifícios no crânio, chamados forames, enquanto viajam para seus destinos.

Outros nervos passam por canais ósseos, caminhos mais longos cercados por osso.

Esses forames e canais podem conter mais de um nervo craniano e também podem conter vasos sanguíneos.

O nervo terminal (0) é uma fina rede de fibras associadas à dura-máter e à lâmina terminal que corre rostralmente ao nervo olfatório, com projeções através da lâmina cribriforme.

O nervo olfativo (I), passa por perfurações na parte da lâmina cribriforme do osso etmoidal.

As fibras nervosas terminam na cavidade nasal superior.
O nervo óptico (II) passa através do forame óptico no osso esfenóide enquanto viaja para o olho.

O nervo oculomotor (III), nervo troclear (IV), nervo abducente (VI) e o ramo oftálmico do nervo trigêmeo (V1) viajam através do seio cavernoso até a fissura orbital superior, saindo do crânio para a órbita.

A divisão maxilar do nervo trigêmeo (V2) passa através do forame redondo no osso esfenóide.

A divisão mandibular do nervo trigêmeo (V3) passa pelo forame oval do osso esfenóide.
O nervo facial (VII) e o nervo vestibulococlear (VIII) entram no canal auditivo interno no osso temporal.

O nervo facial chega então ao lado da face usando o forame estilomastóideo, também no osso temporal.

Suas fibras então se espalham para alcançar e controlar todos os músculos da expressão facial.

O nervo vestibulococlear atinge os órgãos que controlam o equilíbrio e a audição no osso temporal e, portanto, não atinge a superfície externa do crânio.

O glossofaríngeo (IX), o vago (X) e o nervo acessório (XI) deixam o crânio pelo forame jugular para entrar no pescoço.

O nervo glossofaríngeo fornece sensação à parte superior da garganta e à parte posterior da língua, o vago supre os músculos da laringe e continua para baixo para suprir o suprimento parassimpático do tórax e do abdome.

O nervo acessório controla os músculos trapézio e esternocleidomastóideo no pescoço e no ombro.

O nervo hipoglosso (XII) sai do crânio usando o canal hipoglosso no osso occipital.


== Desenvolvimento ==

Os nervos cranianos são formados a partir da contribuição de duas populações de células embrionárias especializadas, a crista neural craniana e os placódios ectodérmicos.

Os componentes do sistema nervoso sensitivo da cabeça são derivados da crista neural e de uma população de células embrionárias que se desenvolvem nas proximidades, os placódios sensoriais cranianos (os placódios olfatório, cristalino, ótico, trigêmeo, epibranquial e paratimpânico).

Os nervos cranianos de dupla origem estão resumidos na tabela a seguir: Contribuições das células da crista neural e placoides para gânglios e nervos cranianos

Abreviaturas: NC, Nervo Craniano; m, nervo puramente motor; misto, nervo misto (sensitivo e motor); NC, crista neural; PA, arco faríngeo (branquial); r, rombômero; s, nervo puramente sensorial. * Não há gânglio conhecido do nervo acessório.

A parte cranial do nervo acessório envia ramos ocasionais para o gânglio superior do nervo vago.


== Função ==

Os nervos cranianos fornecem suprimento motor e sensorial principalmente para as estruturas dentro da cabeça e pescoço.

O suprimento sensorial inclui tanto sensações "gerais", como temperatura e toque, quanto sentidos "especiais", como paladar, visão, olfato, equilíbrio e audição.

O nervo vago (X) fornece suprimento sensorial e autônomo (parassimpático) para as estruturas do pescoço e também para a maioria dos órgãos do tórax e do abdome.


=== Nervo terminal (0) ===

O nervo terminal (0) pode não ter um papel em humanos, embora tenha sido implicado em respostas hormonais ao olfato, resposta sexual e seleção de parceiros.


=== Cheiro (I) ===

O nervo olfativo (I) transmite informações que dão origem ao olfato. Danos ao nervo olfativo (I) podem causar uma incapacidade de cheirar (anosmia), uma distorção no olfato (parosmia) ou uma distorção ou falta de gosto.


=== Visão (II) ===

O nervo óptico (II) transmite informações visuais. Danos ao nervo óptico (II) afetam aspectos específicos da visão que dependem da localização do dano.

Uma pessoa pode não ser capaz de ver objetos em seus lados esquerdo ou direito (hemianopsia homônima) ou pode ter dificuldade em ver objetos de seus campos visuais externos (hemianopsia bitemporal) se o quiasma óptico estiver envolvido.

A inflamação (neurite óptica) pode afetar a nitidez da visão ou a detecção de cores


=== Movimento dos olhos (III, IV, VI) ===


O nervo oculomotor (III), o nervo troclear (IV) e o nervo abducente (VI) coordenam o movimento dos olhos.

O nervo oculomotor controla todos os músculos do olho, exceto o músculo oblíquo superior controlado pelo nervo troclear (IV) e o músculo reto lateral controlado pelo nervo abducente (VI).

Isso significa que a capacidade do olho de olhar para baixo e para dentro é controlada pelo nervo troclear (IV), a capacidade de olhar para fora é controlada pelo nervo abducente (VI) e todos os outros movimentos são controlados pelo nervo oculomotor (III). Danos a esses nervos podem afetar o movimento do olho.

Danos podem resultar em visão dupla (diplopia) porque os movimentos dos olhos não são sincronizados.

Anormalidades do movimento visual também podem ser observadas no exame, como tremores (nistagmo).

Danos ao nervo oculomotor (III) podem causar visão dupla e incapacidade de coordenar os movimentos de ambos os olhos (estrabismo), também queda das pálpebras (ptose) e dilatação da pupila (midríase).

As lesões também podem levar à incapacidade de abrir o olho devido à paralisia do músculo elevador da pálpebra.

Indivíduos que sofrem de uma lesão no nervo oculomotor podem compensar inclinando a cabeça para aliviar os sintomas devido à paralisia de um ou mais dos músculos oculares que ele controla.

Danos ao nervo troclear (IV) também podem causar visão dupla com o olho aduzido e elevado.

O resultado será um olho que não pode se mover para baixo corretamente (especialmente para baixo quando está na posição para dentro).

Isso se deve ao comprometimento do músculo oblíquo superior. Danos ao nervo abducente (VI) também podem resultar em visão dupla.

Isso se deve ao comprometimento do músculo reto lateral, suprido pelo nervo abducente.


=== Nervo trigêmeo (V) ===

O nervo trigêmeo (V) e seus três ramos principais o oftálmico (V1), maxilar (V2) e mandibular (V3) proporcionam sensação à pele da face e também controla os músculos da mastigação.

Danos ao nervo trigêmeo levam à perda de sensibilidade em uma área afetada.

Outras condições que afetam o nervo trigêmeo (V) incluem neuralgia do trigêmeo, herpes zoster, dor de sinusite, presença de abscesso dentário e cefaleia em salvas.


=== Expressão facial (VII) ===

O nervo facial (VII) controla a maioria dos músculos da expressão facial, fornece a sensação do paladar dos dois terços anteriores da língua e controla o músculo estapédio.

A maioria dos músculos é suprida pelo córtex no lado oposto do cérebro; a exceção é o músculo frontal da testa, no qual o lado esquerdo e o lado direito do músculo recebem informações de ambos os lados do cérebro.

Danos ao nervo facial (VII) podem causar paralisia facial.

É aqui que uma pessoa é incapaz de mover os músculos de um ou ambos os lados do rosto.

A causa mais comum disso é a paralisia de Bell, cuja causa final é desconhecida.

Pacientes com paralisia de Bell geralmente têm a boca caída no lado afetado e muitas vezes têm dificuldade para mastigar porque o músculo bucinador é afetado.

O nervo facial também é o nervo craniano mais comumente afetado no trauma fechado.


=== Audição e equilíbrio (VIII) ===

O nervo vestibulococlear (VIII) fornece informações relacionadas ao equilíbrio e à audição por meio de seus dois ramos, os nervos vestibular e coclear.

A parte vestibular é responsável por fornecer sensações dos vestíbulos e do canal semicircular da orelha interna, incluindo informações sobre o equilíbrio, e é um importante componente do reflexo vestíbulo-ocular, que mantém a cabeça estável e permite que os olhos rastreiem objetos em movimento.

O nervo coclear transmite informações da cóclea, permitindo que o som seja ouvido.

Quando danificado, o nervo vestibular pode dar origem à sensação de rotação e tontura (vertigem).

A função do nervo vestibular pode ser testada colocando água fria e morna nos ouvidos e observando a estimulação calórica dos movimentos oculares.

Danos ao nervo vestibulococlear também podem se apresentar como movimentos oculares repetitivos e involuntários (nistagmo), particularmente quando o olho está se movendo horizontalmente.

Danos ao nervo coclear causarão surdez parcial ou completa no ouvido afetado.


=== Sensação oral, paladar e salivação (IX) ===

O nervo glossofaríngeo (IX) supre o músculo estilofaríngeo e proporciona sensação à orofaringe e ao dorso da língua.

O nervo glossofaríngeo também fornece estímulo parassimpático à glândula parótida. Danos ao nervo podem causar falha do reflexo de vômito; uma falha também pode ser observada em danos ao nervo vago (X).


=== Nervo vago (X) ===

O nervo vago (X) fornece suprimento sensorial e parassimpático para estruturas no pescoço e também para a maioria dos órgãos no tórax e abdômen.

A perda da função do nervo vago (X) levará à perda do suprimento parassimpático de um número muito grande de estruturas.

Os principais efeitos do dano ao nervo vago podem incluir um aumento da pressão arterial e da frequência cardíaca.

A disfunção isolada apenas do nervo vago é rara, mas - se a lesão estiver localizada acima do ponto em que o vago se ramifica pela primeira vez - pode ser indicada por uma voz rouca, devido à disfunção de um de seus ramos, o nervo laríngeo recorrente.

Danos a este nervo podem resultar em dificuldades para engolir.


=== Elevação do ombro e rotação da cabeça (XI) ===

O nervo acessório (XI) supre os músculos esternocleidomastóideo e trapézio.

A lesão do nervo acessório (XI) levará à fraqueza no músculo trapézio do mesmo lado da lesão.

O trapézio levanta o ombro ao dar de ombros, de modo que o ombro afetado não será capaz de dar de ombros e a omoplata (escápula) se projetará em uma posição alada.

Dependendo da localização da lesão também pode haver fraqueza presente no músculo esternocleidomastóideo, que atua virando a cabeça de modo que a face aponte para o lado oposto.


=== Movimento da língua (XII) ===

O nervo hipoglosso (XII) supre os músculos intrínsecos da língua, controlando o movimento da língua.

O nervo hipoglosso (XII) é o único que é suprido pelos córtices motores de ambos os hemisférios do cérebro. Danos ao nervo podem levar a fasciculações ou desgaste (atrofia) dos músculos da língua.

Isso levará à fraqueza do movimento da língua desse lado.

Quando danificada e estendida, a lingueta se moverá em direção ao lado mais fraco ou danificado, conforme mostrado na imagem.

As fasciculações da língua às vezes parecem um "saco de vermes".

Danos ao trato nervoso ou núcleo não levarão a atrofia ou fasciculações, mas apenas fraqueza dos músculos do mesmo lado do dano.


== Significado clínico ==

=== Exame ===

Médicos, neurologistas e outros profissionais médicos podem realizar um exame de nervo craniano como parte de um exame neurológico para examinar os nervos cranianos.

Esta é uma série de etapas altamente formalizada envolvendo testes específicos para cada nervo.

A disfunção de um nervo identificada durante o teste pode indicar um problema no nervo ou em uma parte do cérebro.

Um exame de nervos cranianos começa com a observação do paciente, pois algumas lesões de nervos cranianos podem afetar a simetria dos olhos ou da face.

A visão pode ser testada examinando os campos visuais ou examinando a retina com um oftalmoscópio, usando um processo conhecido como fundoscopia.

O teste de campo visual pode ser usado para identificar lesões estruturais no nervo óptico ou mais ao longo das vias visuais.

O movimento dos olhos é testado e anormalidades como nistagmo são observadas.

A sensação do rosto é testada e os pacientes são solicitados a realizar diferentes movimentos faciais, como soprar as bochechas.

A audição é verificada por voz e diapasões.

A úvula do paciente é examinada.

Depois de dar de ombros e virar a cabeça, a função da língua do paciente é avaliada por vários movimentos da língua.

O olfato não é testado rotineiramente, mas se houver suspeita de alteração no olfato, cada narina é testada com substâncias de odores conhecidos, como café ou sabão.

Substâncias com cheiro intenso, por exemplo, amônia, podem levar à ativação de receptores de dor do nervo trigêmeo (V) localizado na cavidade nasal e isso pode confundir o teste olfativo.


=== Dano ===

==== Compressão ====

Os nervos podem ser comprimidos devido ao aumento da pressão intracraniana, um efeito de massa de uma hemorragia intracerebral ou tumor que pressiona os nervos e interfere na transmissão de impulsos ao longo do nervo.

A perda da função de um nervo craniano pode às vezes ser o primeiro sintoma de um câncer intracraniano ou da base do crânio.

Um aumento da pressão intracraniana pode levar ao comprometimento dos nervos ópticos (II) devido à compressão das veias e capilares circundantes, causando inchaço do globo ocular (papiledema).

Um câncer, como um glioma do nervo óptico, também pode afetar o nervo óptico (II).

Um tumor hipofisário pode comprimir os tratos ópticos ou o quiasma óptico do nervo óptico (II), levando à perda do campo visual.

Um tumor hipofisário também pode se estender para o seio cavernoso, comprimindo o nervo oculomotor (III), nervo troclear (IV) e nervo abducente (VI), levando a visão dupla e estrabismo.

Esses nervos também podem ser afetados pela herniação dos lobos temporais do cérebro através da foice do cérebro.

Acredita-se que a causa da neuralgia do trigêmeo, na qual um lado da face é extremamente dolorosa, é a compressão do nervo por uma artéria quando o nervo emerge do tronco cerebral.

Um neuroma acústico, particularmente na junção entre a ponte e a medula, pode comprimir o nervo facial (VII) e o nervo vestibulococlear (VIII), levando à perda auditiva e sensorial no lado afetado.


==== AVC ====

A oclusão dos vasos sanguíneos que suprem os nervos ou seus núcleos, um acidente vascular cerebral isquêmico, pode causar sinais e sintomas específicos relacionados à área danificada.

Se houver um acidente vascular cerebral do mesencéfalo, ponte ou medula, vários nervos cranianos podem ser danificados, resultando em disfunção e sintomas de várias síndromes diferentes.

A trombose, como uma trombose do seio cavernoso, refere-se a um coágulo (trombo) que afeta a drenagem venosa do seio cavernoso, afeta o nervo óptico (II), oculomotor (III), troclear (IV), ramo oftalâmico do nervo trigêmeo (V1 ) e o nervo abducente (VI).


==== Inflamação ====

A inflamação de um nervo craniano pode ocorrer como resultado de infecção, como causas virais, como o vírus do herpes simples reativado, ou pode ocorrer espontaneamente.

A inflamação do nervo facial (VII) pode resultar em paralisia de Bell.

A esclerose múltipla, um processo inflamatório que resulta na perda das bainhas de mielina que circundam os nervos cranianos, pode causar uma variedade de sintomas de deslocamento que afetam vários nervos cranianos.

A inflamação também pode afetar outros nervos cranianos.

Outras causas inflamatórias mais raras que afetam a função de múltiplos nervos cranianos incluem sarcoidose, tuberculose miliar e inflamação das artérias, como granulomatose com poliangeíte.


==== Outro ====

Trauma no crânio, doença óssea, como a doença de Paget, e lesão nos nervos durante a cirurgia são outras causas de danos nos nervos.


== História ==

O anatomista greco-romano Galeno (129-210 d.C.) nomeou sete pares de nervos cranianos.

Muito mais tarde, em 1664, o anatomista inglês Sir Thomas Willis sugeriu que na verdade havia 9 pares de nervos.

Finalmente, em 1778, o anatomista alemão Samuel Soemmering nomeou os 12 pares de nervos que são geralmente aceitos hoje.

No entanto, como muitos dos nervos emergem do tronco cerebral como radículas, há um debate contínuo sobre quantos nervos realmente existem e como eles devem ser agrupados.

Por exemplo, há motivos para considerar os nervos olfatório (I) e óptico (II) como tratos cerebrais, em vez de nervos cranianos.


== Outros animais ==

Os nervos cranianos também estão presentes em outros vertebrados.

Outros amniotas (tetrápodes não anfíbios) têm nervos cranianos semelhantes aos dos humanos.

Nos anamniotas (peixes e anfíbios), o nervo acessório (XI) e o nervo hipoglosso (XII) não existem, sendo o nervo acessório (XI) parte integrante do nervo vago (X); o nervo hipoglosso (XII) é representado por um número variável de nervos espinhais que emergem de segmentos vertebrais fundidos no occipital.

Esses dois nervos só se tornaram nervos discretos nos ancestrais dos amniotas (tetrápodes não anfíbios).

O nervo terminal muito pequeno (nervo N ou O) existe em humanos, mas pode não ser funcional.

Em outros animais, parece ser importante a receptividade sexual com base nas percepções de feromônios.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cranial_nerves

;;;FR;;;



NERFS CRÂNIENS


Les nerfs crâniens sont les nerfs qui émergent directement du cerveau (y compris le tronc cérébral), dont on considère classiquement douze paires.

Les nerfs crâniens relaient les informations entre le cerveau et les parties du corps, principalement vers et depuis les régions de la tête et du cou, y compris les sens spéciaux de la vision, du goût, de l'odorat et de l'ouïe.

Les nerfs crâniens émergent du système nerveux central au-dessus du niveau des premières vertèbres de la colonne vertébrale.

Chaque nerf crânien est apparié et est présent des deux côtés.

Il existe classiquement douze paires de nerfs crâniens, qui sont décrits par les chiffres romains I-XII.

Certains considéraient qu'il y avait treize paires de nerfs crâniens, y compris le nerf crânien zéro.

La numérotation des nerfs crâniens est basée sur l'ordre dans lequel ils émergent du cerveau et du tronc cérébral, d'avant en arrière.

Les nerfs terminaux (0), les nerfs olfactifs (I) et les nerfs optiques (II) émergent du cerveau, et les dix paires restantes proviennent du tronc cérébral, qui est la partie inférieure du cerveau.

Les nerfs crâniens sont considérés comme des composants du système nerveux périphérique (SNP), bien qu'au niveau structurel, les nerfs olfactif (I), optique (II) et trijumeau (V) soient plus précisément considérés comme faisant partie du système nerveux central (SNC) .Les nerfs crâniens sont en contraste avec les nerfs rachidiens, qui émergent des segments de la moelle épinière.


== Anatomie ==


Le plus souvent, les humains sont considérés comme ayant douze paires de nerfs crâniens (I-XII), le nerf terminal (0) étant plus récemment canonisé.

Les nerfs sont : le nerf olfactif (I), le nerf optique (II), le nerf oculomoteur (III), le nerf trochléaire (IV), le nerf trijumeau (V), le nerf abducens (VI), le nerf facial (VII), le nerf vestibulocochléaire (VIII), le nerf glossopharyngé (IX), le nerf vague (X), le nerf accessoire (XI) et le nerf hypoglosse (XII).


=== Terminologie ===

Les nerfs crâniens sont généralement nommés en fonction de leur structure ou de leur fonction.

Par exemple, le nerf olfactif (I) fournit l'odorat et le nerf facial (VII) fournit les muscles du visage.

Parce que le latin était la lingua franca de l'étude de l'anatomie lorsque les nerfs ont été documentés, enregistrés et discutés pour la première fois, de nombreux nerfs conservent des noms latins ou grecs, y compris le nerf trochléaire (IV), nommé en fonction de sa structure, car il alimente un muscle. qui s'attache à une poulie (grec : trochlée).

Le nerf trijumeau (V) est nommé en fonction de ses trois composants (latin : trijumeau signifiant triplets), et le nerf vague (X) est nommé pour son parcours errant (latin : vagus).

Les nerfs crâniens sont numérotés en fonction de leur position d'avant en arrière (rostral-caudal) de leur position sur le cerveau, car, lors de la visualisation du cerveau antérieur et du tronc cérébral d'en bas, ils sont souvent visibles dans leur ordre numérique.

Par exemple, les nerfs olfactifs (I) et les nerfs optiques (II) proviennent de la base du cerveau antérieur, et les autres nerfs, III à XII, proviennent du tronc cérébral.

Les nerfs crâniens ont des voies à l'intérieur et à l'extérieur du crâne.

Les voies à l'intérieur du crâne sont appelées "intracrâniennes" et les voies à l'extérieur du crâne sont appelées "extracrâniennes".

Il existe de nombreux trous dans le crâne appelés "foramina" par lesquels les nerfs peuvent sortir du crâne.

Tous les nerfs crâniens sont appariés, ce qui signifie qu'ils se trouvent sur les côtés droit et gauche du corps.

Le muscle, la peau ou la fonction supplémentaire fournie par un nerf, du même côté du corps que le côté dont il provient, est une fonction ipsilatérale.

Si la fonction est du côté opposé à l'origine du nerf, on parle de fonction controlatérale.


=== Parcours intracrânien ===

==== Noyaux ====

En gros, tous les nerfs crâniens ont un noyau.

A l'exception du nerf olfactif (I) et du nerf optique (II), tous les noyaux sont présents dans le tronc cérébral.

Le mésencéphale du tronc cérébral a les noyaux du nerf oculomoteur (III) et du nerf trochléaire (IV); le pon a les noyaux du nerf trijumeau (V), du nerf abducens (VI), du nerf facial (VII) et du nerf vestibulocochléaire (VIII); et la moelle a les noyaux du nerf glossopharyngé (IX), du nerf vague (X), du nerf accessoire (XI) et du nerf hypoglosse (XII).

Le nerf olfactif (I) émerge du bulbe olfactif et, en fonction légèrement de la division, le nerf optique (II) est considéré comme émergeant des noyaux géniculés latéraux.Parce que chaque nerf peut avoir plusieurs fonctions, les fibres nerveuses qui composent le nerf peuvent s'accumuler dans plus d'un noyau.

Par exemple, le nerf trijumeau (V), qui a un rôle sensitif et moteur, possède au moins quatre noyaux.


==== Sortir du tronc cérébral ====

À l'exception du nerf olfactif (I) et du nerf optique (II), les nerfs crâniens émergent du tronc cérébral.

Le nerf oculomoteur (III) et le nerf trochléaire (IV) émergent du mésencéphale, le trijumeau (V), l'abducens (VI), le facial (VII) et le vestibulocochlea (VIII) du pont, et le glossopharyngien (IX), vagus ( X), accessoire (XI) et hypoglosse (XII) émergent de la moelle.

Le nerf olfactif (I) et le nerf optique (II) émergent séparément.

Les nerfs olfactifs émergent des bulbes olfactifs de chaque côté de la crista galli, une saillie osseuse sous le lobe frontal, et les nerfs optiques (II) émergent du colliculus latéral, renflements de chaque côté des lobes temporaux du cerveau.


==== Ganglions ====

Les nerfs crâniens donnent naissance à un certain nombre de ganglions, des collections de corps cellulaires de neurones dans les nerfs situés à l'extérieur du cerveau.

Ces ganglions sont à la fois des ganglions parasympathiques et sensoriels.

Les ganglions sensoriels des nerfs crâniens correspondent directement aux ganglions de la racine dorsale des nerfs rachidiens et sont connus sous le nom de ganglions des nerfs crâniens.

Des ganglions sensoriels existent pour les nerfs à fonction sensorielle : V, VII, VIII, IX, X.

Il existe également un certain nombre de ganglions parasympathiques des nerfs crâniens.

Les ganglions sympathiques alimentant la tête et le cou résident dans les régions supérieures du tronc sympathique et n'appartiennent pas aux nerfs crâniens.

Le ganglion des nerfs sensoriels, dont la structure est similaire au ganglion de la racine dorsale de la moelle épinière, comprend :
 
Les ganglions trijumeau du nerf trijumeau (V), qui occupe un espace dans la dure-mère appelé caverne de Meckel.

Ce ganglion ne contient que les fibres sensorielles du nerf trijumeau.

Le ganglion géniculé du nerf facial (VII), qui survient juste après l'entrée du nerf dans le canal facial.

Un ganglion supérieur et inférieur du nerf glossopharyngien (IX), qui se produit juste après son passage à travers le foramen jugulaire.

Des ganglions supplémentaires pour les nerfs à fonction parasympathique existent et comprennent le ganglion ciliaire du nerf oculomoteur (III), le ganglion ptérygopalatin du nerf maxillaire (V2), le ganglion sous-maxillaire du nerf lingual, une branche du nerf facial (VII) , et le ganglion otique du nerf glossopharyngien (IX).


==== Sortie du crâne et parcours extracrânien ====
Après avoir émergé du cerveau, les nerfs crâniens voyagent à l'intérieur du crâne, et certains doivent le quitter pour atteindre leurs destinations.

Souvent, les nerfs traversent des trous dans le crâne, appelés foramina, lorsqu'ils se rendent à leur destination.

D'autres nerfs traversent des canaux osseux, des voies plus longues entourées d'os.

Ces foramens et canaux peuvent contenir plus d'un nerf crânien et peuvent également contenir des vaisseaux sanguins.

Le nerf terminal (0) est un mince réseau de fibres associées à la dure-mère et à la lamina terminalis qui s'étendent de manière rostrale au nerf olfactif, avec des projections à travers la plaque cribriforme.

Le nerf olfactif (I) traverse des perforations dans la partie cribriforme de la plaque de l'os ethmoïde.

Les fibres nerveuses se terminent dans la cavité nasale supérieure.
Le nerf optique (II) traverse le foramen optique de l'os sphénoïde lorsqu'il se dirige vers l'œil.

Le nerf oculomoteur (III), le nerf trochléaire (IV), le nerf abducens (VI) et la branche ophtalmique du nerf trijumeau (V1) voyagent à travers le sinus caverneux dans la fissure orbitaire supérieure, passant du crâne dans l'orbite.

La division maxillaire du nerf trijumeau (V2) passe par le foramen rotundum dans l'os sphénoïde.

La division mandibulaire du nerf trijumeau (V3) traverse le foramen ovale de l'os sphénoïde.
Le nerf facial (VII) et le nerf vestibulocochléaire (VIII) pénètrent tous deux dans le conduit auditif interne de l'os temporal.

Le nerf facial atteint ensuite le côté du visage en utilisant le foramen stylomastoïdien, également dans l'os temporal.

Ses fibres se sont ensuite déployées pour atteindre et contrôler tous les muscles de l'expression faciale.

Le nerf vestibulocochléaire atteint les organes qui contrôlent l'équilibre et l'audition dans l'os temporal et n'atteint donc pas la surface externe du crâne.

Le glossopharyngien (IX), le nerf vague (X) et le nerf accessoire (XI) quittent tous le crâne par le foramen jugulaire pour pénétrer dans le cou.

Le nerf glossopharyngien procure une sensation au haut de la gorge et à l'arrière de la langue, le nerf vague alimente les muscles du larynx et continue vers le bas pour fournir un apport parasympathique à la poitrine et à l'abdomen.

Le nerf accessoire contrôle les muscles trapèze et sternocléidomastoïdien du cou et de l'épaule.

Le nerf hypoglosse (XII) sort du crâne en utilisant le canal hypoglosse dans l'os occipital.


== Développement ==

Les nerfs crâniens sont formés à partir de la contribution de deux populations de cellules embryonnaires spécialisées, la crête neurale crânienne et les placodes ectodermiques.

Les composants du système nerveux sensoriel de la tête sont issus de la crête neurale et d'une population de cellules embryonnaires se développant à proximité, les placodes sensorielles crâniennes (les placodes olfactive, cristallinienne, otique, trigéminale, épibranchiale et paratympanique).

Les nerfs crâniens à double origine sont résumés dans le tableau suivant : Contributions des cellules de la crête neurale et des placodes aux ganglions et aux nerfs crâniens

Abréviations : CN, nerf crânien ; m, purement nerf moteur ; mélange, nerf mixte (sensitif et moteur); NC, crête neurale ; PA, arc pharyngé (branchial) ; r, rhombomère ; s, nerf purement sensoriel. * Il n'y a pas de ganglion connu du nerf accessoire.

La partie crânienne du nerf accessoire envoie des branches occasionnelles au ganglion supérieur du nerf vague.


== Fonction ==

Les nerfs crâniens fournissent une alimentation motrice et sensorielle principalement aux structures de la tête et du cou.

L'offre sensorielle comprend à la fois des sensations "générales" telles que la température et le toucher, et des sens "spéciaux" tels que le goût, la vision, l'odorat, l'équilibre et l'ouïe.

Le nerf vague (X) fournit une alimentation sensorielle et autonome (parasympathique) aux structures du cou ainsi qu'à la plupart des organes de la poitrine et de l'abdomen.


=== Nerf terminal (0) ===

Le nerf terminal (0) peut ne pas avoir de rôle chez l'homme, bien qu'il ait été impliqué dans les réponses hormonales à l'odorat, la réponse sexuelle et la sélection du partenaire.


=== Odeur (I) ===

Le nerf olfactif (I) transmet des informations donnant lieu à l'odorat. Les dommages au nerf olfactif (I) peuvent entraîner une incapacité à sentir (anosmie), une distorsion de l'odorat (parosmie), ou une distorsion ou un manque de goût.


=== Vision (II) ===

Le nerf optique (II) transmet des informations visuelles. Les dommages au nerf optique (II) affectent des aspects spécifiques de la vision qui dépendent de l'emplacement des dommages.

Une personne peut ne pas être en mesure de voir des objets sur ses côtés gauche ou droit (hémianopsie homonyme), ou peut avoir des difficultés à voir des objets de son champ visuel externe (hémianopsie bitemporale) si le chiasma optique est impliqué.

L'inflammation (névrite optique) peut affecter la netteté de la vision ou la détection des couleurs


=== Mouvement des yeux (III, IV, VI) ===


Le nerf oculomoteur (III), le nerf trochléaire (IV) et le nerf abducens (VI) coordonnent les mouvements oculaires.

Le nerf oculomoteur contrôle tous les muscles de l'œil à l'exception du muscle oblique supérieur contrôlé par le nerf trochléaire (IV) et du muscle droit latéral contrôlé par le nerf abducens (VI).

Cela signifie que la capacité de l'œil à regarder vers le bas et vers l'intérieur est contrôlée par le nerf trochléaire (IV), la capacité de regarder vers l'extérieur est contrôlée par le nerf abducens (VI) et tous les autres mouvements sont contrôlés par le nerf oculomoteur (III) Les dommages à ces nerfs peuvent affecter le mouvement de l'œil.

Les dommages peuvent entraîner une vision double (diplopie) parce que les mouvements des yeux ne sont pas synchronisés.

Des anomalies du mouvement visuel peuvent également être observées à l'examen, telles que des tremblements (nystagmus).

Les lésions du nerf oculomoteur (III) peuvent entraîner une vision double et une incapacité à coordonner les mouvements des deux yeux (strabisme), ainsi que des paupières tombantes (ptosis) et une dilatation des pupilles (mydriase).

Les lésions peuvent également entraîner une incapacité à ouvrir l'œil en raison de la paralysie du muscle releveur de la paupière.

Les personnes souffrant d'une lésion du nerf oculomoteur peuvent compenser en inclinant la tête pour atténuer les symptômes dus à la paralysie d'un ou plusieurs des muscles oculaires qu'il contrôle.

Les dommages au nerf trochléaire (IV) peuvent également provoquer une double vision avec l'œil en adduction et surélevé.

Le résultat sera un œil qui ne peut pas se déplacer correctement vers le bas (surtout vers le bas lorsqu'il est dans une position vers l'intérieur).

Cela est dû à une altération du muscle oblique supérieur. Les lésions du nerf abducens (VI) peuvent également entraîner une vision double.

Cela est dû à une altération du muscle droit latéral, alimenté par le nerf abducens.


=== Nerf trijumeau (V) ===

Le nerf trijumeau (V) et ses trois branches principales ophtalmique (V1), maxillaire (V2) et mandibulaire (V3) procurent une sensation à la peau du visage et contrôlent également les muscles de la mastication.

Les dommages au nerf trijumeau entraînent une perte de sensation dans une zone touchée.

D'autres affections affectant le nerf trijumeau (V) comprennent la névralgie du trijumeau, le zona, la douleur de la sinusite, la présence d'un abcès dentaire et les céphalées en grappe.


=== Expression faciale (VII) ===

Le nerf facial (VII) contrôle la plupart des muscles de l'expression faciale, fournit la sensation de goût des deux tiers avant de la langue et contrôle le muscle stapédien.

La plupart des muscles sont alimentés par le cortex du côté opposé du cerveau ; l'exception est le muscle frontal du front, dans lequel les côtés gauche et droit du muscle reçoivent tous deux des entrées des deux côtés du cerveau.

Les lésions du nerf facial (VII) peuvent provoquer une paralysie faciale.

C'est là qu'une personne est incapable de bouger les muscles d'un ou des deux côtés de son visage.

La cause la plus fréquente en est la paralysie de Bell, dont la cause ultime est inconnue.

Les patients atteints de paralysie de Bell ont souvent une bouche tombante du côté affecté et ont souvent du mal à mâcher parce que le muscle buccinateur est affecté.

Le nerf facial est également le nerf crânien le plus fréquemment atteint dans les traumatismes contondants.


=== Audition et équilibre (VIII) ===

Le nerf vestibulocochléaire (VIII) fournit des informations relatives à l'équilibre et à l'audition via ses deux branches, les nerfs vestibulaire et cochléaire.

La partie vestibulaire est responsable de la transmission des sensations des vestibules et du canal semi-circulaire de l'oreille interne, y compris des informations sur l'équilibre, et est un élément important du réflexe vestibulooculaire, qui maintient la tête stable et permet aux yeux de suivre les objets en mouvement.

Le nerf cochléaire transmet les informations de la cochlée, ce qui permet d'entendre le son.

Lorsqu'il est endommagé, le nerf vestibulaire peut donner lieu à une sensation de rotation et d'étourdissements (vertiges).

La fonction du nerf vestibulaire peut être testée en mettant de l'eau froide et chaude dans les oreilles et en observant la stimulation calorique des mouvements oculaires.

Les lésions du nerf vestibulocochléaire peuvent également se présenter sous la forme de mouvements oculaires répétitifs et involontaires (nystagmus), en particulier lorsque l'œil se déplace horizontalement.

Les dommages au nerf cochléaire entraîneront une surdité partielle ou complète dans l'oreille affectée.


=== Sensation orale, goût et salivation (IX) ===

Le nerf glossopharyngien (IX) alimente le muscle stylopharyngé et fournit une sensation à l'oropharynx et à l'arrière de la langue.

Le nerf glossopharyngé fournit également une entrée parasympathique à la glande parotide. Les dommages au nerf peuvent entraîner une défaillance du réflexe nauséeux; une défaillance peut également être observée dans les lésions du nerf vague (X).


=== Nerf vague (X) ===

Le nerf vague (X) fournit une alimentation sensorielle et parasympathique aux structures du cou ainsi qu'à la plupart des organes de la poitrine et de l'abdomen.

La perte de fonction du nerf vague (X) entraînera une perte de l'alimentation parasympathique d'un très grand nombre de structures.

Les principaux effets des dommages au nerf vague peuvent inclure une augmentation de la pression artérielle et de la fréquence cardiaque.

Un dysfonctionnement isolé du seul nerf vague est rare, mais - si la lésion est située au-dessus du point où le nerf vague se ramifie pour la première fois - peut être indiqué par une voix rauque, due au dysfonctionnement d'une de ses branches, le nerf laryngé récurrent.

Les dommages à ce nerf peuvent entraîner des difficultés à avaler.


=== Élévation des épaules et rotation de la tête (XI) ===

Le nerf accessoire (XI) innerve les muscles sterno-cléido-mastoïdien et trapèze.

Les dommages au nerf accessoire (XI) entraîneront une faiblesse du muscle trapèze du même côté que les dommages.

Le trapèze soulève l'épaule en haussant les épaules, de sorte que l'épaule affectée ne pourra pas hausser les épaules et l'omoplate (omoplate) dépassera dans une position ailée.

Selon l'emplacement de la lésion, il peut également y avoir une faiblesse dans le muscle sternocléidomastoïdien, qui agit pour tourner la tête de sorte que le visage pointe vers le côté opposé.


=== Mouvement de la langue (XII) ===

Le nerf hypoglosse (XII) fournit les muscles intrinsèques de la langue, contrôlant le mouvement de la langue.

Le nerf hypoglosse (XII) est unique en ce qu'il est alimenté par les cortex moteurs des deux hémisphères du cerveau. Les dommages au nerf peuvent entraîner des fasciculations ou une atrophie (atrophie) des muscles de la langue.

Cela entraînera une faiblesse du mouvement de la langue de ce côté.

Lorsqu'elle est endommagée et étendue, la langue se déplacera vers le côté le plus faible ou endommagé, comme indiqué sur l'image.

On dit parfois que les fasciculations de la langue ressemblent à un "sac de vers".

Les lésions du tractus nerveux ou du noyau n'entraîneront pas d'atrophie ou de fasciculations, mais seulement une faiblesse des muscles du même côté que la lésion.


== Signification clinique ==

=== Examen ===

Les médecins, neurologues et autres professionnels de la santé peuvent effectuer un examen des nerfs crâniens dans le cadre d'un examen neurologique pour examiner les nerfs crâniens.

Il s'agit d'une série d'étapes très formalisées impliquant des tests spécifiques pour chaque nerf.

Le dysfonctionnement d'un nerf identifié lors des tests peut indiquer un problème avec le nerf ou une partie du cerveau.

Un examen des nerfs crâniens commence par l'observation du patient, car certaines lésions des nerfs crâniens peuvent affecter la symétrie des yeux ou du visage.

La vision peut être testée en examinant les champs visuels ou en examinant la rétine avec un ophtalmoscope, en utilisant un processus connu sous le nom de fond d'œil.

Les tests de champ visuel peuvent être utilisés pour localiser des lésions structurelles dans le nerf optique ou plus loin le long des voies visuelles.

Le mouvement des yeux est testé et des anomalies telles que le nystagmus sont observées.

La sensation du visage est testée et les patients sont invités à effectuer différents mouvements du visage, tels que gonfler les joues.

L'audition est vérifiée par la voix et les diapasons.

La luette du patient est examinée.

Après avoir haussé les épaules et tourné la tête, la fonction de la langue du patient est évaluée par divers mouvements de la langue.

L'odorat n'est pas systématiquement testé, mais en cas de suspicion d'un changement de l'odorat, chaque narine est testée avec des substances aux odeurs connues telles que le café ou le savon.

Les substances fortement odorantes, par exemple l'ammoniac, peuvent entraîner l'activation des récepteurs de la douleur du nerf trijumeau (V) situés dans la cavité nasale, ce qui peut perturber les tests olfactifs.


=== Dégâts ===

==== Compression ====

Les nerfs peuvent être comprimés en raison d'une augmentation de la pression intracrânienne, d'un effet de masse d'une hémorragie intracérébrale ou d'une tumeur qui exerce une pression sur les nerfs et interfère avec la transmission des impulsions le long du nerf.

La perte de fonction d'un nerf crânien peut parfois être le premier symptôme d'un cancer intracrânien ou de la base du crâne.

Une augmentation de la pression intracrânienne peut entraîner une altération des nerfs optiques (II) en raison de la compression des veines et des capillaires environnants, provoquant un gonflement du globe oculaire (œdème papillaire).

Un cancer, tel qu'un gliome du nerf optique, peut également affecter le nerf optique (II).

Une tumeur hypophysaire peut comprimer les voies optiques ou le chiasma optique du nerf optique (II), entraînant une perte du champ visuel.

Une tumeur hypophysaire peut également s'étendre dans le sinus caverneux, comprimant le nerf oculuomoteur (III), le nerf trochléaire (IV) et le nerf abducens (VI), entraînant une vision double et un strabisme.

Ces nerfs peuvent également être affectés par une hernie des lobes temporaux du cerveau à travers la faux du cerveau.

On pense que la cause de la névralgie du trijumeau, dans laquelle un côté du visage est extrêmement douloureux, est la compression du nerf par une artère lorsque le nerf émerge du tronc cérébral.

Un névrome acoustique, en particulier à la jonction entre le pont et la moelle, peut comprimer le nerf facial (VII) et le nerf vestibulocochléaire (VIII), entraînant une perte auditive et sensorielle du côté affecté.


==== Course ====

L'occlusion des vaisseaux sanguins qui alimentent les nerfs ou leurs noyaux, un accident vasculaire cérébral ischémique, peut provoquer des signes et des symptômes spécifiques liés à la zone endommagée.

S'il y a un accident vasculaire cérébral du mésencéphale, du pont ou de la moelle épinière, divers nerfs crâniens peuvent être endommagés, entraînant un dysfonctionnement et les symptômes d'un certain nombre de syndromes différents.

La thrombose, telle qu'une thrombose du sinus caverneux, fait référence à un caillot (thrombus) affectant le drainage veineux du sinus caverneux, affecte la branche optique (II), oculomotrice (III), trochléaire (IV), ophtalamique du nerf trijumeau (V1 ) et le nerf abducens (VI).


==== Inflammations ====

L'inflammation d'un nerf crânien peut survenir à la suite d'une infection, telle que des causes virales telles que le virus de l'herpès simplex réactivé, ou peut survenir spontanément.

L'inflammation du nerf facial (VII) peut entraîner la paralysie de Bell.

La sclérose en plaques, un processus inflammatoire entraînant une perte des gaines de myéline qui entourent les nerfs crâniens, peut provoquer une variété de symptômes changeants affectant plusieurs nerfs crâniens.

L'inflammation peut également affecter d'autres nerfs crâniens.

D'autres causes inflammatoires plus rares affectant la fonction de plusieurs nerfs crâniens comprennent la sarcoïdose, la tuberculose miliaire et l'inflammation des artères, comme la granulomatose avec polyangéite.


==== Autre ====

Les traumatismes crâniens, les maladies osseuses, telles que la maladie de Paget, et les lésions nerveuses pendant la chirurgie sont d'autres causes de lésions nerveuses.


== Historique ==

L'anatomiste gréco-romain Galen (129-210 après JC) a nommé sept paires de nerfs crâniens.

Bien plus tard, en 1664, l'anatomiste anglais Sir Thomas Willis suggéra qu'il y avait en fait 9 paires de nerfs.

Enfin, en 1778, l'anatomiste allemand Samuel Soemmering a nommé les 12 paires de nerfs qui sont généralement acceptées aujourd'hui.

Cependant, comme de nombreux nerfs émergent du tronc cérébral sous forme de radicelles, il y a un débat continuel sur le nombre réel de nerfs et sur la manière dont ils doivent être regroupés.

Par exemple, il y a des raisons de considérer à la fois les nerfs olfactifs (I) et optiques (II) comme des voies cérébrales plutôt que comme des nerfs crâniens.


== Autres animaux ==

Les nerfs crâniens sont également présents chez d'autres vertébrés.

D'autres amniotes (tétrapodes non amphibiens) ont des nerfs crâniens similaires à ceux des humains.

Chez les anamniotes (poissons et amphibiens), le nerf accessoire (XI) et le nerf hypoglosse (XII) n'existent pas, le nerf accessoire (XI) faisant partie intégrante du nerf vague (X) ; le nerf hypoglosse (XII) est représenté par un nombre variable de nerfs rachidiens émergeant de segments vertébraux fusionnés à l'occiput.

Ces deux nerfs ne sont devenus des nerfs discrets que chez les ancêtres des amniotes (tétrapodes non amphibiens).

Le très petit nerf terminal (nerf N ou O) existe chez l'homme mais peut ne pas être fonctionnel.

Chez d'autres animaux, il semble être important pour la réceptivité sexuelle basée sur la perception des phéromones.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cranial_nerves
