

FOOT


The foot (plural: feet) is an anatomical structure found in many vertebrates. 

It is the terminal portion of a limb which bears weight and allows locomotion. 

In many animals with feet, the foot is a separate organ at the terminal part of the leg made up of one or more segments or bones, generally including claws or nails.


== Etymology ==

The word "foot", in the sense of meaning the "terminal part of the leg of a vertebrate animal" comes from "Old English fot "foot," from Proto-Germanic *fot (source also of Old Frisian fot, Old Saxon fot, Old Norse fotr, Danish fod, Swedish fot, Dutch voet, Old High German fuoz, German Fuß, Gothic fotus "foot"), from PIE root *ped- "foot".
The "plural form feet is an instance of i-mutation."


== Structure ==


The human foot is a strong and complex mechanical structure containing 26 bones, 33 joints (20 of which are actively articulated), and more than a hundred muscles, tendons, and ligaments. 

The joints of the foot are the ankle and subtalar joint and the interphalangeal joints of the foot. 

An anthropometric study of 1197 North American adult Caucasian males (mean age 35.5 years) found that a man's foot length was 26.3 cm with a standard deviation of 1.2 cm.The foot can be subdivided into the hindfoot, the midfoot, and the forefoot:
The hindfoot is composed of the talus (or ankle bone) and the calcaneus (or heel bone). 

The two long bones of the lower leg, the tibia and fibula, are connected to the top of the talus to form the ankle. 

Connected to the talus at the subtalar joint, the calcaneus, the largest bone of the foot, is cushioned underneath by a layer of fat.The five irregular bones of the midfoot, the cuboid, navicular, and three cuneiform bones, form the arches of the foot which serves as a shock absorber. 

The midfoot is connected to the hind- and fore-foot by muscles and the plantar fascia.The forefoot is composed of five toes and the corresponding five proximal long bones forming the metatarsus. 

Similar to the fingers of the hand, the bones of the toes are called phalanges and the big toe has two phalanges while the other four toes have three phalanges each. 

The joints between the phalanges are called interphalangeal and those between the metatarsus and phalanges are called metatarsophalangeal (MTP).
Both the midfoot and forefoot constitute the dorsum (the area facing upward while standing) and the planum (the area facing downward while standing).

The instep is the arched part of the top of the foot between the toes and the ankle.


=== Bones ===


tibia, fibula
tarsus (7): talus, calcaneus, cuneiformes (3), cuboid, and navicular
metatarsus (5): first, second, third, fourth, and fifth metatarsal bone
phalanges (14)There can be many sesamoid bones near the metatarsophalangeal joints, although they are only regularly present in the distal portion of the first metatarsal bone.


=== Arches ===


The human foot has two longitudinal arches and a transverse arch maintained by the interlocking shapes of the foot bones, strong ligaments, and pulling muscles during activity. 

The slight mobility of these arches when weight is applied to and removed from the foot makes walking and running more economical in terms of energy. 

As can be examined in a footprint, the medial longitudinal arch curves above the ground. 

This arch stretches from the heel bone over the "keystone" ankle bone to the three medial metatarsals. 

In contrast, the lateral longitudinal arch is very low. 

With the cuboid serving as its keystone, it redistributes part of the weight to the calcaneus and the distal end of the fifth metatarsal. 

The two longitudinal arches serve as pillars for the transverse arch which run obliquely across the tarsometatarsal joints. 

Excessive strain on the tendons and ligaments of the feet can result in fallen arches or flat feet.


=== Muscles ===

The muscles acting on the foot can be classified into extrinsic muscles, those originating on the anterior or posterior aspect of the lower leg, and intrinsic muscles, originating on the dorsal (top) or plantar (base) aspects of the foot.


==== Extrinsic ====

All muscles originating on the lower leg except the popliteus muscle are attached to the bones of the foot. 

The tibia and fibula and the interosseous membrane separate these muscles into anterior and posterior groups, in their turn subdivided into subgroups and layers.


===== Anterior group =====
Extensor group: the tibialis anterior originates on the proximal half of the tibia and the interosseous membrane and is inserted near the tarsometatarsal joint of the first digit. 

In the non-weight-bearing leg, the tibialis anterior dorsiflexes the foot and lift its medial edge (supination). 

In the weight-bearing leg, it brings the leg toward the back of the foot, like in rapid walking. 

The extensor digitorum longus arises on the lateral tibial condyle and along the fibula, and is inserted on the second to fifth digits and proximally on the fifth metatarsal. 

The extensor digitorum longus acts similar to the tibialis anterior except that it also dorsiflexes the digits. 

The extensor hallucis longus originates medially on the fibula and is inserted on the first digit. 

It dorsiflexes the big toe and also acts on the ankle in the unstressed leg. 

In the weight-bearing leg, it acts similarly to the tibialis anterior.Peroneal group: the peroneus longus arises on the proximal aspect of the fibula and peroneus brevis below it. 

Together, their tendons pass behind the lateral malleolus. 

Distally, the peroneus longus crosses the plantar side of the foot to reach its insertion on the first tarsometatarsal joint, while the peroneus brevis reaches the proximal part of the fifth metatarsal. 

These two muscles are the strongest pronators and aid in plantar flexion. 

The peroneus longus also acts like a bowstring that braces the transverse arch of the foot.


===== Posterior group =====
The superficial layer of posterior leg muscles is formed by the triceps surae and the plantaris. 

The triceps surae consists of the soleus and the two heads of the gastrocnemius. 

The heads of gastrocnemius arise on the femur, proximal to the condyles, and the soleus arises on the proximal dorsal parts of the tibia and fibula. 

The tendons of these muscles merge to be inserted onto the calcaneus as the Achilles tendon. 

The plantaris originates on the femur proximal to the lateral head of the gastrocnemius and its long tendon is embedded medially into the Achilles tendon. 

The triceps surae is the primary plantar flexor. 

Its strength becomes most obvious during ballet dancing. 

It is fully activated only with the knee extended, because the gastrocnemius is shortened during flexion of the knee. 

During walking it not only lifts the heel, but also flexes the knee, assisted by the plantaris.In the deep layer of posterior muscles, the tibialis posterior arises proximally on the back of the interosseous membrane and adjoining bones, and divides into two parts in the sole of the foot to attach to the tarsus. 

In the non-weight-bearing leg, it produces plantar flexion and supination, and, in the weight-bearing leg, it proximates the heel to the calf. 

The flexor hallucis longus arises on the back of the fibula on the lateral side, and its relatively thick muscle belly extends distally down to the flexor retinaculum where it passes over to the medial side to stretch across the sole to the distal phalanx of the first digit. 

The popliteus is also part of this group, but, with its oblique course across the back of the knee, does not act on the foot.


==== Intrinsic ====
On the top of the foot, the tendons of extensor digitorum brevis and extensor hallucis brevis lie deep in the system of long extrinsic extensor tendons. 

They both arise on the calcaneus and extend into the dorsal aponeurosis of digits one to four, just beyond the penultimate joints. 

They act to dorsiflex the digits. 

Similar to the intrinsic muscles of the hand, there are three groups of muscles in the sole of foot, those of the first and last digits, and a central group:

Muscles of the big toe: the abductor hallucis stretches medially along the border of the sole, from the calcaneus to the first digit. 

Below its tendon, the tendons of the long flexors pass through the tarsal canal. 

The abductor hallucis is an abductor and a weak flexor, and also helps maintain the arch of the foot. 

The flexor hallucis brevis arises on the medial cuneiform bone and related ligaments and tendons. 

An important plantar flexor, it is crucial to ballet dancing. 

Both these muscles are inserted with two heads proximally and distally to the first metatarsophalangeal joint. 

The adductor hallucis is part of this group, though it originally formed a separate system (see Contrahens). 

It has two heads, the oblique head originating obliquely across the central part of the midfoot, and the transverse head originating near the metatarsophalangeal joints of digits five to three. 

Both heads are inserted into the lateral sesamoid bone of the first digit. 

The adductor hallucis acts as a tensor of the plantar arches and also adducts the big toe and might plantar flex the proximal phalanx.Muscles of the little toe: Stretching laterally from the calcaneus to the proximal phalanx of the fifth digit, the abductor digiti minimi form the lateral margin of the foot and are the largest of the muscles of the fifth digit. 

Arising from the base of the fifth metatarsal, the flexor digiti minimi is inserted together with abductor on the first phalanx. 

Often absent, the opponens digiti minimi originates near the cuboid bone and is inserted on the fifth metatarsal bone. 

These three muscles act to support the arch of the foot and to plantar flex the fifth digit.

Central muscle group: The four lumbricals arise on the medial side of the tendons of flexor digitorum longus and are inserted on the medial margins of the proximal phalanges. 

The quadratus plantae originates with two slips from the lateral and medial margins of the calcaneus and inserts into the lateral margin of the flexor digitorum tendon. 

It is also known as the flexor accessorius. 

The flexor digitorum brevis arises inferiorly on the calcaneus and its three tendons are inserted into the middle phalanges of digits two to four (sometimes also the fifth digit). 

These tendons divide before their insertions and the tendons of flexor digitorum longus pass through these divisions. 

Flexor digitorum brevis flexes the middle phalanges. 

It is occasionally absent. 

Between the toes, the dorsal and plantar interossei stretch from the metatarsals to the proximal phalanges of digits two to five. 

The plantar interossei adduct and the dorsal interossei abduct these digits, and are also plantar flexors at the metatarsophalangeal joints.


== Clinical significance ==


Due to their position and function, feet are exposed to a variety of potential infections and injuries, including athlete's foot, bunions, ingrown toenails, Morton's neuroma, plantar fasciitis, plantar warts, and stress fractures. 

In addition, there are several genetic disorders that can affect the shape and function of the feet, including clubfoot or flat feet.
This leaves humans more vulnerable to medical problems that are caused by poor leg and foot alignments. 

Also, the wearing of shoes, sneakers and boots can impede proper alignment and movement within the ankle and foot. 

For example, high-heeled shoes are known to throw off the natural weight balance (this can also affect the lower back). 

For the sake of posture, flat soles with no heels are advised.
A doctor who specializes in the treatment of the feet practices podiatry and is called a podiatrist. 

A pedorthist specializes in the use and modification of footwear to treat problems related to the lower limbs.

Fractures of the foot include:

Lisfranc fracture – in which one or all of the metatarsals are displaced from the tarsus
Jones fracture – a fracture of the fifth metatarsal
March fracture – a fracture of the distal third of one of the metatarsals occurring because of recurrent stress
Calcaneal fracture
Broken toe – a fracture of a phalanx
Cuneiform fracture – Due to the ligamentous support of the midfoot, isolated cuneiform fractures are rare.


== Pronation ==


In anatomy, pronation is a rotational movement of the forearm (at the radioulnar joint) or foot (at the subtalar and talocalcaneonavicular joints). 

Pronation of the foot refers to how the body distributes weight as it cycles through the gait. 

During the gait cycle the foot can pronate in many different ways based on rearfoot and forefoot function. 

Types of pronation include neutral pronation, underpronation (supination), and overpronation.

Neutral pronationAn individual who neutrally pronates initially strikes the ground on the lateral side of the heel. 

As the individual transfers weight from the heel to the metatarsus, the foot will roll in a medial direction, such that the weight is distributed evenly across the metatarsus. 

In this stage of the gait, the knee will generally, but not always, track directly over the hallux.
This rolling inward motion as the foot progresses from heel to toe is the way that the body naturally absorbs shock. 

Neutral pronation is the most ideal, efficient type of gait when using a heel strike gait; in a forefoot strike, the body absorbs shock instead via flexation of the foot.

OverpronationAs with a neutral pronator, an individual who overpronates initially strikes the ground on the lateral side of the heel. 

As the individual transfers weight from the heel to the metatarsus, however, the foot will roll too far in a medial direction, such that the weight is distributed unevenly across the metatarsus, with excessive weight borne on the hallux. 

In this stage of the gait, the knee will generally, but not always, track inward.
An overpronator does not absorb shock efficiently. 

Imagine someone jumping onto a diving board, but the board is so flimsy that when it is struck, it bends and allows the person to plunge straight down into the water instead of back into the air. 

Similarly, an overpronator's arches will collapse, or the ankles will roll inward (or a combination of the two) as they cycle through the gait. 

An individual whose bone structure involves external rotation at the hip, knee, or ankle will be more likely to overpronate than one whose bone structure has internal rotation or central alignment. 

An individual who overpronates tends to wear down their running shoes on the medial (inside) side of the shoe toward the toe area.When choosing a running or walking shoe, a person with overpronation can choose shoes that have good inside support—usually by strong material at the inside sole and arch of the shoe. 

It is usually visible. 

The inside support area is marked by strong greyish material to support the weight when a person lands on the outside foot and then roll onto the inside foot.

Underpronation (supination)
An individual who underpronates also initially strikes the ground on the lateral side of the heel. 

As the individual transfers weight from the heel to the metatarsus, the foot will not roll far enough in a medial direction. 

The weight is distributed unevenly across the metatarsus, with excessive weight borne on the fifth metatarsal, toward the lateral side of the foot. 

In this stage of the gait, the knee will generally, but not always, track laterally of the hallux.
Like an overpronator, an underpronator does not absorb shock efficiently – but for the opposite reason. 

The underpronated foot is like a diving board that, instead of failing to spring someone in the air because it is too flimsy, fails to do so because it is too rigid. 

There is virtually no give. 

An underpronator's arches or ankles don't experience much motion as they cycle through the gait. 

An individual whose bone structure involves internal rotation at the hip, knee, or ankle will be more likely to underpronate than one whose bone structure has external rotation or central alignment. 

Usually – but not always – those who are bow-legged tend to underpronate. 

An individual who underpronates tends to wear down their running shoes on the lateral (outside) side of the shoe toward the rear of the shoe in the heel area.


== Society and culture ==


Humans usually wear shoes or similar footwear for protection from hazards when walking outside. 

There are a number of contexts where it is considered inappropriate to wear shoes. 

Some people consider it rude to wear shoes into a house and a Māori Marae should only be entered with bare feet.
Foot fetishism is the most common sexual fetish.


== Other animals ==


A paw is the soft foot of a mammal, generally a quadruped, that has claws or nails (e.g., a cat or dog's paw). 

A hard foot is called a hoof. 

Depending on style of locomotion, animals can be classified as plantigrade (sole walking), digitigrade (toe walking), or unguligrade (nail walking).
The metatarsals are the bones that make up the main part of the foot in humans, and part of the leg in large animals or paw in smaller animals. 

The number of metatarsals are directly related to the mode of locomotion with many larger animals having their digits reduced to two (elk, cow, sheep) or one (horse). 

The metatarsal bones of feet and paws are tightly grouped compared to, most notably, the human hand where the thumb metacarpal diverges from the rest of the metacarpus.


== Metaphorical and cultural usage ==


The word "foot" is used to refer to a "...linear measure was in Old English (the exact length has varied over time), this being considered the length of a man's foot; a unit of measure used widely and anciently. 

In this sense the plural is often foot. 

The current inch and foot are implied from measurements in 12c."
The word "foot" also has a musical meaning; a "...metrical foot (late Old English, translating Latin pes, Greek pous in the same sense) is commonly taken to represent one rise and one fall of a foot: keeping time according to some, dancing according to others."The word "foot" was used in Middle English to mean "a person" (c. 1200).
The expression "...to put one's best foot foremost first recorded 1849 (Shakespeare has the better foot before, 1596)". 

The expression to "...put one's foot in (one's) mouth "say something stupid" was first used in 1942. 

The expression "put (one's) foot in something" meaning to "make a mess of it" was used in 1823.The word "footloose" was first used in the 1690s, meaning "free to move the feet, unshackled"; the more "figurative sense of "free to act as one pleases" was first used in 1873. 

Like "footloose", "flat-footed" at first had its obvious literal meaning (in 1600, it meant "with flat feet") but by 1912 it meant "unprepared" (U.S. baseball slang).


=== Bibliography ===

France, Diane L. (2008). 

Human and Nonhuman Bone Identification: A Color Atlas. 

CRC Press. 

ISBN 978-1-4200-6286-1.
Marieb, Elaine Nicpon; Hoehn, Katja (2007). 

Human anatomy & physiology. 

Pearson Education. 

ISBN 978-0-321-37294-9.
Platzer, Werner (2004). 

Color Atlas of Human Anatomy, Vol. 1: Locomotor System (5th ed.). 

Thieme. 

ISBN 3-13-533305-1.
"Anatomy of the foot and ankle". 

Podiatry Channel. 

Archived from the original on 31 August 2009. 

Retrieved 21 August 2009.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Foot
;;;ES;;;



PIE


El pie (plural: pies) es una estructura anatómica que se encuentra en muchos vertebrados.

Es la porción terminal de una extremidad que soporta el peso y permite la locomoción.

En muchos animales con patas, la pata es un órgano separado en la parte terminal de la pata formado por uno o más segmentos o huesos, que generalmente incluyen garras o uñas.


== Etimología ==

La palabra "pie", en el sentido de que significa la "parte terminal de la pata de un animal vertebrado" proviene del "inglés antiguo fot" pie, "del protogermánico *fot (fuente también del frisio antiguo fot, sajón antiguo fot , nórdico antiguo fotr, danés fod, sueco fot, holandés voet, antiguo alto alemán fuoz, alemán Fuß, gótico fotus "pie"), de la raíz PIE *ped- "pie".
La "forma plural pies es un ejemplo de i-mutación".


== Estructura ==


El pie humano es una estructura mecánica fuerte y compleja que contiene 26 huesos, 33 articulaciones (20 de las cuales están articuladas activamente) y más de cien músculos, tendones y ligamentos.

Las articulaciones del pie son el tobillo y la articulación subastragalina y las articulaciones interfalángicas del pie.

Un estudio antropométrico de 1197 hombres caucásicos adultos norteamericanos (edad media de 35,5 años) encontró que la longitud del pie de un hombre era de 26,3 cm con una desviación estándar de 1,2 cm. El pie se puede subdividir en retropié, mediopié y antepié:
El retropié está compuesto por el astrágalo (o hueso del tobillo) y el calcáneo (o hueso del talón).

Los dos huesos largos de la parte inferior de la pierna, la tibia y el peroné, están conectados a la parte superior del astrágalo para formar el tobillo.

Conectado al astrágalo en la articulación subastragalina, el calcáneo, el hueso más grande del pie, está protegido debajo por una capa de grasa. Los cinco huesos irregulares de la parte media del pie, el cuboides, el navicular y los tres huesos cuneiformes, forman los arcos de el pie que sirve como amortiguador.

El mediopié está conectado con el retropié y el antepié mediante músculos y la fascia plantar. El antepié está compuesto por cinco dedos y los correspondientes cinco huesos largos proximales que forman el metatarso.

Al igual que los dedos de la mano, los huesos de los dedos de los pies se llaman falanges y el dedo gordo del pie tiene dos falanges, mientras que los otros cuatro dedos tienen tres falanges cada uno.

Las articulaciones entre las falanges se denominan interfalángicas y las que se encuentran entre el metatarso y las falanges se denominan metatarsofalángicas (MTP).
Tanto el mediopié como el antepié constituyen el dorso (el área que mira hacia arriba al estar de pie) y el plano (el área que mira hacia abajo al estar de pie).

El empeine es la parte arqueada de la parte superior del pie entre los dedos y el tobillo.


=== Huesos ===


tibia, peroné
tarso (7): astrágalo, calcáneo, cuneiformes (3), cuboides y escafoides
metatarso (5): primer, segundo, tercero, cuarto y quinto hueso metatarsiano
falanges (14) Puede haber muchos huesos sesamoideos cerca de las articulaciones metatarsofalángicas, aunque solo están presentes regularmente en la porción distal del primer hueso metatarsiano.


=== Arcos ===


El pie humano tiene dos arcos longitudinales y un arco transversal mantenido por las formas entrelazadas de los huesos del pie, ligamentos fuertes y músculos que tiran durante la actividad.

La ligera movilidad de estos arcos cuando se aplica y se quita peso del pie hace que caminar y correr sea más económico en términos de energía.

Como se puede examinar en una huella, el arco longitudinal medial se curva sobre el suelo.

Este arco se extiende desde el hueso del talón sobre el hueso del tobillo "clave" hasta los tres metatarsianos mediales.

En cambio, el arco longitudinal lateral es muy bajo.

Con el cuboides como piedra angular, redistribuye parte del peso hacia el calcáneo y el extremo distal del quinto metatarsiano.

Los dos arcos longitudinales sirven como pilares para el arco transversal que discurre oblicuamente a través de las articulaciones tarsometatarsianas.

La tensión excesiva en los tendones y ligamentos de los pies puede provocar arcos caídos o pies planos.


=== Músculos ===

Los músculos que actúan sobre el pie se pueden clasificar en músculos extrínsecos, los que se originan en la cara anterior o posterior de la parte inferior de la pierna, y músculos intrínsecos, que se originan en la cara dorsal (superior) o plantar (base) del pie.


==== Extrínseco ====

Todos los músculos que se originan en la parte inferior de la pierna, excepto el músculo poplíteo, están unidos a los huesos del pie.

La tibia y el peroné y la membrana interósea separan estos músculos en grupos anterior y posterior, a su vez subdivididos en subgrupos y capas.


===== Grupo anterior =====
Grupo extensor: el tibial anterior se origina en la mitad proximal de la tibia y la membrana interósea y se inserta cerca de la articulación tarsometatarsiana del primer dedo.

En la pierna que no soporta peso, el tibial anterior dorsiflexiona el pie y levanta su borde medial (supinación).

En la pierna que soporta peso, lleva la pierna hacia la parte posterior del pie, como en la marcha rápida.

El extensor digitorum longus surge en el cóndilo tibial lateral y a lo largo del peroné, y se inserta en los dedos segundo a quinto y proximalmente en el quinto metatarsiano.

El extensor digitorum longus actúa de manera similar al tibialis anterior excepto que también flexiona los dedos.

El extensor hallucis longus se origina medialmente en el peroné y se inserta en el primer dedo.

Realiza la dorsiflexión del dedo gordo del pie y también actúa sobre el tobillo en la pierna no tensionada.

En la pierna que soporta peso, actúa de manera similar al tibial anterior. Grupo peroneo: el peroneo largo surge en la cara proximal del peroné y el peroneo corto debajo de él.

Juntos, sus tendones pasan por detrás del maléolo lateral.

Distalmente, el peroneo largo cruza la cara plantar del pie para llegar a su inserción en la primera articulación tarsometatarsiana, mientras que el peroneo corto alcanza la parte proximal del quinto metatarsiano.

Estos dos músculos son los pronadores más fuertes y ayudan en la flexión plantar.

El peroneo largo también actúa como una cuerda de arco que apuntala el arco transverso del pie.


===== Grupo posterior =====
La capa superficial de los músculos posteriores de la pierna está formada por el tríceps sural y el plantar.

El tríceps sural está formado por el sóleo y las dos cabezas del gastrocnemio.

Las cabezas del gastrocnemio surgen en el fémur, proximales a los cóndilos, y el sóleo surge en las partes dorsales proximales de la tibia y el peroné.

Los tendones de estos músculos se fusionan para insertarse en el calcáneo como el tendón de Aquiles.

El plantaris se origina en el fémur proximal a la cabeza lateral del gastrocnemio y su tendón largo se incrusta medialmente en el tendón de Aquiles.

El tríceps sural es el principal flexor plantar.

Su fuerza se vuelve más evidente durante el baile de ballet.

Se activa completamente solo con la rodilla extendida, porque el gastrocnemio se acorta durante la flexión de la rodilla.

Al caminar, no solo levanta el talón, sino que también flexiona la rodilla, asistido por el plantar. En la capa profunda de los músculos posteriores, el tibial posterior surge proximalmente en la parte posterior de la membrana interósea y los huesos adyacentes, y se divide en dos partes en la planta del pie para unirse al tarso.

En la pierna que no soporta, produce flexión plantar y supinación, y en la pierna que soporta, acerca el talón a la pantorrilla.

El flexor hallucis longus surge en la parte posterior del peroné en el lado lateral, y su vientre muscular relativamente grueso se extiende distalmente hasta el retináculo flexor donde pasa al lado medial para estirarse a través de la planta del pie hasta la falange distal del primer dedo. .

El poplíteo también forma parte de este grupo, pero, con su curso oblicuo a través de la parte posterior de la rodilla, no actúa sobre el pie.


==== Intrínseco ====
En la parte superior del pie, los tendones del extensor digitorum brevis y del extensor hallucis brevis se encuentran profundamente en el sistema de tendones extensores extrínsecos largos.

Ambos surgen en el calcáneo y se extienden hacia la aponeurosis dorsal de los dedos uno a cuatro, justo más allá de las penúltimas articulaciones.

Actúan para flexionar los dedos.

Similar a los músculos intrínsecos de la mano, existen tres grupos de músculos en la planta del pie, los del primer y último dedo, y un grupo central:

Músculos del dedo gordo del pie: el abductor hallucis se extiende medialmente a lo largo del borde de la planta del pie, desde el calcáneo hasta el primer dedo.

Debajo de su tendón, los tendones de los flexores largos pasan a través del canal del tarso.

El abductor hallucis es un abductor y un flexor débil, y también ayuda a mantener el arco del pie.

El flexor hallucis brevis surge en el hueso cuneiforme medial y los ligamentos y tendones relacionados.

Un importante flexor plantar, es crucial para el baile de ballet.

Ambos músculos se insertan con dos cabezas proximal y distalmente a la primera articulación metatarsofalángica.

El aductor del dedo gordo es parte de este grupo, aunque originalmente formaba un sistema separado (ver Contrahens).

Tiene dos cabezas, la cabeza oblicua que se origina oblicuamente a través de la parte central de la parte media del pie y la cabeza transversal que se origina cerca de las articulaciones metatarsofalángicas de los dedos cinco a tres.

Ambas cabezas se insertan en el hueso sesamoideo lateral del primer dedo.

El aductor del dedo gordo actúa como un tensor de los arcos plantares y también aduce el dedo gordo del pie y podría flexionar plantar la falange proximal. el margen lateral del pie y son los más grandes de los músculos del quinto dedo.

Partiendo de la base del quinto metatarsiano, el flexor digiti minimi se inserta junto con el abductor en la primera falange.

A menudo ausente, el oponente digiti minimi se origina cerca del hueso cuboides y se inserta en el quinto hueso metatarsiano.

Estos tres músculos actúan para sostener el arco del pie y flexionar plantar el quinto dedo.

Grupo muscular central: Los cuatro lumbricales surgen en el lado medial de los tendones del flexor largo de los dedos y se insertan en los márgenes mediales de las falanges proximales.

El cuadrado plantae se origina con dos deslizamientos de los márgenes lateral y medial del calcáneo y se inserta en el margen lateral del tendón flexor de los dedos.

También se le conoce como flexor accesorio.

El flexor digitorum brevis surge inferiormente en el calcáneo y sus tres tendones se insertan en las falanges medias de los dedos dos a cuatro (a veces también el quinto dedo).

Estos tendones se dividen antes de sus inserciones y los tendones del flexor digitorum longus pasan a través de estas divisiones.

Flexor digitorum brevis flexiona las falanges medias.

Ocasionalmente está ausente.

Entre los dedos de los pies, los interóseos dorsal y plantar se extienden desde los metatarsianos hasta las falanges proximales de los dedos dos a cinco.

El aducto interóseo plantar y el interóseo dorsal abducen estos dedos y también son flexores plantares en las articulaciones metatarsofalángicas.


== Importancia clínica ==


Debido a su posición y función, los pies están expuestos a una variedad de infecciones y lesiones potenciales, que incluyen pie de atleta, juanetes, uñas encarnadas, neuroma de Morton, fascitis plantar, verrugas plantares y fracturas por estrés.

Además, existen varios trastornos genéticos que pueden afectar la forma y función de los pies, incluido el pie zambo o el pie plano.
Esto deja a los humanos más vulnerables a los problemas médicos causados ​​por una mala alineación de las piernas y los pies.

Además, el uso de zapatos, zapatillas y botas puede impedir la alineación y el movimiento adecuados del tobillo y el pie.

Por ejemplo, se sabe que los zapatos de tacón alto alteran el equilibrio natural del peso (esto también puede afectar la zona lumbar).

Por el bien de la postura, se recomiendan suelas planas sin tacones.
Un médico que se especializa en el tratamiento de los pies practica la podología y se llama podólogo.

Un podólogo se especializa en el uso y modificación de calzado para tratar problemas relacionados con las extremidades inferiores.

Las fracturas del pie incluyen:

Fractura de Lisfranc: en la que uno o todos los metatarsianos se desplazan del tarso.
Fractura de Jones: una fractura del quinto metatarsiano.
Fractura de marzo: una fractura del tercio distal de uno de los metatarsianos que ocurre debido a un estrés recurrente
Fractura de calcáneo
Dedo del pie roto - una fractura de una falange
Fractura cuneiforme: debido al soporte ligamentoso de la parte media del pie, las fracturas cuneiformes aisladas son raras.


== Pronación ==


En anatomía, la pronación es un movimiento de rotación del antebrazo (en la articulación radiocubital) o del pie (en las articulaciones subastragalina y astrágalocaneoescafoidea).

La pronación del pie se refiere a cómo el cuerpo distribuye el peso a medida que avanza en el ciclo de la marcha.

Durante el ciclo de la marcha, el pie puede pronarse de muchas maneras diferentes según la función del retropié y del antepié.

Los tipos de pronación incluyen pronación neutra, pronación insuficiente (supinación) y pronación excesiva.

Pronación neutral Un individuo que prona neutralmente inicialmente golpea el suelo en el lado lateral del talón.

A medida que el individuo transfiere el peso del talón al metatarso, el pie girará en dirección medial, de modo que el peso se distribuya uniformemente a lo largo del metatarso.

En esta etapa de la marcha, la rodilla generalmente, pero no siempre, seguirá directamente sobre el hallux.
Este movimiento rodante hacia adentro a medida que el pie avanza desde el talón hasta la punta es la forma en que el cuerpo absorbe naturalmente el impacto.

La pronación neutra es el tipo de marcha más ideal y eficiente cuando se utiliza una marcha de golpe de talón; en un golpe con la parte delantera del pie, el cuerpo absorbe el impacto mediante la flexión del pie.

Sobrepronación Al igual que con un pronador neutral, un individuo que sobreprona inicialmente golpea el suelo en el lado lateral del talón.

Sin embargo, a medida que el individuo transfiere el peso del talón al metatarso, el pie girará demasiado en dirección medial, de modo que el peso se distribuirá de manera desigual a lo largo del metatarso, y el peso excesivo recaerá sobre el hallux.

En esta etapa de la marcha, la rodilla por lo general, pero no siempre, se desplazará hacia adentro.
Un sobrepronador no absorbe los golpes de manera eficiente.

Imagine a alguien saltando sobre un trampolín, pero el trampolín es tan endeble que cuando se golpea, se dobla y permite que la persona se sumerja directamente en el agua en lugar de volver al aire.

De manera similar, los arcos de un sobrepronador colapsarán, o los tobillos rodarán hacia adentro (o una combinación de ambos) a medida que avanzan en el ciclo de la marcha.

Un individuo cuya estructura ósea implique rotación externa en la cadera, la rodilla o el tobillo tendrá más probabilidades de sobrepronación que uno cuya estructura ósea tenga rotación interna o alineación central.

Una persona con sobrepronación tiende a desgastar sus zapatos para correr en el lado medial (interior) del zapato hacia el área de los dedos. Al elegir un zapato para correr o caminar, una persona con sobrepronación puede elegir zapatos que tengan un buen soporte interior, generalmente por un fuerte material en la suela interior y el arco del zapato.

Suele ser visible.

El área de apoyo interior está marcada por un material grisáceo fuerte para soportar el peso cuando una persona cae sobre el pie exterior y luego rueda sobre el pie interior.

Subpronación (supinación)
Un individuo que subprona también golpea inicialmente el suelo en el lado lateral del talón.

A medida que el individuo transfiere el peso del talón al metatarso, el pie no rodará lo suficiente en dirección medial.

El peso se distribuye de manera desigual a lo largo del metatarso, y el peso excesivo se soporta en el quinto metatarsiano, hacia el lado lateral del pie.

En esta etapa de la marcha, la rodilla por lo general, aunque no siempre, seguirá lateralmente al hallux.
Al igual que un sobrepronador, un subapronador no absorbe los golpes de manera eficiente, sino por la razón opuesta.

El pie subpronado es como un trampolín que, en lugar de fallar en hacer saltar a alguien en el aire porque es demasiado endeble, falla porque es demasiado rígido.

Prácticamente no hay dar.

Los arcos o los tobillos de un pronador no experimentan mucho movimiento a medida que avanzan en el ciclo de la marcha.

Un individuo cuya estructura ósea implique rotación interna en la cadera, la rodilla o el tobillo tendrá más probabilidades de subpronación que uno cuya estructura ósea tenga rotación externa o alineación central.

Por lo general, pero no siempre, los que tienen las piernas arqueadas tienden a subpronar.

Una persona que sube la pronación tiende a desgastar sus zapatos para correr en el lado lateral (exterior) del zapato hacia la parte trasera del zapato en el área del talón.


== Sociedad y cultura ==


Los humanos generalmente usan zapatos o calzado similar para protegerse de los peligros cuando caminan afuera.

Hay una serie de contextos en los que se considera inapropiado usar zapatos.

Algunas personas consideran de mala educación usar zapatos en una casa y solo se debe ingresar a un maorí Marae con los pies descalzos.
El fetichismo de pies es el fetiche sexual más común.


== Otros animales ==


Una pata es el pie blando de un mamífero, generalmente un cuadrúpedo, que tiene garras o uñas (p. ej., la pata de un gato o un perro).

Un pie duro se llama pezuña.

Dependiendo del estilo de locomoción, los animales pueden clasificarse como plantígrados (caminar con las suelas), digitígrados (caminar con los dedos de los pies) o ungulígrados (caminar con las uñas).
Los metatarsianos son los huesos que forman la parte principal del pie en los humanos y parte de la pierna en los animales grandes o la pata en los animales más pequeños.

El número de metatarsianos está directamente relacionado con el modo de locomoción; muchos animales más grandes tienen sus dígitos reducidos a dos (alce, vaca, oveja) o uno (caballo).

Los huesos metatarsianos de los pies y las patas están estrechamente agrupados en comparación, sobre todo, con la mano humana, donde el metacarpiano del pulgar diverge del resto del metacarpo.


== Uso metafórico y cultural ==


La palabra "pie" se usa para referirse a una "... medida lineal en inglés antiguo (la longitud exacta ha variado con el tiempo), siendo considerada la longitud del pie de un hombre; una unidad de medida utilizada ampliamente y antiguamente.

En este sentido, el plural suele ser pie.

La pulgada y el pie actuales están implícitos a partir de las medidas en 12c".
La palabra "pie" también tiene un significado musical; un "... pie métrico (inglés antiguo tardío, que se traduce en latín pes, griego pous en el mismo sentido) se toma comúnmente para representar una subida y una bajada de un pie: mantener el tiempo según algunos, bailar según otros". La palabra "pie" se usó en inglés medio para significar "una persona" (c. 1200).
La expresión "... poner el mejor pie en primer lugar se registró por primera vez en 1849 (Shakespeare tiene el mejor pie antes, 1596)".

La expresión "... poner el pie en (la) boca" "decir algo estúpido" se utilizó por primera vez en 1942.

La expresión "poner (el) pie en algo" que significa "hacer un desastre" se usó en 1823. La palabra "footloose" se usó por primera vez en la década de 1690, que significa "libre para mover los pies, sin grilletes"; el sentido más figurativo de "libre para actuar como a uno le plazca" se utilizó por primera vez en 1873.

Al igual que "footloose", "flat-footed" al principio tenía su significado literal obvio (en 1600, significaba "with flat feet"), pero en 1912 significaba "no preparado" (jerga de béisbol estadounidense).


=== Bibliografía ===

Francia, Diane L. (2008).

Identificación de huesos humanos y no humanos: un atlas en color.

Prensa CRC.

ISBN 978-1-4200-6286-1.
Marieb, Elaine Nicpon; Hoehn, Katja (2007).

Anatomía y fisiología humana.

Educación Pearson.

ISBN 978-0-321-37294-9.
Platzer, Werner (2004).

Atlas en color de anatomía humana, vol. 1: Sistema Locomotor (5ª ed.).

Thieme.

ISBN 3-13-533305-1.
"Anatomía del pie y tobillo".

Canal Podología.

Archivado desde el original el 31 de agosto de 2009.

Consultado el 21 de agosto de 2009.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pie

;;;PT;;;



PÉ


O pé (plural: pés) é uma estrutura anatômica encontrada em muitos vertebrados.

É a porção terminal de um membro que suporta peso e permite a locomoção.

Em muitos animais com pés, o pé é um órgão separado na parte terminal da perna composta por um ou mais segmentos ou ossos, geralmente incluindo garras ou unhas.


== Etimologia ==

A palavra "pé", no sentido de significar a "parte terminal da perna de um animal vertebrado" vem do "inglês antigo fot "foot", do proto-germânico *fot (fonte também de Old Frisian fot, Old Saxon fot , Fotr em nórdico antigo, fod dinamarquês, fot sueco, voet holandês, fuoz em alto alemão antigo, Fuß alemão, fotus gótico "pé"), da raiz de TORTA *ped- "pé".
A "forma plural pés é uma instância de i-mutação".


== Estrutura ==


O pé humano é uma estrutura mecânica forte e complexa contendo 26 ossos, 33 articulações (20 das quais são ativamente articuladas) e mais de cem músculos, tendões e ligamentos.

As articulações do pé são o tornozelo e a articulação subtalar e as articulações interfalângicas do pé.

Um estudo antropométrico de 1.197 homens caucasianos adultos norte-americanos (idade média de 35,5 anos) descobriu que o comprimento do pé de um homem era de 26,3 cm com um desvio padrão de 1,2 cm. O pé pode ser subdividido em retropé, mediopé e antepé:
O retropé é composto pelo tálus (ou osso do tornozelo) e pelo calcâneo (ou osso do calcanhar).

Os dois ossos longos da parte inferior da perna, a tíbia e a fíbula, estão conectados ao topo do tálus para formar o tornozelo.

Conectado ao tálus na articulação subtalar, o calcâneo, o maior osso do pé, é amortecido por baixo por uma camada de gordura. o pé que serve como amortecedor.

O mediopé está conectado ao retropé e antepé por músculos e a fáscia plantar. O antepé é composto por cinco dedos e os cinco ossos longos proximais correspondentes que formam o metatarso.

Semelhante aos dedos da mão, os ossos dos dedos dos pés são chamados de falanges e o dedão do pé tem duas falanges, enquanto os outros quatro dedos têm três falanges cada.

As articulações entre as falanges são chamadas de interfalângicas e aquelas entre o metatarso e as falanges são chamadas de metatarsofalângicas (MTP).
Tanto o mediopé quanto o antepé constituem o dorso (a área voltada para cima quando em pé) e o plano (a área voltada para baixo quando em pé).

O peito do pé é a parte arqueada da parte superior do pé entre os dedos e o tornozelo.


=== Ossos ===


tíbia, fíbula
tarso (7): tálus, calcâneo, cuneiformes (3), cubóide e navicular
metatarso (5): primeiro, segundo, terceiro, quarto e quinto osso metatarso
falanges (14) Pode haver muitos ossos sesamoides próximos às articulações metatarsofalângicas, embora estejam presentes apenas regularmente na porção distal do primeiro metatarso.


=== Arcos ===


O pé humano tem dois arcos longitudinais e um arco transversal mantido pelas formas entrelaçadas dos ossos do pé, ligamentos fortes e músculos de tração durante a atividade.

A leve mobilidade desses arcos quando o peso é aplicado e removido do pé torna a caminhada e a corrida mais econômicas em termos de energia.

Como pode ser examinado em uma pegada, o arco longitudinal medial se curva acima do solo.

Este arco se estende do osso do calcanhar sobre o osso do tornozelo "pedra angular" até os três metatarsos mediais.

Em contraste, o arco longitudinal lateral é muito baixo.

Com o cubóide servindo como sua pedra angular, ele redistribui parte do peso para o calcâneo e a extremidade distal do quinto metatarso.

Os dois arcos longitudinais servem como pilares para o arco transversal que corre obliquamente através das articulações tarsometatársicas.

A tensão excessiva nos tendões e ligamentos dos pés pode resultar em arcos caídos ou pés chatos.


=== Músculos ===

Os músculos que atuam no pé podem ser classificados em músculos extrínsecos, aqueles originados na face anterior ou posterior da perna, e músculos intrínsecos, originados na face dorsal (superior) ou plantar (base) do pé.


==== Extrínseco ====

Todos os músculos que se originam na parte inferior da perna, exceto o músculo poplíteo, estão ligados aos ossos do pé.

A tíbia e a fíbula e a membrana interóssea separam esses músculos em grupos anterior e posterior, por sua vez subdivididos em subgrupos e camadas.


===== Grupo anterior =====
Grupo extensor: o tibial anterior origina-se na metade proximal da tíbia e na membrana interóssea e insere-se próximo à articulação tarsometatársica do primeiro dedo.

Na perna sem sustentação de peso, o tibial anterior faz a dorsiflexão do pé e levanta sua borda medial (supinação).

Na perna de sustentação de peso, ela traz a perna em direção à parte de trás do pé, como na caminhada rápida.

O extensor longo dos dedos origina-se no côndilo tibial lateral e ao longo da fíbula, e insere-se no segundo ao quinto dedos e proximalmente no quinto metatarso.

O extensor longo dos dedos age de forma semelhante ao tibial anterior, exceto que também faz a dorsiflexão dos dedos.

O extensor longo do hálux origina-se medialmente na fíbula e insere-se no primeiro dedo.

Ele faz a dorsiflexão do dedão do pé e também atua no tornozelo na perna não estressada.

Na perna de sustentação de peso, atua de forma semelhante ao tibial anterior.Grupo fibular: o fibular longo surge na face proximal da fíbula e o fibular curto abaixo dela.

Juntos, seus tendões passam atrás do maléolo lateral.

Distalmente, o fibular longo cruza o lado plantar do pé para alcançar sua inserção na primeira articulação tarsometatársica, enquanto o fibular curto atinge a parte proximal do quinto metatarso.

Esses dois músculos são os pronadores mais fortes e auxiliam na flexão plantar.

O fibular longo também atua como uma corda de arco que sustenta o arco transversal do pé.


===== Grupo posterior =====
A camada superficial dos músculos posteriores da perna é formada pelo tríceps sural e plantar.

O tríceps sural consiste no sóleo e nas duas cabeças do gastrocnêmio.

As cabeças do gastrocnêmio surgem no fêmur, proximal aos côndilos, e o sóleo surge nas partes dorsais proximais da tíbia e da fíbula.

Os tendões desses músculos se fundem para serem inseridos no calcâneo como o tendão de Aquiles.

O plantaris se origina no fêmur proximal à cabeça lateral do gastrocnêmio e seu tendão longo está embutido medialmente no tendão de Aquiles.

O tríceps sural é o flexor plantar primário.

Sua força se torna mais óbvia durante a dança do balé.

Ele é totalmente ativado apenas com o joelho estendido, pois o gastrocnêmio é encurtado durante a flexão do joelho.

Durante a caminhada, ele não apenas levanta o calcanhar, mas também flexiona o joelho, auxiliado pelo plantar. a sola do pé para fixar ao tarso.

Na perna sem carga, produz flexão plantar e supinação e, na perna com carga, aproxima o calcanhar da panturrilha.

O flexor longo do hálux surge na parte posterior da fíbula no lado lateral, e seu ventre muscular relativamente espesso se estende distalmente até o retináculo dos flexores, onde passa para o lado medial para se estender pela sola até a falange distal do primeiro dedo. .

O poplíteo também faz parte desse grupo, mas, com seu trajeto oblíquo na parte posterior do joelho, não atua sobre o pé.


==== Intrínseco ====
Na parte superior do pé, os tendões do extensor curto dos dedos e do extensor curto do hálux situam-se profundamente no sistema dos tendões extensores extrínsecos longos.

Ambos surgem no calcâneo e se estendem até a aponeurose dorsal dos dedos um a quatro, logo além das penúltimas articulações.

Eles agem para dorsiflexionar os dedos.

Semelhante aos músculos intrínsecos da mão, existem três grupos de músculos na sola do pé, os do primeiro e último dígitos e um grupo central:

Músculos do dedão do pé: o abdutor do hálux estende-se medialmente ao longo da borda da sola, do calcâneo ao primeiro dedo.

Abaixo de seu tendão, os tendões dos flexores longos passam pelo canal do tarso.

O abdutor do hálux é um abdutor e um flexor fraco, e também ajuda a manter o arco do pé.

O flexor curto do hálux surge no osso cuneiforme medial e ligamentos e tendões relacionados.

Um importante flexor plantar, é crucial para a dança do balé.

Ambos os músculos estão inseridos com duas cabeças proximal e distalmente à primeira articulação metatarsofalângica.

O adutor do hálux faz parte deste grupo, embora originalmente tenha formado um sistema separado (ver Contrahens).

Tem duas cabeças, a cabeça oblíqua originando-se obliquamente na parte central do mediopé, e a cabeça transversa originando-se perto das articulações metatarsofalângicas dos dedos cinco a três.

Ambas as cabeças são inseridas no osso sesamoide lateral do primeiro dedo.

O adutor do hálux atua como tensor dos arcos plantares e também aduz o dedão do pé e pode flexionar plantarmente a falange proximal. a margem lateral do pé e são os maiores dos músculos do quinto dedo.

Surgindo da base do quinto metatarso, o flexor do dedo mínimo é inserido junto com o abdutor na primeira falange.

Frequentemente ausente, o oponente do dedo mínimo origina-se próximo ao osso cubóide e insere-se no quinto metatarso.

Esses três músculos agem para sustentar o arco do pé e flexionar plantar o quinto dedo.

Grupo muscular central: Os quatro lumbricais surgem na face medial dos tendões do flexor longo dos dedos e são inseridos nas margens mediais das falanges proximais.

O quadrado plantar se origina com dois deslizamentos das margens lateral e medial do calcâneo e se insere na margem lateral do tendão flexor dos dedos.

Também é conhecido como flexor acessório.

O flexor curto dos dedos surge inferiormente no calcâneo e seus três tendões são inseridos nas falanges médias dos dedos dois a quatro (às vezes também no quinto dedo).

Esses tendões se dividem antes de suas inserções e os tendões do flexor longo dos dedos passam por essas divisões.

O flexor curto dos dedos flexiona as falanges médias.

Ocasionalmente está ausente.

Entre os dedos, os interósseos dorsais e plantares se estendem dos metatarsos até as falanges proximais dos dedos dois a cinco.

O aduto interósseo plantar e o interósseo dorsal abduzem esses dedos e também são flexores plantares nas articulações metatarsofalângicas.


== Significado clínico ==


Devido à sua posição e função, os pés estão expostos a uma variedade de possíveis infecções e lesões, incluindo pé de atleta, joanetes, unhas encravadas, neuroma de Morton, fascite plantar, verrugas plantares e fraturas por estresse.

Além disso, existem vários distúrbios genéticos que podem afetar a forma e a função dos pés, incluindo pé torto ou pé chato.
Isso deixa os humanos mais vulneráveis ​​a problemas médicos causados ​​por alinhamentos inadequados de pernas e pés.

Além disso, o uso de sapatos, tênis e botas pode impedir o alinhamento e o movimento adequados no tornozelo e no pé.

Por exemplo, sapatos de salto alto são conhecidos por prejudicar o equilíbrio natural do peso (isso também pode afetar a região lombar).

Por uma questão de postura, recomenda-se o uso de solas planas sem salto.
Um médico especializado no tratamento dos pés pratica podologia e é chamado de podólogo.

Um pedortista é especializado no uso e modificação de calçados para tratar problemas relacionados aos membros inferiores.

As fraturas do pé incluem:

Fratura de Lisfranc – na qual um ou todos os metatarsos são deslocados do tarso
Fratura de Jones - uma fratura do quinto metatarso
Fratura de março - uma fratura do terço distal de um dos metatarsos que ocorre devido ao estresse recorrente
Fratura do calcâneo
Dedo quebrado - uma fratura de uma falange
Fratura cuneiforme – Devido ao suporte ligamentar do mediopé, fraturas cuneiformes isoladas são raras.


== Pronação ==


Em anatomia, a pronação é um movimento de rotação do antebraço (na articulação radioulnar) ou do pé (nas articulações subtalar e talolocalcaneonavicular).

A pronação do pé refere-se a como o corpo distribui o peso à medida que percorre a marcha.

Durante o ciclo da marcha, o pé pode pronar de muitas maneiras diferentes, com base na função do retropé e do antepé.

Os tipos de pronação incluem pronação neutra, subpronação (supinação) e superpronação.

Pronação neutraUm indivíduo que prona de forma neutra inicialmente atinge o solo na lateral do calcanhar.

À medida que o indivíduo transfere o peso do calcanhar para o metatarso, o pé vai rolar na direção medial, de modo que o peso seja distribuído uniformemente pelo metatarso.

Nesta fase da marcha, o joelho geralmente, mas nem sempre, segue diretamente sobre o hálux.
Esse movimento de rolamento para dentro à medida que o pé progride do calcanhar aos dedos é a maneira como o corpo absorve naturalmente o choque.

A pronação neutra é o tipo de marcha mais ideal e eficiente ao usar uma marcha de apoio do calcanhar; em um golpe com o antepé, o corpo absorve o choque através da flexão do pé.

SuperpronaçãoAssim como com um pronador neutro, um indivíduo que superprona inicialmente atinge o solo na lateral do calcanhar.

À medida que o indivíduo transfere o peso do calcanhar para o metatarso, no entanto, o pé vai rolar muito na direção medial, de modo que o peso é distribuído de forma desigual pelo metatarso, com peso excessivo no hálux.

Nesta fase da marcha, o joelho geralmente, mas nem sempre, segue para dentro.
Um overpronator não absorve o choque com eficiência.

Imagine alguém pulando em um trampolim, mas o trampolim é tão frágil que quando é atingido, ele se dobra e permite que a pessoa mergulhe direto na água em vez de voltar para o ar.

Da mesma forma, os arcos de um pronador excessivo entrarão em colapso, ou os tornozelos rolarão para dentro (ou uma combinação dos dois) enquanto percorrem a marcha.

Um indivíduo cuja estrutura óssea envolve rotação externa no quadril, joelho ou tornozelo terá maior probabilidade de pronar em excesso do que aquele cuja estrutura óssea tem rotação interna ou alinhamento central.

Um indivíduo com pronação excessiva tende a usar seus tênis de corrida no lado medial (interno) do tênis em direção à área do dedo do pé. material na sola interior e arco do sapato.

Geralmente é visível.

A área de apoio interna é marcada por um material acinzentado forte para suportar o peso quando uma pessoa cai com o pé de fora e depois rola para o pé de dentro.

Subpronação (supinação)
Um indivíduo que subprona também inicialmente atinge o solo na lateral do calcanhar.

À medida que o indivíduo transfere o peso do calcanhar para o metatarso, o pé não vai rolar o suficiente na direção medial.

O peso é distribuído de forma desigual ao longo do metatarso, com peso excessivo suportado no quinto metatarso, em direção à face lateral do pé.

Nesta fase da marcha, o joelho geralmente, mas nem sempre, acompanha lateralmente o hálux.
Como um superpronador, um subpronador não absorve o choque com eficiência – mas pelo motivo oposto.

O pé subpronado é como um trampolim que, em vez de deixar alguém no ar por ser muito frágil, deixa de fazê-lo por ser muito rígido.

Praticamente não há dar.

Os arcos ou tornozelos de um subpronador não experimentam muito movimento enquanto percorrem a marcha.

Um indivíduo cuja estrutura óssea envolve rotação interna no quadril, joelho ou tornozelo terá maior probabilidade de subpronar do que aquele cuja estrutura óssea tem rotação externa ou alinhamento central.

Normalmente – mas nem sempre – aqueles que têm pernas tortas tendem a pronar insuficientemente.

Um indivíduo que subprona tende a usar seus tênis de corrida no lado lateral (externo) do sapato em direção à parte traseira do sapato na área do calcanhar.


== Sociedade e cultura ==


Os humanos geralmente usam sapatos ou calçados semelhantes para proteção contra perigos ao caminhar ao ar livre.

Há uma série de contextos em que é considerado inadequado usar sapatos.

Algumas pessoas consideram rude usar sapatos em uma casa e um Māori Marae só deve ser entrado com os pés descalços.
O fetichismo por pés é o fetiche sexual mais comum.


== Outros animais ==


Uma pata é o pé macio de um mamífero, geralmente um quadrúpede, que tem garras ou unhas (por exemplo, a pata de um gato ou cachorro).

Um pé duro é chamado de casco.

Dependendo do estilo de locomoção, os animais podem ser classificados como plantígrados (andar na sola), digitígrados (andar na ponta dos pés) ou unguigrados (andar com as unhas).
Os metatarsos são os ossos que compõem a parte principal do pé em humanos, e parte da perna em animais de grande porte ou pata em animais menores.

O número de metatarsos está diretamente relacionado ao modo de locomoção com muitos animais maiores tendo seus dedos reduzidos a dois (alce, vaca, ovelha) ou um (cavalo).

Os ossos metatarsais dos pés e das patas são bem agrupados em comparação, principalmente, com a mão humana, onde o metacarpo do polegar diverge do resto do metacarpo.


== Uso metafórico e cultural ==


A palavra "pé" é usada para se referir a uma "... medida linear estava em inglês antigo (o comprimento exato variou ao longo do tempo), sendo considerado o comprimento do pé de um homem; uma unidade de medida usada amplamente e antigamente.

Nesse sentido, o plural é muitas vezes pé.

A polegada e o pé atuais estão implícitos nas medições em 12c."
A palavra "pé" também tem um significado musical; um "... pé métrico (inglês antigo tardio, traduzindo latim pes, grego pous no mesmo sentido) é comumente usado para representar uma subida e uma queda de um pé: mantendo o tempo de acordo com alguns, dançando de acordo com outros". a palavra "pé" era usada no inglês médio para significar "uma pessoa" (c. 1200).
A expressão "... colocar o melhor pé em primeiro lugar foi registrada pela primeira vez em 1849 (Shakespeare tem o melhor pé antes, 1596)".

A expressão "...colocar o pé na boca" dizer algo estúpido foi usada pela primeira vez em 1942.

A expressão "colocar o pé em alguma coisa" significando "fazer uma bagunça" foi usada em 1823. A palavra "footloose" foi usada pela primeira vez na década de 1690, significando "livre para mover os pés, sem algemas"; o "sentido mais figurativo de "livre para agir como quiser" foi usado pela primeira vez em 1873.

Como "footloose", "flat-footed" a princípio tinha seu significado literal óbvio (em 1600, significava "com pés chatos"), mas em 1912 significava "despreparado" (gíria do beisebol dos EUA).


=== Bibliografia ===

França, Diane L. (2008).

Identificação de ossos humanos e não humanos: um atlas colorido.

Imprensa CRC.

ISBN 978-1-4200-6286-1.
Marieb, Elaine Nicpon; Hoehn, Katja (2007).

Anatomia e fisiologia humana.

Pearson Educação.

ISBN 978-0-321-37294-9.
Platzer, Werner (2004).

Atlas colorido de anatomia humana, vol. 1: Sistema Locomotor (5ª ed.).

Thieme.

ISBN 3-13-533305-1.
"Anatomia do pé e tornozelo".

Canal de Podologia.

Arquivado a partir do original em 31 de agosto de 2009.

Recuperado em 21 de agosto de 2009.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Foot

;;;FR;;;



LE PIED


Le pied (pluriel : pieds) est une structure anatomique que l'on retrouve chez de nombreux vertébrés.

C'est la partie terminale d'un membre qui supporte le poids et permet la locomotion.

Chez de nombreux animaux munis de pieds, le pied est un organe séparé à la partie terminale de la patte composé d'un ou plusieurs segments ou os, comprenant généralement des griffes ou des ongles.


== Etymologie ==

Le mot "pied", dans le sens de signifier la "partie terminale de la patte d'un animal vertébré" vient du "vieil anglais fot "pied", du proto-germanique *fot (source également du vieux frison fot, du vieux saxon fot , vieux norrois fotr, fod danois, fot suédois, voet néerlandais, vieux haut allemand fuoz, allemand Fuß, gothique fotus "pied"), de la racine TARTE * ped- "pied".
La "forme plurielle des pieds est un exemple d'i-mutation".


== Structure ==


Le pied humain est une structure mécanique solide et complexe contenant 26 os, 33 articulations (dont 20 sont activement articulées) et plus d'une centaine de muscles, tendons et ligaments.

Les articulations du pied sont la cheville et l'articulation sous-talienne et les articulations interphalangiennes du pied.

Une étude anthropométrique portant sur 1 197 hommes de race blanche adultes nord-américains (âge moyen : 35,5 ans) a révélé que la longueur du pied d'un homme était de 26,3 cm avec un écart type de 1,2 cm. Le pied peut être subdivisé en arrière-pied, médio-pied et avant-pied :
L'arrière-pied est composé du talus (ou os de la cheville) et du calcanéum (ou os du talon).

Les deux os longs du bas de la jambe, le tibia et le péroné, sont reliés au sommet du talus pour former la cheville.

Relié au talus au niveau de l'articulation sous-talienne, le calcanéum, le plus gros os du pied, est recouvert d'une couche de graisse. Les cinq os irréguliers du médio-pied, le cuboïde, le naviculaire et les trois os cunéiformes forment les arches de le pied qui sert d'amortisseur.

Le médio-pied est relié à l'arrière-pied et à l'avant-pied par des muscles et le fascia plantaire. L'avant-pied est composé de cinq orteils et des cinq os longs proximaux correspondants formant le métatarse.

Semblables aux doigts de la main, les os des orteils sont appelés phalanges et le gros orteil a deux phalanges tandis que les quatre autres orteils ont trois phalanges chacun.

Les articulations entre les phalanges sont appelées interphalangiennes et celles entre le métatarse et les phalanges sont appelées métatarsophalangiennes (MTP).
Le médio-pied et l'avant-pied constituent le dos (la zone tournée vers le haut en position debout) et le planum (la zone tournée vers le bas en position debout).

Le cou-de-pied est la partie cambrée du dessus du pied entre les orteils et la cheville.


=== Os ===


tibia, péroné
tarse (7) : talus, calcanéus, cunéiformes (3), cuboïde et naviculaire
métatarse (5) : premier, deuxième, troisième, quatrième et cinquième os métatarsien
phalanges (14) Il peut y avoir de nombreux os sésamoïdes près des articulations métatarsophalangiennes, bien qu'ils ne soient régulièrement présents que dans la partie distale du premier os métatarsien.


=== Arches ===


Le pied humain a deux arcs longitudinaux et un arc transversal maintenus par les formes imbriquées des os du pied, des ligaments solides et des muscles de traction pendant l'activité.

La faible mobilité de ces voûtes lors de l'application et du retrait de poids sur le pied rend la marche et la course plus économes en énergie.

Comme on peut l'examiner dans une empreinte, l'arc longitudinal médian se courbe au-dessus du sol.

Cet arc s'étend de l'os du talon sur l'os de la cheville "clé de voûte" jusqu'aux trois métatarsiens médiaux.

En revanche, l'arc longitudinal latéral est très bas.

Le cuboïde lui servant de clé de voûte, il redistribue une partie du poids au calcanéus et à l'extrémité distale du cinquième métatarsien.

Les deux arcs longitudinaux servent de piliers à l'arc transversal qui traverse obliquement les articulations tarso-métatarsiennes.

Une tension excessive sur les tendons et les ligaments des pieds peut entraîner la chute de la voûte plantaire ou des pieds plats.


=== Muscles ===

Les muscles agissant sur le pied peuvent être classés en muscles extrinsèques, ceux qui prennent naissance sur la face antérieure ou postérieure de la jambe inférieure, et en muscles intrinsèques, qui prennent naissance sur les faces dorsale (haut) ou plantaire (base) du pied.


==== Extrinsèque ====

Tous les muscles provenant de la partie inférieure de la jambe, à l'exception du muscle poplité, sont attachés aux os du pied.

Le tibia et le péroné et la membrane interosseuse séparent ces muscles en groupes antérieurs et postérieurs, à leur tour subdivisés en sous-groupes et couches.


===== Groupe antérieur =====
Groupe des extenseurs : le tibial antérieur prend naissance sur la moitié proximale du tibia et la membrane interosseuse et s'insère près de l'articulation tarso-métatarsienne du premier doigt.

Dans la jambe non portante, le tibial antérieur fléchit le pied et soulève son bord médial (supination).

Dans la jambe d'appui, il ramène la jambe vers l'arrière du pied, comme dans la marche rapide.

L'extensor digitorum longus prend naissance sur le condyle tibial latéral et le long du péroné, et est inséré sur les deuxième à cinquième doigts et de manière proximale sur le cinquième métatarsien.

L'extensor digitorum longus agit de la même manière que le tibial antérieur, sauf qu'il fait également une flexion dorsale des doigts.

L'extensor hallucis longus prend naissance médialement sur le péroné et s'insère sur le premier doigt.

Il effectue une flexion dorsale du gros orteil et agit également sur la cheville dans la jambe non sollicitée.

Dans la jambe portante, il agit de manière similaire au tibial antérieur.

Ensemble, leurs tendons passent derrière la malléole latérale.

Distalement, le peroneus longus traverse la face plantaire du pied pour atteindre son insertion sur la première articulation tarso-métatarsienne, tandis que le peroneus brevis atteint la partie proximale du cinquième métatarsien.

Ces deux muscles sont les pronateurs les plus puissants et contribuent à la flexion plantaire.

Le peroneus longus agit également comme une corde d'arc qui renforce l'arche transversale du pied.


===== Groupe postérieur =====
La couche superficielle des muscles postérieurs de la jambe est formée par le triceps sural et le plantaris.

Le triceps sural est constitué du soléaire et des deux chefs du gastrocnémien.

Les têtes de gastrocnémien apparaissent sur le fémur, à proximité des condyles, et le soléaire apparaît sur les parties dorsales proximales du tibia et du péroné.

Les tendons de ces muscles fusionnent pour être insérés sur le calcanéus comme le tendon d'Achille.

Le plantaire prend naissance sur le fémur à proximité du chef latéral du gastrocnémien et son long tendon est intégré médialement dans le tendon d'Achille.

Le triceps sural est le principal fléchisseur plantaire.

Sa force devient plus évidente lors de la danse classique.

Il n'est pleinement activé qu'avec le genou en extension, car le gastrocnémien est raccourci lors de la flexion du genou.

Pendant la marche, il soulève non seulement le talon, mais fléchit également le genou, aidé par le plantaris. Dans la couche profonde des muscles postérieurs, le tibial postérieur se pose de manière proximale sur le dos de la membrane interosseuse et des os adjacents, et se divise en deux parties dans la plante du pied à attacher au tarse.

Dans la jambe non porteuse, il produit une flexion plantaire et une supination, et, dans la jambe porteuse, il rapproche le talon du mollet.

Le long fléchisseur de l'hallux apparaît à l'arrière du péroné sur le côté latéral, et son ventre musculaire relativement épais s'étend distalement jusqu'au rétinaculum des fléchisseurs où il passe du côté médial pour s'étendre à travers la semelle jusqu'à la phalange distale du premier doigt. .

Le poplité fait également partie de ce groupe, mais, avec sa course oblique à travers l'arrière du genou, n'agit pas sur le pied.


==== Intrinsèque ====
Sur le dessus du pied, les tendons du court extenseur des orteils et du court extenseur de l'hallux reposent profondément dans le système des longs tendons extenseurs extrinsèques.

Ils naissent tous deux sur le calcanéus et s'étendent dans l'aponévrose dorsale des chiffres un à quatre, juste au-delà des avant-dernières articulations.

Ils agissent pour dorsiflexer les chiffres.

Semblables aux muscles intrinsèques de la main, il existe trois groupes de muscles dans la plante du pied, ceux des premier et dernier chiffres, et un groupe central :

Muscles du gros orteil : l'abducteur de l'hallux s'étire médialement le long du bord de la plante du pied, du calcanéus au premier doigt.

En dessous de son tendon, les tendons des longs fléchisseurs traversent le canal tarsien.

L'abducteur de l'hallux est un abducteur et un fléchisseur faible, et aide également à maintenir la voûte plantaire.

Le court fléchisseur de l'hallux naît sur l'os cunéiforme médial et les ligaments et tendons associés.

Fléchisseur plantaire important, il est indispensable à la danse classique.

Ces deux muscles sont insérés avec deux têtes proximalement et distalement à la première articulation métatarsophalangienne.

L'adducteur de l'hallux fait partie de ce groupe, même s'il formait à l'origine un système distinct (voir Contrahens).

Il a deux têtes, la tête oblique prenant naissance obliquement à travers la partie centrale du médio-pied et la tête transversale prenant naissance près des articulations métatarso-phalangiennes des chiffres cinq à trois.

Les deux têtes sont insérées dans l'os sésamoïde latéral du premier doigt.

L'adducteur de l'hallux agit comme un tenseur des arcs plantaires et adduit également le gros orteil et peut fléchir plantairement la phalange proximale. Muscles du petit orteil : s'étirant latéralement du calcanéus à la phalange proximale du cinquième doigt, la forme abducteur digiti minimi la marge latérale du pied et sont les plus grands des muscles du cinquième doigt.

Découlant de la base du cinquième métatarsien, le fléchisseur des doigts minimi est inséré avec le ravisseur sur la première phalange.

Souvent absent, l'adversaire digiti minimi prend naissance près de l'os cuboïde et s'insère sur le cinquième métatarsien.

Ces trois muscles agissent pour soutenir la voûte plantaire et pour fléchir plantairement le cinquième doigt.

Groupe musculaire central : Les quatre lombricaux naissent du côté médial des tendons du long fléchisseur des doigts et s'insèrent sur les bords médiaux des phalanges proximales.

Le quadratus plantae provient de deux feuillets des marges latérale et médiale du calcanéus et s'insère dans la marge latérale du tendon fléchisseur des doigts.

Il est également connu sous le nom de fléchisseur accessoire.

Le court fléchisseur des doigts naît en bas sur le calcanéus et ses trois tendons sont insérés dans les phalanges médianes des chiffres deux à quatre (parfois aussi le cinquième chiffre).

Ces tendons se divisent avant leurs insertions et les tendons du long fléchisseur des doigts traversent ces divisions.

Flexor digitorum brevis fléchit les phalanges moyennes.

Il est parfois absent.

Entre les orteils, les interosseux dorsaux et plantaires s'étendent des métatarsiens aux phalanges proximales des doigts deux à cinq.

L'adduit interosseux plantaire et l'interosseux dorsal enlèvent ces doigts et sont également des fléchisseurs plantaires au niveau des articulations métatarso-phalangiennes.


== Signification clinique ==


En raison de leur position et de leur fonction, les pieds sont exposés à diverses infections et blessures potentielles, notamment le pied d'athlète, les oignons, les ongles incarnés, le névrome de Morton, la fasciite plantaire, les verrues plantaires et les fractures de stress.

De plus, plusieurs troubles génétiques peuvent affecter la forme et la fonction des pieds, notamment le pied bot ou le pied plat.
Cela rend les humains plus vulnérables aux problèmes médicaux causés par un mauvais alignement des jambes et des pieds.

De plus, le port de chaussures, de baskets et de bottes peut empêcher un bon alignement et un bon mouvement de la cheville et du pied.

Par exemple, les chaussures à talons hauts sont connues pour perturber l'équilibre naturel du poids (cela peut également affecter le bas du dos).

Pour des raisons de posture, des semelles plates sans talons sont conseillées.
Un médecin spécialisé dans le traitement des pieds pratique la podologie et s'appelle un podologue.

Un podo-orthésiste se spécialise dans l'utilisation et la modification de chaussures pour traiter les problèmes liés aux membres inférieurs.

Les fractures du pied comprennent :

Fracture de Lisfranc - dans laquelle un ou tous les métatarsiens sont déplacés du tarse
Fracture de Jones - une fracture du cinquième métatarsien
Fracture de mars - une fracture du tiers distal de l'un des métatarsiens survenant en raison d'un stress récurrent
Fracture calcanéenne
Orteil cassé - une fracture d'une phalange
Fracture cunéiforme - En raison du soutien ligamentaire du médio-pied, les fractures cunéiformes isolées sont rares.


==Pronation ==


En anatomie, la pronation est un mouvement de rotation de l'avant-bras (au niveau de l'articulation radioulnaire) ou du pied (au niveau des articulations sous-talienne et talocalcanéo-naviculaire).

La pronation du pied fait référence à la façon dont le corps distribue le poids au cours de la marche.

Pendant le cycle de marche, le pied peut pronation de différentes manières en fonction de la fonction de l'arrière-pied et de l'avant-pied.

Les types de pronation comprennent la pronation neutre, la sous-pronation (supination) et la surpronation.

Pronation neutreUn individu qui prononce de manière neutre frappe initialement le sol sur le côté latéral du talon.

Au fur et à mesure que l'individu transfère le poids du talon au métatarse, le pied roulera dans une direction médiale, de sorte que le poids est réparti uniformément sur le métatarse.

À ce stade de la démarche, le genou passera généralement, mais pas toujours, directement au-dessus de l'hallux.
Ce mouvement de roulement vers l'intérieur au fur et à mesure que le pied progresse du talon aux orteils est la façon dont le corps absorbe naturellement les chocs.

La pronation neutre est le type de démarche le plus idéal et le plus efficace lors de l'utilisation d'une démarche de frappe au talon; lors d'une frappe de l'avant-pied, le corps absorbe les chocs via la flexion du pied.

SurpronationComme avec un pronateur neutre, une personne qui surpronate frappe initialement le sol sur le côté latéral du talon.

Lorsque l'individu transfère du poids du talon au métatarse, cependant, le pied roulera trop loin dans une direction médiale, de sorte que le poids est réparti de manière inégale sur le métatarse, avec un poids excessif supporté par l'hallux.

À ce stade de la marche, le genou se déplace généralement, mais pas toujours, vers l'intérieur.
Un surpronateur n'absorbe pas efficacement les chocs.

Imaginez quelqu'un qui saute sur un plongeoir, mais le plongeoir est si fragile que lorsqu'il est frappé, il se plie et permet à la personne de plonger directement dans l'eau au lieu de retourner dans les airs.

De même, les arcs d'un surpronateur s'effondreront ou les chevilles rouleront vers l'intérieur (ou une combinaison des deux) au cours de la démarche.

Un individu dont la structure osseuse implique une rotation externe au niveau de la hanche, du genou ou de la cheville sera plus susceptible de surpronation que celui dont la structure osseuse a une rotation interne ou un alignement central.

Une personne qui surpronation a tendance à porter ses chaussures de course sur le côté médial (intérieur) de la chaussure vers la zone des orteils. Lors du choix d'une chaussure de course ou de marche, une personne souffrant de surpronation peut choisir des chaussures qui ont un bon soutien intérieur, généralement par une forte matériau à l'intérieur de la semelle et de la voûte plantaire de la chaussure.

Il est généralement visible.

La zone d'appui intérieure est marquée par un matériau grisâtre solide pour supporter le poids lorsqu'une personne atterrit sur le pied extérieur puis roule sur le pied intérieur.

Sous-pronation (supination)
Un individu sous-pronateur frappe également initialement le sol sur le côté latéral du talon.

Comme l'individu transfère le poids du talon au métatarse, le pied ne roulera pas assez loin dans une direction médiale.

Le poids est réparti de manière inégale sur le métatarse, avec un poids excessif supporté sur le cinquième métatarsien, vers le côté latéral du pied.

À ce stade de la marche, le genou suivra généralement, mais pas toujours, latéralement l'hallux.
Comme un surpronateur, un sous-pronateur n'absorbe pas efficacement les chocs - mais pour la raison opposée.

Le pied sous-proné est comme un plongeoir qui, au lieu de ne pas faire sauter quelqu'un en l'air parce qu'il est trop fragile, ne le fait pas parce qu'il est trop rigide.

Il n'y a pratiquement rien à donner.

Les arcs ou les chevilles d'un sous-pronateur ne subissent pas beaucoup de mouvement lorsqu'ils parcourent la démarche.

Un individu dont la structure osseuse implique une rotation interne au niveau de la hanche, du genou ou de la cheville sera plus susceptible de sous-pronation que celui dont la structure osseuse a une rotation externe ou un alignement central.

Habituellement - mais pas toujours - ceux qui ont les jambes arquées ont tendance à sous-pronation.

Une personne qui sous-pronète a tendance à user ses chaussures de course sur le côté latéral (extérieur) de la chaussure vers l'arrière de la chaussure dans la zone du talon.


== Société et culture ==


Les humains portent généralement des chaussures ou des chaussures similaires pour se protéger des dangers lorsqu'ils marchent à l'extérieur.

Il existe un certain nombre de contextes où il est considéré comme inapproprié de porter des chaussures.

Certaines personnes considèrent qu'il est impoli de porter des chaussures dans une maison et un Māori Marae ne doit être entré que pieds nus.
Le fétichisme des pieds est le fétichisme sexuel le plus courant.


== Autres animaux ==


Une patte est le pied mou d'un mammifère, généralement un quadrupède, qui a des griffes ou des ongles (par exemple, une patte de chat ou de chien).

Un pied dur s'appelle un sabot.

Selon le style de locomotion, les animaux peuvent être classés comme plantigrades (marche de la semelle), digitigrades (marche des orteils) ou unguligrades (marche des ongles).
Les métatarsiens sont les os qui constituent la partie principale du pied chez l'homme et une partie de la jambe chez les grands animaux ou de la patte chez les petits animaux.

Le nombre de métatarsiens est directement lié au mode de locomotion, de nombreux animaux plus gros ayant leurs chiffres réduits à deux (élan, vache, mouton) ou un (cheval).

Les os métatarsiens des pieds et des pattes sont étroitement regroupés par rapport, notamment, à la main humaine où le métacarpien du pouce diverge du reste du métacarpe.


== Usage métaphorique et culturel ==


Le mot "pied" est utilisé pour désigner une "... mesure linéaire était en vieil anglais (la longueur exacte a varié au fil du temps), ceci étant considéré comme la longueur du pied d'un homme ; une unité de mesure utilisée largement et anciennement.

En ce sens, le pluriel est souvent le pied.

Le pouce et le pied actuels sont déduits des mesures en 12c."
Le mot « pied » a aussi une signification musicale ; un "... pied métrique (vieil anglais tardif, traduisant le latin pes , grec pous dans le même sens) est généralement pris pour représenter une montée et une descente d'un pied: garder le temps selon certains, danser selon d'autres. " Le le mot «pied» était utilisé en moyen anglais pour signifier «une personne» (vers 1200).
L'expression "... mettre son meilleur pied avant tout a été enregistrée pour la première fois en 1849 (Shakespeare a le meilleur pied avant, 1596)".

L'expression "... mettre son pied dans (sa) bouche " dire quelque chose de stupide " a été utilisée pour la première fois en 1942.

L'expression "mettre (son) pied dans quelque chose" signifiant "faire un gâchis" a été utilisée en 1823. Le mot "footloose" a été utilisé pour la première fois dans les années 1690, signifiant "libre de bouger les pieds, sans entraves" ; le «sens plus figuratif de« libre d'agir comme bon lui semble »a été utilisé pour la première fois en 1873.

Comme "footloose", "flat-footed" avait d'abord son sens littéral évident (en 1600, cela signifiait "avec les pieds plats") mais en 1912, cela signifiait "non préparé" (argot de baseball américain).


=== Bibliographie ===

France, Diane L. (2008).

Identification des os humains et non humains : un atlas en couleurs.

Presse CRC.

ISBN 978-1-4200-6286-1.
Marieb, Elaine Nicpon; Hoehn, Katja (2007).

Anatomie et physiologie humaines.

Éducation Pearson.

ISBN 978-0-321-37294-9.
Platzer, Werner (2004).

Atlas en couleurs d'anatomie humaine, Vol. 1 : Système locomoteur (5e éd.).

Thième.

ISBN 3-13-533305-1.
"Anatomie du pied et de la cheville".

Canal Podologie.

Archivé de l'original le 31 août 2009.

Récupéré le 21 août 2009.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Foot
