

HAIR


Hair is a protein filament that grows from follicles found in the dermis. 

Hair is one of the defining characteristics of mammals.

The human body, apart from areas of glabrous skin, is covered in follicles which produce thick terminal and fine vellus hair. 

Most common interest in hair is focused on hair growth, hair types, and hair care, but hair is also an important biomaterial primarily composed of protein, notably alpha-keratin.

Attitudes towards different forms of hair, such as hairstyles and hair removal, vary widely across different cultures and historical periods, but it is often used to indicate a person's personal beliefs or social position, such as their age, sex, or religion.


== Overview ==

The word "hair" usually refers to two distinct structures: 

the part beneath the skin, called the hair follicle, or, when pulled from the skin, the bulb or root. 

This organ is located in the dermis and maintains stem cells, which not only re-grow the hair after it falls out, but also are recruited to regrow skin after a wound.

the hair shaft, which is the hard filamentous part that extends above the skin surface. 

A cross section of the hair shaft may be divided roughly into three zones.

Hair fibers have a structure consisting of several layers, starting from the outside:

the cuticle, which consists of several layers of flat, thin cells laid out overlapping one another as roof shingles
the cortex, which contains the keratin bundles in cell structures that remain roughly rod-like the medulla, a disorganized and open area at the fiber's center


== Description ==

Each strand of hair is made up of the medulla, cortex, and cuticle. 

The innermost region, the medulla, is not always present which is an open, unstructured region. 

The highly structural and organized cortex, or second of three layers of the hair, is the primary source of mechanical strength and water uptake. 

The cortex contains melanin, which colors the fiber based on the number, distribution and types of melanin granules. 

The shape of the follicle determines the shape of the cortex, and the shape of the fiber is related to how straight or curly the hair is. 

People with straight hair have round hair fibers. 

Oval and other shaped fibers are generally more wavy or curly. 

The cuticle is the outer covering. 

Its complex structure slides as the hair swells and is covered with a single molecular layer of lipid that makes the hair repel water. 

The diameter of human hair varies from 0.017 to 0.18 millimeters (0.00067 to 0.00709 in). 

There are two million small, tubular glands and sweat glands that produce watery fluids that cool the body by evaporation. 

The glands at the opening of the hair produce a fatty secretion that lubricates the hair.

Hair growth begins inside the hair follicle. 

The only "living" portion of the hair is found in the follicle. 

The hair that is visible is the hair shaft, which exhibits no biochemical activity and is considered "dead". 

The base of a hair's root (the "bulb") contains the cells that produce the hair shaft. 

Other structures of the hair follicle include the oil producing sebaceous gland which lubricates the hair and the arrector pili muscles, which are responsible for causing hairs to stand up. 

In humans with little body hair, the effect results in goose bumps.


=== Root of the hair ===

The root of the hair ends in an enlargement, the hair bulb, which is whiter in color and softer in texture than the shaft and is lodged in a follicular involution of the epidermis called the hair follicle. 

The bulb of hair consists of fibrous connective tissue, glassy membrane, external root sheath, internal root sheath composed of epithelium stratum (Henle's layer) and granular stratum (Huxley's layer), cuticle, cortex and medulla.


=== Natural color ===

All natural hair colors are the result of two types of hair pigments. 

Both of these pigments are melanin types, produced inside the hair follicle and packed into granules found in the fibers. 

Eumelanin is the dominant pigment in brown hair and black hair, while pheomelanin is dominant in red hair. 

Blond hair is the result of having little pigmentation in the hair strand. 

Gray hair occurs when melanin production decreases or stops, while poliosis is white hair (and often the skin to which the hair is attached), typically in spots that never possessed melanin at all, or ceased for natural reasons, generally genetic, in the first years of life.


=== Human hair growth ===

Hair grows everywhere on the external body except for mucus membranes and glabrous skin, such as that found on the palms of the hands, soles of the feet, and lips.

Hair follows a specific growth cycle with three distinct and concurrent phases: anagen, catagen, and telogen phases; all three occur simultaneously throughout the body. 

Each has specific characteristics that determine the length of the hair.
The body has different types of hair, including vellus hair and androgenic hair, each with its own type of cellular construction. 

The different construction gives the hair unique characteristics, serving specific purposes, mainly, warmth and protection.


=== Texture ===

Hair exists in a variety of textures. 

Three main aspects of hair texture are the curl pattern, volume, and consistency. 

The derivations of hair texture are not fully understood. 

All mammalian hair is composed of keratin, so the make-up of hair follicles is not the source of varying hair patterns. 

There are a range of theories pertaining to the curl patterns of hair. 

Scientists have come to believe that the shape of the hair shaft has an effect on the curliness of the individual's hair. 

A very round shaft allows for fewer disulfide bonds to be present in the hair strand. 

This means the bonds present are directly in line with one another, resulting in straight hair.

The flatter the hair shaft becomes, the curlier hair gets, because the shape allows more cysteines to become compacted together resulting in a bent shape that, with every additional disulfide bond, becomes curlier in form. 

As the hair follicle shape determines curl pattern, the hair follicle size determines thickness. 

While the circumference of the hair follicle expands, so does the thickness of the hair follicle. 

An individual's hair volume, as a result, can be thin, normal, or thick. 

The consistency of hair can almost always be grouped into three categories: fine, medium, and coarse. 

This trait is determined by the hair follicle volume and the condition of the strand. 

Fine hair has the smallest circumference, coarse hair has the largest circumference, and medium hair is anywhere between the other two. 

Coarse hair has a more open cuticle than thin or medium hair causing it to be the most porous.


==== Classification systems ====

There are various systems that people use to classify their curl patterns. 

Being knowledgeable of an individual's hair type is a good start to knowing how to take care of one's hair. 

There is not just one method to discovering one's hair type. 

Additionally it is possible, and quite normal to have more than one kind of hair type, for instance having a mixture of both type 3a & 3b curls.

Andre Walker systemThe Andre Walker Hair Typing System is the most widely used system to classify hair. 

The system was created by the hairstylist of Oprah Winfrey, Andre Walker. 

According to this system there are four types of hair: straight, wavy, curly, kinky.

Type 1 is straight hair, which reflects the most sheen and also the most resilient hair of all of the hair types. 

It is hard to damage and immensely difficult to curl this hair texture. 

Because the sebum easily spreads from the scalp to the ends without curls or kinks to interrupt its path, it is the most oily hair texture of all.

Type 2 is wavy hair, whose texture and sheen ranges somewhere between straight and curly hair. 

Wavy hair is also more likely to become frizzy than straight hair. 

While type A waves can easily alternate between straight and curly styles, type B and C Wavy hair is resistant to styling.
Type 3 is curly hair known to have an S-shape. 

The curl pattern may resemble a lowercase "s", uppercase "S", or sometimes an uppercase "Z" or lowercase "z". 

This hair type is usually voluminous, "climate dependent (humidity = frizz), and damage-prone." Lack of proper care causes less defined curls.

Type 4 is kinky hair, which features a tightly coiled curl pattern (or no discernible curl pattern at all) that is often fragile with a very high density. 

This type of hair shrinks when wet and because it has fewer cuticle layers than other hair types it is more susceptible to damage.

FIA systemThis is a method which classifies the hair by curl pattern, hair-strand thickness and overall hair volume.


== Functions ==

Many mammals have fur and other hairs that serve different functions. 

Hair provides thermal regulation and camouflage for many animals; for others it provides signals to other animals such as warnings, mating, or other communicative displays; and for some animals hair provides defensive functions and, rarely, even offensive protection. 

Hair also has a sensory function, extending the sense of touch beyond the surface of the skin. 

Guard hairs give warnings that may trigger a recoiling reaction.


=== Warmth ===


While humans have developed clothing and other means of keeping warm, the hair found on the head serves primarily as a source of heat insulation and cooling (when sweat evaporates from soaked hair) as well as protection from ultra-violet radiation exposure. 

The function of hair in other locations is debated. 

Hats and coats are still required while doing outdoor activities in cold weather to prevent frostbite and hypothermia, but the hair on the human body does help to keep the internal temperature regulated. 

When the body is too cold, the arrector pili muscles found attached to hair follicles stand up, causing the hair in these follicles to do the same. 

These hairs then form a heat-trapping layer above the epidermis. 

This process is formally called piloerection, derived from the Latin words 'pilus' ('hair') and 'erectio' ('rising up'), but is more commonly known as 'having goose bumps' in English. 

This is more effective in other mammals whose fur fluffs up to create air pockets between hairs that insulate the body from the cold. 

The opposite actions occur when the body is too warm; the arrector muscles make the hair lie flat on the skin which allows heat to leave.


=== Protection ===

In some mammals, such as hedgehogs and porcupines, the hairs have been modified into hard spines or quills. 

These are covered with thick plates of keratin and serve as protection against predators. 

Thick hair such as that of the lion's mane and grizzly bear's fur do offer some protection from physical damages such as bites and scratches.


=== Touch sense ===

Displacement and vibration of hair shafts are detected by hair follicle nerve receptors and nerve receptors within the skin. 

Hairs can sense movements of air as well as touch by physical objects and they provide sensory awareness of the presence of ectoparasites. 

Some hairs, such as eyelashes, are especially sensitive to the presence of potentially harmful matter.


==== Eyebrows and eyelashes ====

The eyebrows provide moderate protection to the eyes from dirt, sweat and rain. 

They also play a key role in non-verbal communication by displaying emotions such as sadness, anger, surprise and excitement. 

In many other mammals, they contain much longer, whisker-like hairs that act as tactile sensors.

The eyelash grows at the edges of the eyelid and protects the eye from dirt. 

The eyelash is to humans, camels, horses, ostriches etc., what whiskers are to cats; they are used to sense when dirt, dust, or any other potentially harmful object is too close to the eye. 

The eye reflexively closes as a result of this sensation.


== Evolution ==

Hair has its origins in the common ancestor of mammals, the synapsids, about 300 million years ago. 

It is currently unknown at what stage the synapsids acquired mammalian characteristics such as body hair and mammary glands, as the fossils only rarely provide direct evidence for soft tissues. 

Skin impression of the belly and lower tail of a pelycosaur, possibly Haptodus shows the basal synapsid stock bore transverse rows of rectangular scutes, similar to those of a modern crocodile, so the age of acquirement of hair logically couldn't have been earlier than ~299 ma, based on the current understanding of the animal's phylogeny. 

An exceptionally well-preserved skull of Estemmenosuchus, a therapsid from the Upper Permian, shows smooth, hairless skin with what appears to be glandular depressions, though as a semi-aquatic species it might not have been particularly useful to determine the integument of terrestrial species. 

The oldest undisputed known fossils showing unambiguous imprints of hair are the Callovian (late middle Jurassic) Castorocauda and several contemporary haramiyidans, both near-mammal cynodonts, giving the age as no later than ~220 ma based on the modern phylogenetic understanding of these clades. 

More recently, studies on terminal Permian Russian coprolites may suggest that non-mammalian synapsids from that era had fur. 

If this is the case, these are the oldest hair remnants known, showcasing that fur occurred as far back as the latest Paleozoic.

Some modern mammals have a special gland in front of each orbit used to preen the fur, called the harderian gland. 

Imprints of this structure are found in the skull of the small early mammals like Morganucodon, but not in their cynodont ancestors like Thrinaxodon.

The hairs of the fur in modern animals are all connected to nerves, and so the fur also serves as a transmitter for sensory input. 

Fur could have evolved from sensory hair (whiskers). 

The signals from this sensory apparatus is interpreted in the neocortex, a section of the brain that expanded markedly in animals like Morganucodon and Hadrocodium. 

The more advanced therapsids could have had a combination of naked skin, whiskers, and scutes. 

A full pelage likely did not evolve until the therapsid-mammal transition. 

The more advanced, smaller therapsids could have had a combination of hair and scutes, a combination still found in some modern mammals, such as rodents and the opossum.

The high interspecific variability of the size, color, and microstructure of hair often enables the identification of species based on single hair filaments.

In varying degrees most mammals have some skin areas without natural hair. 

On the human body, glabrous skin is found on the ventral portion of the fingers, palms, soles of feet and lips, which are all parts of the body most closely associated with interacting with the world around us, as are the labia minora and glans penis. 

There are four main types of mechanoreceptors in the glabrous skin of humans: Pacinian corpuscles, Meissner's corpuscles, Merkel's discs, and Ruffini corpuscles.

The naked mole-rat (Heterocephalus glaber) has evolved skin lacking in general, pelagic hair covering, yet has retained long, very sparsely scattered tactile hairs over its body. 

Glabrousness is a trait that may be associated with neoteny.


=== Human hairlessness ===

The general hairlessness of humans in comparison to related species may be due to loss of functionality in the pseudogene KRTHAP1 (which helps produce keratin) in the human lineage about 240,000 years ago. 

On an individual basis, mutations in the gene HR can lead to complete hair loss, though this is not typical in humans. 

Humans may also lose their hair as a result of hormonal imbalance due to drugs or pregnancy.

In order to comprehend why humans have significantly less body hair than other primates, one must understand that mammalian body hair is not merely an aesthetic characteristic; it protects the skin from wounds, bites, heat, cold, and UV radiation. 

Additionally, it can be used as a communication tool and as a camouflage.

Humans are the only primate species that have undergone significant hair loss and of the approximately 5000 extant species of mammal, only a handful are effectively hairless. 

This list includes elephants, rhinoceroses, hippopotamuses, walruses, some species of pigs, whales and other cetaceans, and naked mole rats. 

Most mammals have light skin that is covered by fur, and biologists believe that early human ancestors started out this way also. 

Dark skin probably evolved after humans lost their body fur, because the naked skin was vulnerable to the strong UV radiation as explained in the Out of Africa hypothesis. 

Therefore, evidence of the time when human skin darkened has been used to date the loss of human body hair, assuming that the dark skin was needed after the fur was gone.

It was expected that dating the split of the ancestral human louse into two species, the head louse and the pubic louse, would date the loss of body hair in human ancestors. 

However, it turned out that the human pubic louse does not descend from the ancestral human louse, but from the gorilla louse, diverging 3.3 million years ago. 

This suggests that humans had lost body hair (but retained head hair) and developed thick pubic hair prior to this date, were living in or close to the forest where gorillas lived, and acquired pubic lice from butchering gorillas or sleeping in their nests. 

The evolution of the body louse from the head louse, on the other hand, places the date of clothing much later, some 100,000 years ago.

The sweat glands in humans could have evolved to spread from the hands and feet as the body hair changed, or the hair change could have occurred to facilitate sweating. 

Horses and humans are two of the few animals capable of sweating on most of their body, yet horses are larger and still have fully developed fur. 

In humans, the skin hairs lie flat in hot conditions, as the arrector pili muscles relax, preventing heat from being trapped by a layer of still air between the hairs, and increasing heat loss by convection.

Another hypothesis for the thick body hair on humans proposes that Fisherian runaway sexual selection played a role (as well as in the selection of long head hair), (see terminal and vellus hair), as well as a much larger role of testosterone in men. 

Sexual selection is the only theory thus far that explains the sexual dimorphism seen in the hair patterns of men and women. 

On average, men have more body hair than women. 

Males have more terminal hair, especially on the face, chest, abdomen, and back, and females have more vellus hair, which is less visible. 

The halting of hair development at a juvenile stage, vellus hair, would also be consistent with the neoteny evident in humans, especially in females, and thus they could have occurred at the same time. 

This theory, however, has significant holdings in today's cultural norms. 

There is no evidence that sexual selection would proceed to such a drastic extent over a million years ago when a full, lush coat of hair would most likely indicate health and would therefore be more likely to be selected for, not against.

A further hypothesis is that human hair was reduced in response to ectoparasites. 

The "ectoparasite" explanation of modern human nakedness is based on the principle that a hairless primate would harbor fewer parasites. 

When our ancestors adopted group-dwelling social arrangements roughly 1.8 mya, ectoparasite loads increased dramatically. 

Early humans became the only one of the 193 primate species to have fleas, which can be attributed to the close living arrangements of large groups of individuals. 

While primate species have communal sleeping arrangements, these groups are always on the move and thus are less likely to harbor ectoparasites. 

Another view is proposed by James Giles, who attempts to explain hairlessness as evolved from the relationship between mother and child, and as a consequence of bipedalism. 

Giles also connects romantic love to hairlessness.Another hypothesis is that humans' use of fire caused or initiated the reduction in human hair.


=== Evolutionary variation ===

Evolutionary biologists suggest that the genus Homo arose in East Africa approximately 2.5 million years ago. 

They devised new hunting techniques. 

The higher protein diet led to the evolution of larger body and brain sizes. 

Jablonski postulates that increasing body size, in conjunction with intensified hunting during the day at the equator, gave rise to a greater need to rapidly expel heat. 

As a result, humans evolved the ability to sweat: a process which was facilitated by the loss of body hair.

Another factor in human evolution that also occurred in the prehistoric past was a preferential selection for neoteny, particularly in females. 

The idea that adult humans exhibit certain neotenous (juvenile) features, not evinced in the other great apes, is about a century old. 

Louis Bolk made a long list of such traits, and Stephen Jay Gould published a short list in Ontogeny and Phylogeny. 

In addition, paedomorphic characteristics in women are often acknowledged as desirable by men in developed countries. 

For instance, vellus hair is a juvenile characteristic. 

However, while men develop longer, coarser, thicker, and darker terminal hair through sexual differentiation, women do not, leaving their vellus hair visible.


=== Texture ===


==== Curly hair ====

Jablonski asserts head hair was evolutionarily advantageous for pre-humans to retain because it protected the scalp as they walked upright in the intense African (equatorial) UV light. 

While some might argue that, by this logic, humans should also express hairy shoulders because these body parts would putatively be exposed to similar conditions, the protection of the head, the seat of the brain that enabled humanity to become one of the most successful species on the planet (and which also is very vulnerable at birth) was arguably a more urgent issue (axillary hair in the underarms and groin were also retained as signs of sexual maturity). 

Sometime during the gradual process by which Homo erectus began a transition from furry skin to the naked skin expressed by Homo sapiens, hair texture putatively gradually changed from straight hair (the condition of most mammals, including humanity's closest cousins—chimpanzees) to Afro-textured hair or 'kinky' (i.e. tightly coiled). 

This argument assumes that curly hair better impedes the passage of UV light into the body relative to straight hair (thus curly or coiled hair would be particularly advantageous for light-skinned hominids living at the equator).

It is substantiated by Iyengar's findings (1998) that UV light can enter into straight human hair roots (and thus into the body through the skin) via the hair shaft. 

Specifically, the results of that study suggest that this phenomenon resembles the passage of light through fiber optic tubes (which do not function as effectively when kinked or sharply curved or coiled). 

In this sense, when hominids (i.e. 

Homo Erectus) were gradually losing their straight body hair and thereby exposing the initially pale skin underneath their fur to the sun, straight hair would have been an adaptive liability. 

By inverse logic, later, as humans traveled farther from Africa and/or the equator, straight hair may have (initially) evolved to aid the entry of UV light into the body during the transition from dark, UV-protected skin to paler skin.

Jablonski's assertions suggest that the adjective "woolly" in reference to Afro-hair is a misnomer in connoting the high heat insulation derivable from the true wool of sheep. 

Instead, the relatively sparse density of Afro-hair, combined with its springy coils actually results in an airy, almost sponge-like structure that in turn, Jablonski argues, more likely facilitates an increase in the circulation of cool air onto the scalp. 

Further, wet Afro-hair does not stick to the neck and scalp unless totally drenched and instead tends to retain its basic springy puffiness because it less easily responds to moisture and sweat than straight hair does. 

In this sense, the trait may enhance comfort levels in intense equatorial climates more than straight hair (which, on the other hand, tends to naturally fall over the ears and neck to a degree that provides slightly enhanced comfort levels in cold climates relative to tightly coiled hair).

Further, it is notable that the most pervasive expression of this hair texture can be found in sub-Saharan Africa; a region of the world that abundant genetic and paleo-anthropological evidence suggests, was the relatively recent (≈200,000-year-old) point of origin for modern humanity. 

In fact, although genetic findings (Tishkoff, 2009) suggest that sub-Saharan Africans are the most genetically diverse continental group on Earth, Afro-textured hair approaches ubiquity in this region. 

This points to a strong, long-term selective pressure that, in stark contrast to most other regions of the genomes of sub-Saharan groups, left little room for genetic variation at the determining loci. 

Such a pattern, again, does not seem to support human sexual aesthetics as being the sole or primary cause of this distribution.


==== The EDAR locus ====

A group of studies have recently shown that genetic patterns at the EDAR locus, a region of the modern human genome that contributes to hair texture variation among most individuals of East Asian descent, support the hypothesis that (East Asian) straight hair likely developed in this branch of the modern human lineage subsequent to the original expression of tightly coiled natural afro-hair. 

Specifically, the relevant findings indicate that the EDAR mutation coding for the predominant East Asian 'coarse' or thick, straight hair texture arose within the past ≈65,000 years, which is a time frame that covers from the earliest of the 'Out of Africa' migrations up to now.


== Disease ==

Ringworm is a fungal disease that targets hairy skin.Premature greying of hair is another condition that results in greying before the age of 20 years in Whites, before 25 years in Asians, and before 30 years in Africans.


== Hair care ==

Hair care involves the hygiene and cosmetology of hair including hair on the scalp, facial hair (beard and moustache), pubic hair and other body hair. 

Hair care routines differ according to an individual's culture and the physical characteristics of one's hair. 

Hair may be colored, trimmed, shaved, plucked, or otherwise removed with treatments such as waxing, sugaring, and threading.


=== Removal practices ===

Depilation is the removal of hair from the surface of the skin. 

This can be achieved through methods such as shaving. 

Epilation is the removal of the entire hair strand, including the part of the hair that has not yet left the follicle. 

A popular way to epilate hair is through waxing.


==== Shaving ====

Shaving is accomplished with bladed instruments, such as razors. 

The blade is brought close to the skin and stroked over the hair in the desired area to cut the terminal hairs and leave the skin feeling smooth. 

Depending upon the rate of growth, one can begin to feel the hair growing back within hours of shaving. 

This is especially evident in men who develop a five o'clock shadow after having shaved their faces. 

This new growth is called stubble. 

Stubble typically appears to grow back thicker because the shaved hairs are blunted instead of tapered off at the end, although the hair never actually grows back thicker.


==== Waxing ====
Waxing involves using a sticky wax and strip of paper or cloth to pull hair from the root. 

Waxing is the ideal hair removal technique to keep an area hair-free for long periods of time. 

It can take three to five weeks for waxed hair to begin to resurface again. 

Hair in areas that have been waxed consistently is known to grow back finer and thinner, especially compared to hair that has been shaved with a razor.


==== Laser removal ====

Laser hair removal is a cosmetic method where a small laser beam pulses selective heat on dark target matter in the area that causes hair growth without harming the skin tissue. 

This process is repeated several times over the course of many months to a couple of years with hair regrowing less frequently until it finally stops; this is used as a more permanent solution to waxing or shaving. 

Laser removal is practiced in many clinics along with many at-home products.


==== Cutting and trimming ====

Because the hair on one's head is normally longer than other types of body hair, it is cut with scissors or clippers. 

People with longer hair will most often use scissors to cut their hair, whereas shorter hair is maintained using a trimmer. 

Depending on the desired length and overall health of the hair, periods without cutting or trimming the hair can vary.
Cut hair may be used in wigs. 

Global imports of hair in 2010 was worth $US 1.24 billion.


== Social role ==

Hair has great social significance for human beings. 

It can grow on most external areas of the human body, except on the palms of the hands and the soles of the feet (among other areas). 

Hair is most noticeable on most people in a small number of areas, which are also the ones that are most commonly trimmed, plucked, or shaved. 

These include the face, ears, head, eyebrows, legs, and armpits, as well as the pubic region. 

The highly visible differences between male and female body and facial hair are a notable secondary sex characteristic.

The world's longest documented hair belongs to Xie Qiuping (in China), at 5.627 m (18 ft 5.54 in) when measured on 8 May 2004. 

She has been growing her hair since 1973, from the age of 13.


=== Indication of status ===

Healthy hair indicates health and youth (important in evolutionary biology). 

Hair color and texture can be a sign of ethnic ancestry. 

Facial hair is a sign of puberty in men. 

White or gray hair is a sign of age or genetics, which may be concealed with hair dye (not easily for some), although many prefer to assume it (especially if it is a poliosis characteristic of the person since childhood). 

Male pattern baldness is a sign of age, which may be concealed with a toupee, hats, or religious and cultural adornments. 

Although drugs and medical procedures exist for the treatment of baldness, many balding men simply shave their heads. 

In early modern China, the queue was a male hairstyle worn by the Manchus from central Manchuria and the Han Chinese during the Qing dynasty; hair on the front of the head was shaved off above the temples every ten days, mimicking male-pattern baldness, and the rest of the hair braided into a long pigtail.
Hairstyle may be an indicator of group membership. 

During the English Civil War, the followers of Oliver Cromwell decided to crop their hair close to their head, as an act of defiance to the curls and ringlets of the king's men. 

This led to the Parliamentary faction being nicknamed Roundheads. 

Recent isotopic analysis of hair is helping to shed further light on sociocultural interaction, giving information on food procurement and consumption in the 19th century. 

Having bobbed hair was popular among the flappers in the 1920s as a sign of rebellion against traditional roles for women. 

Female art students known as the "cropheads" also adopted the style, notably at the Slade School in London, England. 

Regional variations in hirsutism cause practices regarding hair on the arms and legs to differ. 

Some religious groups may follow certain rules regarding hair as part of religious observance. 

The rules often differ for men and women.

Many subcultures have hairstyles which may indicate an unofficial membership. 

Many hippies, metalheads, and Indian sadhus have long hair, as well many older indie kids. 

Many punks wear a hairstyle known as a mohawk or other spiked and dyed hairstyles; skinheads have short-cropped or completely shaved heads. 

Long stylized bangs were very common for emos, scene kids and younger indie kids in the 2000s and early 2010s, among people of both genders.

Heads were shaved in concentration camps, and head-shaving has been used as punishment, especially for women with long hair. 

The shaven head is common in military haircuts, while Western monks are known for the tonsure. 

By contrast, among some Indian holy men, the hair is worn extremely long.In the time of Confucius (5th century BCE), the Chinese grew out their hair and often tied it, as a symbol of filial piety.

Regular hairdressing in some cultures is considered a sign of wealth or status. 

The dreadlocks of the Rastafari movement were despised early in the movement's history. 

In some cultures, having one's hair cut can symbolize a liberation from one's past, usually after a trying time in one's life. 

Cutting the hair also may be a sign of mourning.
Tightly coiled hair in its natural state may be worn in an Afro. 

This hairstyle was once worn among African Americans as a symbol of racial pride. 

Given that the coiled texture is the natural state of some African Americans' hair, or perceived as being more "African", this simple style is now often seen as a sign of self-acceptance and an affirmation that the beauty norms of the (eurocentric) dominant culture are not absolute. 

It is important to note that African Americans as a whole have a variety of hair textures, as they are not an ethnically homogeneous group, but an ad-hoc of different racial admixtures.

The film Easy Rider (1969) includes the assumption that the two main characters could have their long hairs forcibly shaved with a rusty razor when jailed, symbolizing the intolerance of some conservative groups toward members of the counterculture. 

At the conclusion of the Oz obscenity trials in the UK in 1971, the defendants had their heads shaved by the police, causing public outcry. 

During the appeal trial, they appeared in the dock wearing wigs. 

A case where a 14-year-old student was expelled from school in Brazil in the mid-2000s, allegedly because of his fauxhawk haircut, sparked national debate and legal action resulting in compensation.


=== Religious practices ===

Women's hair may be hidden using headscarves, a common part of the hijab in Islam and a symbol of modesty required for certain religious rituals in Eastern Orthodoxy. 

Russian Orthodox Church requires all married women to wear headscarves inside the church; this tradition is often extended to all women, regardless of marital status. 

Orthodox Judaism also commands the use of scarves and other head coverings for married women for modesty reasons. 

Certain Hindu sects also wear head scarves for religious reasons. 

Sikhs have an obligation not to cut hair (a Sikh cutting hair becomes 'apostate' which means fallen from religion) and men keep it tied in a bun on the head, which is then covered appropriately using a turban. 

Multiple religions, both ancient and contemporary, require or advise one to allow their hair to become dreadlocks, though people also wear them for fashion. 

For men, Islam, Orthodox Judaism, Orthodox Christianity, Roman Catholicism, and other religious groups have at various times recommended or required the covering of the head and sections of the hair of men, and some have dictates relating to the cutting of men's facial and head hair. 

Some Christian sects throughout history and up to modern times have also religiously proscribed the cutting of women's hair. 

For some Sunni madhabs, the donning of a kufi or topi is a form of sunnah.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hair
;;;ES;;;



PELO


El cabello es un filamento de proteína que crece a partir de folículos que se encuentran en la dermis.

El pelo es una de las características definitorias de los mamíferos.

El cuerpo humano, aparte de las áreas de piel glabra, está cubierto de folículos que producen vello terminal grueso y vello fino.

El interés más común en el cabello se centra en el crecimiento del cabello, los tipos de cabello y el cuidado del cabello, pero el cabello también es un biomaterial importante compuesto principalmente de proteínas, en particular alfa-queratina.

Las actitudes hacia las diferentes formas de cabello, como los peinados y la depilación, varían ampliamente entre las diferentes culturas y períodos históricos, pero a menudo se usa para indicar las creencias personales o la posición social de una persona, como su edad, sexo o religión.


== Resumen ==

La palabra "pelo" generalmente se refiere a dos estructuras distintas:

la parte debajo de la piel, llamada folículo piloso o, cuando se extrae de la piel, el bulbo o la raíz.

Este órgano está ubicado en la dermis y mantiene las células madre, que no solo vuelven a hacer crecer el cabello después de que se cae, sino que también se reclutan para que vuelva a crecer la piel después de una herida.

el tallo del cabello, que es la parte filamentosa dura que se extiende por encima de la superficie de la piel.

Una sección transversal del tallo del cabello se puede dividir aproximadamente en tres zonas.

Las fibras capilares tienen una estructura que consta de varias capas, comenzando desde el exterior:

la cutícula, que consta de varias capas de células planas y delgadas dispuestas superpuestas entre sí como tejas de techo
la corteza, que contiene los haces de queratina en estructuras celulares que se asemejan más o menos a un bastón la médula, un área desorganizada y abierta en el centro de la fibra


== Descripción ==

Cada mechón de cabello está formado por la médula, la corteza y la cutícula.

La región más interna, la médula, no siempre está presente, ya que es una región abierta y desestructurada.

La corteza altamente estructurada y organizada, o la segunda de las tres capas del cabello, es la principal fuente de resistencia mecánica y absorción de agua.

La corteza contiene melanina, que colorea la fibra según el número, la distribución y los tipos de gránulos de melanina.

La forma del folículo determina la forma de la corteza, y la forma de la fibra está relacionada con qué tan liso o rizado es el cabello.

Las personas con cabello lacio tienen fibras capilares redondas.

Las fibras ovaladas y de otras formas son generalmente más onduladas o rizadas.

La cutícula es la cubierta exterior.

Su compleja estructura se desliza a medida que el cabello se hincha y se cubre con una única capa molecular de lípidos que hace que el cabello rechace el agua.

El diámetro del cabello humano varía de 0,017 a 0,18 milímetros (0,00067 a 0,00709 pulgadas).

Hay dos millones de pequeñas glándulas tubulares y glándulas sudoríparas que producen fluidos acuosos que refrescan el cuerpo por evaporación.

Las glándulas en la apertura del cabello producen una secreción grasa que lubrica el cabello.

El crecimiento del cabello comienza dentro del folículo piloso.

La única porción "viva" del cabello se encuentra en el folículo.

El cabello que es visible es el tallo del cabello, que no presenta actividad bioquímica y se considera "muerto".

La base de la raíz de un cabello (el "bulbo") contiene las células que producen el tallo del cabello.

Otras estructuras del folículo piloso incluyen la glándula sebácea productora de aceite que lubrica el cabello y los músculos arrector pili, que son responsables de hacer que el vello se levante.

En humanos con poco vello corporal, el efecto produce piel de gallina.


=== Raíz del cabello ===

La raíz del cabello termina en un agrandamiento, el bulbo piloso, que es de color más blanco y textura más suave que el tallo y se aloja en una involución folicular de la epidermis llamada folículo piloso.

El bulbo piloso consta de tejido conjuntivo fibroso, membrana vítrea, vaina radicular externa, vaina radicular interna compuesta por estrato epitelial (capa de Henle) y estrato granular (capa de Huxley), cutícula, corteza y médula.


=== Color natural ===

Todos los colores naturales del cabello son el resultado de dos tipos de pigmentos para el cabello.

Ambos pigmentos son del tipo melanina, se producen dentro del folículo piloso y se empaquetan en gránulos que se encuentran en las fibras.

La eumelanina es el pigmento dominante en el cabello castaño y negro, mientras que la feomelanina es dominante en el cabello rojo.

El cabello rubio es el resultado de tener poca pigmentación en la hebra capilar.

Las canas ocurren cuando la producción de melanina disminuye o se detiene, mientras que la poliosis es el cabello blanco (y a menudo la piel a la que está adherido el cabello), típicamente en lugares que nunca poseyeron melanina en absoluto, o cesaron por razones naturales, generalmente genéticas, en el primer momento. años de vida


=== Crecimiento del cabello humano ===

El cabello crece en todas partes en el cuerpo externo excepto en las membranas mucosas y la piel lampiña, como la que se encuentra en las palmas de las manos, las plantas de los pies y los labios.

El cabello sigue un ciclo de crecimiento específico con tres fases distintas y concurrentes: fases anágena, catágena y telógena; los tres ocurren simultáneamente en todo el cuerpo.

Cada uno tiene características específicas que determinan la longitud del cabello.
El cuerpo tiene diferentes tipos de cabello, incluido vello velloso y cabello androgénico, cada uno con su propio tipo de construcción celular.

La diferente construcción le da al cabello características únicas, sirviendo a propósitos específicos, principalmente, calidez y protección.


=== Textura ===

El cabello existe en una variedad de texturas.

Los tres aspectos principales de la textura del cabello son el patrón de rizo, el volumen y la consistencia.

Las derivaciones de la textura del cabello no se comprenden completamente.

Todo el cabello de los mamíferos está compuesto de queratina, por lo que la composición de los folículos pilosos no es la fuente de los diferentes patrones de cabello.

Hay una variedad de teorías relacionadas con los patrones de rizo del cabello.

Los científicos han llegado a creer que la forma del tallo del cabello tiene un efecto sobre el rizado del cabello del individuo.

Un eje muy redondo permite que haya menos enlaces disulfuro en el cabello.

Esto significa que los enlaces presentes están directamente alineados entre sí, lo que da como resultado un cabello liso.

Cuanto más plano se vuelve el tallo del cabello, más rizado se vuelve el cabello, porque la forma permite que más cisteínas se compacten juntas, lo que da como resultado una forma doblada que, con cada enlace disulfuro adicional, se vuelve más rizado.

Como la forma del folículo piloso determina el patrón del rizo, el tamaño del folículo piloso determina el grosor.

Mientras que la circunferencia del folículo piloso se expande, también lo hace el grosor del folículo piloso.

El volumen de cabello de un individuo, como resultado, puede ser delgado, normal o grueso.

La consistencia del cabello casi siempre se puede agrupar en tres categorías: fina, media y gruesa.

Este rasgo está determinado por el volumen del folículo piloso y la condición de la hebra.

El cabello fino tiene la circunferencia más pequeña, el cabello grueso tiene la circunferencia más grande y el cabello mediano está entre los otros dos.

El cabello grueso tiene una cutícula más abierta que el cabello fino o mediano, lo que hace que sea más poroso.


==== Sistemas de clasificación ====

Hay varios sistemas que la gente usa para clasificar sus patrones de rizos.

Conocer el tipo de cabello de una persona es un buen comienzo para saber cómo cuidarlo.

No existe un solo método para descubrir el tipo de cabello.

Además, es posible, y bastante normal, tener más de un tipo de cabello, por ejemplo, tener una mezcla de rizos de tipo 3a y 3b.

Sistema Andre WalkerEl sistema de tipificación de cabello de Andre Walker es el sistema más utilizado para clasificar el cabello.

El sistema fue creado por el estilista de Oprah Winfrey, Andre Walker.

Según este sistema existen cuatro tipos de cabello: liso, ondulado, rizado, rizado.

El tipo 1 es el cabello lacio, que refleja el cabello más brillante y resistente de todos los tipos de cabello.

Es difícil dañar e inmensamente difícil rizar esta textura de cabello.

Debido a que el sebo se extiende fácilmente desde el cuero cabelludo hasta las puntas sin rizos ni torceduras que interrumpan su camino, es la textura de cabello más grasosa de todas.

El tipo 2 es cabello ondulado, cuya textura y brillo oscila entre el cabello liso y rizado.

El cabello ondulado también tiene más probabilidades de encresparse que el cabello liso.

Mientras que las ondas tipo A pueden alternar fácilmente entre estilos lisos y rizados, el cabello ondulado tipo B y C es resistente al peinado.
El tipo 3 es cabello rizado que se sabe que tiene forma de S.

El patrón de rizo puede parecerse a una "s" minúscula, una "S" mayúscula o, a veces, una "Z" mayúscula o una "z" minúscula.

Este tipo de cabello suele ser voluminoso, "dependiente del clima (humedad = frizz) y propenso a daños". La falta de cuidado adecuado provoca rizos menos definidos.

El tipo 4 es el cabello rizado, que presenta un patrón de rizo muy enrollado (o ningún patrón de rizo perceptible) que a menudo es frágil con una densidad muy alta.

Este tipo de cabello se encoge cuando está mojado y, debido a que tiene menos capas de cutícula que otros tipos de cabello, es más susceptible al daño.

Sistema FIAEste es un método que clasifica el cabello por patrón de rizos, grosor del cabello y volumen general del cabello.


== Funciones ==

Muchos mamíferos tienen pelaje y otros pelos que cumplen diferentes funciones.

El pelo proporciona regulación térmica y camuflaje para muchos animales; para otros, proporciona señales a otros animales, como advertencias, apareamiento u otras manifestaciones comunicativas; y para algunos animales, el pelo proporciona funciones defensivas y, en raras ocasiones, incluso protección ofensiva.

El cabello también tiene una función sensorial, extendiendo el sentido del tacto más allá de la superficie de la piel.

Los pelos de protección dan advertencias que pueden desencadenar una reacción de retroceso.


=== Calidez ===


Si bien los humanos han desarrollado ropa y otros medios para mantenerse calientes, el cabello que se encuentra en la cabeza sirve principalmente como fuente de aislamiento térmico y enfriamiento (cuando el sudor se evapora del cabello empapado), así como también como protección contra la exposición a la radiación ultravioleta.

Se debate la función del cabello en otros lugares.

Todavía se requieren sombreros y abrigos mientras se realizan actividades al aire libre en climas fríos para evitar la congelación y la hipotermia, pero el cabello del cuerpo humano ayuda a mantener regulada la temperatura interna.

Cuando el cuerpo está demasiado frío, los músculos arrector pili que se encuentran unidos a los folículos pilosos se levantan, lo que hace que el cabello en estos folículos haga lo mismo.

Estos pelos luego forman una capa que atrapa el calor sobre la epidermis.

Este proceso se denomina formalmente piloerección, derivado de las palabras latinas 'pilus' ('pelo') y 'erectio' ('levantarse'), pero se conoce más comúnmente como 'tener la piel de gallina' en inglés.

Esto es más efectivo en otros mamíferos cuyo pelaje se esponja para crear bolsas de aire entre los pelos que aíslan el cuerpo del frío.

Las acciones opuestas ocurren cuando el cuerpo está demasiado caliente; los músculos erectores hacen que el cabello quede plano sobre la piel, lo que permite que salga el calor.


=== Protección ===

En algunos mamíferos, como los erizos y los puercoespines, los pelos se han modificado en espinas o púas duras.

Estos están cubiertos con gruesas placas de queratina y sirven como protección contra los depredadores.

El pelo grueso como el de la melena del león y el pelaje del oso grizzly ofrecen cierta protección contra daños físicos como mordeduras y arañazos.


=== Sentido del tacto ===

El desplazamiento y la vibración de los tallos del cabello son detectados por los receptores nerviosos del folículo piloso y los receptores nerviosos dentro de la piel.

Los pelos pueden sentir los movimientos del aire, así como el tacto de los objetos físicos y proporcionan una conciencia sensorial de la presencia de ectoparásitos.

Algunos pelos, como las pestañas, son especialmente sensibles a la presencia de materias potencialmente nocivas.


==== Cejas y pestañas ====

Las cejas brindan una protección moderada a los ojos contra la suciedad, el sudor y la lluvia.

También juegan un papel clave en la comunicación no verbal al mostrar emociones como la tristeza, la ira, la sorpresa y la emoción.

En muchos otros mamíferos, contienen pelos mucho más largos, parecidos a bigotes, que actúan como sensores táctiles.

La pestaña crece en los bordes del párpado y protege el ojo de la suciedad.

La pestaña es para los humanos, camellos, caballos, avestruces, etc., lo que los bigotes son para los gatos; se utilizan para detectar cuando la suciedad, el polvo o cualquier otro objeto potencialmente dañino está demasiado cerca del ojo.

El ojo se cierra reflexivamente como resultado de esta sensación.


== Evolución ==

El cabello tiene su origen en el ancestro común de los mamíferos, los sinápsidos, hace unos 300 millones de años.

Actualmente se desconoce en qué etapa los sinápsidos adquirieron características de mamíferos como el vello corporal y las glándulas mamarias, ya que los fósiles rara vez proporcionan evidencia directa de tejidos blandos.

Impresión de la piel del vientre y la parte inferior de la cola de un pelicosaurio, posiblemente Haptodus, muestra que el stock de sinápsidos basales tenía filas transversales de escudos rectangulares, similares a los de un cocodrilo moderno, por lo que la edad de adquisición del cabello lógicamente no podría haber sido anterior a ~ 299 ma, basado en la comprensión actual de la filogenia del animal.

Un cráneo excepcionalmente bien conservado de Estemmenosuchus, un terápsido del Pérmico superior, muestra una piel suave y sin pelo con lo que parecen ser depresiones glandulares, aunque como especie semiacuática podría no haber sido particularmente útil para determinar el tegumento de especies terrestres. .

Los fósiles conocidos indiscutibles más antiguos que muestran huellas inequívocas de cabello son el Calloviano (Jurásico medio tardío) Castorocauda y varios haramiyidans contemporáneos, ambos cinodontes casi mamíferos, lo que da una edad no posterior a ~ 220 ma según la comprensión filogenética moderna de estos clados.

Más recientemente, los estudios sobre los coprolitos rusos del Pérmico terminal pueden sugerir que los sinápsidos no mamíferos de esa época tenían pelaje.

Si este es el caso, estos son los restos de cabello más antiguos que se conocen, lo que demuestra que el pelaje se remonta al último Paleozoico.

Algunos mamíferos modernos tienen una glándula especial frente a cada órbita que se usa para acicalar el pelaje, llamada glándula más dura.

Las huellas de esta estructura se encuentran en el cráneo de los pequeños mamíferos primitivos como Morganucodon, pero no en sus antepasados ​​cinodontes como Thrinaxodon.

Todos los pelos del pelaje de los animales modernos están conectados a los nervios, por lo que el pelaje también sirve como transmisor de información sensorial.

El pelaje podría haber evolucionado a partir del cabello sensorial (bigotes).

Las señales de este aparato sensorial se interpretan en la neocorteza, una sección del cerebro que se expandió notablemente en animales como Morganucodon y Hadrocodium.

Los terápsidos más avanzados podrían haber tenido una combinación de piel desnuda, bigotes y escudos.

Un pelaje completo probablemente no evolucionó hasta la transición terápsido-mamífero.

Los terápsidos más pequeños y avanzados podrían haber tenido una combinación de pelo y escudos, una combinación que todavía se encuentra en algunos mamíferos modernos, como los roedores y la zarigüeya.

La alta variabilidad interespecífica del tamaño, color y microestructura del cabello a menudo permite la identificación de especies basadas en filamentos de cabello individuales.

En diversos grados, la mayoría de los mamíferos tienen algunas áreas de la piel sin pelo natural.

En el cuerpo humano, la piel lampiña se encuentra en la parte ventral de los dedos, las palmas, las plantas de los pies y los labios, que son todas las partes del cuerpo más estrechamente asociadas con la interacción con el mundo que nos rodea, al igual que los labios menores y el glande. pene.

Hay cuatro tipos principales de mecanorreceptores en la piel glabra de los humanos: corpúsculos de Pacini, corpúsculos de Meissner, discos de Merkel y corpúsculos de Ruffini.

La rata topo desnuda ( Heterocephalus glaber ) ha desarrollado una piel que carece en general de una cubierta de pelo pelágico, pero ha conservado pelos táctiles largos y muy escasamente dispersos sobre su cuerpo.

La glabra es un rasgo que puede estar asociado con la neotenia.


=== Calvicie humana ===

La calvicie general de los humanos en comparación con especies relacionadas puede deberse a la pérdida de funcionalidad en el pseudogen KRTHAP1 (que ayuda a producir queratina) en el linaje humano hace unos 240.000 años.

De forma individual, las mutaciones en el gen HR pueden conducir a la pérdida completa del cabello, aunque esto no es típico en los humanos.

Los seres humanos también pueden perder el cabello como resultado de un desequilibrio hormonal debido a las drogas o el embarazo.

Para comprender por qué los humanos tienen significativamente menos vello corporal que otros primates, uno debe entender que el vello corporal de los mamíferos no es meramente una característica estética; protege la piel de heridas, mordeduras, calor, frío y radiación UV.

Además, se puede utilizar como herramienta de comunicación y como camuflaje.

Los humanos son la única especie de primates que ha sufrido una pérdida significativa de cabello y de las aproximadamente 5000 especies de mamíferos existentes, solo un puñado carece efectivamente de cabello.

Esta lista incluye elefantes, rinocerontes, hipopótamos, morsas, algunas especies de cerdos, ballenas y otros cetáceos, y ratas topo desnudas.

La mayoría de los mamíferos tienen una piel clara cubierta por pelaje, y los biólogos creen que los primeros ancestros humanos también comenzaron de esta manera.

La piel oscura probablemente evolucionó después de que los humanos perdieran su pelaje corporal, porque la piel desnuda era vulnerable a la fuerte radiación ultravioleta, como se explica en la hipótesis de Memorias de África.

Por lo tanto, la evidencia de la época en que la piel humana se oscureció se ha utilizado para fechar la pérdida del vello corporal humano, asumiendo que la piel oscura era necesaria después de que el pelaje desapareciera.

Se esperaba que datar la división del piojo humano ancestral en dos especies, el piojo de la cabeza y el piojo púbico, dataría la pérdida de vello corporal en los ancestros humanos.

Sin embargo, resultó que el piojo púbico humano no desciende del piojo humano ancestral, sino del piojo gorila, divergiendo hace 3,3 millones de años.

Esto sugiere que los humanos habían perdido vello corporal (pero retuvieron el vello de la cabeza) y desarrollaron vello púbico grueso antes de esta fecha, vivían en el bosque donde vivían los gorilas o cerca de él, y adquirieron piojos púbicos al matar gorilas o dormir en sus nidos.

La evolución del piojo del cuerpo a partir del piojo de la cabeza, por otro lado, sitúa la fecha de la vestimenta mucho más tarde, hace unos 100.000 años.

Las glándulas sudoríparas en los humanos podrían haber evolucionado para extenderse desde las manos y los pies a medida que cambiaba el vello corporal, o el cambio de cabello podría haber ocurrido para facilitar la sudoración.

Los caballos y los humanos son dos de los pocos animales capaces de sudar en la mayor parte de su cuerpo, sin embargo, los caballos son más grandes y aún tienen un pelaje completamente desarrollado.

En los seres humanos, los pelos de la piel quedan planos en condiciones de calor, ya que los músculos erectores del pelo se relajan, evitando que el calor quede atrapado por una capa de aire quieto entre los pelos y aumentando la pérdida de calor por convección.

Otra hipótesis para el vello corporal grueso en los humanos propone que la selección sexual descontrolada de Fisher jugó un papel (así como en la selección del cabello largo en la cabeza), (ver vello terminal y velloso), así como un papel mucho más importante de la testosterona en los hombres. .

La selección sexual es la única teoría hasta el momento que explica el dimorfismo sexual observado en los patrones de cabello de hombres y mujeres.

En promedio, los hombres tienen más vello corporal que las mujeres.

Los machos tienen más vello terminal, especialmente en la cara, el pecho, el abdomen y la espalda, y las hembras tienen más vello velloso, que es menos visible.

La interrupción del desarrollo del cabello en una etapa juvenil, vello velloso, también sería consistente con la neotenia evidente en humanos, especialmente en mujeres, y por lo tanto podrían haber ocurrido al mismo tiempo.

Esta teoría, sin embargo, tiene importantes participaciones en las normas culturales de hoy.

No hay evidencia de que la selección sexual se llevara a cabo de manera tan drástica hace más de un millón de años, cuando una capa de cabello abundante y exuberante probablemente indicaría salud y, por lo tanto, sería más probable que se seleccionara a favor, no en contra.

Otra hipótesis es que el cabello humano se redujo en respuesta a los ectoparásitos.

La explicación del "ectoparásito" de la desnudez humana moderna se basa en el principio de que un primate sin pelo albergaría menos parásitos.

Cuando nuestros antepasados ​​adoptaron arreglos sociales de vivienda en grupo hace aproximadamente 1,8 millones de años, las cargas de ectoparásitos aumentaron drásticamente.

Los primeros humanos se convirtieron en los únicos de las 193 especies de primates que tenían pulgas, lo que se puede atribuir a los arreglos de vida cercanos de grandes grupos de individuos.

Si bien las especies de primates tienen arreglos comunales para dormir, estos grupos siempre están en movimiento y, por lo tanto, es menos probable que alberguen ectoparásitos.

James Giles propone otro punto de vista, quien intenta explicar la calvicie como una evolución de la relación entre madre e hijo, y como consecuencia del bipedalismo.

Giles también conecta el amor romántico con la falta de cabello. Otra hipótesis es que el uso del fuego por parte de los humanos causó o inició la reducción del cabello humano.


=== Variación evolutiva ===

Los biólogos evolutivos sugieren que el género Homo surgió en el este de África hace aproximadamente 2,5 millones de años.

Idearon nuevas técnicas de caza.

La dieta rica en proteínas condujo a la evolución de cuerpos y cerebros más grandes.

Jablonski postula que el aumento del tamaño corporal, junto con la intensificación de la caza durante el día en el ecuador, dio lugar a una mayor necesidad de expulsar rápidamente el calor.

Como resultado, los humanos desarrollaron la capacidad de sudar: un proceso que fue facilitado por la pérdida de vello corporal.

Otro factor en la evolución humana que también ocurrió en el pasado prehistórico fue una selección preferencial por la neotenia, particularmente en las hembras.

La idea de que los humanos adultos exhiben ciertas características neotenicas (juveniles), que no se evidencian en los otros grandes simios, tiene alrededor de un siglo de antigüedad.

Louis Bolk hizo una larga lista de tales rasgos, y Stephen Jay Gould publicó una breve lista en Ontogeny and Phylogeny.

Además, las características pedomórficas de las mujeres suelen ser reconocidas como deseables por los hombres de los países desarrollados.

Por ejemplo, el vello velloso es una característica juvenil.

Sin embargo, mientras que los hombres desarrollan vello terminal más largo, grueso, grueso y oscuro a través de la diferenciación sexual, las mujeres no lo hacen, dejando su vello visible.


=== Textura ===


==== Pelo rizado ====

Jablonski afirma que el pelo de la cabeza fue evolutivamente ventajoso para que los prehumanos lo retuvieran porque protegía el cuero cabelludo mientras caminaban erguidos bajo la intensa luz ultravioleta africana (ecuatorial).

Si bien algunos podrían argumentar que, según esta lógica, los humanos también deberían tener hombros peludos porque estas partes del cuerpo supuestamente estarían expuestas a condiciones similares, la protección de la cabeza, el asiento del cerebro que permitió a la humanidad convertirse en una de las especies más exitosas. en el planeta (y que también es muy vulnerable al nacer) era posiblemente un problema más urgente (el vello axilar en las axilas y la ingle también se conservaron como signos de madurez sexual).

En algún momento durante el proceso gradual por el cual el Homo erectus comenzó una transición de la piel peluda a la piel desnuda expresada por el Homo sapiens, la textura del cabello supuestamente cambió gradualmente de cabello lacio (la condición de la mayoría de los mamíferos, incluidos los primos más cercanos de la humanidad, los chimpancés) a cabello con textura afro. pelo o 'kinky' (es decir, muy enrollado).

Este argumento asume que el cabello rizado impide mejor el paso de la luz ultravioleta al cuerpo en comparación con el cabello liso (por lo tanto, el cabello rizado o enrollado sería particularmente ventajoso para los homínidos de piel clara que viven en el ecuador).

Los hallazgos de Iyengar (1998) corroboran que la luz ultravioleta puede entrar en las raíces rectas del cabello humano (y, por lo tanto, en el cuerpo a través de la piel) a través del tallo del cabello.

Específicamente, los resultados de ese estudio sugieren que este fenómeno se asemeja al paso de la luz a través de los tubos de fibra óptica (que no funcionan con tanta eficacia cuando están retorcidos, curvados o enrollados).

En este sentido, cuando los homínidos (ie

Homo Erectus) estaban perdiendo gradualmente su vello corporal lacio y, por lo tanto, exponiendo al sol la piel inicialmente pálida debajo de su pelaje, el cabello lacio habría sido una responsabilidad adaptativa.

Por lógica inversa, más tarde, a medida que los humanos viajaron más lejos de África y/o el ecuador, el cabello lacio puede haber evolucionado (inicialmente) para ayudar a la entrada de la luz ultravioleta en el cuerpo durante la transición de una piel oscura protegida contra los rayos ultravioleta a una piel más pálida.

Las afirmaciones de Jablonski sugieren que el adjetivo "lanoso" en referencia al cabello afro es un nombre inapropiado al connotar el alto aislamiento térmico derivado de la verdadera lana de oveja.

En cambio, la densidad relativamente escasa del cabello afro, combinada con sus bucles elásticos en realidad da como resultado una estructura aireada, casi como una esponja que, a su vez, argumenta Jablonski, probablemente facilita un aumento en la circulación de aire fresco en el cuero cabelludo.

Además, el cabello afro húmedo no se pega al cuello ni al cuero cabelludo a menos que esté completamente empapado y, en cambio, tiende a conservar su hinchazón elástica básica porque responde con menos facilidad a la humedad y al sudor que el cabello lacio.

En este sentido, el rasgo puede mejorar los niveles de comodidad en climas ecuatoriales intensos más que el cabello lacio (que, por otro lado, tiende a caer naturalmente sobre las orejas y el cuello hasta un grado que proporciona niveles de comodidad ligeramente mejorados en climas fríos en relación con el pelo apretado). pelo enroscado).

Además, cabe destacar que la expresión más generalizada de esta textura capilar se puede encontrar en el África subsahariana; una región del mundo que sugiere abundante evidencia genética y paleoantropológica, fue el punto de origen relativamente reciente (≈200.000 años) de la humanidad moderna.

De hecho, aunque los hallazgos genéticos (Tishkoff, 2009) sugieren que los africanos subsaharianos son el grupo continental con mayor diversidad genética en la Tierra, el cabello con textura afro se acerca a la ubicuidad en esta región.

Esto apunta a una fuerte presión selectiva a largo plazo que, en marcado contraste con la mayoría de las otras regiones de los genomas de los grupos subsaharianos, dejó poco espacio para la variación genética en los loci determinantes.

Tal patrón, de nuevo, no parece apoyar la estética sexual humana como la causa única o principal de esta distribución.


==== El lugar geométrico EDAR ====

Un grupo de estudios ha demostrado recientemente que los patrones genéticos en el locus EDAR, una región del genoma humano moderno que contribuye a la variación de la textura del cabello entre la mayoría de las personas de ascendencia asiática oriental, respaldan la hipótesis de que el cabello liso (asiático oriental) probablemente se desarrolló en este rama del linaje humano moderno posterior a la expresión original del cabello afro natural muy enrollado.

Específicamente, los hallazgos relevantes indican que la mutación EDAR que codifica para la textura predominante del cabello lacio "grueso" o grueso del este de Asia surgió en los últimos 65,000 años, que es un período de tiempo que cubre desde el principio de "Memorias de África". migraciones hasta ahora.


== Enfermedad ==

La tiña es una enfermedad fúngica que se dirige a la piel peluda. El envejecimiento prematuro del cabello es otra afección que provoca el envejecimiento antes de los 20 años en los blancos, antes de los 25 años en los asiáticos y antes de los 30 años en los africanos.


== Cuidado del cabello ==

El cuidado del cabello implica la higiene y la cosmetología del cabello, incluido el cabello en el cuero cabelludo, el vello facial (barba y bigote), el vello púbico y otro vello corporal.

Las rutinas de cuidado del cabello difieren según la cultura del individuo y las características físicas del cabello.

El cabello puede ser teñido, recortado, afeitado, arrancado o eliminado de otra manera con tratamientos como depilación con cera, azúcar y hilo.


=== Prácticas de eliminación ===

La depilación es la eliminación del vello de la superficie de la piel.

Esto se puede lograr a través de métodos como el afeitado.

La depilación es la eliminación de todo el cabello, incluida la parte del cabello que aún no ha salido del folículo.

Una forma popular de depilar el cabello es a través de la depilación con cera.


==== Afeitado ====

El afeitado se logra con instrumentos con cuchillas, como las maquinillas de afeitar.

La cuchilla se acerca a la piel y se frota sobre el vello en el área deseada para cortar los vellos terminales y dejar la piel con una sensación suave.

Dependiendo de la tasa de crecimiento, uno puede comenzar a sentir que el cabello vuelve a crecer a las pocas horas de afeitarse.

Esto es especialmente evidente en los hombres que desarrollan una sombra de cinco en punto después de haberse afeitado la cara.

Este nuevo crecimiento se llama rastrojo.

Por lo general, la barba parece volver a crecer más gruesa porque los pelos afeitados se vuelven romos en lugar de disminuir al final, aunque el cabello en realidad nunca vuelve a crecer más grueso.


==== Depilación ====
La depilación implica el uso de una cera pegajosa y una tira de papel o tela para arrancar el vello desde la raíz.

La depilación con cera es la técnica de depilación ideal para mantener una zona libre de vello durante largos periodos de tiempo.

Puede tomar de tres a cinco semanas para que el cabello encerado comience a resurgir nuevamente.

Se sabe que el vello en áreas que se han depilado con cera constantemente vuelve a crecer más y más delgado, especialmente en comparación con el vello que se ha afeitado con una navaja.


==== Eliminación con láser ====

La depilación láser es un método cosmético en el que un pequeño rayo láser emite calor selectivo sobre la materia oscura en el área que provoca el crecimiento del vello sin dañar el tejido de la piel.

Este proceso se repite varias veces en el transcurso de muchos meses a un par de años y el cabello vuelve a crecer con menos frecuencia hasta que finalmente se detiene; esto se usa como una solución más permanente para la depilación con cera o el afeitado.

La eliminación con láser se practica en muchas clínicas junto con muchos productos para el hogar.


==== Cortar y recortar ====

Debido a que el vello de la cabeza es normalmente más largo que otros tipos de vello corporal, se corta con tijeras o maquinilla.

Las personas con cabello más largo suelen usar tijeras para cortarse el cabello, mientras que el cabello más corto se mantiene con una recortadora.

Dependiendo de la longitud deseada y la salud general del cabello, los períodos sin cortar o recortar el cabello pueden variar.
El cabello cortado puede usarse en pelucas.

Las importaciones globales de cabello en 2010 tuvieron un valor de $US 1,24 mil millones.


== Rol social ==

El cabello tiene una gran importancia social para los seres humanos.

Puede crecer en la mayoría de las áreas externas del cuerpo humano, excepto en las palmas de las manos y las plantas de los pies (entre otras áreas).

El vello es más notorio en la mayoría de las personas en una pequeña cantidad de áreas, que también son las que se recortan, arrancan o afeitan con mayor frecuencia.

Estos incluyen la cara, las orejas, la cabeza, las cejas, las piernas y las axilas, así como la región púbica.

Las diferencias altamente visibles entre el cuerpo y el vello facial masculino y femenino son una característica sexual secundaria notable.

El cabello documentado más largo del mundo pertenece a Xie Qiuping (en China), con 5,627 m (18 pies 5,54 pulgadas) cuando se midió el 8 de mayo de 2004.

Lleva dejándose crecer el pelo desde 1973, desde los 13 años.


=== Indicación de estado ===

El cabello sano indica salud y juventud (importante en biología evolutiva).

El color y la textura del cabello pueden ser un signo de ascendencia étnica.

El vello facial es un signo de la pubertad en los hombres.

El pelo blanco o gris es un signo de la edad o de la genética, que puede disimularse con tintes (no es fácil para algunos), aunque muchos prefieren asumirlo (sobre todo si se trata de una poliosis característica de la persona desde la infancia).

La calvicie de patrón masculino es un signo de la edad, que puede ocultarse con un tupé, sombreros o adornos religiosos y culturales.

Aunque existen medicamentos y procedimientos médicos para el tratamiento de la calvicie, muchos hombres calvos simplemente se afeitan la cabeza.

En la China moderna temprana, la cola era un peinado masculino usado por los manchúes del centro de Manchuria y los chinos Han durante la dinastía Qing; el cabello de la parte delantera de la cabeza se afeitaba por encima de las sienes cada diez días, imitando la calvicie de patrón masculino, y el resto del cabello se trenzaba en una larga coleta.
El peinado puede ser un indicador de pertenencia a un grupo.

Durante la Guerra Civil Inglesa, los seguidores de Oliver Cromwell decidieron cortarse el cabello muy cerca de la cabeza, como un acto de desafío a los rizos y tirabuzones de los hombres del rey.

Esto llevó a que la facción parlamentaria fuera apodada Roundheads.

El análisis isotópico reciente del cabello está ayudando a arrojar más luz sobre la interacción sociocultural, brindando información sobre la adquisición y el consumo de alimentos en el siglo XIX.

Tener el pelo corto era popular entre los flappers en la década de 1920 como un signo de rebelión contra los roles tradicionales de las mujeres.

Las estudiantes de arte conocidas como "cropheads" también adoptaron el estilo, especialmente en la Slade School de Londres, Inglaterra.

Las variaciones regionales en el hirsutismo hacen que las prácticas con respecto al vello de los brazos y las piernas difieran.

Algunos grupos religiosos pueden seguir ciertas reglas con respecto al cabello como parte de la observancia religiosa.

Las reglas a menudo difieren para hombres y mujeres.

Muchas subculturas tienen peinados que pueden indicar una membresía no oficial.

Muchos hippies, metaleros y sadhus indios tienen el pelo largo, al igual que muchos chicos independientes mayores.

Muchos punks usan un peinado conocido como mohawk u otros peinados con púas y teñidos; los skinheads tienen la cabeza rapada o completamente rapada.

Los flequillos largos y estilizados eran muy comunes para los emos, los scene kids y los indie kids más jóvenes en la década de 2000 y principios de la de 2010, entre personas de ambos sexos.

En los campos de concentración se rapaban las cabezas, y el rapado de cabezas se ha utilizado como castigo, especialmente para las mujeres con cabello largo.

La cabeza rapada es común en los cortes de pelo militares, mientras que los monjes occidentales son conocidos por la tonsura.

Por el contrario, entre algunos hombres santos indios, el cabello se usa extremadamente largo. En la época de Confucio (siglo V a. C.), los chinos se dejaban crecer el cabello y, a menudo, lo ataban, como símbolo de piedad filial.

Peinarse regularmente en algunas culturas se considera un signo de riqueza o estatus.

Las rastas del movimiento Rastafari fueron despreciadas al principio de la historia del movimiento.

En algunas culturas, cortarse el cabello puede simbolizar una liberación del pasado, generalmente después de un momento difícil en la vida.

Cortarse el pelo también puede ser señal de luto.
El cabello bien enrollado en su estado natural se puede usar en un estilo afro.

Este peinado se usó una vez entre los afroamericanos como símbolo de orgullo racial.

Dado que la textura enrollada es el estado natural del cabello de algunos afroamericanos, o se percibe como más "africano", este estilo simple ahora se ve a menudo como un signo de autoaceptación y una afirmación de que las normas de belleza del (eurocéntrico). ) la cultura dominante no son absolutos.

Es importante tener en cuenta que los afroamericanos en su conjunto tienen una variedad de texturas de cabello, ya que no son un grupo étnicamente homogéneo, sino un ad-hoc de diferentes mezclas raciales.

La película Easy Rider (1969) incluye la suposición de que a los dos personajes principales se les podría afeitar el pelo largo con una navaja oxidada cuando están encarcelados, lo que simboliza la intolerancia de algunos grupos conservadores hacia los miembros de la contracultura.

Al concluir los juicios por obscenidad de Oz en el Reino Unido en 1971, la policía les afeitó la cabeza a los acusados, lo que provocó la protesta pública.

Durante el juicio de apelación, aparecieron en el banquillo con pelucas.

Un caso en el que un estudiante de 14 años fue expulsado de la escuela en Brasil a mediados de la década de 2000, supuestamente debido a su corte de pelo fauxhawk, provocó un debate nacional y acciones legales que resultaron en una compensación.


=== Prácticas religiosas ===

El cabello de las mujeres puede ocultarse con pañuelos en la cabeza, una parte común del hiyab en el Islam y un símbolo de modestia requerido para ciertos rituales religiosos en la ortodoxia oriental.

La Iglesia Ortodoxa Rusa requiere que todas las mujeres casadas usen pañuelos en la cabeza dentro de la iglesia; esta tradición se extiende a menudo a todas las mujeres, independientemente de su estado civil.

El judaísmo ortodoxo también ordena el uso de bufandas y otras cubiertas para la cabeza para mujeres casadas por razones de modestia.

Ciertas sectas hindúes también usan pañuelos en la cabeza por motivos religiosos.

Los sikhs tienen la obligación de no cortarse el cabello (un sikh que corta el cabello se convierte en 'apóstata', lo que significa caído de la religión) y los hombres lo mantienen atado en un moño en la cabeza, que luego se cubre adecuadamente con un turbante.

Múltiples religiones, tanto antiguas como contemporáneas, requieren o aconsejan que uno se permita que su cabello se convierta en rastas, aunque la gente también las usa por moda.

Para los hombres, el islam, el judaísmo ortodoxo, el cristianismo ortodoxo, el catolicismo romano y otros grupos religiosos han recomendado o exigido en varias ocasiones cubrir la cabeza y las secciones del cabello de los hombres, y algunos tienen dictados relacionados con el corte de la cara y el cabello de los hombres. cabello.

Algunas sectas cristianas a lo largo de la historia y hasta los tiempos modernos también han proscrito religiosamente el corte del cabello de las mujeres.

Para algunos madhabs sunitas, ponerse un kufi o topi es una forma de sunnah.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cabello

;;;PT;;;



CABELO


O cabelo é um filamento de proteína que cresce a partir de folículos encontrados na derme.

O cabelo é uma das características definidoras dos mamíferos.

O corpo humano, além de áreas de pele glabra, é coberto por folículos que produzem pelos grossos terminais e finos.

O interesse mais comum no cabelo está focado no crescimento do cabelo, tipos de cabelo e cuidados com o cabelo, mas o cabelo também é um importante biomaterial composto principalmente de proteínas, principalmente alfa-queratina.

Atitudes em relação a diferentes formas de cabelo, como penteados e depilação, variam muito em diferentes culturas e períodos históricos, mas muitas vezes é usado para indicar as crenças pessoais ou a posição social de uma pessoa, como idade, sexo ou religião.


== Visão geral ==

A palavra "cabelo" geralmente se refere a duas estruturas distintas:

a parte abaixo da pele, chamada folículo piloso, ou, quando retirado da pele, o bulbo ou raiz.

Esse órgão está localizado na derme e mantém as células-tronco, que não apenas crescem novamente o cabelo depois que ele cai, mas também são recrutadas para regenerar a pele após uma ferida.

a haste do cabelo, que é a parte filamentosa dura que se estende acima da superfície da pele.

Uma seção transversal da haste do cabelo pode ser dividida aproximadamente em três zonas.

As fibras capilares têm uma estrutura composta por várias camadas, começando do lado de fora:

a cutícula, que consiste em várias camadas de células planas e finas dispostas sobrepostas umas às outras como telhas
o córtex, que contém os feixes de queratina em estruturas celulares que permanecem aproximadamente como a medula, uma área desorganizada e aberta no centro da fibra


== Descrição ==

Cada fio de cabelo é formado pela medula, córtex e cutícula.

A região mais interna, a medula, nem sempre está presente, que é uma região aberta e não estruturada.

O córtex altamente estrutural e organizado, ou a segunda das três camadas do cabelo, é a principal fonte de resistência mecânica e absorção de água.

O córtex contém melanina, que colore a fibra com base no número, distribuição e tipos de grânulos de melanina.

A forma do folículo determina a forma do córtex, e a forma da fibra está relacionada com o quão liso ou encaracolado é o cabelo.

Pessoas com cabelos lisos têm fibras de cabelo redondas.

As fibras ovais e de outras formas são geralmente mais onduladas ou encaracoladas.

A cutícula é a cobertura externa.

Sua estrutura complexa desliza à medida que o cabelo incha e é coberta com uma única camada molecular de lipídio que faz com que o cabelo repela a água.

O diâmetro do cabelo humano varia de 0,017 a 0,18 milímetros (0,00067 a 0,00709 in).

Existem dois milhões de pequenas glândulas tubulares e glândulas sudoríparas que produzem fluidos aquosos que resfriam o corpo por evaporação.

As glândulas na abertura do cabelo produzem uma secreção gordurosa que lubrifica o cabelo.

O crescimento do cabelo começa dentro do folículo piloso.

A única porção "viva" do cabelo é encontrada no folículo.

O cabelo que fica visível é a haste capilar, que não apresenta atividade bioquímica e é considerada "morta".

A base da raiz de um cabelo (o "bulbo") contém as células que produzem a haste do cabelo.

Outras estruturas do folículo piloso incluem a glândula sebácea produtora de óleo que lubrifica o cabelo e os músculos eretores do pêlo, que são responsáveis ​​por fazer com que os pêlos se levantem.

Em humanos com poucos pelos corporais, o efeito resulta em arrepios.


=== Raiz do cabelo ===

A raiz do cabelo termina em um alargamento, o bulbo capilar, que é mais branco na cor e mais suave na textura do que o eixo e está alojado em uma involução folicular da epiderme chamada folículo piloso.

O bulbo do cabelo é constituído por tecido conjuntivo fibroso, membrana vítrea, bainha radicular externa, bainha radicular interna composta por estrato epitelial (camada de Henle) e estrato granular (camada de Huxley), cutícula, córtex e medula.


=== Cor natural ===

Todas as cores naturais do cabelo são o resultado de dois tipos de pigmentos capilares.

Ambos os pigmentos são tipos de melanina, produzidos dentro do folículo piloso e embalados em grânulos encontrados nas fibras.

A eumelanina é o pigmento dominante em cabelos castanhos e cabelos pretos, enquanto a feomelanina é dominante em cabelos ruivos.

O cabelo loiro é o resultado de ter pouca pigmentação no fio de cabelo.

Os cabelos grisalhos ocorrem quando a produção de melanina diminui ou para, enquanto a poliose é o cabelo branco (e muitas vezes a pele à qual o cabelo está ligado), geralmente em pontos que nunca possuíam melanina ou cessaram por razões naturais, geralmente genéticas, no primeiro anos de vida.


=== Crescimento do cabelo humano ===

O cabelo cresce em todo o corpo externo, exceto nas membranas mucosas e na pele glabra, como a encontrada nas palmas das mãos, solas dos pés e lábios.

O cabelo segue um ciclo de crescimento específico com três fases distintas e concomitantes: fases anágena, catágena e telógena; todos os três ocorrem simultaneamente em todo o corpo.

Cada um tem características específicas que determinam o comprimento do cabelo.
O corpo tem diferentes tipos de cabelo, incluindo pêlos vellus e pêlos androgênicos, cada um com seu próprio tipo de construção celular.

A construção diferenciada confere ao cabelo características únicas, atendendo a propósitos específicos, principalmente, calor e proteção.


=== Textura ===

O cabelo existe em uma variedade de texturas.

Três aspectos principais da textura do cabelo são o padrão de cachos, volume e consistência.

As derivações da textura do cabelo não são totalmente compreendidas.

Todos os pêlos de mamíferos são compostos de queratina, portanto, a composição dos folículos capilares não é a fonte de padrões de cabelo variados.

Há uma série de teorias referentes aos padrões de cachos do cabelo.

Os cientistas passaram a acreditar que a forma da haste do cabelo tem um efeito sobre a ondulação do cabelo do indivíduo.

Um eixo muito redondo permite que menos ligações dissulfeto estejam presentes no fio de cabelo.

Isso significa que as ligações presentes estão diretamente alinhadas umas com as outras, resultando em cabelos lisos.

Quanto mais plana a haste do cabelo se torna, mais crespo fica o cabelo, porque a forma permite que mais cisteínas sejam compactadas, resultando em uma forma dobrada que, com cada ligação dissulfeto adicional, torna-se mais encaracolada.

Como a forma do folículo piloso determina o padrão de ondulação, o tamanho do folículo piloso determina a espessura.

Enquanto a circunferência do folículo piloso se expande, o mesmo acontece com a espessura do folículo piloso.

O volume de cabelo de um indivíduo, como resultado, pode ser fino, normal ou grosso.

A consistência do cabelo quase sempre pode ser agrupada em três categorias: fino, médio e grosso.

Essa característica é determinada pelo volume do folículo piloso e pela condição do fio.

O cabelo fino tem a menor circunferência, o cabelo grosso tem a maior circunferência e o cabelo médio está em qualquer lugar entre os outros dois.

O cabelo grosso tem uma cutícula mais aberta do que o cabelo fino ou médio, fazendo com que seja o mais poroso.


==== Sistemas de classificação ====

Existem vários sistemas que as pessoas usam para classificar seus padrões de cachos.

Conhecer o tipo de cabelo de uma pessoa é um bom começo para saber como cuidar do cabelo.

Não existe apenas um método para descobrir o tipo de cabelo.

Além disso, é possível, e bastante normal, ter mais de um tipo de cabelo, por exemplo, ter uma mistura de cachos do tipo 3a e 3b.

Sistema Andre WalkerO sistema de tipagem de cabelo Andre Walker é o sistema mais utilizado para classificar o cabelo.

O sistema foi criado pelo cabeleireiro de Oprah Winfrey, Andre Walker.

De acordo com este sistema, existem quatro tipos de cabelo: liso, ondulado, encaracolado, crespo.

O tipo 1 é o cabelo liso, que reflete o mais brilho e também o cabelo mais resistente de todos os tipos de cabelo.

É difícil danificar e imensamente difícil enrolar essa textura de cabelo.

Como o sebo se espalha facilmente do couro cabeludo até as pontas, sem cachos ou dobras para interromper seu caminho, é a textura de cabelo mais oleosa de todas.

O tipo 2 é o cabelo ondulado, cuja textura e brilho variam entre o cabelo liso e o encaracolado.

O cabelo ondulado também é mais propenso a ficar crespo do que o cabelo liso.

Enquanto as ondas do tipo A podem alternar facilmente entre estilos lisos e encaracolados, os cabelos ondulados do tipo B e C são resistentes ao estilo.
O tipo 3 é o cabelo encaracolado conhecido por ter uma forma de S.

O padrão de ondulação pode se assemelhar a um "s" minúsculo, "S" maiúsculo ou às vezes um "Z" maiúsculo ou "z" minúsculo.

Esse tipo de cabelo geralmente é volumoso, "dependente do clima (umidade = frizz) e propenso a danos". A falta de cuidados adequados causa cachos menos definidos.

O tipo 4 é o cabelo crespo, que apresenta um padrão de ondulação bem enrolado (ou nenhum padrão de ondulação discernível) que geralmente é frágil com uma densidade muito alta.

Este tipo de cabelo encolhe quando molhado e, por ter menos camadas de cutícula do que outros tipos de cabelo, é mais suscetível a danos.

Sistema FIAEste é um método que classifica o cabelo por padrão de cachos, espessura do fio de cabelo e volume geral do cabelo.


== Funções ==

Muitos mamíferos têm pêlos e outros pêlos que servem a diferentes funções.

O cabelo fornece regulação térmica e camuflagem para muitos animais; para outros, fornece sinais para outros animais, como avisos, acasalamento ou outras exibições comunicativas; e para alguns animais o pelo fornece funções defensivas e, raramente, até proteção ofensiva.

O cabelo também tem uma função sensorial, estendendo o sentido do tato além da superfície da pele.

Pêlos de proteção dão avisos que podem desencadear uma reação de recuo.


=== Calor ===


Embora os humanos tenham desenvolvido roupas e outros meios de se manter aquecido, o cabelo encontrado na cabeça serve principalmente como fonte de isolamento térmico e resfriamento (quando o suor evapora do cabelo encharcado), bem como proteção contra a exposição à radiação ultravioleta.

A função do cabelo em outros locais é debatida.

Chapéus e casacos ainda são necessários ao fazer atividades ao ar livre em clima frio para evitar queimaduras de frio e hipotermia, mas o cabelo no corpo humano ajuda a manter a temperatura interna regulada.

Quando o corpo está muito frio, os músculos eretores do pêlo encontrados ligados aos folículos pilosos se levantam, fazendo com que o cabelo nesses folículos faça o mesmo.

Esses pêlos formam uma camada de retenção de calor acima da epiderme.

Este processo é formalmente chamado de piloereção, derivado das palavras latinas 'pilus' ('cabelo') e 'erectio' ('levantar'), mas é mais comumente conhecido como 'ter arrepios' em inglês.

Isso é mais eficaz em outros mamíferos cuja pelagem se levanta para criar bolsas de ar entre os pelos que isolam o corpo do frio.

As ações opostas ocorrem quando o corpo está muito quente; os músculos eretores fazem com que o cabelo fique plano sobre a pele, o que permite que o calor saia.


=== Proteção ===

Em alguns mamíferos, como ouriços e porcos-espinhos, os cabelos foram modificados em espinhos duros ou espinhos.

Estes são cobertos com grossas placas de queratina e servem como proteção contra predadores.

Pelos grossos, como o da juba do leão e o pelo do urso pardo, oferecem alguma proteção contra danos físicos, como mordidas e arranhões.


=== Sentido de toque ===

O deslocamento e a vibração das hastes capilares são detectados pelos receptores nervosos do folículo piloso e pelos receptores nervosos dentro da pele.

Os pelos podem sentir os movimentos do ar, bem como o toque de objetos físicos e fornecem percepção sensorial da presença de ectoparasitas.

Alguns pelos, como os cílios, são especialmente sensíveis à presença de matéria potencialmente nociva.


==== Sobrancelhas e cílios ====

As sobrancelhas fornecem proteção moderada aos olhos contra sujeira, suor e chuva.

Eles também desempenham um papel fundamental na comunicação não verbal, exibindo emoções como tristeza, raiva, surpresa e excitação.

Em muitos outros mamíferos, eles contêm pêlos muito mais longos e semelhantes a bigodes que atuam como sensores táteis.

O cílio cresce nas bordas da pálpebra e protege o olho da sujeira.

A pestana é para os humanos, camelos, cavalos, avestruzes etc., o que os bigodes são para os gatos; eles são usados ​​para detectar quando sujeira, poeira ou qualquer outro objeto potencialmente nocivo está muito perto do olho.

O olho fecha reflexivamente como resultado dessa sensação.


== Evolução ==

O cabelo tem suas origens no ancestral comum dos mamíferos, os sinapsídeos, há cerca de 300 milhões de anos.

Atualmente, não se sabe em que estágio os sinapsídeos adquiriram características de mamíferos, como pêlos no corpo e glândulas mamárias, pois os fósseis raramente fornecem evidências diretas de tecidos moles.

Impressão da pele da barriga e cauda inferior de um pelicossauro, possivelmente Haptodus mostra que o estoque de sinapsídeos basal apresentava fileiras transversais de escudos retangulares, semelhantes aos de um crocodilo moderno, de modo que a idade de aquisição do cabelo logicamente não poderia ter sido anterior a ~ 299 ma, com base no conhecimento atual da filogenia do animal.

Um crânio excepcionalmente bem preservado de Estemmenosuchus, um terapsídeo do Permiano Superior, mostra uma pele lisa e sem pêlos com o que parece ser depressões glandulares, embora como espécie semi-aquática possa não ter sido particularmente útil para determinar o tegumento de espécies terrestres .

Os fósseis conhecidos indiscutíveis mais antigos que mostram marcas inequívocas de cabelo são o Castorocauda caloviano (jurássico médio tardio) e vários haramiyidans contemporâneos, ambos cinodontes quase mamíferos, dando a idade não superior a ~ 220 ma com base na compreensão filogenética moderna desses clados.

Mais recentemente, estudos sobre coprólitos russos do Permiano terminais podem sugerir que os sinapsídeos não-mamíferos daquela época tinham pelos.

Se este for o caso, estes são os restos de cabelo mais antigos conhecidos, mostrando que a pele ocorreu desde o Paleozóico mais recente.

Alguns mamíferos modernos têm uma glândula especial na frente de cada órbita usada para alisar a pele, chamada de glândula hardiana.

Impressões dessa estrutura são encontradas no crânio de pequenos mamíferos primitivos como Morganucodon, mas não em seus ancestrais cinodontes como Thrinaxodon.

Os pêlos do pêlo dos animais modernos estão todos conectados aos nervos, e assim o pêlo também serve como transmissor de informações sensoriais.

A pele pode ter evoluído a partir do cabelo sensorial (bigodes).

Os sinais desse aparato sensorial são interpretados no neocórtex, uma seção do cérebro que se expandiu acentuadamente em animais como Morganucodon e Hadrocodium.

Os terapsídeos mais avançados poderiam ter uma combinação de pele nua, bigodes e escudos.

Uma pelagem completa provavelmente não evoluiu até a transição terapsídeo-mamífero.

Os terapsídeos mais avançados e menores poderiam ter uma combinação de pêlos e escudos, uma combinação ainda encontrada em alguns mamíferos modernos, como roedores e gambás.

A alta variabilidade interespecífica do tamanho, cor e microestrutura do cabelo muitas vezes permite a identificação de espécies com base em filamentos de cabelo únicos.

Em graus variados, a maioria dos mamíferos tem algumas áreas da pele sem pêlos naturais.

No corpo humano, a pele glabra é encontrada na porção ventral dos dedos, palmas das mãos, solas dos pés e lábios, que são todas as partes do corpo mais intimamente associadas à interação com o mundo ao nosso redor, assim como os pequenos lábios e a glande. pênis.

Existem quatro tipos principais de mecanorreceptores na pele glabra dos humanos: corpúsculos de Pacini, corpúsculos de Meissner, discos de Merkel e corpúsculos de Ruffini.

O rato-toupeira-pelado (Heterocephalus glaber) desenvolveu uma pele sem cobertura geral de pêlos pelágicos, mas manteve pêlos táteis longos e esparsamente espalhados sobre seu corpo.

A glabrosidade é uma característica que pode estar associada à neotenia.


=== Calvície humana ===

A calvície geral dos humanos em comparação com espécies relacionadas pode ser devido à perda de funcionalidade no pseudogene KRTHAP1 (que ajuda a produzir queratina) na linhagem humana há cerca de 240.000 anos.

Em uma base individual, mutações no gene HR podem levar à perda completa de cabelo, embora isso não seja típico em humanos.

Os seres humanos também podem perder o cabelo como resultado do desequilíbrio hormonal devido a drogas ou gravidez.

Para compreender por que os humanos têm significativamente menos pelos corporais do que outros primatas, é preciso entender que os pelos corporais dos mamíferos não são apenas uma característica estética; protege a pele de feridas, mordidas, calor, frio e radiação UV.

Além disso, pode ser usado como ferramenta de comunicação e como camuflagem.

Os seres humanos são as únicas espécies de primatas que sofreram perda de cabelo significativa e das cerca de 5.000 espécies existentes de mamíferos, apenas um punhado é efetivamente sem pêlos.

Esta lista inclui elefantes, rinocerontes, hipopótamos, morsas, algumas espécies de porcos, baleias e outros cetáceos e ratos-toupeira-pelados.

A maioria dos mamíferos tem pele clara coberta por pelos, e os biólogos acreditam que os primeiros ancestrais humanos também começaram assim.

A pele escura provavelmente evoluiu depois que os humanos perderam o pelo do corpo, porque a pele nua era vulnerável à forte radiação UV, conforme explicado na hipótese Out of Africa.

Portanto, a evidência da época em que a pele humana escureceu foi usada para datar a perda de pelos do corpo humano, assumindo que a pele escura era necessária depois que a pele se foi.

Esperava-se que datar a divisão do piolho humano ancestral em duas espécies, o piolho da cabeça e o piolho púbico, dataria a perda de pêlos do corpo nos ancestrais humanos.

No entanto, descobriu-se que o piolho púbico humano não descende do piolho humano ancestral, mas do piolho gorila, divergindo há 3,3 milhões de anos.

Isso sugere que os humanos perderam pêlos no corpo (mas retiveram pêlos na cabeça) e desenvolveram pêlos pubianos grossos antes dessa data, viviam dentro ou perto da floresta onde viviam os gorilas e adquiriram piolhos púbicos matando gorilas ou dormindo em seus ninhos.

A evolução do piolho do corpo do piolho da cabeça, por outro lado, coloca a data da roupa muito mais tarde, cerca de 100.000 anos atrás.

As glândulas sudoríparas em humanos podem ter evoluído para se espalhar das mãos e dos pés à medida que os pêlos do corpo mudavam, ou a mudança do cabelo poderia ter ocorrido para facilitar a transpiração.

Cavalos e humanos são dois dos poucos animais capazes de suar na maior parte de seu corpo, mas os cavalos são maiores e ainda têm pele totalmente desenvolvida.

Em humanos, os pelos da pele ficam planos em condições de calor, pois os músculos eretores do pelo relaxam, evitando que o calor seja retido por uma camada de ar parado entre os pelos e aumentando a perda de calor por convecção.

Outra hipótese para os pêlos grossos do corpo em humanos propõe que a seleção sexual descontrolada Fisheriana desempenhou um papel (assim como na seleção de pêlos longos), (ver pêlos terminais e vellus), bem como um papel muito maior da testosterona nos homens .

A seleção sexual é a única teoria até agora que explica o dimorfismo sexual visto nos padrões de cabelo de homens e mulheres.

Em média, os homens têm mais pêlos no corpo do que as mulheres.

Os machos têm mais pelos terminais, especialmente na face, tórax, abdômen e costas, e as fêmeas têm mais pelos velus, que são menos visíveis.

A interrupção do desenvolvimento do cabelo em um estágio juvenil, o cabelo veludo, também seria consistente com a neotenia evidente em humanos, especialmente em mulheres, e, portanto, poderia ter ocorrido ao mesmo tempo.

Esta teoria, no entanto, tem participações significativas nas normas culturais de hoje.

Não há evidências de que a seleção sexual tenha ocorrido de forma tão drástica há mais de um milhão de anos, quando uma pelagem abundante e exuberante provavelmente indicaria saúde e, portanto, seria mais provável que fosse selecionada a favor, não contra.

Outra hipótese é que o cabelo humano foi reduzido em resposta aos ectoparasitas.

A explicação "ectoparasita" da nudez humana moderna é baseada no princípio de que um primata sem pêlos abrigaria menos parasitas.

Quando nossos ancestrais adotaram arranjos sociais de habitação em grupo por cerca de 1,8 milhões de anos, as cargas de ectoparasitas aumentaram dramaticamente.

Os primeiros humanos se tornaram a única das 193 espécies de primatas a ter pulgas, o que pode ser atribuído aos arranjos de vida próximos de grandes grupos de indivíduos.

Embora as espécies de primatas tenham arranjos comunitários de sono, esses grupos estão sempre em movimento e, portanto, são menos propensos a abrigar ectoparasitas.

Outra visão é proposta por James Giles, que tenta explicar a falta de pelos como uma evolução da relação entre mãe e filho, e como consequência do bipedismo.

Giles também liga o amor romântico à falta de pelos. Outra hipótese é que o uso do fogo pelos humanos causou ou iniciou a redução do cabelo humano.


=== Variação evolutiva ===

Biólogos evolucionistas sugerem que o gênero Homo surgiu na África Oriental há aproximadamente 2,5 milhões de anos.

Eles inventaram novas técnicas de caça.

A dieta mais rica em proteínas levou à evolução de tamanhos maiores do corpo e do cérebro.

Jablonski postula que o aumento do tamanho do corpo, em conjunto com a caça intensificada durante o dia no equador, deu origem a uma maior necessidade de expelir rapidamente o calor.

Como resultado, os humanos desenvolveram a capacidade de suar: um processo que foi facilitado pela perda de pêlos do corpo.

Outro fator na evolução humana que também ocorreu no passado pré-histórico foi a seleção preferencial pela neotenia, principalmente nas fêmeas.

A ideia de que humanos adultos exibem certas características neotênas (juvenis), não evidenciadas nos outros grandes símios, tem cerca de um século.

Louis Bolk fez uma longa lista de tais características, e Stephen Jay Gould publicou uma pequena lista em Ontogeny and Phylogeny.

Além disso, características pedomórficas em mulheres são frequentemente reconhecidas como desejáveis ​​por homens em países desenvolvidos.

Por exemplo, o cabelo veludo é uma característica juvenil.

No entanto, enquanto os homens desenvolvem pelos terminais mais longos, grossos, espessos e escuros por meio da diferenciação sexual, as mulheres não o fazem, deixando seus pelos velos visíveis.


=== Textura ===


==== Cabelo cacheado ====

Jablonski afirma que o cabelo da cabeça era evolutivamente vantajoso para os pré-humanos reterem porque protegia o couro cabeludo enquanto caminhavam eretos na intensa luz UV africana (equatorial).

Enquanto alguns podem argumentar que, por essa lógica, os humanos também deveriam expressar ombros peludos porque essas partes do corpo estariam supostamente expostas a condições semelhantes, a proteção da cabeça, a sede do cérebro que permitiu à humanidade se tornar uma das espécies mais bem-sucedidas no planeta (e que também é muito vulnerável ao nascimento) era sem dúvida uma questão mais urgente (os pêlos axilares nas axilas e na virilha também foram mantidos como sinais de maturidade sexual).

Em algum momento durante o processo gradual pelo qual o Homo erectus começou a transição da pele peluda para a pele nua expressa pelo Homo sapiens, a textura do cabelo mudou gradualmente de cabelo liso (a condição da maioria dos mamíferos, incluindo os primos mais próximos da humanidade – chimpanzés) para afro-texturizado. cabelo ou 'kinky' (ou seja, bem enrolado).

Este argumento assume que o cabelo encaracolado impede melhor a passagem da luz UV para o corpo em relação ao cabelo liso (assim, o cabelo encaracolado ou enrolado seria particularmente vantajoso para hominídeos de pele clara que vivem no equador).

É comprovado pelas descobertas de Iyengar (1998) que a luz UV pode entrar nas raízes retas do cabelo humano (e, portanto, no corpo através da pele) através da haste do cabelo.

Especificamente, os resultados desse estudo sugerem que esse fenômeno se assemelha à passagem da luz através de tubos de fibra ótica (que não funcionam com tanta eficácia quando dobrados ou curvados ou enrolados).

Nesse sentido, quando os hominídeos (ou seja,

Homo Erectus) estavam gradualmente perdendo os pelos lisos do corpo e, assim, expondo a pele inicialmente pálida sob a pele ao sol, os cabelos lisos teriam sido uma desvantagem adaptativa.

Por lógica inversa, mais tarde, à medida que os humanos viajavam para mais longe da África e/ou do equador, o cabelo liso pode ter (inicialmente) evoluído para auxiliar a entrada de luz UV no corpo durante a transição da pele escura e protegida dos raios UV para a pele mais pálida.

As afirmações de Jablonski sugerem que o adjetivo "lanoso" em referência ao cabelo afro é um equívoco ao conotar o alto isolamento térmico derivado da verdadeira lã de ovelha.

Em vez disso, a densidade relativamente esparsa do cabelo afro, combinada com suas espirais elásticas, na verdade resulta em uma estrutura arejada, quase esponjosa que, por sua vez, argumenta Jablonski, provavelmente facilita um aumento na circulação de ar frio no couro cabeludo.

Além disso, o cabelo afro molhado não gruda no pescoço e no couro cabeludo, a menos que esteja totalmente encharcado e, em vez disso, tende a reter seu inchaço elástico básico porque responde menos facilmente à umidade e ao suor do que o cabelo liso.

Nesse sentido, o traço pode aumentar os níveis de conforto em climas equatoriais intensos mais do que cabelos lisos (que, por outro lado, tendem a cair naturalmente sobre as orelhas e pescoço em um grau que proporciona níveis de conforto ligeiramente maiores em climas frios em relação a cabelos apertados). cabelo enrolado).

Além disso, é notável que a expressão mais difundida dessa textura capilar pode ser encontrada na África subsaariana; uma região do mundo que a abundante evidência genética e paleo-antropológica sugere, foi o ponto de origem relativamente recente (≈200.000 anos) para a humanidade moderna.

De fato, embora as descobertas genéticas (Tishkoff, 2009) sugiram que os africanos subsaarianos sejam o grupo continental mais geneticamente diverso da Terra, o cabelo com textura afro se aproxima da onipresença nesta região.

Isso aponta para uma forte pressão seletiva de longo prazo que, em contraste com a maioria das outras regiões dos genomas de grupos subsaarianos, deixou pouco espaço para variação genética nos loci determinantes.

Tal padrão, mais uma vez, não parece apoiar a estética sexual humana como sendo a causa única ou primária dessa distribuição.


==== O locus EDAR ====

Um grupo de estudos mostrou recentemente que os padrões genéticos no locus EDAR, uma região do genoma humano moderno que contribui para a variação da textura do cabelo entre a maioria dos indivíduos de ascendência do leste asiático, apoiam a hipótese de que o cabelo liso (do leste asiático) provavelmente se desenvolveu neste ramo da linhagem humana moderna subsequente à expressão original do cabelo afro natural bem enrolado.

Especificamente, os resultados relevantes indicam que a codificação da mutação EDAR para a textura predominante do cabelo liso ou grosso do Leste Asiático surgiu nos últimos ≈65.000 anos, que é um período de tempo que abrange desde o mais antigo dos 'Out of Africa' migrações até agora.


== Doença ==

Micose é uma doença fúngica que atinge a pele pilosa. O envelhecimento prematuro do cabelo é outra condição que resulta em cabelos grisalhos antes dos 20 anos nos brancos, antes dos 25 anos nos asiáticos e antes dos 30 anos nos africanos.


== Cuidados com o cabelo ==

O cuidado capilar envolve a higiene e cosmetologia dos cabelos, incluindo cabelos no couro cabeludo, pêlos faciais (barba e bigode), pêlos pubianos e outros pêlos do corpo.

As rotinas de cuidados com os cabelos diferem de acordo com a cultura de um indivíduo e as características físicas do cabelo.

O cabelo pode ser tingido, aparado, raspado, arrancado ou removido de outra forma com tratamentos como depilação, adoçamento e fios.


=== Práticas de remoção ===

A depilação é a remoção dos pelos da superfície da pele.

Isso pode ser alcançado através de métodos como barbear.

A depilação é a remoção de todo o fio de cabelo, incluindo a parte do cabelo que ainda não saiu do folículo.

Uma maneira popular de depilar o cabelo é através da depilação.


==== Depilação ====

O barbear é feito com instrumentos de lâminas, como navalhas.

A lâmina é aproximada da pele e acariciada sobre o cabelo na área desejada para cortar os pêlos terminais e deixar a pele macia.

Dependendo da taxa de crescimento, pode-se começar a sentir o cabelo crescer novamente dentro de horas após o barbear.

Isso é especialmente evidente em homens que desenvolvem uma sombra de cinco horas depois de terem barbeado o rosto.

Este novo crescimento é chamado de restolho.

A barba por fazer normalmente parece voltar a crescer mais espessa porque os pelos raspados são embotados em vez de afilados no final, embora o cabelo nunca volte a crescer mais espesso.


==== Depilação ====
A depilação envolve o uso de uma cera pegajosa e uma tira de papel ou pano para puxar o cabelo da raiz.

A depilação com cera é a técnica de depilação ideal para manter uma área livre de pelos por longos períodos de tempo.

Pode levar de três a cinco semanas para o cabelo depilado começar a ressurgir novamente.

Sabe-se que o cabelo em áreas que foram depiladas consistentemente volta a crescer cada vez mais fino, especialmente em comparação com o cabelo que foi raspado com uma navalha.


==== Remoção a laser ====

A depilação a laser é um método cosmético em que um pequeno feixe de laser pulsa calor seletivo sobre o alvo escuro na área que causa o crescimento do cabelo sem prejudicar o tecido da pele.

Este processo é repetido várias vezes ao longo de muitos meses a alguns anos, com o cabelo crescendo com menos frequência até que finalmente pare; isso é usado como uma solução mais permanente para depilação ou barbear.

A remoção a laser é praticada em muitas clínicas, juntamente com muitos produtos caseiros.


==== Cortar e aparar ====

Porque o cabelo na cabeça é normalmente mais longo do que outros tipos de pêlos do corpo, ele é cortado com tesoura ou tosquiadeira.

As pessoas com cabelos mais longos costumam usar tesouras para cortar os cabelos, enquanto os cabelos mais curtos são mantidos com um aparador.

Dependendo do comprimento desejado e da saúde geral do cabelo, os períodos sem cortar ou aparar o cabelo podem variar.
O cabelo cortado pode ser usado em perucas.

As importações globais de cabelo em 2010 valeram US$ 1,24 bilhão.


== Papel social ==

O cabelo tem um grande significado social para os seres humanos.

Pode crescer na maioria das áreas externas do corpo humano, exceto nas palmas das mãos e solas dos pés (entre outras áreas).

O cabelo é mais perceptível na maioria das pessoas em um pequeno número de áreas, que também são as mais comumente aparadas, arrancadas ou raspadas.

Estes incluem o rosto, orelhas, cabeça, sobrancelhas, pernas e axilas, bem como a região pubiana.

As diferenças altamente visíveis entre o corpo masculino e feminino e os pêlos faciais são uma característica sexual secundária notável.

O cabelo mais longo documentado do mundo pertence a Xie Qiuping (na China), com 5,627 m (18 pés 5,54 pol) quando medido em 8 de maio de 2004.

Ela deixa o cabelo crescer desde 1973, desde os 13 anos.


=== Indicação de estado ===

Cabelo saudável indica saúde e juventude (importante na biologia evolutiva).

A cor e a textura do cabelo podem ser um sinal de ascendência étnica.

Os pelos faciais são um sinal de puberdade nos homens.

Cabelos brancos ou grisalhos são um sinal de idade ou genética, que pode ser ocultado com tintura de cabelo (não é fácil para alguns), embora muitos prefiram assumir (principalmente se for uma poliose característica da pessoa desde a infância).

A calvície masculina é um sinal de idade, que pode ser disfarçada com uma peruca, chapéus ou adornos religiosos e culturais.

Embora existam medicamentos e procedimentos médicos para o tratamento da calvície, muitos homens calvos simplesmente raspam a cabeça.

No início da China moderna, a fila era um penteado masculino usado pelos manchus da Manchúria central e pelos chineses han durante a dinastia Qing; o cabelo na frente da cabeça era raspado acima das têmporas a cada dez dias, imitando a calvície masculina, e o resto do cabelo trançado em uma longa trança.
Penteado pode ser um indicador de associação ao grupo.

Durante a Guerra Civil Inglesa, os seguidores de Oliver Cromwell decidiram cortar o cabelo rente à cabeça, como um ato de desafio aos cachos e cachos dos homens do rei.

Isso levou a facção parlamentar a ser apelidada de Roundheads.

A análise isotópica recente do cabelo está ajudando a esclarecer melhor a interação sociocultural, fornecendo informações sobre a aquisição e consumo de alimentos no século XIX.

Ter o cabelo cortado era popular entre as melindrosas na década de 1920 como um sinal de rebelião contra os papéis tradicionais das mulheres.

Estudantes de arte femininas conhecidas como "cropheads" também adotaram o estilo, principalmente na Slade School, em Londres, Inglaterra.

As variações regionais no hirsutismo fazem com que as práticas de pêlos nos braços e nas pernas sejam diferentes.

Alguns grupos religiosos podem seguir certas regras em relação ao cabelo como parte da observância religiosa.

As regras muitas vezes diferem para homens e mulheres.

Muitas subculturas têm penteados que podem indicar uma adesão não oficial.

Muitos hippies, metaleiros e sadhus indianos têm cabelos compridos, assim como muitos garotos indie mais velhos.

Muitos punks usam um penteado conhecido como moicano ou outros penteados espetados e tingidos; skinheads têm cabeças curtas ou completamente raspadas.

Franjas longas e estilizadas eram muito comuns para emos, garotos de cena e garotos indie mais jovens nos anos 2000 e início dos anos 2010, entre pessoas de ambos os sexos.

As cabeças eram raspadas nos campos de concentração, e raspar a cabeça tem sido usado como punição, especialmente para mulheres com cabelos compridos.

A cabeça raspada é comum em cortes de cabelo militares, enquanto os monges ocidentais são conhecidos pela tonsura.

Em contraste, entre alguns homens santos indianos, o cabelo é usado extremamente comprido. No tempo de Confúcio (século V aC), os chineses deixavam o cabelo crescer e muitas vezes o amarravam, como um símbolo de piedade filial.

O cabeleireiro regular em algumas culturas é considerado um sinal de riqueza ou status.

Os dreadlocks do movimento Rastafari foram desprezados no início da história do movimento.

Em algumas culturas, cortar o cabelo pode simbolizar uma libertação do passado, geralmente após um período difícil na vida.

Cortar o cabelo também pode ser um sinal de luto.
O cabelo bem enrolado em seu estado natural pode ser usado em um afro.

Este penteado já foi usado entre os afro-americanos como um símbolo de orgulho racial.

Dado que a textura enrolada é o estado natural do cabelo de alguns afro-americanos, ou percebido como sendo mais "africano", este estilo simples é agora muitas vezes visto como um sinal de auto-aceitação e uma afirmação de que as normas de beleza do (eurocêntrico ) a cultura dominante não são absolutas.

É importante notar que os afro-americanos como um todo têm uma variedade de texturas de cabelo, pois não são um grupo etnicamente homogêneo, mas um ad-hoc de diferentes misturas raciais.

O filme Easy Rider (1969) inclui a suposição de que os dois personagens principais poderiam ter seus longos cabelos raspados à força com uma navalha enferrujada quando presos, simbolizando a intolerância de alguns grupos conservadores em relação aos membros da contracultura.

Na conclusão dos julgamentos de obscenidade de Oz no Reino Unido em 1971, os réus tiveram suas cabeças raspadas pela polícia, causando protestos públicos.

Durante o julgamento de apelação, eles apareceram no banco dos réus usando perucas.

Um caso em que um estudante de 14 anos foi expulso da escola no Brasil em meados dos anos 2000, supostamente por causa de seu corte de cabelo fauxhawk, provocou debate nacional e ações legais que resultaram em indenização.


=== Práticas religiosas ===

O cabelo das mulheres pode ser escondido usando lenços na cabeça, uma parte comum do hijab no Islã e um símbolo de modéstia exigido para certos rituais religiosos na ortodoxia oriental.

A Igreja Ortodoxa Russa exige que todas as mulheres casadas usem lenços na cabeça dentro da igreja; esta tradição é muitas vezes estendida a todas as mulheres, independentemente do estado civil.

O judaísmo ortodoxo também ordena o uso de lenços e outras coberturas de cabeça para mulheres casadas por motivos de modéstia.

Certas seitas hindus também usam lenços na cabeça por motivos religiosos.

Os sikhs têm a obrigação de não cortar o cabelo (um corte de cabelo sikh torna-se 'apóstata', o que significa caído da religião) e os homens o mantêm amarrado em um coque na cabeça, que é então coberto adequadamente com um turbante.

Múltiplas religiões, antigas e contemporâneas, exigem ou aconselham uma pessoa a permitir que seus cabelos se tornem dreadlocks, embora as pessoas também os usem para a moda.

Para os homens, o Islã, o Judaísmo Ortodoxo, o Cristianismo Ortodoxo, o Catolicismo Romano e outros grupos religiosos em várias ocasiões recomendaram ou exigiram a cobertura da cabeça e partes do cabelo dos homens, e alguns têm ditames relacionados ao corte do rosto e do rosto dos homens. cabelo.

Algumas seitas cristãs ao longo da história e até os tempos modernos também proibiram religiosamente o corte do cabelo das mulheres.

Para alguns madhabs sunitas, a colocação de um kufi ou topi é uma forma de sunnah.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hair

;;;FR;;;



CHEVEU


Les cheveux sont un filament protéique qui pousse à partir des follicules trouvés dans le derme.

Le poil est l'une des caractéristiques déterminantes des mammifères.

Le corps humain, en dehors des zones de peau glabre, est recouvert de follicules qui produisent des poils terminaux épais et fins.

L'intérêt le plus courant pour les cheveux se concentre sur la croissance des cheveux, les types de cheveux et les soins capillaires, mais les cheveux sont également un biomatériau important composé principalement de protéines, notamment d'alpha-kératine.

Les attitudes envers différentes formes de cheveux, telles que les coiffures et l'épilation, varient considérablement selon les cultures et les périodes historiques, mais elles sont souvent utilisées pour indiquer les croyances personnelles ou la position sociale d'une personne, telles que son âge, son sexe ou sa religion.


== Aperçu ==

Le mot "cheveux" fait généralement référence à deux structures distinctes :

la partie sous la peau, appelée follicule pileux ou, lorsqu'elle est retirée de la peau, le bulbe ou la racine.

Cet organe est situé dans le derme et maintient les cellules souches, qui non seulement repoussent les cheveux après leur chute, mais sont également recrutées pour faire repousser la peau après une blessure.

la tige pilaire, qui est la partie filamenteuse dure qui s'étend au-dessus de la surface de la peau.

Une section transversale de la tige pilaire peut être divisée grossièrement en trois zones.

Les fibres capillaires ont une structure composée de plusieurs couches, en partant de l'extérieur :

la cuticule, qui se compose de plusieurs couches de cellules plates et minces disposées en chevauchement comme des bardeaux de toit
le cortex, qui contient les faisceaux de kératine dans des structures cellulaires qui restent à peu près en forme de tige la moelle, une zone désorganisée et ouverte au centre de la fibre


== Descriptif ==

Chaque mèche de cheveux est constituée de la moelle, du cortex et de la cuticule.

La région la plus interne, la moelle, n'est pas toujours présente qui est une région ouverte et non structurée.

Le cortex hautement structurel et organisé, ou deuxième des trois couches du cheveu, est la principale source de résistance mécanique et d'absorption d'eau.

Le cortex contient de la mélanine, qui colore la fibre en fonction du nombre, de la distribution et des types de granules de mélanine.

La forme du follicule détermine la forme du cortex, et la forme de la fibre est liée à la façon dont les cheveux sont raides ou bouclés.

Les personnes aux cheveux raides ont des fibres capillaires rondes.

Les fibres ovales et d'autres formes sont généralement plus ondulées ou bouclées.

La cuticule est l'enveloppe extérieure.

Sa structure complexe glisse au fur et à mesure que le cheveu gonfle et est recouverte d'une seule couche moléculaire de lipide qui repousse l'eau du cheveu.

Le diamètre des cheveux humains varie de 0,017 à 0,18 millimètre (0,00067 à 0,00709 po).

Il existe deux millions de petites glandes tubulaires et glandes sudoripares qui produisent des fluides aqueux qui refroidissent le corps par évaporation.

Les glandes à l'ouverture des cheveux produisent une sécrétion graisseuse qui lubrifie les cheveux.

La croissance des cheveux commence à l'intérieur du follicule pileux.

La seule partie "vivante" du cheveu se trouve dans le follicule.

Le cheveu visible est la tige pilaire, qui ne présente aucune activité biochimique et est considérée comme "morte".

La base de la racine d'un cheveu (le "bulbe") contient les cellules qui produisent la tige du cheveu.

D'autres structures du follicule pileux comprennent la glande sébacée productrice d'huile qui lubrifie les cheveux et les muscles arrecteurs des poils, qui sont responsables du dressage des poils.

Chez les humains avec peu de poils, l'effet se traduit par la chair de poule.


=== Racine des cheveux ===

La racine du poil se termine par un renflement, le bulbe pileux, de couleur plus blanche et de texture plus douce que la tige et logé dans une involution folliculaire de l'épiderme appelée follicule pileux.

Le bulbe des cheveux est constitué de tissu conjonctif fibreux, d'une membrane vitreuse, d'une gaine racinaire externe, d'une gaine racinaire interne composée d'une couche d'épithélium (couche de Henle) et d'une couche granuleuse (couche de Huxley), d'une cuticule, d'un cortex et d'une moelle.


=== Couleur naturelle ===

Toutes les couleurs de cheveux naturels sont le résultat de deux types de pigments capillaires.

Ces deux pigments sont des types de mélanine, produits à l'intérieur du follicule pileux et emballés dans des granules trouvés dans les fibres.

L'eumélanine est le pigment dominant dans les cheveux bruns et les cheveux noirs, tandis que la phéomélanine est dominante dans les cheveux roux.

Les cheveux blonds sont le résultat d'avoir peu de pigmentation dans la mèche de cheveux.

Les cheveux gris se produisent lorsque la production de mélanine diminue ou s'arrête, tandis que la poliose est des cheveux blancs (et souvent la peau à laquelle les cheveux sont attachés), généralement dans des endroits qui n'ont jamais possédé de mélanine du tout, ou ont cessé pour des raisons naturelles, généralement génétiques, dans le premier années de vie.


=== Croissance des cheveux humains ===

Les poils poussent partout sur le corps externe, à l'exception des membranes muqueuses et de la peau glabre, comme celles que l'on trouve sur la paume des mains, la plante des pieds et les lèvres.

Les cheveux suivent un cycle de croissance spécifique avec trois phases distinctes et simultanées : les phases anagène, catagène et télogène ; tous les trois se produisent simultanément dans tout le corps.

Chacun a des caractéristiques spécifiques qui déterminent la longueur des cheveux.
Le corps a différents types de cheveux, y compris les cheveux vellus et les cheveux androgènes, chacun avec son propre type de construction cellulaire.

La construction différente confère aux cheveux des caractéristiques uniques, servant des objectifs spécifiques, principalement la chaleur et la protection.


=== Textures ===

Les cheveux existent dans une variété de textures.

Les trois principaux aspects de la texture des cheveux sont le motif de boucles, le volume et la consistance.

Les dérivations de la texture des cheveux ne sont pas entièrement comprises.

Tous les poils de mammifères sont composés de kératine, de sorte que la composition des follicules pileux n'est pas à l'origine de la variation des motifs capillaires.

Il existe une gamme de théories relatives aux motifs de boucles des cheveux.

Les scientifiques en sont venus à croire que la forme de la tige du cheveu a un effet sur la frisure des cheveux de l'individu.

Une tige très ronde permet à moins de liaisons disulfure d'être présentes dans la mèche de cheveux.

Cela signifie que les liaisons présentes sont directement alignées les unes sur les autres, ce qui donne des cheveux lisses.

Plus la tige capillaire devient plate, plus les cheveux sont bouclés, car la forme permet à plus de cystéines de se compacter ensemble, ce qui donne une forme courbée qui, avec chaque liaison disulfure supplémentaire, devient plus bouclée.

Comme la forme du follicule pileux détermine le motif des boucles, la taille du follicule pileux détermine l'épaisseur.

Alors que la circonférence du follicule pileux augmente, l'épaisseur du follicule pileux augmente également.

Le volume de cheveux d'un individu peut donc être fin, normal ou épais.

La consistance des cheveux peut presque toujours être regroupée en trois catégories : fine, moyenne et grossière.

Ce trait est déterminé par le volume du follicule pileux et l'état de la mèche.

Les cheveux fins ont la plus petite circonférence, les cheveux grossiers ont la plus grande circonférence et les cheveux moyens se situent n'importe où entre les deux autres.

Les cheveux épais ont une cuticule plus ouverte que les cheveux fins ou moyens, ce qui en fait les plus poreux.


==== Systèmes de classification ====

Il existe différents systèmes que les gens utilisent pour classer leurs modèles de boucles.

Connaître le type de cheveux d'un individu est un bon début pour savoir comment prendre soin de ses cheveux.

Il n'y a pas qu'une seule méthode pour découvrir son type de cheveux.

De plus, il est possible, et tout à fait normal, d'avoir plus d'un type de cheveux, par exemple un mélange de boucles de type 3a et 3b.

Système Andre WalkerLe système de typage capillaire Andre Walker est le système le plus largement utilisé pour classer les cheveux.

Le système a été créé par le coiffeur d'Oprah Winfrey, Andre Walker.

Selon ce système, il existe quatre types de cheveux : raides, ondulés, bouclés, crépus.

Le type 1 correspond aux cheveux raides, qui reflètent le plus de brillance et aussi les cheveux les plus résistants de tous les types de cheveux.

Il est difficile d'endommager et extrêmement difficile de boucler cette texture de cheveux.

Parce que le sébum se propage facilement du cuir chevelu jusqu'aux pointes sans boucles ni plis pour interrompre son chemin, c'est la texture de cheveux la plus grasse de toutes.

Le type 2 correspond aux cheveux ondulés, dont la texture et la brillance se situent quelque part entre les cheveux raides et bouclés.

Les cheveux ondulés sont également plus susceptibles de devenir crépus que les cheveux raides.

Alors que les ondes de type A peuvent facilement alterner entre les styles lisses et bouclés, les cheveux ondulés de type B et C résistent au coiffage.
Le type 3 correspond aux cheveux bouclés connus pour avoir une forme en S.

Le motif de boucle peut ressembler à un "s" minuscule, un "S" majuscule ou parfois un "Z" majuscule ou un "z" minuscule.

Ce type de cheveux est généralement volumineux, "dépendant du climat (humidité = frisottis) et sujet aux dommages". Le manque de soins appropriés provoque des boucles moins définies.

Le type 4 correspond aux cheveux crépus, qui présentent un motif de boucles étroitement enroulé (ou aucun motif de boucles perceptible) qui est souvent fragile avec une densité très élevée.

Ce type de cheveux rétrécit lorsqu'il est mouillé et parce qu'il a moins de couches de cuticules que les autres types de cheveux, il est plus susceptible d'être endommagé.

Système FIA ​​Il s'agit d'une méthode qui classe les cheveux par motif de boucles, épaisseur des mèches de cheveux et volume global des cheveux.


== Fonctions ==

De nombreux mammifères ont une fourrure et d'autres poils qui remplissent différentes fonctions.

Les poils assurent la régulation thermique et le camouflage de nombreux animaux ; pour d'autres, il fournit des signaux à d'autres animaux tels que des avertissements, des accouplements ou d'autres affichages communicatifs ; et pour certains animaux, les poils assurent des fonctions défensives et, rarement, même une protection offensive.

Les cheveux ont également une fonction sensorielle, étendant le sens du toucher au-delà de la surface de la peau.

Les poils de garde donnent des avertissements qui peuvent déclencher une réaction de recul.


=== Chaleur ===


Alors que les humains ont développé des vêtements et d'autres moyens de se tenir au chaud, les cheveux trouvés sur la tête servent principalement de source d'isolation thermique et de refroidissement (lorsque la sueur s'évapore des cheveux trempés) ainsi que de protection contre l'exposition aux rayons ultraviolets.

La fonction des cheveux dans d'autres endroits est débattue.

Les chapeaux et les manteaux sont toujours nécessaires lors des activités de plein air par temps froid pour prévenir les engelures et l'hypothermie, mais les poils du corps humain aident à maintenir la température interne régulée.

Lorsque le corps est trop froid, les muscles arrecteurs des poils attachés aux follicules pileux se redressent, ce qui fait que les poils de ces follicules font de même.

Ces poils forment alors une couche piégeant la chaleur au-dessus de l'épiderme.

Ce processus est formellement appelé piloérection, dérivé des mots latins «pilus» («cheveux») et «erectio» («se lever»), mais est plus communément appelé «avoir la chair de poule» en anglais.

Ceci est plus efficace chez d'autres mammifères dont la fourrure gonfle pour créer des poches d'air entre les poils qui isolent le corps du froid.

Les actions opposées se produisent lorsque le corps est trop chaud ; les muscles arrecteurs font reposer les cheveux à plat sur la peau, ce qui permet à la chaleur de s'échapper.


=== Se protéger ===

Chez certains mammifères, comme les hérissons et les porcs-épics, les poils ont été modifiés en épines dures ou en piquants.

Celles-ci sont recouvertes d'épaisses plaques de kératine et servent de protection contre les prédateurs.

Les poils épais tels que ceux de la crinière du lion et de la fourrure du grizzli offrent une certaine protection contre les dommages physiques tels que les morsures et les égratignures.


=== Sens du toucher ===

Le déplacement et la vibration des tiges pileuses sont détectés par les récepteurs nerveux du follicule pileux et les récepteurs nerveux de la peau.

Les poils peuvent détecter les mouvements de l'air ainsi que le toucher d'objets physiques et ils fournissent une prise de conscience sensorielle de la présence d'ectoparasites.

Certains poils, comme les cils, sont particulièrement sensibles à la présence de matières potentiellement nocives.


==== Sourcils et cils ====

Les sourcils offrent une protection modérée aux yeux contre la saleté, la sueur et la pluie.

Ils jouent également un rôle clé dans la communication non verbale en affichant des émotions telles que la tristesse, la colère, la surprise et l'excitation.

Chez de nombreux autres mammifères, ils contiennent des poils beaucoup plus longs en forme de moustaches qui agissent comme des capteurs tactiles.

Le cil pousse sur les bords de la paupière et protège l'œil de la saleté.

Le cil est aux humains, aux chameaux, aux chevaux, aux autruches, etc., ce que les moustaches sont aux chats ; ils sont utilisés pour détecter quand la saleté, la poussière ou tout autre objet potentiellement nocif est trop proche de l'œil.

L'œil se ferme par réflexe à la suite de cette sensation.


== Évolution ==

Les cheveux trouvent leur origine dans l'ancêtre commun des mammifères, les synapsides, il y a environ 300 millions d'années.

On ignore actuellement à quel stade les synapsides ont acquis des caractéristiques de mammifères telles que les poils et les glandes mammaires, car les fossiles ne fournissent que rarement des preuves directes des tissus mous.

Impression cutanée du ventre et de la queue inférieure d'un pelycosaure, peut-être Haptodus montre que le stock synapside basal portait des rangées transversales d'écailles rectangulaires, similaires à celles d'un crocodile moderne, de sorte que l'âge d'acquisition des cheveux ne pouvait logiquement pas être antérieur à ~ 299 ma, basé sur la compréhension actuelle de la phylogénie de l'animal.

Un crâne exceptionnellement bien conservé d' Estemmenosuchus , un thérapside du Permien supérieur , montre une peau lisse et sans poils avec ce qui semble être des dépressions glandulaires, bien qu'en tant qu'espèce semi-aquatique, il n'ait peut-être pas été particulièrement utile de déterminer le tégument des espèces terrestres .

Les plus anciens fossiles connus incontestés montrant des empreintes de cheveux sans ambiguïté sont le Callovien (Jurassique moyen tardif) Castorocauda et plusieurs haramiyidans contemporains , tous deux cynodontes proches des mammifères , donnant l'âge au plus tard à environ 220 ma sur la base de la compréhension phylogénétique moderne de ces clades.

Plus récemment, des études sur les coprolites russes du Permien terminal peuvent suggérer que les synapsides non mammifères de cette époque avaient de la fourrure.

Si tel est le cas, ce sont les plus anciens restes de cheveux connus, montrant que la fourrure est apparue dès le dernier Paléozoïque.

Certains mammifères modernes ont une glande spéciale devant chaque orbite utilisée pour lisser la fourrure, appelée glande de Harder.

Des empreintes de cette structure se trouvent dans le crâne des petits mammifères primitifs comme Morganucodon, mais pas dans leurs ancêtres cynodontes comme Thrinaxodon.

Les poils de la fourrure des animaux modernes sont tous connectés aux nerfs, et la fourrure sert donc également de transmetteur pour les entrées sensorielles.

La fourrure pourrait avoir évolué à partir des poils sensoriels (moustaches).

Les signaux de cet appareil sensoriel sont interprétés dans le néocortex, une section du cerveau qui s'est considérablement développée chez des animaux comme Morganucodon et Hadrocodium.

Les thérapsides les plus avancés auraient pu avoir une combinaison de peau nue, de moustaches et d'écailles.

Un pelage complet n'a probablement pas évolué avant la transition thérapside-mammifère.

Les thérapsides plus avancés et plus petits auraient pu avoir une combinaison de poils et d'écailles, une combinaison que l'on trouve encore chez certains mammifères modernes, tels que les rongeurs et l'opossum.

La grande variabilité interspécifique de la taille, de la couleur et de la microstructure des cheveux permet souvent l'identification d'espèces basées sur des filaments de cheveux simples.

À des degrés divers, la plupart des mammifères ont des zones cutanées sans poils naturels.

Sur le corps humain, la peau glabre se trouve sur la partie ventrale des doigts, des paumes, de la plante des pieds et des lèvres, qui sont toutes les parties du corps les plus étroitement associées à l'interaction avec le monde qui nous entoure, tout comme les petites lèvres et le gland. pénis.

Il existe quatre principaux types de mécanorécepteurs dans la peau glabre de l'homme : les corpuscules de Pacini, les corpuscules de Meissner, les disques de Merkel et les corpuscules de Ruffini.

Le rat-taupe nu ( Heterocephalus glaber ) a développé une peau dépourvue de couverture générale de poils pélagiques, mais a conservé de longs poils tactiles très clairsemés sur son corps.

Le caractère glabre est un trait qui peut être associé à la néoténie.


=== L'absence de poils humains ===

La glabre générale des humains par rapport aux espèces apparentées peut être due à la perte de fonctionnalité du pseudogène KRTHAP1 (qui aide à produire de la kératine) dans la lignée humaine il y a environ 240 000 ans.

Sur une base individuelle, des mutations du gène HR peuvent entraîner une perte de cheveux complète, bien que ce ne soit pas typique chez l'homme.

Les humains peuvent également perdre leurs cheveux à la suite d'un déséquilibre hormonal dû aux médicaments ou à la grossesse.

Afin de comprendre pourquoi les humains ont beaucoup moins de poils que les autres primates, il faut comprendre que les poils des mammifères ne sont pas simplement une caractéristique esthétique ; il protège la peau des blessures, des morsures, de la chaleur, du froid et des rayons UV.

De plus, il peut être utilisé comme outil de communication et comme camouflage.

Les humains sont la seule espèce de primate à avoir subi une perte de poils importante et sur les quelque 5 000 espèces de mammifères existantes, seule une poignée est effectivement dépourvue de poils.

Cette liste comprend des éléphants, des rhinocéros, des hippopotames, des morses, certaines espèces de porcs, des baleines et d'autres cétacés, ainsi que des rats-taupes nus.

La plupart des mammifères ont une peau claire recouverte de fourrure, et les biologistes pensent que les premiers ancêtres humains ont également commencé de cette façon.

La peau foncée a probablement évolué après que les humains aient perdu leur fourrure corporelle, car la peau nue était vulnérable au fort rayonnement UV, comme expliqué dans l'hypothèse Out of Africa.

Par conséquent, des preuves de l'époque où la peau humaine s'est assombrie ont été utilisées pour dater la perte de poils humains, en supposant que la peau foncée était nécessaire après la disparition de la fourrure.

On s'attendait à ce que la datation de la scission du pou humain ancestral en deux espèces, le pou de tête et le pou du pubis, daterait la perte de poils chez les ancêtres humains.

Cependant, il s'est avéré que le pou du pubis humain ne descend pas du pou humain ancestral, mais du pou du gorille, divergeant il y a 3,3 millions d'années.

Cela suggère que les humains avaient perdu leurs poils (mais avaient conservé leurs cheveux) et développé des poils pubiens épais avant cette date, vivaient dans ou à proximité de la forêt où vivaient les gorilles et avaient acquis des poux du pubis en dépeçant des gorilles ou en dormant dans leurs nids.

L'évolution du pou de corps à partir du pou de tête, en revanche, place la date du vêtement beaucoup plus tard, il y a environ 100 000 ans.

Les glandes sudoripares chez l'homme pourraient avoir évolué pour se propager des mains et des pieds à mesure que les poils du corps changeaient, ou le changement de cheveux aurait pu se produire pour faciliter la transpiration.

Les chevaux et les humains sont deux des rares animaux capables de transpirer sur la majeure partie de leur corps, mais les chevaux sont plus gros et ont encore une fourrure complètement développée.

Chez l'homme, les poils de la peau reposent à plat dans des conditions chaudes, car les muscles arrecteurs des poils se détendent, empêchant la chaleur d'être piégée par une couche d'air immobile entre les poils et augmentant la perte de chaleur par convection.

Une autre hypothèse pour les poils épais sur les humains propose que la sélection sexuelle galopante des pêcheurs ait joué un rôle (ainsi que dans la sélection des cheveux longs), (voir cheveux terminaux et vellus ), ainsi qu'un rôle beaucoup plus important de la testostérone chez les hommes. .

La sélection sexuelle est la seule théorie à ce jour qui explique le dimorphisme sexuel observé dans les modèles de cheveux des hommes et des femmes.

En moyenne, les hommes ont plus de poils que les femmes.

Les mâles ont plus de poils terminaux, en particulier sur le visage, la poitrine, l'abdomen et le dos, et les femelles ont plus de poils vellus, qui sont moins visibles.

L'arrêt du développement des poils à un stade juvénile, les poils de velus, serait également cohérent avec la néoténie évidente chez les humains, en particulier chez les femelles, et donc ils auraient pu se produire en même temps.

Cette théorie, cependant, a des implications importantes dans les normes culturelles d'aujourd'hui.

Il n'y a aucune preuve que la sélection sexuelle se déroulerait à un degré aussi drastique il y a plus d'un million d'années, alors qu'une chevelure pleine et luxuriante indiquerait très probablement la santé et serait donc plus susceptible d'être sélectionnée pour, et non contre.

Une autre hypothèse est que les cheveux humains ont été réduits en réponse aux ectoparasites.

L'explication "ectoparasite" de la nudité humaine moderne est basée sur le principe qu'un primate sans poils hébergerait moins de parasites.

Lorsque nos ancêtres ont adopté des arrangements sociaux de groupe d'environ 1,8 mya, les charges d'ectoparasites ont augmenté de façon spectaculaire.

Les premiers humains sont devenus la seule des 193 espèces de primates à avoir des puces, ce qui peut être attribué aux conditions de vie rapprochées de grands groupes d'individus.

Alors que les espèces de primates ont des arrangements de sommeil communs, ces groupes sont toujours en mouvement et sont donc moins susceptibles d'héberger des ectoparasites.

Un autre point de vue est proposé par James Giles, qui tente d'expliquer l'absence de poils telle qu'elle a évolué à partir de la relation entre la mère et l'enfant et comme conséquence de la bipédie.

Giles relie également l'amour romantique à l'absence de poils. Une autre hypothèse est que l'utilisation du feu par les humains a causé ou initié la réduction des cheveux humains.


=== Variation évolutive ===

Les biologistes évolutionnistes suggèrent que le genre Homo est apparu en Afrique de l'Est il y a environ 2,5 millions d'années.

Ils ont inventé de nouvelles techniques de chasse.

Le régime alimentaire plus riche en protéines a conduit à l'évolution d'un corps et d'un cerveau de plus grande taille.

Jablonski postule que l'augmentation de la taille corporelle, associée à une chasse intensifiée pendant la journée à l'équateur, a entraîné un besoin accru d'expulser rapidement la chaleur.

En conséquence, les humains ont développé la capacité de transpirer : un processus qui a été facilité par la perte de poils.

Un autre facteur de l'évolution humaine qui s'est également produit dans le passé préhistorique était une sélection préférentielle pour la néoténie, en particulier chez les femelles.

L'idée que les humains adultes présentent certaines caractéristiques néoténiques (juvéniles), non mises en évidence chez les autres grands singes, date d'environ un siècle.

Louis Bolk a fait une longue liste de ces traits, et Stephen Jay Gould a publié une courte liste dans Ontogeny and Phylogeny.

De plus, les caractéristiques pédomorphes chez les femmes sont souvent reconnues comme souhaitables par les hommes dans les pays développés.

Par exemple, les poils de vellus sont une caractéristique juvénile.

Cependant, alors que les hommes développent des cheveux terminaux plus longs, plus grossiers, plus épais et plus foncés grâce à la différenciation sexuelle, les femmes ne le font pas, laissant leurs cheveux vellus visibles.


=== Textures ===


==== Cheveux bouclés ====

Jablonski affirme que les cheveux étaient évolutivement avantageux pour les pré-humains, car ils protégeaient le cuir chevelu lorsqu'ils marchaient debout dans la lumière UV africaine (équatoriale) intense.

Alors que certains pourraient soutenir que, selon cette logique, les humains devraient également exprimer des épaules velues parce que ces parties du corps seraient supposées être exposées à des conditions similaires, la protection de la tête, le siège du cerveau qui a permis à l'humanité de devenir l'une des espèces les plus prospères sur la planète (et qui est aussi très vulnérable à la naissance) était sans doute un problème plus urgent (les poils axillaires aux aisselles et à l'aine étaient également retenus comme signes de maturité sexuelle).

Au cours du processus graduel par lequel l'Homo erectus a commencé une transition de la peau velue à la peau nue exprimée par l'Homo sapiens, la texture des cheveux putativement a progressivement changé des cheveux raides (la condition de la plupart des mammifères, y compris les plus proches cousins ​​de l'humanité - les chimpanzés) à Afro-texturé cheveux ou « crépus » (c'est-à-dire étroitement enroulés).

Cet argument suppose que les cheveux bouclés empêchent mieux le passage de la lumière UV dans le corps que les cheveux raides (ainsi, les cheveux bouclés ou enroulés seraient particulièrement avantageux pour les hominidés à peau claire vivant à l'équateur).

Il est étayé par les découvertes d'Iyengar (1998) que la lumière UV peut pénétrer dans les racines droites des cheveux humains (et donc dans le corps à travers la peau) via la tige du cheveu.

Plus précisément, les résultats de cette étude suggèrent que ce phénomène ressemble au passage de la lumière à travers des tubes à fibres optiques (qui ne fonctionnent pas aussi efficacement lorsqu'ils sont pliés ou fortement incurvés ou enroulés).

En ce sens, lorsque les hominidés (c'est-à-dire

Homo Erectus) perdaient progressivement leurs poils raides et exposaient ainsi la peau initialement pâle sous leur fourrure au soleil, les cheveux raides auraient été un handicap adaptatif.

Par logique inverse, plus tard, alors que les humains s'éloignaient de l'Afrique et/ou de l'équateur, les cheveux lisses ont peut-être (initialement) évolué pour faciliter l'entrée de la lumière UV dans le corps lors de la transition d'une peau sombre et protégée contre les UV à une peau plus pâle.

Les affirmations de Jablonski suggèrent que l'adjectif «laineux» en référence aux cheveux afro est un abus de langage pour désigner la haute isolation thermique dérivant de la vraie laine de mouton.

Au lieu de cela, la densité relativement clairsemée des cheveux afro, combinée à ses spirales élastiques, donne en réalité une structure aérée, presque semblable à une éponge, qui à son tour, selon Jablonski, facilite plus probablement une augmentation de la circulation de l'air frais sur le cuir chevelu.

De plus, les cheveux afro mouillés ne collent pas au cou et au cuir chevelu à moins d'être totalement trempés et ont plutôt tendance à conserver leur gonflement élastique de base car ils réagissent moins facilement à l'humidité et à la transpiration que les cheveux raides.

En ce sens, le trait peut améliorer les niveaux de confort dans les climats équatoriaux intenses plus que les cheveux lisses (qui, d'autre part, ont tendance à tomber naturellement sur les oreilles et le cou à un degré qui offre des niveaux de confort légèrement améliorés dans les climats froids par rapport aux cheveux serrés). cheveux bouclés).

De plus, il est à noter que l'expression la plus répandue de cette texture capillaire se trouve en Afrique subsaharienne ; une région du monde que suggèrent d'abondantes preuves génétiques et paléoanthropologiques, était le point d'origine relativement récent (≈ 200 000 ans) de l'humanité moderne.

En fait, bien que les découvertes génétiques (Tishkoff, 2009) suggèrent que les Africains subsahariens constituent le groupe continental le plus génétiquement diversifié sur Terre, les cheveux à texture afro se rapprochent de l'ubiquité dans cette région.

Cela indique une forte pression sélective à long terme qui, contrairement à la plupart des autres régions des génomes des groupes subsahariens, laissait peu de place à la variation génétique aux loci déterminants.

Un tel modèle, encore une fois, ne semble pas soutenir l'esthétique sexuelle humaine comme étant la cause unique ou principale de cette distribution.


==== Le lieu EDAR ====

Un groupe d'études a récemment montré que les modèles génétiques au locus EDAR, une région du génome humain moderne qui contribue à la variation de la texture des cheveux chez la plupart des individus d'origine est-asiatique, soutiennent l'hypothèse selon laquelle les cheveux raides (est-asiatiques) se sont probablement développés dans ce branche de la lignée humaine moderne postérieure à l'expression originale des cheveux afro naturels étroitement enroulés.

Plus précisément, les résultats pertinents indiquent que la mutation EDAR codant pour la texture prédominante des cheveux « grossiers » ou épais et raides d'Asie de l'Est est apparue au cours des ≈65 000 dernières années, ce qui est une période qui couvre depuis le plus tôt le « Out of Africa » migrations jusqu'à présent.


== Maladie ==

La teigne est une maladie fongique qui cible la peau poilue. Le grisonnement prématuré des cheveux est une autre affection qui se traduit par un grisonnement avant l'âge de 20 ans chez les Blancs, avant 25 ans chez les Asiatiques et avant 30 ans chez les Africains.


== Soin des cheveux ==

Les soins capillaires impliquent l'hygiène et la cosmétologie des cheveux, y compris les cheveux du cuir chevelu, les poils du visage (barbe et moustache), les poils pubiens et les autres poils du corps.

Les routines de soins capillaires diffèrent selon la culture d'un individu et les caractéristiques physiques de ses cheveux.

Les cheveux peuvent être colorés, coupés, rasés, épilés ou autrement enlevés avec des traitements tels que l'épilation à la cire, le sucre et le filetage.


=== Pratiques de suppression ===

L'épilation consiste à enlever les poils de la surface de la peau.

Ceci peut être réalisé grâce à des méthodes telles que le rasage.

L'épilation est l'élimination de la totalité de la mèche de cheveux, y compris la partie du poil qui n'a pas encore quitté le follicule.

L'épilation à la cire est un moyen populaire d'épiler les cheveux.


==== Rasage ====

Le rasage est accompli avec des instruments à lame, tels que des rasoirs.

La lame est rapprochée de la peau et passée sur les poils dans la zone souhaitée pour couper les poils terminaux et laisser la peau lisse.

Selon le taux de croissance, on peut commencer à sentir les poils repousser quelques heures après le rasage.

Cela est particulièrement évident chez les hommes qui développent une ombre à cinq heures après s'être rasé le visage.

Cette nouvelle croissance est appelée chaume.

Le chaume semble généralement repousser plus épais parce que les poils rasés sont émoussés au lieu d'être effilés à la fin, bien que les poils ne repoussent jamais plus épais.


==== Epilation ====
L'épilation à la cire consiste à utiliser une cire collante et une bande de papier ou de tissu pour arracher les poils de la racine.

L'épilation à la cire est la technique d'épilation idéale pour garder une zone sans poils pendant de longues périodes.

Cela peut prendre de trois à cinq semaines pour que les cheveux cirés recommencent à refaire surface.

Les cheveux dans les zones qui ont été régulièrement épilées sont connus pour repousser plus fins et plus fins, en particulier par rapport aux cheveux qui ont été rasés avec un rasoir.


==== Enlèvement laser ====

L'épilation au laser est une méthode cosmétique dans laquelle un petit faisceau laser émet une chaleur sélective sur la matière cible sombre dans la zone qui provoque la croissance des poils sans endommager le tissu cutané.

Ce processus est répété plusieurs fois au cours de plusieurs mois à quelques années, les cheveux repoussant moins fréquemment jusqu'à ce qu'ils s'arrêtent finalement. ceci est utilisé comme une solution plus permanente à l'épilation à la cire ou au rasage.

L'épilation au laser est pratiquée dans de nombreuses cliniques avec de nombreux produits à domicile.


==== Couper et tailler ====

Parce que les cheveux sur la tête sont normalement plus longs que les autres types de poils, ils sont coupés avec des ciseaux ou une tondeuse.

Les personnes aux cheveux longs utiliseront le plus souvent des ciseaux pour se couper les cheveux, tandis que les cheveux plus courts sont entretenus à l'aide d'une tondeuse.

En fonction de la longueur souhaitée et de la santé générale des cheveux, les périodes sans couper ou tailler les cheveux peuvent varier.
Les cheveux coupés peuvent être utilisés dans les perruques.

Les importations mondiales de cheveux en 2010 s'élevaient à 1,24 milliard de dollars américains.


== Rôle social ==

Les cheveux ont une grande importance sociale pour les êtres humains.

Il peut se développer sur la plupart des zones externes du corps humain, à l'exception de la paume des mains et de la plante des pieds (entre autres).

Les cheveux sont plus visibles sur la plupart des gens dans un petit nombre de zones, qui sont également celles qui sont le plus souvent coupées, épilées ou rasées.

Ceux-ci incluent le visage, les oreilles, la tête, les sourcils, les jambes et les aisselles, ainsi que la région pubienne.

Les différences très visibles entre le corps masculin et féminin et les poils du visage sont une caractéristique sexuelle secondaire notable.

Les cheveux documentés les plus longs au monde appartiennent à Xie Qiuping (en Chine), à ​​5,627 m (18 pieds 5,54 pouces) lorsqu'ils sont mesurés le 8 mai 2004.

Elle fait pousser ses cheveux depuis 1973, dès l'âge de 13 ans.


=== Indication d'état ===

Des cheveux sains indiquent la santé et la jeunesse (important dans la biologie évolutive).

La couleur et la texture des cheveux peuvent être un signe d'ascendance ethnique.

La pilosité faciale est un signe de puberté chez les hommes.

Les cheveux blancs ou gris sont un signe d'âge ou de génétique, qui peut être dissimulé par une coloration capillaire (pas facilement pour certains), bien que beaucoup préfèrent l'assumer (surtout s'il s'agit d'une poliose caractéristique de la personne depuis l'enfance).

La calvitie masculine est un signe de l'âge, qui peut être dissimulé par un toupet, des chapeaux ou des ornements religieux et culturels.

Bien que des médicaments et des procédures médicales existent pour le traitement de la calvitie, de nombreux hommes chauves se rasent simplement la tête.

Au début de la Chine moderne, la file d'attente était une coiffure masculine portée par les Mandchous du centre de la Mandchourie et les Chinois Han pendant la dynastie Qing ; les cheveux sur le devant de la tête étaient rasés au-dessus des tempes tous les dix jours, imitant la calvitie masculine, et le reste des cheveux tressés en une longue natte.
La coiffure peut être un indicateur d'appartenance à un groupe.

Pendant la guerre civile anglaise, les partisans d'Oliver Cromwell ont décidé de couper leurs cheveux près de leur tête, comme un acte de défi aux boucles et aux boucles des hommes du roi.

Cela a conduit la faction parlementaire à être surnommée Roundheads.

L'analyse isotopique récente des cheveux contribue à éclairer davantage l'interaction socioculturelle, donnant des informations sur l'approvisionnement et la consommation de nourriture au 19ème siècle.

Avoir les cheveux coupés était populaire parmi les garçonnes dans les années 1920 en signe de rébellion contre les rôles traditionnels des femmes.

Les étudiantes en art connues sous le nom de «cropheads» ont également adopté le style, notamment à la Slade School de Londres, en Angleterre.

Les variations régionales de l'hirsutisme entraînent des différences dans les pratiques concernant la pilosité des bras et des jambes.

Certains groupes religieux peuvent suivre certaines règles concernant les cheveux dans le cadre de l'observance religieuse.

Les règles diffèrent souvent pour les hommes et les femmes.

De nombreuses sous-cultures ont des coiffures qui peuvent indiquer une appartenance non officielle.

De nombreux hippies, métalleux et sadhus indiens ont les cheveux longs, ainsi que de nombreux enfants indépendants plus âgés.

De nombreux punks portent une coiffure connue sous le nom de mohawk ou d'autres coiffures à pointes et teintes; les skinheads ont la tête courte ou complètement rasée.

Les longues franges stylisées étaient très courantes chez les emos, les enfants de la scène et les jeunes enfants indépendants dans les années 2000 et au début des années 2010, chez les personnes des deux sexes.

Les têtes étaient rasées dans les camps de concentration et le rasage de la tête a été utilisé comme punition, en particulier pour les femmes aux cheveux longs.

La tête rasée est courante dans les coupes de cheveux militaires, tandis que les moines occidentaux sont connus pour la tonsure.

En revanche, chez certains saints hommes indiens, les cheveux sont portés extrêmement longs. À l'époque de Confucius (Ve siècle avant notre ère), les Chinois faisaient pousser leurs cheveux et les attachaient souvent, comme symbole de piété filiale.

La coiffure régulière dans certaines cultures est considérée comme un signe de richesse ou de statut.

Les dreadlocks du mouvement Rastafari ont été méprisés au début de l'histoire du mouvement.

Dans certaines cultures, se faire couper les cheveux peut symboliser une libération de son passé, généralement après une période difficile de sa vie.

Couper les cheveux peut aussi être un signe de deuil.
Les cheveux étroitement enroulés dans leur état naturel peuvent être portés dans un Afro.

Cette coiffure était autrefois portée par les Afro-Américains comme symbole de fierté raciale.

Sachant que la texture enroulée est l'état naturel des cheveux de certains afro-américains, ou perçus comme étant plus "africains", ce style simple est désormais souvent perçu comme un signe d'acceptation de soi et une affirmation que les normes de beauté de l'(eurocentrique ) la culture dominante ne sont pas absolues.

Il est important de noter que les Afro-Américains dans leur ensemble ont une variété de textures de cheveux, car ils ne constituent pas un groupe ethniquement homogène, mais un ad hoc de différents mélanges raciaux.

Le film Easy Rider (1969) inclut l'hypothèse que les deux personnages principaux pourraient avoir leurs longs cheveux rasés de force avec un rasoir rouillé lorsqu'ils sont emprisonnés, symbolisant l'intolérance de certains groupes conservateurs envers les membres de la contre-culture.

À la fin des procès pour obscénité d'Oz au Royaume-Uni en 1971, les accusés se sont fait raser la tête par la police, provoquant un tollé général.

Lors du procès en appel, ils sont apparus sur le banc des accusés portant des perruques.

Une affaire où un élève de 14 ans a été expulsé de l'école au Brésil au milieu des années 2000, prétendument à cause de sa coupe de cheveux fauxhawk, a déclenché un débat national et une action en justice aboutissant à une indemnisation.


=== Pratiques religieuses ===

Les cheveux des femmes peuvent être cachés à l'aide de foulards, une partie commune du hijab dans l'islam et un symbole de modestie requis pour certains rituels religieux dans l'orthodoxie orientale.

L'Église orthodoxe russe exige que toutes les femmes mariées portent le foulard à l'intérieur de l'église ; cette tradition est souvent étendue à toutes les femmes, quel que soit leur statut matrimonial.

Le judaïsme orthodoxe commande également l'utilisation de foulards et autres couvre-chefs pour les femmes mariées pour des raisons de pudeur.

Certaines sectes hindoues portent également des foulards pour des raisons religieuses.

Les sikhs ont l'obligation de ne pas couper les cheveux (un sikh qui coupe les cheveux devient « apostat », ce qui signifie tombé de la religion) et les hommes les gardent attachés en un chignon sur la tête, qui est ensuite recouvert de manière appropriée à l'aide d'un turban.

Plusieurs religions, à la fois anciennes et contemporaines, exigent ou conseillent de laisser leurs cheveux devenir des dreadlocks, bien que les gens les portent aussi pour la mode.

Pour les hommes, l'islam, le judaïsme orthodoxe, le christianisme orthodoxe, le catholicisme romain et d'autres groupes religieux ont à plusieurs reprises recommandé ou exigé le recouvrement de la tête et des mèches de cheveux des hommes, et certains ont des préceptes relatifs à la coupe du visage et des cheveux des hommes. les cheveux.

Certaines sectes chrétiennes à travers l'histoire et jusqu'aux temps modernes ont également interdit religieusement la coupe des cheveux des femmes.

Pour certains madhabs sunnites, le port d'un kufi ou d'un topi est une forme de sunna.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hair
