

HAND


A hand is a prehensile, multi-fingered appendage located at the end of the forearm or forelimb of primates such as humans, chimpanzees, monkeys, and lemurs. 

A few other vertebrates such as the koala (which has two opposable thumbs on each "hand" and fingerprints extremely similar to human fingerprints) are often described as having "hands" instead of paws on their front limbs. 

The raccoon is usually described as having "hands" though opposable thumbs are lacking.Some evolutionary anatomists use the term hand to refer to the appendage of digits on the forelimb more generally — for example, in the context of whether the three digits of the bird hand involved the same homologous loss of two digits as in the dinosaur hand.The human hand usually has five digits: four fingers plus one thumb; these are often referred to collectively as five fingers, however, whereby the thumb is included as one of the fingers. 

It has 27 bones, not including the sesamoid bone, the number of which varies among people, 14 of which are the phalanges (proximal, intermediate and distal) of the fingers and thumb. 

The metacarpal bones connect the fingers and the carpal bones of the wrist. 

Each human hand has five metacarpals and eight carpal bones.
Fingers contain some of the densest areas of nerve endings in the body, and are the richest source of tactile feedback. 

They also have the greatest positioning capability of the body; thus, the sense of touch is intimately associated with hands. 

Like other paired organs (eyes, feet, legs) each hand is dominantly controlled by the opposing brain hemisphere, so that handedness—the preferred hand choice for single-handed activities such as writing with a pencil, reflects individual brain functioning.
Among humans, the hands play an important function in body language and sign language. 

Likewise, the ten digits of two hands and the twelve phalanges of four fingers (touchable by the thumb) have given rise to number systems and calculation techniques.


== Structure ==

Many mammals and other animals have grasping appendages similar in form to a hand such as paws, claws, and talons, but these are not scientifically considered to be grasping hands. 

The scientific use of the term hand in this sense to distinguish the terminations of the front paws from the hind ones is an example of anthropomorphism. 

The only true grasping hands appear in the mammalian order of primates. 

Hands must also have opposable thumbs, as described later in the text.
The hand is located at the distal end of each arm. 

Apes and monkeys are sometimes described as having four hands, because the toes are long and the hallux is opposable and looks more like a thumb, thus enabling the feet to be used as hands.
The word "hand" is sometimes used by evolutionary anatomists to refer to the appendage of digits on the forelimb such as when researching the homology between the three digits of the bird hand and the dinosaur hand.An adult human male's hand weighs about a pound.


=== Areas ===


Areas of the human hand include:

The palm (Volar), which is the central region of the anterior part of the hand, located superficially to the metacarpus. 

The skin in this area contains dermal papillae to increase friction, such as are also present on the fingers and used for fingerprints.
The opisthenar area (dorsal) is the corresponding area on the posterior part of the hand.
The heel of the hand is the area anteriorly to the bases of the metacarpal bones, located in the proximal part of the palm. 

It is the area that sustains most pressure when using the palm of the hand for support, such as in handstand.There are five digits attached to the hand, notably with a nail fixed to the end in place of the normal claw. 

The four fingers can be folded over the palm which allows the grasping of objects. 

Each finger, starting with the one closest to the thumb, has a colloquial name to distinguish it from the others:

index finger, pointer finger, forefinger, or 2nd digit
middle finger or long finger or 3rd digit
ring finger or 4th digit
little finger, pinky finger, small finger, baby finger, or 5th digitThe thumb (connected to the first metacarpal bone and trapezium) is located on one of the sides, parallel to the arm. 

A reliable way of identifying human hands is from the presence of opposable thumbs. 

Opposable thumbs are identified by the ability to be brought opposite to the fingers, a muscle action known as opposition.


=== Bones ===


The skeleton of the human hand consists of 27 bones: the eight short carpal bones of the wrist are organized into a proximal row (scaphoid, lunate, triquetral and pisiform) which articulates with the bones of the forearm, and a distal row (trapezium, trapezoid, capitate and hamate), which articulates with the bases of the five metacarpal bones of the hand. 

The heads of the metacarpals will each in turn articulate with the bases of the proximal phalanx of the fingers and thumb. 

These articulations with the fingers are the metacarpophalangeal joints known as the knuckles. 

At the palmar aspect of the first metacarpophalangeal joints are small, almost spherical bones called the sesamoid bones. 

The fourteen phalanges make up the fingers and thumb, and are numbered I-V (thumb to little finger) when the hand is viewed from an anatomical position (palm up). 

The four fingers each consist of three phalanx bones: proximal, middle, and distal. 

The thumb only consists of a proximal and distal phalanx. 

Together with the phalanges of the fingers and thumb these metacarpal bones form five rays or poly-articulated chains.
Because supination and pronation (rotation about the axis of the forearm) are added to the two axes of movements of the wrist, the ulna and radius are sometimes considered part of the skeleton of the hand.
There are numerous sesamoid bones in the hand, small ossified nodes embedded in tendons; the exact number varies between people: whereas a pair of sesamoid bones are found at virtually all thumb metacarpophalangeal joints, sesamoid bones are also common at the interphalangeal joint of the thumb (72.9%) and at the metacarpophalangeal joints of the little finger (82.5%) and the index finger (48%). 

In rare cases, sesamoid bones have been found in all the metacarpophalangeal joints and all distal interphalangeal joints except that of the long finger.
The articulations are:

interphalangeal articulations of hand (the hinge joints between the bones of the digits)
metacarpophalangeal joints (where the digits meet the palm)
intercarpal articulations (where the palm meets the wrist)
wrist (may also be viewed as belonging to the forearm).


==== Arches ====

The fixed and mobile parts of the hand adapt to various everyday tasks by forming bony arches: longitudinal arches (the rays formed by the finger bones and their associated metacarpal bones), transverse arches (formed by the carpal bones and distal ends of the metacarpal bones), and oblique arches (between the thumb and four fingers):
Of the longitudinal arches or rays of the hand, that of the thumb is the most mobile (and the least longitudinal). 

While the ray formed by the little finger and its associated metacarpal bone still offers some mobility, the remaining rays are firmly rigid. 

The phalangeal joints of the index finger, however, offer some independence to its finger, due to the arrangement of its flexor and extension tendons.The carpal bones form two transversal rows, each forming an arch concave on the palmar side. 

Because the proximal arch simultaneously has to adapt to the articular surface of the radius and to the distal carpal row, it is by necessity flexible. 

In contrast, the capitate, the "keystone" of the distal arch, moves together with the metacarpal bones and the distal arch is therefore rigid. 

The stability of these arches is more dependent of the ligaments and capsules of the wrist than of the interlocking shapes of the carpal bones, and the wrist is therefore more stable in flexion than in extension. 

The distal carpal arch affects the function of the CMC joints and the hands, but not the function of the wrist or the proximal carpal arch. 

The ligaments that maintain the distal carpal arches are the transverse carpal ligament and the intercarpal ligaments (also oriented transversally). 

These ligaments also form the carpal tunnel and contribute to the deep and superficial palmar arches. 

Several muscle tendons attaching to the TCL and the distal carpals also contribute to maintaining the carpal arch.Compared to the carpal arches, the arch formed by the distal ends of the metacarpal bones is flexible due to the mobility of the peripheral metacarpals (thumb and little finger). 

As these two metacarpals approach each other, the palmar gutter deepens. 

The central-most metacarpal (middle finger) is the most rigid. 

It and its two neighbors are tied to the carpus by the interlocking shapes of the metacarpal bones. 

The thumb metacarpal only articulates with the trapezium and is therefore completely independent, while the fifth metacarpal (little finger) is semi-independent with the fourth metacarpal (ring finger) which forms a transitional element to the fifth metacarpal.Together with the thumb, the four fingers form four oblique arches, of which the arch of the index finger functionally is the most important, especially for precision grip, while the arch of the little finger contribute an important locking mechanism for power grip. 

The thumb is undoubtedly the "master digit" of the hand, giving value to all the other fingers. 

Together with the index and middle finger, it forms the dynamic tridactyl configuration responsible for most grips not requiring force. 

The ring and little fingers are more static, a reserve ready to interact with the palm when great force is needed.


=== Muscles ===


The muscles acting on the hand can be subdivided into two groups: the extrinsic and intrinsic muscle groups. 

The extrinsic muscle groups are the long flexors and extensors. 

They are called extrinsic because the muscle belly is located on the forearm.


==== Intrinsic ====
The intrinsic muscle groups are the thenar (thumb) and hypothenar (little finger) muscles; the interosseous muscles (four dorsally and three volarly) originating between the metacarpal bones; and the lumbrical muscles arising from the deep flexor (and are special because they have no bony origin) to insert on the dorsal extensor hood mechanism.


==== Extrinsic ====

The fingers have two long flexors, located on the underside of the forearm. 

They insert by tendons to the phalanges of the fingers. 

The deep flexor attaches to the distal phalanx, and the superficial flexor attaches to the middle phalanx. 

The flexors allow for the actual bending of the fingers. 

The thumb has one long flexor and a short flexor in the thenar muscle group. 

The human thumb also has other muscles in the thenar group (opponens and abductor brevis muscle), moving the thumb in opposition, making grasping possible.
The extensors are located on the back of the forearm and are connected in a more complex way than the flexors to the dorsum of the fingers. 

The tendons unite with the interosseous and lumbrical muscles to form the extensorhood mechanism. 

The primary function of the extensors is to straighten out the digits. 

The thumb has two extensors in the forearm; the tendons of these form the anatomical snuff box. 

Also, the index finger and the little finger have an extra extensor used, for instance, for pointing. 

The extensors are situated within 6 separate compartments.

The first four compartments are located in the grooves present on the dorsum of inferior side of radius while the 5th compartment is in between radius and ulna. 

The 6th compartment is in the groove on the dorsum of inferior side of ulna.


=== Nerve supply ===


The hand is innervated by the radial, median, and ulnar nerves.

MotorThe radial nerve supplies the finger extensors and the thumb abductor, thus the muscles that extends at the wrist and metacarpophalangeal joints (knuckles); and that abducts and extends the thumb.
The median nerve supplies the flexors of the wrist and digits, the abductors and opponens of the thumb, the first and second lumbrical.
The ulnar nerve supplies the remaining intrinsic muscles of the hand.All muscles of the hand are innervated by the brachial plexus (C5–T1) and can be classified by innervation:
SensoryThe radial nerve supplies the skin on the back of the hand from the thumb to the ring finger and the dorsal aspects of the index, middle, and half ring fingers as far as the proximal interphalangeal joints.
The median nerve supplies the palmar side of the thumb, index, middle, and half ring fingers. 

Dorsal branches innervates the distal phalanges of the index, middle, and half ring fingers.
The ulnar nerve supplies the ulnar third of the hand, both at the palm and the back of the hand, and the little and half ring fingers.There is a considerable variation to this general pattern, except for the little finger and volar surface of the index finger. 

For example, in some individuals, the ulnar nerve supplies the entire ring finger and the ulnar side of the middle finger, whilst, in others, the median nerve supplies the entire ring finger.


=== Blood supply ===


The hand is supplied with blood from two arteries, the ulnar artery and the radial artery. 

These arteries form three arches over the dorsal and palmar aspects of the hand, the dorsal carpal arch (across the back of the hand), the deep palmar arch, and the superficial palmar arch. 

Together these three arches and their anastomoses provide oxygenated blood to the palm, the fingers, and the thumb.
The hand is drained by the dorsal venous network of the hand with deoxygenated blood leaving the hand via the cephalic vein and the basilic vein.


=== Skin ===


The glabrous (hairless) skin on the front of the hand, the palm, is relatively thick and can be bent along the hand's flexure lines where the skin is tightly bound to the underlying tissue and bones. 

Compared to the rest of the body's skin, the hands' palms (as well as the soles of the feet) are usually lighter — and even much lighter in dark-skinned individuals, compared to the other side of the hand. 

Indeed, genes specifically expressed in the dermis of palmoplantar skin inhibit melanin production and thus the ability to tan, and promote the thickening of the stratum lucidum and stratum corneum layers of the epidermis. 

All parts of the skin involved in grasping are covered by papillary ridges (fingerprints) acting as friction pads. 

In contrast, the hairy skin on the dorsal side is thin, soft, and pliable, so that the skin can recoil when the fingers are stretched. 

On the dorsal side, the skin can be moved across the hand up to 3 cm (1.2 in); an important input the cutaneous mechanoreceptors.The web of the hand is a "fold of skin which connects the digits". 

These webs, located between each set of digits, are known as skin folds (interdigital folds or plica interdigitalis). 

They are defined as "one of the folds of skin, or rudimentary web, between the fingers and toes".


=== Variation ===


The ratio of the length of the index finger to the length of the ring finger in adults is affected by the level of exposure to male sex hormones of the embryo in utero. 

This digit ratio is below 1 for both sexes but it is lower in males than in females on average.


== Clinical significance ==


A number of genetic disorders affect the hand. 

Polydactyly is the presence of more than the usual number of fingers. 

One of the disorders that can cause this is Catel-Manzke syndrome. 

The fingers may be fused in a disorder known as syndactyly. 

Or there may be an absence of one or more central fingers—a condition known as ectrodactyly. 

Additionally, some people are born without one or both hands (amelia). 

Hereditary multiple exostoses of the forearm—also known as hereditary multiple osteochondromas—is another cause of hand and forearm deformity in children and adults.There are several cutaneous conditions that can affect the hand including the nails.
The autoimmune disease rheumatoid arthritis can affect the hand, particularly the joints of the fingers.
Some conditions can be treated by hand surgery. 

These include carpal tunnel syndrome, a painful condition of the hand and fingers caused by compression of the median nerve, and Dupuytren's contracture, a condition in which fingers bend towards the palm and cannot be straightened. 

Similarly, injury to the ulnar nerve may result in a condition in which some of the fingers cannot be flexed.
A common fracture of the hand is a scaphoid fracture—a fracture of the scaphoid bone, one of the carpal bones. 

This is the commonest carpal bone fracture and can be slow to heal due to a limited blood flow to the bone. 

There are various types of fracture to the base of the thumb; these are known as Rolando fractures, Bennet's fracture, and Gamekeeper's thumb. 

Another common fracture, known as Boxer's fracture, is to the neck of a metacarpal. 

One can also have a broken finger.


== Evolution ==


The prehensile hands and feet of primates evolved from the mobile hands of semi-arboreal tree shrews that lived about 60 million years ago. 

This development has been accompanied by important changes in the brain and the relocation of the eyes to the front of the face, together allowing the muscle control and stereoscopic vision necessary for controlled grasping. 

This grasping, also known as power grip, is supplemented by the precision grip between the thumb and the distal finger pads made possible by the opposable thumbs. 

Hominidae (great apes including humans) acquired an erect bipedal posture about 3.6 million years ago, which freed the hands from the task of locomotion and paved the way for the precision and range of motion in human hands. 

Functional analyses of the features unique to the hand of modern humans have shown that they are consistent with the stresses and requirements associated with the effective use of paleolithic stone tools. 

It is possible that the refinement of the bipedal posture in the earliest hominids evolved to facilitate the use of the trunk as leverage in accelerating the hand.While the human hand has unique anatomical features, including a longer thumb and fingers that can be controlled individually to a higher degree, the hands of other primates are anatomically similar and the dexterity of the human hand can not be explained solely on anatomical factors. 

The neural machinery underlying hand movements is a major contributing factor; primates have evolved direct connections between neurons in cortical motor areas and spinal motoneurons, giving the cerebral cortex monosynaptic control over the motoneurons of the hand muscles; placing the hands "closer" to the brain.
The recent evolution of the human hand is thus a direct result of the development of the central nervous system, and the hand, therefore, is a direct tool of our consciousness — the main source of differentiated tactile sensations — and a precise working organ enabling gestures — the expressions of our personalities.

There are nevertheless several primitive features left in the human hand, including pentadactyly (having five fingers), the hairless skin of the palm and fingers, and the os centrale found in human embryos, prosimians, and apes. 

Furthermore, the precursors of the intrinsic muscles of the hand are present in the earliest fishes, reflecting that the hand evolved from the pectoral fin and thus is much older than the arm in evolutionary terms.The proportions of the human hand are plesiomorphic (shared by both ancestors and extant primate species); the elongated thumbs and short hands more closely resemble the hand proportions of Miocene apes than those of extant primates.
Humans did not evolve from knuckle-walking apes, and chimpanzees and gorillas independently acquired elongated metacarpals as part of their adaptation to their modes of locomotion. 

Several primitive hand features most likely present in the chimpanzee-human last common ancestor (CHLCA) and absent in modern humans are still present in the hands of Australopithecus, Paranthropus, and Homo floresiensis. 

This suggests that the derived changes in modern humans and Neanderthals did not evolve until 2.5 to 1.5 million years ago or after the appearance of the earliest Acheulian stone tools, and that these changes are associated with tool-related tasks beyond those observed in other hominins.
The thumbs of Ardipithecus ramidus, an early hominin, are almost as robust as in humans, so this may be a primitive trait, while the palms of other extant higher primates are elongated to the extent that some of the thumb's original function has been lost (most notably in highly arboreal primates such as the spider monkey). 

In humans, the big toe is thus more derived than the thumb.There is a hypothesis suggesting the form of the modern human hand is especially conducive to the formation of a compact fist, presumably for fighting purposes. 

The fist is compact and thus effective as a weapon. 

It also provides protection for the fingers. 

However, this is not widely accepted to be one of the primary selective pressures acting on hand morphology throughout human evolution, with tool use and production being thought to be far more influential.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hand
;;;ES;;;



MANO


Una mano es un apéndice prensil con varios dedos ubicado al final del antebrazo o miembro anterior de primates como humanos, chimpancés, monos y lémures.

Algunos otros vertebrados, como el koala (que tiene dos pulgares opuestos en cada "mano" y huellas dactilares extremadamente similares a las huellas dactilares humanas) a menudo se describen con "manos" en lugar de patas en las extremidades delanteras.

Por lo general, se describe que el mapache tiene "manos", aunque carecen de pulgares oponibles. Algunos anatomistas evolutivos usan el término mano para referirse al apéndice de los dedos en la extremidad anterior de manera más general; la mano implicaba la misma pérdida homóloga de dos dígitos que en la mano del dinosaurio. La mano humana suele tener cinco dígitos: cuatro dedos más un pulgar; sin embargo, estos a menudo se denominan colectivamente como cinco dedos, por lo que el pulgar se incluye como uno de los dedos.

Tiene 27 huesos, sin incluir el hueso sesamoideo, cuyo número varía entre las personas, 14 de los cuales son las falanges (proximal, intermedia y distal) de los dedos y el pulgar.

Los huesos metacarpianos conectan los dedos y los huesos carpianos de la muñeca.

Cada mano humana tiene cinco metacarpianos y ocho huesos del carpo.
Los dedos contienen algunas de las áreas más densas de terminaciones nerviosas del cuerpo y son la fuente más rica de retroalimentación táctil.

También tienen la mayor capacidad de posicionamiento del cuerpo; así, el sentido del tacto está íntimamente asociado con las manos.

Al igual que otros órganos emparejados (ojos, pies, piernas), cada mano está controlada predominantemente por el hemisferio cerebral opuesto, por lo que la preferencia manual, la elección manual preferida para actividades con una sola mano, como escribir con un lápiz, refleja el funcionamiento del cerebro individual.
Entre los humanos, las manos juegan una función importante en el lenguaje corporal y el lenguaje de señas.

Asimismo, los diez dígitos de dos manos y las doce falanges de cuatro dedos (tocables por el pulgar) han dado lugar a sistemas numéricos y técnicas de cálculo.


== Estructura ==

Muchos mamíferos y otros animales tienen apéndices de agarre similares en forma a una mano, como patas, garras y garras, pero científicamente no se consideran manos de agarre.

El uso científico del término mano en este sentido para distinguir las terminaciones de las patas delanteras de las traseras es un ejemplo de antropomorfismo.

Las únicas manos de agarre verdaderas aparecen en el orden de los primates de los mamíferos.

Las manos también deben tener pulgares oponibles, como se describe más adelante en el texto.
La mano se encuentra en el extremo distal de cada brazo.

Los simios y los monos a veces se describen como si tuvieran cuatro manos, porque los dedos de los pies son largos y el hallux es oponible y se parece más a un pulgar, lo que permite que los pies se usen como manos.
Los anatomistas evolutivos utilizan a veces la palabra "mano" para referirse al apéndice de los dedos en la extremidad anterior, como cuando se investiga la homología entre los tres dedos de la mano del pájaro y la mano del dinosaurio. La mano de un hombre humano adulto pesa alrededor de una libra.


=== Áreas ===


Las áreas de la mano humana incluyen:

La palma (Volar), que es la región central de la parte anterior de la mano, situada superficialmente al metacarpo.

La piel de esta zona contiene papilas dérmicas para aumentar la fricción, como las que también están presentes en los dedos y se utilizan para las huellas dactilares.
El área opisthenar (dorsal) es el área correspondiente en la parte posterior de la mano.
El talón de la mano es el área anterior a las bases de los huesos metacarpianos, ubicada en la parte proximal de la palma.

Es el área que soporta la mayor presión cuando se usa la palma de la mano como apoyo, como en la parada de manos. Hay cinco dedos unidos a la mano, en particular con un clavo fijado en el extremo en lugar de la garra normal.

Los cuatro dedos se pueden doblar sobre la palma, lo que permite agarrar objetos.

Cada dedo, comenzando por el más cercano al pulgar, tiene un nombre coloquial para distinguirlo de los demás:

dedo índice, dedo índice, dedo índice o segundo dígito
dedo medio o dedo largo o tercer dígito
dedo anular o cuarto dígito
dedo meñique, dedo meñique, dedo meñique, dedo meñique o 5° dedo El pulgar (conectado al primer metacarpiano y al trapecio) se encuentra en uno de los lados, paralelo al brazo.

Una forma confiable de identificar las manos humanas es por la presencia de pulgares oponibles.

Los pulgares oponibles se identifican por la capacidad de colocarse frente a los dedos, una acción muscular conocida como oposición.


=== Huesos ===


El esqueleto de la mano humana consta de 27 huesos: los ocho huesos cortos del carpo de la muñeca están organizados en una fila proximal (escafoides, semilunar, piramidal y pisiforme) que se articula con los huesos del antebrazo, y una fila distal (trapecio, trapezoide, grande y ganchoso), que se articula con las bases de los cinco huesos metacarpianos de la mano.

Las cabezas de los metacarpianos se articularán a su vez con las bases de la falange proximal de los dedos y el pulgar.

Estas articulaciones con los dedos son las articulaciones metacarpofalángicas conocidas como nudillos.

En la cara palmar de las primeras articulaciones metacarpofalángicas hay huesos pequeños, casi esféricos, llamados huesos sesamoideos.

Las catorce falanges forman los dedos y el pulgar, y se numeran IV (del pulgar al meñique) cuando se observa la mano desde una posición anatómica (palma hacia arriba).

Cada uno de los cuatro dedos consta de tres huesos de falange: proximal, medio y distal.

El pulgar solo consta de una falange proximal y distal.

Junto con las falanges de los dedos y el pulgar, estos huesos metacarpianos forman cinco radios o cadenas poliarticuladas.
Debido a que la supinación y la pronación (rotación sobre el eje del antebrazo) se suman a los dos ejes de movimiento de la muñeca, el cúbito y el radio a veces se consideran parte del esqueleto de la mano.
Hay numerosos huesos sesamoideos en la mano, pequeños nódulos osificados incrustados en los tendones; el número exacto varía entre las personas: mientras que un par de huesos sesamoideos se encuentran en prácticamente todas las articulaciones metacarpofalángicas del pulgar, los huesos sesamoideos también son comunes en la articulación interfalángica del pulgar (72,9 %) y en las articulaciones metacarpofalángicas del dedo meñique (82,5 %). ) y el dedo índice (48%).

En casos raros, se han encontrado huesos sesamoideos en todas las articulaciones metacarpofalángicas y en todas las articulaciones interfalángicas distales excepto en el dedo mayor.
Las articulaciones son:

Articulaciones interfalángicas de la mano (las articulaciones de bisagra entre los huesos de los dedos)
articulaciones metacarpofalángicas (donde los dedos se encuentran con la palma)
Articulaciones intercarpianas (donde la palma de la mano se encuentra con la muñeca)
muñeca (también puede verse como perteneciente al antebrazo).


==== Arcos ====

Las partes fijas y móviles de la mano se adaptan a diversas tareas cotidianas formando arcos óseos: arcos longitudinales (los rayos formados por los huesos de los dedos y sus huesos metacarpianos asociados), arcos transversales (formados por los huesos del carpo y los extremos distales de los huesos metacarpianos). ), y arcos oblicuos (entre el pulgar y cuatro dedos):
De los arcos longitudinales o radios de la mano, el del pulgar es el más móvil (y el menos longitudinal).

Mientras que el rayo formado por el dedo meñique y su hueso metacarpiano asociado aún ofrecen cierta movilidad, los rayos restantes son firmemente rígidos.

Las articulaciones falángicas del dedo índice, sin embargo, ofrecen cierta independencia a su dedo, debido a la disposición de sus tendones flexores y extensores. Los huesos del carpo forman dos filas transversales, cada una formando un arco cóncavo en el lado palmar.

Debido a que el arco proximal tiene que adaptarse simultáneamente a la superficie articular del radio ya la fila distal del carpo, es necesariamente flexible.

Por el contrario, el hueso grande, la "piedra angular" del arco distal, se mueve junto con los huesos metacarpianos y, por lo tanto, el arco distal es rígido.

La estabilidad de estos arcos depende más de los ligamentos y las cápsulas de la muñeca que de las formas entrelazadas de los huesos del carpo y, por lo tanto, la muñeca es más estable en flexión que en extensión.

El arco carpiano distal afecta la función de las articulaciones CMC y las manos, pero no la función de la muñeca o el arco carpiano proximal.

Los ligamentos que mantienen los arcos carpianos distales son el ligamento transverso del carpo y los ligamentos intercarpianos (también orientados transversalmente).

Estos ligamentos también forman el túnel carpiano y contribuyen a los arcos palmares profundo y superficial.

Varios tendones musculares que se unen al TCL y los carpianos distales también contribuyen a mantener el arco carpiano. Comparado con los arcos carpianos, el arco formado por los extremos distales de los huesos metacarpianos es flexible debido a la movilidad de los metacarpianos periféricos (pulgar y meñique). dedo).

A medida que estos dos metacarpianos se acercan, la canaleta palmar se profundiza.

El metacarpiano más central (dedo medio) es el más rígido.

Él y sus dos vecinos están atados al carpo por las formas entrelazadas de los huesos metacarpianos.

El metacarpiano del pulgar solo se articula con el trapecio y por lo tanto es completamente independiente, mientras que el quinto metacarpiano (dedo meñique) es semi-independiente con el cuarto metacarpiano (dedo anular) que forma un elemento de transición al quinto metacarpiano. Junto con el pulgar, el cuatro dedos forman cuatro arcos oblicuos, de los cuales el arco del dedo índice es funcionalmente el más importante, especialmente para el agarre de precisión, mientras que el arco del dedo meñique contribuye con un importante mecanismo de bloqueo para el agarre de potencia.

El pulgar es sin duda el "dígito maestro" de la mano, dando valor a todos los demás dedos.

Junto con el índice y el dedo medio, forma la configuración tridáctila dinámica responsable de la mayoría de los agarres que no requieren fuerza.

Los dedos anular y meñique son más estáticos, una reserva lista para interactuar con la palma cuando se necesita mucha fuerza.


=== Músculos ===


Los músculos que actúan sobre la mano se pueden subdividir en dos grupos: los grupos de músculos extrínsecos e intrínsecos.

Los grupos de músculos extrínsecos son los extensores y flexores largos.

Se denominan extrínsecos porque el vientre muscular se encuentra en el antebrazo.


==== Intrínseco ====
Los grupos musculares intrínsecos son los músculos tenar (pulgar) e hipotenar (dedo meñique); los músculos interóseos (cuatro dorsalmente y tres palmares) que se originan entre los huesos metacarpianos; y los músculos lumbricales que surgen del flexor profundo (y son especiales porque no tienen un origen óseo) para insertarse en el mecanismo del capuchón extensor dorsal.


==== Extrínseco ====

Los dedos tienen dos flexores largos, ubicados en la parte inferior del antebrazo.

Se insertan por tendones en las falanges de los dedos.

El flexor profundo se une a la falange distal y el flexor superficial se une a la falange media.

Los flexores permiten la flexión real de los dedos.

El pulgar tiene un flexor largo y un flexor corto en el grupo de músculos tenares.

El pulgar humano también tiene otros músculos en el grupo tenar (oponente y músculo abductor corto), que mueven el pulgar en oposición, lo que hace posible el agarre.
Los extensores están ubicados en la parte posterior del antebrazo y están conectados de una manera más compleja que los flexores al dorso de los dedos.

Los tendones se unen con los músculos interóseos y lumbricales para formar el mecanismo extensor.

La función principal de los extensores es enderezar los dedos.

El pulgar tiene dos extensores en el antebrazo; los tendones de estos forman la tabaquera anatómica.

Además, el dedo índice y el meñique tienen un extensor adicional que se usa, por ejemplo, para señalar.

Los extensores están situados dentro de 6 compartimentos separados.

Los primeros cuatro compartimentos están ubicados en los surcos presentes en el dorso del lado inferior del radio, mientras que el quinto compartimento está entre el radio y el cúbito.

El sexto compartimento está en el surco en el dorso del lado inferior del cúbito.


=== Suministro nervioso ===


La mano está inervada por los nervios radial, mediano y cubital.

MotorEl nervio radial inerva los extensores de los dedos y el abductor del pulgar, por lo tanto, los músculos que se extienden en la muñeca y las articulaciones metacarpofalángicas (nudillos); y que abduce y extiende el pulgar.
El nervio mediano inerva los flexores de la muñeca y los dedos, los abductores y oponentes del pulgar, el primero y el segundo lumbricales.
El nervio cubital inerva los músculos intrínsecos restantes de la mano. Todos los músculos de la mano están inervados por el plexo braquial (C5-T1) y se pueden clasificar por inervación:
Sensorial El nervio radial inerva la piel del dorso de la mano desde el pulgar hasta el dedo anular y las caras dorsales de los dedos índice, medio y medio anular hasta las articulaciones interfalángicas proximales.
El nervio mediano inerva el lado palmar de los dedos pulgar, índice, medio y medio anular.

Las ramas dorsales inervan las falanges distales de los dedos índice, medio y medio anular.
El nervio cubital inerva el tercio cubital de la mano, tanto en la palma como en el dorso de la mano, y los dedos anular y meñique. Hay una variación considerable en este patrón general, excepto en el dedo meñique y la superficie volar de la dedo índice.

Por ejemplo, en algunos individuos, el nervio cubital inerva todo el dedo anular y el lado cubital del dedo medio, mientras que, en otros, el nervio mediano inerva todo el dedo anular.


=== Suministro de sangre ===


La mano recibe sangre de dos arterias, la arteria cubital y la arteria radial.

Estas arterias forman tres arcos sobre las caras dorsal y palmar de la mano, el arco carpiano dorsal (en el dorso de la mano), el arco palmar profundo y el arco palmar superficial.

Juntos, estos tres arcos y sus anastomosis proporcionan sangre oxigenada a la palma, los dedos y el pulgar.
La mano es drenada por la red venosa dorsal de la mano con sangre desoxigenada que sale de la mano a través de la vena cefálica y la vena basílica.


=== Piel ===


La piel glabra (sin pelo) en el frente de la mano, la palma, es relativamente gruesa y se puede doblar a lo largo de las líneas de flexión de la mano donde la piel está fuertemente unida al tejido y los huesos subyacentes.

En comparación con el resto de la piel del cuerpo, las palmas de las manos (así como las plantas de los pies) suelen ser más claras, e incluso mucho más claras en las personas de piel oscura, en comparación con el otro lado de la mano.

De hecho, los genes expresados ​​específicamente en la dermis de la piel palmoplantar inhiben la producción de melanina y, por lo tanto, la capacidad de broncearse, y promueven el engrosamiento de las capas del estrato lúcido y del estrato córneo de la epidermis.

Todas las partes de la piel involucradas en el agarre están cubiertas por crestas papilares (huellas dactilares) que actúan como almohadillas de fricción.

Por el contrario, la piel peluda del lado dorsal es delgada, suave y flexible, de modo que la piel puede retroceder cuando se estiran los dedos.

En el lado dorsal, la piel se puede mover a lo largo de la mano hasta 3 cm (1,2 pulgadas); una entrada importante para los mecanorreceptores cutáneos. La red de la mano es un "pliegue de piel que conecta los dedos".

Estas redes, ubicadas entre cada conjunto de dígitos, se conocen como pliegues de la piel (pliegues interdigitales o plica interdigitalis).

Se definen como "uno de los pliegues de piel, o red rudimentaria, entre los dedos de manos y pies".


=== Variación ===


La relación entre la longitud del dedo índice y la longitud del dedo anular en adultos se ve afectada por el nivel de exposición a las hormonas sexuales masculinas del embrión en el útero.

Esta proporción de dígitos está por debajo de 1 para ambos sexos, pero es menor en los hombres que en las mujeres en promedio.


== Importancia clínica ==


Una serie de trastornos genéticos afectan a la mano.

La polidactilia es la presencia de más dedos de los habituales.

Uno de los trastornos que pueden causar esto es el síndrome de Catel-Manzke.

Los dedos pueden estar fusionados en un trastorno conocido como sindactilia.

O puede haber ausencia de uno o más dedos centrales, una condición conocida como ectrodactilia.

Además, algunas personas nacen sin una o ambas manos (amelia).

La exostosis múltiple hereditaria del antebrazo, también conocida como osteocondromas múltiples hereditarios, es otra causa de deformidad de la mano y el antebrazo en niños y adultos. Existen varias afecciones cutáneas que pueden afectar la mano, incluidas las uñas.
La artritis reumatoide, enfermedad autoinmune, puede afectar la mano, particularmente las articulaciones de los dedos.
Algunas condiciones se pueden tratar con cirugía de la mano.

Estos incluyen el síndrome del túnel carpiano, una condición dolorosa de la mano y los dedos causada por la compresión del nervio mediano, y la contractura de Dupuytren, una condición en la que los dedos se doblan hacia la palma y no se pueden enderezar.

De manera similar, la lesión del nervio cubital puede provocar una condición en la que algunos de los dedos no se pueden flexionar.
Una fractura común de la mano es una fractura de escafoides, una fractura del hueso escafoides, uno de los huesos del carpo.

Esta es la fractura del hueso del carpo más común y puede tardar en sanar debido a un flujo sanguíneo limitado al hueso.

Hay varios tipos de fractura en la base del pulgar; estos se conocen como fracturas de Rolando, fractura de Bennet y pulgar de Gamekeeper.

Otra fractura común, conocida como fractura de Boxer, es la del cuello de un metacarpiano.

Uno también puede tener un dedo roto.


== Evolución ==


Las manos y los pies prensiles de los primates evolucionaron a partir de las manos móviles de las musarañas arborícolas semiarborícolas que vivieron hace unos 60 millones de años.

Este desarrollo ha ido acompañado de importantes cambios en el cerebro y la reubicación de los ojos en la parte frontal de la cara, lo que en conjunto permite el control muscular y la visión estereoscópica necesaria para el agarre controlado.

Este agarre, también conocido como agarre de fuerza, se complementa con el agarre de precisión entre el pulgar y las yemas distales de los dedos que es posible gracias a los pulgares oponibles.

Los homínidos (grandes simios, incluidos los humanos) adquirieron una postura bípeda erguida hace unos 3,6 millones de años, lo que liberó a las manos de la tarea de la locomoción y allanó el camino para la precisión y el rango de movimiento de las manos humanas.

Los análisis funcionales de las características únicas de la mano de los humanos modernos han demostrado que son consistentes con las tensiones y los requisitos asociados con el uso efectivo de las herramientas de piedra paleolíticas.

Es posible que el refinamiento de la postura bípeda en los primeros homínidos evolucionara para facilitar el uso del tronco como palanca para acelerar la mano. Mientras que la mano humana tiene características anatómicas únicas, incluido un pulgar más largo y dedos que se pueden controlar individualmente para En un grado superior, las manos de otros primates son anatómicamente similares y la destreza de la mano humana no puede explicarse únicamente por factores anatómicos.

La maquinaria neural que subyace a los movimientos de la mano es un factor importante que contribuye; los primates han desarrollado conexiones directas entre las neuronas en las áreas motoras corticales y las motoneuronas espinales, dando a la corteza cerebral un control monosináptico sobre las motoneuronas de los músculos de la mano; colocando las manos "más cerca" del cerebro.
La evolución reciente de la mano humana es, por lo tanto, un resultado directo del desarrollo del sistema nervioso central y, por lo tanto, la mano es una herramienta directa de nuestra conciencia, la principal fuente de sensaciones táctiles diferenciadas, y un órgano de trabajo preciso que permite gestos. — las expresiones de nuestras personalidades.

Sin embargo, quedan varias características primitivas en la mano humana, incluida la pentadactilia (que tiene cinco dedos), la piel sin pelo de la palma y los dedos, y el os centrale que se encuentra en embriones humanos, prosimios y simios.

Además, los precursores de los músculos intrínsecos de la mano están presentes en los primeros peces, lo que refleja que la mano evolucionó a partir de la aleta pectoral y, por lo tanto, es mucho más antigua que el brazo en términos evolutivos. Las proporciones de la mano humana son plesiomorfas (compartidas por tanto antepasados ​​como especies de primates existentes); los pulgares alargados y las manos cortas se asemejan más a las proporciones de las manos de los simios del Mioceno que a las de los primates actuales.
Los humanos no evolucionaron a partir de simios que caminaban con los nudillos, y los chimpancés y los gorilas adquirieron metacarpianos alargados de forma independiente como parte de su adaptación a sus modos de locomoción.

Varias características primitivas de la mano probablemente presentes en el último ancestro común chimpancé-humano (CHLCA) y ausentes en los humanos modernos todavía están presentes en las manos de Australopithecus, Paranthropus y Homo floresiensis.

Esto sugiere que los cambios derivados en los humanos modernos y los neandertales no evolucionaron hasta hace 2,5 a 1,5 millones de años o después de la aparición de las primeras herramientas de piedra de Acheulian, y que estos cambios están asociados con tareas relacionadas con herramientas más allá de las observadas en otros homínidos.
Los pulgares de Ardipithecus ramidus, uno de los primeros homínidos, son casi tan robustos como los de los humanos, por lo que esto puede ser un rasgo primitivo, mientras que las palmas de las manos de otros primates superiores existentes se alargan hasta el punto de que se ha perdido parte de la función original del pulgar ( más notablemente en primates altamente arborícolas como el mono araña).

En los humanos, el dedo gordo del pie es más derivado que el pulgar. Existe una hipótesis que sugiere que la forma de la mano humana moderna es especialmente propicia para la formación de un puño compacto, presumiblemente con fines de lucha.

El puño es compacto y, por lo tanto, eficaz como arma.

También proporciona protección para los dedos.

Sin embargo, no se acepta ampliamente que esta sea una de las principales presiones selectivas que actúan sobre la morfología de la mano a lo largo de la evolución humana, y se cree que el uso y la producción de herramientas son mucho más influyentes.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mano

;;;PT;;;



MÃO


Uma mão é um apêndice preênsil, com vários dedos, localizado no final do antebraço ou membro anterior de primatas, como humanos, chimpanzés, macacos e lêmures.

Alguns outros vertebrados, como o coala (que tem dois polegares oponíveis em cada "mão" e impressões digitais extremamente semelhantes às impressões digitais humanas) são frequentemente descritos como tendo "mãos" em vez de patas em seus membros anteriores.

O guaxinim é geralmente descrito como tendo "mãos", embora não existam polegares opositores. mão envolvia a mesma perda homóloga de dois dígitos que na mão do dinossauro. A mão humana geralmente tem cinco dígitos: quatro dedos mais um polegar; estes são muitas vezes referidos coletivamente como cinco dedos, no entanto, em que o polegar é incluído como um dos dedos.

Possui 27 ossos, sem contar o osso sesamoide, cujo número varia entre as pessoas, sendo 14 as falanges (proximal, intermediária e distal) dos dedos e do polegar.

Os ossos do metacarpo conectam os dedos e os ossos do carpo do punho.

Cada mão humana tem cinco metacarpos e oito ossos do carpo.
Os dedos contêm algumas das áreas mais densas de terminações nervosas do corpo e são a fonte mais rica de feedback tátil.

Possuem também a maior capacidade de posicionamento do corpo; assim, o sentido do tato está intimamente associado às mãos.

Como outros órgãos emparelhados (olhos, pés, pernas), cada mão é controlada dominantemente pelo hemisfério cerebral oposto, de modo que a lateralidade – a escolha de mão preferida para atividades com uma mão, como escrever com um lápis, reflete o funcionamento individual do cérebro.
Entre os humanos, as mãos desempenham uma função importante na linguagem corporal e na linguagem de sinais.

Da mesma forma, os dez dígitos de duas mãos e as doze falanges de quatro dedos (tocáveis ​​pelo polegar) deram origem a sistemas numéricos e técnicas de cálculo.


== Estrutura ==

Muitos mamíferos e outros animais têm apêndices semelhantes em forma de mão, como patas, garras e garras, mas estes não são cientificamente considerados como mãos de agarrar.

O uso científico do termo mão nesse sentido para distinguir as terminações das patas dianteiras das traseiras é um exemplo de antropomorfismo.

As únicas mãos que realmente agarram aparecem na ordem dos primatas dos mamíferos.

As mãos também devem ter polegares opositores, conforme descrito mais adiante no texto.
A mão está localizada na extremidade distal de cada braço.

Macacos e macacos são às vezes descritos como tendo quatro mãos, porque os dedos dos pés são longos e o hálux é oponível e se parece mais com um polegar, permitindo assim que os pés sejam usados ​​como mãos.
A palavra "mão" às vezes é usada por anatomistas evolucionários para se referir ao apêndice de dígitos no membro anterior, como ao pesquisar a homologia entre os três dígitos da mão do pássaro e a mão do dinossauro. A mão de um homem adulto pesa cerca de um quilo.


=== Áreas ===


As áreas da mão humana incluem:

A palma (Volar), que é a região central da parte anterior da mão, localizada superficialmente ao metacarpo.

A pele nesta área contém papilas dérmicas para aumentar o atrito, como também estão presentes nos dedos e usadas para impressões digitais.
A área opisthenar (dorsal) é a área correspondente na parte posterior da mão.
O calcanhar da mão é a área anterior às bases dos ossos metacarpais, localizada na parte proximal da palma.

É a área que mais sofre pressão quando se usa a palma da mão como apoio, como na parada de mão. Há cinco dedos presos à mão, notadamente com uma unha fixada na ponta no lugar da garra normal.

Os quatro dedos podem ser dobrados sobre a palma da mão o que permite a apreensão de objetos.

Cada dedo, começando pelo mais próximo do polegar, tem um nome coloquial para distingui-lo dos demais:

dedo indicador, dedo indicador, dedo indicador ou 2º dígito
dedo médio ou dedo longo ou 3º dígito
dedo anelar ou 4º dígito
dedo mínimo, dedo mindinho, dedo mínimo, dedo bebê ou 5º dedoO polegar (ligado ao primeiro metacarpo e trapézio) está localizado em um dos lados, paralelo ao braço.

Uma maneira confiável de identificar mãos humanas é pela presença de polegares opositores.

Os polegares opositores são identificados pela capacidade de serem colocados em oposição aos dedos, uma ação muscular conhecida como oposição.


=== Ossos ===


O esqueleto da mão humana é composto por 27 ossos: os oito ossos curtos do carpo do punho estão organizados em uma fileira proximal (escafoide, semilunar, piramidal e pisiforme) que se articula com os ossos do antebraço, e uma fileira distal (trapézio, trapézio, capitato e hamato), que se articula com as bases dos cinco ossos metacarpais da mão.

As cabeças dos metacarpos se articulam, por sua vez, com as bases da falange proximal dos dedos e do polegar.

Essas articulações com os dedos são as articulações metacarpofalângicas conhecidas como juntas.

Na face palmar das primeiras articulações metacarpofalângicas estão pequenos ossos quase esféricos chamados ossos sesamoides.

As quatorze falanges compõem os dedos e o polegar, e são numeradas IV (polegar ao dedo mínimo) quando a mão é vista de uma posição anatômica (palma para cima).

Os quatro dedos consistem em três ossos da falange: proximal, médio e distal.

O polegar consiste apenas em uma falange proximal e distal.

Juntamente com as falanges dos dedos e do polegar, esses ossos metacarpais formam cinco raios ou cadeias poliarticuladas.
Como a supinação e a pronação (rotação em torno do eixo do antebraço) são adicionadas aos dois eixos de movimentos do punho, a ulna e o rádio às vezes são considerados parte do esqueleto da mão.
Existem numerosos ossos sesamoides na mão, pequenos nódulos ossificados embutidos em tendões; o número exato varia entre as pessoas: enquanto um par de ossos sesamoides são encontrados em praticamente todas as articulações metacarpofalângicas do polegar, os ossos sesamoides também são comuns na articulação interfalângica do polegar (72,9%) e nas articulações metacarpofalângicas do dedo mínimo (82,5% ) e o dedo indicador (48%).

Em casos raros, ossos sesamoides foram encontrados em todas as articulações metacarpofalângicas e em todas as articulações interfalângicas distais, exceto a do dedo longo.
As articulações são:

articulações interfalângicas da mão (as articulações em dobradiça entre os ossos dos dedos)
articulações metacarpofalângicas (onde os dedos encontram a palma)
articulações intercarpais (onde a palma encontra o punho)
pulso (também pode ser visto como pertencente ao antebraço).


==== Arcos ====

As partes fixas e móveis da mão se adaptam a várias tarefas cotidianas formando arcos ósseos: arcos longitudinais (os raios formados pelos ossos dos dedos e seus metacarpos associados), arcos transversais (formados pelos ossos do carpo e extremidades distais dos ossos do metacarpo) ) e arcos oblíquos (entre o polegar e os quatro dedos):
Dos arcos ou raios longitudinais da mão, o do polegar é o mais móvel (e o menos longitudinal).

Enquanto o raio formado pelo dedo mínimo e seu osso metacarpo associado ainda oferece alguma mobilidade, os raios restantes são firmemente rígidos.

As articulações falangeanas do dedo indicador, entretanto, oferecem alguma independência ao seu dedo, devido à disposição de seus tendões flexores e extensores. Os ossos do carpo formam duas fileiras transversais, cada uma formando um arco côncavo no lado palmar.

Como o arco proximal tem que se adaptar simultaneamente à superfície articular do rádio e à fileira distal do carpo, ele é necessariamente flexível.

Em contraste, o capitato, a "pedra angular" do arco distal, move-se junto com os ossos metacarpais e, portanto, o arco distal é rígido.

A estabilidade desses arcos é mais dependente dos ligamentos e cápsulas do punho do que das formas entrelaçadas dos ossos do carpo, e o punho é, portanto, mais estável em flexão do que em extensão.

O arco do carpo distal afeta a função das articulações CMC e das mãos, mas não a função do punho ou do arco do carpo proximal.

Os ligamentos que mantêm os arcos carpais distais são o ligamento transverso do carpo e os ligamentos intercarpais (também orientados transversalmente).

Esses ligamentos também formam o túnel do carpo e contribuem para os arcos palmares profundos e superficiais.

Vários tendões musculares que se ligam ao TCL e aos carpos distais também contribuem para a manutenção do arco do carpo. Comparado aos arcos do carpo, o arco formado pelas extremidades distais dos ossos do metacarpo é flexível devido à mobilidade dos metacarpos dedo).

À medida que esses dois metacarpos se aproximam, a calha palmar se aprofunda.

O metacarpo mais central (dedo médio) é o mais rígido.

Ele e seus dois vizinhos estão ligados ao carpo pelas formas entrelaçadas dos ossos metacarpais.

O metacarpo do polegar articula-se apenas com o trapézio e, portanto, é completamente independente, enquanto o quinto metacarpo (dedo mínimo) é semi-independente com o quarto metacarpo (dedo anelar) que forma um elemento de transição para o quinto metacarpo. quatro dedos formam quatro arcos oblíquos, dos quais o arco do dedo indicador funcionalmente é o mais importante, especialmente para a preensão de precisão, enquanto o arco do dedo mínimo contribui com um importante mecanismo de travamento para a preensão de força.

O polegar é, sem dúvida, o "dígito mestre" da mão, dando valor a todos os outros dedos.

Juntamente com o dedo indicador e médio, forma a configuração tridáctila dinâmica responsável pela maioria das pegadas que não requerem força.

Os dedos anelar e mínimo são mais estáticos, uma reserva pronta para interagir com a palma quando for necessária muita força.


=== Músculos ===


Os músculos que atuam na mão podem ser subdivididos em dois grupos: os grupos musculares extrínsecos e intrínsecos.

Os grupos musculares extrínsecos são os flexores e extensores longos.

Eles são chamados de extrínsecos porque o ventre muscular está localizado no antebraço.


==== Intrínseco ====
Os grupos musculares intrínsecos são os músculos tenar (polegar) e hipotenar (dedo mínimo); os músculos interósseos (quatro dorsais e três volares) originando-se entre os ossos metacarpais; e os músculos lumbricais que se originam do flexor profundo (e são especiais por não terem origem óssea) para se inserir no mecanismo do capuz extensor dorsal.


==== Extrínseco ====

Os dedos têm dois flexores longos, localizados na parte inferior do antebraço.

Eles se inserem por tendões nas falanges dos dedos.

O flexor profundo fixa-se à falange distal e o flexor superficial fixa-se à falange média.

Os flexores permitem a flexão real dos dedos.

O polegar tem um flexor longo e um flexor curto no grupo muscular tenar.

O polegar humano também possui outros músculos do grupo tenar (músculo oponente e abdutor curto), movendo o polegar em oposição, tornando possível a preensão.
Os extensores estão localizados na parte posterior do antebraço e estão conectados de forma mais complexa do que os flexores ao dorso dos dedos.

Os tendões unem-se aos músculos interósseos e lumbricais para formar o mecanismo extensor.

A função primária dos extensores é endireitar os dedos.

O polegar tem dois extensores no antebraço; os tendões destes formam a tabaqueira anatômica.

Além disso, o dedo indicador e o dedo mínimo possuem um extensor extra usado, por exemplo, para apontar.

Os extensores estão situados em 6 compartimentos separados.

Os quatro primeiros compartimentos estão localizados nos sulcos presentes no dorso do lado inferior do rádio enquanto o 5º compartimento está entre o rádio e a ulna.

O 6º compartimento está no sulco no dorso do lado inferior da ulna.


=== Suprimento nervoso ===


A mão é inervada pelos nervos radial, mediano e ulnar.

MotorO nervo radial supre os extensores dos dedos e o abdutor do polegar, portanto, os músculos que se estendem no punho e nas articulações metacarpofalângicas (articulações dos dedos); e que abduz e estende o polegar.
O nervo mediano supre os flexores do punho e dedos, os abdutores e oponentes do polegar, o primeiro e o segundo lumbricais.
O nervo ulnar supre os demais músculos intrínsecos da mão. Todos os músculos da mão são inervados pelo plexo braquial (C5-T1) e podem ser classificados por inervação:
Sensorial O nervo radial supre a pele do dorso da mão do polegar ao dedo anular e as faces dorsais dos dedos indicador, médio e anular até as articulações interfalângicas proximais.
O nervo mediano supre o lado palmar dos dedos polegar, indicador, médio e anular.

Os ramos dorsais inervam as falanges distais dos dedos indicador, médio e anular.
O nervo ulnar supre o terço ulnar da mão, tanto na palma quanto no dorso da mão, e os dedos anular e anular. dedo indicador.

Por exemplo, em alguns indivíduos, o nervo ulnar supre todo o dedo anular e o lado ulnar do dedo médio, enquanto, em outros, o nervo mediano supre todo o dedo anular.


=== Suprimento sanguíneo ===


A mão é suprida com sangue de duas artérias, a artéria ulnar e a artéria radial.

Essas artérias formam três arcos sobre as faces dorsal e palmar da mão, o arco carpal dorsal (nas costas da mão), o arco palmar profundo e o arco palmar superficial.

Juntos, esses três arcos e suas anastomoses fornecem sangue oxigenado para a palma, os dedos e o polegar.
A mão é drenada pela rede venosa dorsal da mão com sangue desoxigenado que sai da mão através da veia cefálica e da veia basílica.


=== Pele ===


A pele glabra (sem pelos) na frente da mão, a palma, é relativamente espessa e pode ser dobrada ao longo das linhas de flexão da mão, onde a pele está firmemente ligada ao tecido e aos ossos subjacentes.

Em comparação com o resto da pele do corpo, as palmas das mãos (assim como as solas dos pés) são geralmente mais claras – e ainda muito mais claras em indivíduos de pele escura, em comparação com o outro lado da mão.

De fato, genes expressos especificamente na derme da pele palmoplantar inibem a produção de melanina e, portanto, a capacidade de bronzear, e promovem o espessamento das camadas do estrato lúcido e do estrato córneo da epiderme.

Todas as partes da pele envolvidas na preensão são cobertas por cristas papilares (impressões digitais) que atuam como almofadas de fricção.

Em contraste, a pele peluda no lado dorsal é fina, macia e flexível, de modo que a pele pode recuar quando os dedos são esticados.

No lado dorsal, a pele pode ser movida na mão até 3 cm (1,2 pol); uma entrada importante dos mecanorreceptores cutâneos. A teia da mão é uma "dobra de pele que conecta os dedos".

Essas teias, localizadas entre cada conjunto de dígitos, são conhecidas como dobras cutâneas (dobras interdigitais ou plica interdigitalis).

Eles são definidos como "uma das dobras da pele, ou teia rudimentar, entre os dedos das mãos e dos pés".


=== Variação ===


A proporção entre o comprimento do dedo indicador e o comprimento do dedo anelar em adultos é afetada pelo nível de exposição aos hormônios sexuais masculinos do embrião no útero.

Esta proporção de dígitos está abaixo de 1 para ambos os sexos, mas é menor nos homens do que nas mulheres, em média.


== Significado clínico ==


Uma série de distúrbios genéticos afetam a mão.

Polidactilia é a presença de mais do que o número normal de dedos.

Um dos distúrbios que podem causar isso é a síndrome de Catel-Manzke.

Os dedos podem estar fundidos em um distúrbio conhecido como sindactilia.

Ou pode haver ausência de um ou mais dedos centrais – uma condição conhecida como ectrodactilia.

Além disso, algumas pessoas nascem sem uma ou ambas as mãos (amélia).

Exostoses múltiplas hereditárias do antebraço - também conhecidas como osteocondromas múltiplos hereditários - é outra causa de deformidade da mão e do antebraço em crianças e adultos. Existem várias condições cutâneas que podem afetar a mão, incluindo as unhas.
A artrite reumatóide doença auto-imune pode afetar a mão, particularmente as articulações dos dedos.
Algumas condições podem ser tratadas por cirurgia da mão.

Estes incluem a síndrome do túnel do carpo, uma condição dolorosa da mão e dos dedos causada pela compressão do nervo mediano e a contratura de Dupuytren, uma condição na qual os dedos se dobram em direção à palma e não podem ser endireitados.

Da mesma forma, a lesão do nervo ulnar pode resultar em uma condição na qual alguns dos dedos não podem ser flexionados.
Uma fratura comum da mão é uma fratura do escafoide – uma fratura do osso escafoide, um dos ossos do carpo.

Esta é a fratura mais comum do osso do carpo e pode demorar a cicatrizar devido a um fluxo sanguíneo limitado para o osso.

Existem vários tipos de fratura na base do polegar; estas são conhecidas como fraturas de Rolando, fratura de Bennet e polegar de Gamekeeper.

Outra fratura comum, conhecida como fratura de Boxer, é no colo de um metacarpo.

Pode-se também ter um dedo quebrado.


== Evolução ==


As mãos e pés preênseis dos primatas evoluíram das mãos móveis de musaranhos semi-arbóreos que viveram cerca de 60 milhões de anos atrás.

Esse desenvolvimento foi acompanhado por importantes mudanças no cérebro e a realocação dos olhos para a frente da face, permitindo o controle muscular e a visão estereoscópica necessários para a preensão controlada.

Essa preensão, também conhecida como preensão de força, é complementada pela preensão de precisão entre o polegar e as pontas distais dos dedos possibilitadas pelos polegares opositores.

Os hominídeos (grandes símios, incluindo humanos) adquiriram uma postura bípede ereta há cerca de 3,6 milhões de anos, o que libertou as mãos da tarefa de locomoção e abriu caminho para a precisão e amplitude de movimento nas mãos humanas.

Análises funcionais das características exclusivas da mão dos humanos modernos mostraram que elas são consistentes com as tensões e exigências associadas ao uso eficaz de ferramentas de pedra paleolíticas.

É possível que o refinamento da postura bípede nos primeiros hominídeos tenha evoluído para facilitar o uso do tronco como alavanca para acelerar a mão. em maior grau, as mãos de outros primatas são anatomicamente semelhantes e a destreza da mão humana não pode ser explicada apenas por fatores anatômicos.

A maquinaria neural subjacente aos movimentos das mãos é um importante fator contribuinte; os primatas desenvolveram conexões diretas entre neurônios em áreas motoras corticais e motoneurônios espinhais, dando ao córtex cerebral controle monossináptico sobre os motoneurônios dos músculos da mão; colocando as mãos "mais perto" do cérebro.
A evolução recente da mão humana é, portanto, um resultado direto do desenvolvimento do sistema nervoso central, e a mão, portanto, é uma ferramenta direta de nossa consciência – a principal fonte de sensações táteis diferenciadas – e um órgão de trabalho preciso que possibilita gestos. — as expressões de nossas personalidades.

Existem, no entanto, várias características primitivas deixadas na mão humana, incluindo a pentadactilia (com cinco dedos), a pele sem pêlos da palma e dos dedos e o os centrale encontrado em embriões humanos, prossímios e macacos.

Além disso, os precursores dos músculos intrínsecos da mão estão presentes nos primeiros peixes, refletindo que a mão evoluiu da barbatana peitoral e, portanto, é muito mais antiga que o braço em termos evolutivos.As proporções da mão humana são plesiomórficas (compartilhadas por tanto ancestrais quanto espécies de primatas existentes); os polegares alongados e as mãos curtas se assemelham mais às proporções das mãos dos macacos do Mioceno do que as dos primatas existentes.
Os humanos não evoluíram de macacos que andam nos dedos, e chimpanzés e gorilas adquiriram independentemente metacarpos alongados como parte de sua adaptação aos seus modos de locomoção.

Várias características de mãos primitivas provavelmente presentes no último ancestral comum chimpanzé-humano (CHLCA) e ausentes em humanos modernos ainda estão presentes nas mãos de Australopithecus, Paranthropus e Homo floresiensis.

Isso sugere que as mudanças derivadas em humanos modernos e neandertais não evoluíram até 2,5 a 1,5 milhão de anos atrás ou após o aparecimento das primeiras ferramentas de pedra acheulianas, e que essas mudanças estão associadas a tarefas relacionadas a ferramentas além daquelas observadas em outros hominídeos.
Os polegares de Ardipithecus ramidus, um hominídeo primitivo, são quase tão robustos quanto em humanos, então isso pode ser uma característica primitiva, enquanto as palmas de outros primatas superiores existentes são alongadas na medida em que parte da função original do polegar foi perdida. mais notavelmente em primatas altamente arborícolas, como o macaco-aranha).

Nos humanos, o dedão do pé é, portanto, mais derivado do que o polegar. Há uma hipótese sugerindo que a forma da mão humana moderna é especialmente propícia à formação de um punho compacto, presumivelmente para fins de luta.

O punho é compacto e, portanto, eficaz como arma.

Ele também fornece proteção para os dedos.

No entanto, isso não é amplamente aceito como uma das principais pressões seletivas que atuam na morfologia da mão ao longo da evolução humana, com o uso e a produção de ferramentas sendo considerados muito mais influentes.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hand

;;;FR;;;



MAIN


Une main est un appendice préhensile à plusieurs doigts situé à l'extrémité de l'avant-bras ou du membre antérieur des primates tels que les humains, les chimpanzés, les singes et les lémuriens.

Quelques autres vertébrés tels que le koala (qui a deux pouces opposables sur chaque "main" et des empreintes digitales extrêmement similaires aux empreintes digitales humaines) sont souvent décrits comme ayant des "mains" au lieu de pattes sur leurs membres antérieurs.

Le raton laveur est généralement décrit comme ayant des "mains" bien que les pouces opposables manquent. main impliquait la même perte homologue de deux chiffres que dans la main de dinosaure. La main humaine a généralement cinq chiffres : quatre doigts plus un pouce ; ceux-ci sont souvent appelés collectivement cinq doigts, cependant, le pouce étant inclus comme l'un des doigts.

Il comporte 27 os, sans compter l'os sésamoïde, dont le nombre varie selon les personnes, dont 14 sont les phalanges (proximales, intermédiaires et distales) des doigts et du pouce.

Les os métacarpiens relient les doigts et les os carpiens du poignet.

Chaque main humaine a cinq métacarpiens et huit os du carpe.
Les doigts contiennent certaines des zones les plus denses de terminaisons nerveuses du corps et sont la source la plus riche de rétroaction tactile.

Ils ont également la plus grande capacité de positionnement du corps ; ainsi, le sens du toucher est intimement associé aux mains.

Comme d'autres organes appariés (yeux, pieds, jambes), chaque main est principalement contrôlée par l'hémisphère cérébral opposé, de sorte que la latéralité - le choix de main préféré pour les activités à une main telles que l'écriture avec un crayon, reflète le fonctionnement cérébral individuel.
Chez les humains, les mains jouent un rôle important dans le langage corporel et le langage des signes.

De même, les dix chiffres de deux mains et les douze phalanges de quatre doigts (touchables par le pouce) ont donné naissance à des systèmes de numération et à des techniques de calcul.


== Structure ==

De nombreux mammifères et autres animaux ont des appendices de préhension de forme similaire à une main tels que des pattes, des griffes et des serres, mais ceux-ci ne sont pas scientifiquement considérés comme des mains de préhension.

L'utilisation scientifique du terme main dans ce sens pour distinguer les terminaisons des pattes avant de celles de derrière est un exemple d'anthropomorphisme.

Les seules vraies mains agrippantes apparaissent dans l'ordre mammifère des primates.

Les mains doivent également avoir des pouces opposables, comme décrit plus loin dans le texte.
La main est située à l'extrémité distale de chaque bras.

Les singes et les singes sont parfois décrits comme ayant quatre mains, car les orteils sont longs et l'hallux est opposable et ressemble plus à un pouce, permettant ainsi aux pieds d'être utilisés comme mains.
Le mot "main" est parfois utilisé par les anatomistes évolutionnistes pour désigner l'appendice des chiffres sur le membre antérieur, par exemple lors de la recherche de l'homologie entre les trois chiffres de la main de l'oiseau et de la main du dinosaure. La main d'un homme adulte pèse environ une livre.


=== Zones ===


Les domaines de la main humaine comprennent:

La paume (Volar), qui est la région centrale de la partie antérieure de la main, située superficiellement au métacarpe.

La peau de cette zone contient des papilles dermiques pour augmenter la friction, comme celles qui sont également présentes sur les doigts et utilisées pour les empreintes digitales.
La zone opisthénar (dorsale) est la zone correspondante sur la partie postérieure de la main.
Le talon de la main est la zone en avant des bases des os métacarpiens, située dans la partie proximale de la paume.

C'est la zone qui subit le plus de pression lors de l'utilisation de la paume de la main comme support, comme dans le poirier. Il y a cinq doigts attachés à la main, notamment avec un ongle fixé à l'extrémité à la place de la griffe normale.

Les quatre doigts peuvent être repliés sur la paume ce qui permet de saisir des objets.

Chaque doigt, en commençant par celui le plus proche du pouce, porte un nom familier pour le distinguer des autres :

index, pointeur, index ou 2e chiffre
majeur ou doigt long ou 3ème chiffre
annulaire ou 4ème chiffre
petit doigt, petit doigt, petit doigt, petit doigt ou 5e doigtLe pouce (relié au premier métacarpien et au trapèze) est situé sur l'un des côtés, parallèlement au bras.

Un moyen fiable d'identifier les mains humaines est la présence de pouces opposables.

Les pouces opposables sont identifiés par la capacité à être amenés à l'opposé des doigts, une action musculaire connue sous le nom d'opposition.


=== Os ===


Le squelette de la main humaine est constitué de 27 os : les huit os courts du carpe du poignet sont organisés en une rangée proximale (scaphoïde, lunatique, triquetral et pisiforme) qui s'articule avec les os de l'avant-bras, et une rangée distale (trapèze, trapézoïdal, capité et hamate), qui s'articule avec les bases des cinq os métacarpiens de la main.

Les têtes des métacarpiens s'articuleront chacune à leur tour avec les bases de la phalange proximale des doigts et du pouce.

Ces articulations avec les doigts sont les articulations métacarpo-phalangiennes appelées jointures.

À la face palmaire des premières articulations métacarpo-phalangiennes se trouvent de petits os presque sphériques appelés os sésamoïdes.

Les quatorze phalanges composent les doigts et le pouce, et sont numérotées IV (pouce à petit doigt) lorsque la main est vue d'une position anatomique (paume vers le haut).

Les quatre doigts sont chacun constitués de trois os de phalange : proximal, moyen et distal.

Le pouce se compose uniquement d'une phalange proximale et distale.

Avec les phalanges des doigts et du pouce, ces os métacarpiens forment cinq rayons ou chaînes polyarticulées.
Parce que la supination et la pronation (rotation autour de l'axe de l'avant-bras) s'ajoutent aux deux axes de mouvements du poignet, le cubitus et le radius sont parfois considérés comme faisant partie du squelette de la main.
Il y a de nombreux os sésamoïdes dans la main, de petits nœuds ossifiés intégrés dans les tendons ; le nombre exact varie d'une personne à l'autre : alors qu'une paire d'os sésamoïdes se trouve à pratiquement toutes les articulations métacarpophalangiennes du pouce, les os sésamoïdes sont également fréquents à l'articulation interphalangienne du pouce (72,9 %) et aux articulations métacarpophalangiennes de l'auriculaire (82,5 %). ) et l'index (48%).

Dans de rares cas, des os sésamoïdes ont été trouvés dans toutes les articulations métacarpo-phalangiennes et toutes les articulations interphalangiennes distales sauf celle du doigt long.
Les articulations sont :

articulations interphalangiennes de la main (articulations charnières entre les os des doigts)
articulations métacarpo-phalangiennes (où les doigts rencontrent la paume)
articulations intercarpiennes (où la paume rencontre le poignet)
poignet (peut également être considéré comme appartenant à l'avant-bras).


==== Arches ====

Les parties fixe et mobile de la main s'adaptent aux diverses tâches quotidiennes en formant des arcs osseux : arcs longitudinaux (les rayons formés par les os des doigts et leurs os métacarpiens associés), arcs transversaux (formés par les os du carpe et les extrémités distales des os métacarpiens ), et les arcs obliques (entre le pouce et les quatre doigts) :
Des arcs ou rayons longitudinaux de la main, celui du pouce est le plus mobile (et le moins longitudinal).

Alors que le rayon formé par le petit doigt et son os métacarpien associé offre encore une certaine mobilité, les rayons restants sont fermement rigides.

Les articulations phalangiennes de l'index offrent cependant une certaine indépendance à son doigt, du fait de la disposition de ses tendons fléchisseurs et d'extension. Les os du carpe forment deux rangées transversales formant chacune un arc concave du côté palmaire.

L'arc proximal devant simultanément s'adapter à la surface articulaire du radius et à la rangée carpienne distale, il est par nécessité flexible.

En revanche, le capitatum, la "clé de voûte" de l'arc distal, se déplace avec les os métacarpiens et l'arc distal est donc rigide.

La stabilité de ces arcs est plus dépendante des ligaments et des capsules du poignet que des formes imbriquées des os du carpe, et le poignet est donc plus stable en flexion qu'en extension.

L'arc carpien distal affecte la fonction des articulations CMC et des mains, mais pas la fonction du poignet ou de l'arc carpien proximal.

Les ligaments qui maintiennent les arcs carpiens distaux sont le ligament carpien transverse et les ligaments intercarpiens (également orientés transversalement).

Ces ligaments forment également le canal carpien et contribuent aux arcades palmaires profondes et superficielles.

Plusieurs tendons musculaires s'attachant au TCL et aux carpiens distaux contribuent également au maintien de l'arc carpien. Comparé aux arcs carpiens, l'arc formé par les extrémités distales des os métacarpiens est flexible du fait de la mobilité des métacarpiens périphériques (pouce et petit doigt).

Au fur et à mesure que ces deux métacarpiens se rapprochent, la gouttière palmaire s'approfondit.

Le métacarpien le plus central (le majeur) est le plus rigide.

Lui et ses deux voisins sont liés au carpe par les formes imbriquées des os métacarpiens.

Le métacarpien du pouce ne s'articule qu'avec le trapèze et est donc complètement indépendant, tandis que le cinquième métacarpien (auriculaire) est semi-indépendant avec le quatrième métacarpien (annulaire) qui forme un élément de transition vers le cinquième métacarpien.Avec le pouce, le quatre doigts forment quatre arcs obliques, dont l'arc de l'index est fonctionnellement le plus important, en particulier pour la préhension de précision, tandis que l'arc de l'auriculaire contribue à un mécanisme de verrouillage important pour la prise de puissance.

Le pouce est sans aucun doute le "maître chiffre" de la main, donnant de la valeur à tous les autres doigts.

Avec l'index et le majeur, il forme la configuration tridactyle dynamique responsable de la plupart des prises ne nécessitant pas de force.

L'annulaire et les petits doigts sont plus statiques, une réserve prête à interagir avec la paume lorsqu'une grande force est nécessaire.


=== Muscles ===


Les muscles agissant sur la main peuvent être subdivisés en deux groupes : les groupes musculaires extrinsèques et intrinsèques.

Les groupes musculaires extrinsèques sont les longs fléchisseurs et extenseurs.

Ils sont dits extrinsèques car le ventre musculaire est situé sur l'avant-bras.


==== Intrinsèque ====
Les groupes musculaires intrinsèques sont les muscles thénar (pouce) et hypothénar (petit doigt); les muscles interosseux (quatre dorsalement et trois palmairement) prenant naissance entre les os métacarpiens ; et les muscles lombricaux issus du fléchisseur profond (et sont particuliers car ils n'ont pas d'origine osseuse) à insérer sur le mécanisme du capuchon extenseur dorsal.


==== Extrinsèque ====

Les doigts ont deux longs fléchisseurs, situés sous l'avant-bras.

Ils s'insèrent par des tendons aux phalanges des doigts.

Le fléchisseur profond s'attache à la phalange distale et le fléchisseur superficiel s'attache à la phalange moyenne.

Les fléchisseurs permettent la flexion réelle des doigts.

Le pouce a un long fléchisseur et un court fléchisseur dans le groupe musculaire thénar.

Le pouce humain possède également d'autres muscles du groupe thénar (muscle adversaire et court abducteur), déplaçant le pouce en opposition, rendant possible la préhension.
Les extenseurs sont situés à l'arrière de l'avant-bras et sont reliés de manière plus complexe que les fléchisseurs au dos des doigts.

Les tendons s'unissent aux muscles interosseux et lombricaux pour former le mécanisme d'extenseur.

La fonction première des extenseurs est de redresser les doigts.

Le pouce a deux extenseurs dans l'avant-bras ; les tendons de ceux-ci forment la tabatière anatomique.

De plus, l'index et le petit doigt ont un extenseur supplémentaire utilisé, par exemple, pour pointer.

Les extenseurs sont situés dans 6 compartiments séparés.

Les quatre premiers compartiments sont situés dans les rainures présentes sur le dos du côté inférieur du radius tandis que le 5ème compartiment se situe entre le radius et le cubitus.

Le 6ème compartiment est dans la rainure sur le dos du côté inférieur de l'ulna.


=== Innervation ===


La main est innervée par les nerfs radial, médian et ulnaire.

MoteurLe nerf radial fournit les extenseurs des doigts et l'abducteur du pouce, donc les muscles qui s'étendent au niveau du poignet et des articulations métacarpo-phalangiennes (articulations); et qui enlève et étend le pouce.
Le nerf médian innerve les fléchisseurs du poignet et des doigts, les abducteurs et les adversaires du pouce, le premier et le second lombricaux.
Le nerf cubital fournit les muscles intrinsèques restants de la main. Tous les muscles de la main sont innervés par le plexus brachial (C5-T1) et peuvent être classés par innervation :
SensorielLe nerf radial innerve la peau du dos de la main du pouce à l'annulaire et les faces dorsales de l'index, du majeur et du demi-annulaire jusqu'aux articulations interphalangiennes proximales.
Le nerf médian irrigue la face palmaire du pouce, de l'index, du majeur et du demi-annulaire.

Les branches dorsales innervent les phalanges distales de l'index, du majeur et du demi-annulaire.
Le nerf cubital alimente le tiers ulnaire de la main, à la fois à la paume et au dos de la main, ainsi que le petit et le demi-annulaire. Il existe une variation considérable de ce schéma général, à l'exception du petit doigt et de la surface palmaire l'index.

Par exemple, chez certains individus, le nerf cubital irrigue tout l'annulaire et le côté ulnaire du majeur, tandis que chez d'autres, le nerf médian irrigue tout l'annulaire.


=== Approvisionnement en sang ===


La main est alimentée en sang par deux artères, l'artère ulnaire et l'artère radiale.

Ces artères forment trois arcs sur les faces dorsale et palmaire de la main, l'arc carpien dorsal (sur le dos de la main), l'arc palmaire profond et l'arc palmaire superficiel.

Ensemble, ces trois arcs et leurs anastomoses fournissent du sang oxygéné à la paume, aux doigts et au pouce.
La main est drainée par le réseau veineux dorsal de la main avec du sang désoxygéné sortant de la main par la veine céphalique et la veine basilique.


=== Peau ===


La peau glabre (sans poils) sur le devant de la main, la paume, est relativement épaisse et peut être pliée le long des lignes de flexion de la main où la peau est étroitement liée aux tissus et aux os sous-jacents.

Par rapport au reste de la peau du corps, les paumes des mains (ainsi que la plante des pieds) sont généralement plus claires - et même beaucoup plus claires chez les personnes à la peau foncée, par rapport à l'autre côté de la main.

En effet, des gènes spécifiquement exprimés dans le derme de la peau palmoplantaire inhibent la production de mélanine et donc la capacité à bronzer, et favorisent l'épaississement des couches stratum lucidum et stratum corneum de l'épiderme.

Toutes les parties de la peau impliquées dans la préhension sont recouvertes de crêtes papillaires (empreintes digitales) agissant comme des coussinets de friction.

En revanche, la peau velue de la face dorsale est fine, douce et souple, de sorte que la peau peut reculer lorsque les doigts sont étirés.

Sur la face dorsale, la peau peut être déplacée sur la main jusqu'à 3 cm (1,2 po); un intrant important les mécanorécepteurs cutanés. La nappe de la main est un "pli de peau qui relie les doigts".

Ces toiles, situées entre chaque ensemble de doigts, sont appelées plis cutanés (plis interdigitaux ou plica interdigitalis).

Ils sont définis comme "l'un des plis de la peau, ou toile rudimentaire, entre les doigts et les orteils".


=== Variante ===


Le rapport entre la longueur de l'index et la longueur de l'annulaire chez l'adulte est affecté par le niveau d'exposition aux hormones sexuelles mâles de l'embryon in utero.

Ce rapport numérique est inférieur à 1 pour les deux sexes mais il est inférieur chez les hommes que chez les femmes en moyenne.


== Signification clinique ==


Un certain nombre de maladies génétiques affectent la main.

La polydactylie est la présence de plus que le nombre habituel de doigts.

L'un des troubles qui peuvent en être la cause est le syndrome de Catel-Manzke.

Les doigts peuvent être fusionnés dans un trouble connu sous le nom de syndactylie.

Ou il peut y avoir une absence d'un ou plusieurs doigts centraux, une condition connue sous le nom d'ectrodactylie.

De plus, certaines personnes naissent sans une ou les deux mains (amelia).

Les exostoses multiples héréditaires de l'avant-bras, également appelées ostéochondromes multiples héréditaires, sont une autre cause de déformation de la main et de l'avant-bras chez les enfants et les adultes. Plusieurs affections cutanées peuvent affecter la main, y compris les ongles.
La polyarthrite rhumatoïde, maladie auto-immune, peut affecter la main, en particulier les articulations des doigts.
Certaines conditions peuvent être traitées par chirurgie de la main.

Ceux-ci comprennent le syndrome du canal carpien, une affection douloureuse de la main et des doigts causée par la compression du nerf médian, et la contracture de Dupuytren, une affection dans laquelle les doigts se plient vers la paume et ne peuvent pas être redressés.

De même, une lésion du nerf cubital peut entraîner une condition dans laquelle certains des doigts ne peuvent pas être fléchis.
Une fracture courante de la main est une fracture du scaphoïde - une fracture de l'os scaphoïde, l'un des os du carpe.

Il s'agit de la fracture de l'os carpien la plus courante et peut être lente à guérir en raison d'un flux sanguin limité vers l'os.

Il existe différents types de fracture à la base du pouce ; celles-ci sont connues sous le nom de fractures de Rolando, de fracture de Bennet et de pouce de Gamekeeper.

Une autre fracture courante, connue sous le nom de fracture de Boxer, se situe au niveau du col d'un métacarpien.

On peut aussi avoir un doigt cassé.


== Évolution ==


Les mains et les pieds préhensiles des primates ont évolué à partir des mains mobiles des musaraignes semi-arboricoles qui vivaient il y a environ 60 millions d'années.

Cette évolution s'est accompagnée d'importants changements dans le cerveau et de la relocalisation des yeux vers l'avant du visage, permettant ensemble le contrôle musculaire et la vision stéréoscopique nécessaires à une préhension contrôlée.

Cette préhension, aussi appelée power grip, est complétée par la préhension de précision entre le pouce et la pulpe distale des doigts rendue possible par les pouces opposables.

Les hominidés (grands singes, y compris les humains) ont acquis une posture bipède dressée il y a environ 3,6 millions d'années, ce qui a libéré les mains de la tâche de locomotion et ouvert la voie à la précision et à l'amplitude des mouvements des mains humaines.

Les analyses fonctionnelles des caractéristiques uniques à la main de l'homme moderne ont montré qu'elles sont compatibles avec les contraintes et les exigences associées à l'utilisation efficace des outils de pierre paléolithiques.

Il est possible que le raffinement de la posture bipède chez les premiers hominidés ait évolué pour faciliter l'utilisation du tronc comme levier pour accélérer la main. Alors que la main humaine a des caractéristiques anatomiques uniques, y compris un pouce et des doigts plus longs qui peuvent être contrôlés individuellement pour à un degré supérieur, les mains des autres primates sont anatomiquement similaires et la dextérité de la main humaine ne peut s'expliquer uniquement par des facteurs anatomiques.

La machinerie neuronale sous-jacente aux mouvements de la main est un facteur contributif majeur; les primates ont développé des connexions directes entre les neurones des aires motrices corticales et les motoneurones spinaux, donnant au cortex cérébral un contrôle monosynaptique sur les motoneurones des muscles de la main ; placer les mains "plus près" du cerveau.
L'évolution récente de la main humaine est donc un résultat direct du développement du système nerveux central, et la main est donc un outil direct de notre conscience - la principale source de sensations tactiles différenciées - et un organe de travail précis permettant des gestes — les expressions de nos personnalités.

Il reste néanmoins plusieurs caractéristiques primitives dans la main humaine, notamment la pentadactylie (ayant cinq doigts), la peau glabre de la paume et des doigts et l'os central que l'on trouve chez les embryons humains, les prosimiens et les singes.

De plus, les précurseurs des muscles intrinsèques de la main sont présents chez les premiers poissons, reflétant que la main a évolué à partir de la nageoire pectorale et est donc beaucoup plus ancienne que le bras en termes d'évolution. Les proportions de la main humaine sont plésiomorphes (partagées par à la fois les ancêtres et les espèces de primates existantes) ; les pouces allongés et les mains courtes ressemblent plus aux proportions des mains des singes du Miocène qu'à celles des primates existants.
Les humains n'ont pas évolué à partir de singes marchant sur les doigts, et les chimpanzés et les gorilles ont indépendamment acquis des métacarpiens allongés dans le cadre de leur adaptation à leurs modes de locomotion.

Plusieurs caractéristiques primitives de la main très probablement présentes dans le dernier ancêtre commun chimpanzé-humain (CHLCA) et absentes chez l'homme moderne sont toujours présentes entre les mains d'Australopithecus, Paranthropus et Homo floresiensis.

Cela suggère que les changements dérivés chez les humains modernes et les Néandertaliens n'ont évolué qu'il y a 2,5 à 1,5 millions d'années ou après l'apparition des premiers outils de pierre acheuliens, et que ces changements sont associés à des tâches liées aux outils au-delà de celles observées chez d'autres hominidés.
Les pouces d'Ardipithecus ramidus, un hominin précoce, sont presque aussi robustes que chez l'homme, il peut donc s'agir d'un trait primitif, tandis que les paumes d'autres primates supérieurs existants sont allongées au point qu'une partie de la fonction originale du pouce a été perdue ( notamment chez les primates très arboricoles comme le singe araignée).

Chez l'homme, le gros orteil est donc plus dérivé que le pouce. Il existe une hypothèse suggérant que la forme de la main humaine moderne est particulièrement propice à la formation d'un poing compact, vraisemblablement à des fins de combat.

Le poing est compact et donc efficace comme arme.

Il offre également une protection pour les doigts.

Cependant, cela n'est pas largement accepté comme l'une des principales pressions sélectives agissant sur la morphologie de la main tout au long de l'évolution humaine, l'utilisation et la production d'outils étant considérées comme beaucoup plus influentes.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Main
