

HEART


The heart is a muscular organ in most animals that pumps blood through the blood vessels of the circulatory system. 

The pumped blood carries oxygen and nutrients to the body, while carrying metabolic waste such as carbon dioxide to the lungs. 

In humans, the heart is approximately the size of a closed fist and is located between the lungs, in the middle compartment of the chest.

In humans, other mammals, and birds, the heart is divided into four chambers: upper left and right atria and lower left and right ventricles. 

Commonly the right atrium and ventricle are referred together as the right heart and their left counterparts as the left heart. 

Fish, in contrast, have two chambers, an atrium and a ventricle, while reptiles have three chambers. 

In a healthy heart blood flows one way through the heart due to heart valves, which prevent backflow. 

The heart is enclosed in a protective sac, the pericardium, which also contains a small amount of fluid. 

The wall of the heart is made up of three layers: epicardium, myocardium, and endocardium.The heart pumps blood with a rhythm determined by a group of pacemaker cells in the sinoatrial node. 

These generate a current that causes contraction of the heart, traveling through the atrioventricular node and along the conduction system of the heart. 

The heart receives blood low in oxygen from the systemic circulation, which enters the right atrium from the superior and inferior venae cavae and passes to the right ventricle. 

From here it is pumped into the pulmonary circulation, through the lungs where it receives oxygen and gives off carbon dioxide. 

Oxygenated blood then returns to the left atrium, passes through the left ventricle and is pumped out through the aorta to the systemic circulation−where the oxygen is used and metabolized to carbon dioxide. 

The heart beats at a resting rate close to 72 beats per minute. 

Exercise temporarily increases the rate, but lowers resting heart rate in the long term, and is good for heart health.

Cardiovascular diseases (CVD) are the most common cause of death globally as of 2008, accounting for 30% of deaths. 

Of these more than three-quarters are a result of coronary artery disease and stroke. 

Risk factors include: smoking, being overweight, little exercise, high cholesterol, high blood pressure, and poorly controlled diabetes, among others. 

Cardiovascular diseases frequently do not have symptoms or may cause chest pain or shortness of breath. 

Diagnosis of heart disease is often done by the taking of a medical history, listening to the heart-sounds with a stethoscope, ECG, echocardiogram, and ultrasound. 

Specialists who focus on diseases of the heart are called cardiologists, although many specialties of medicine may be involved in treatment.


== Structure ==



=== Location and shape ===


The human heart is situated in the mediastinum, at the level of thoracic vertebrae T5-T8. 

A double-membraned sac called the pericardium surrounds the heart and attaches to the mediastinum. 

The back surface of the heart lies near the vertebral column, and the front surface sits behind the sternum and rib cartilages. 

The upper part of the heart is the attachment point for several large blood vessels—the venae cavae, aorta and pulmonary trunk. 

The upper part of the heart is located at the level of the third costal cartilage. 

The lower tip of the heart, the apex, lies to the left of the sternum (8 to 9 cm from the midsternal line) between the junction of the fourth and fifth ribs near their articulation with the costal cartilages.

The largest part of the heart is usually slightly offset to the left side of the chest (though occasionally it may be offset to the right) and is felt to be on the left because the left heart is stronger and larger, since it pumps to all body parts. 

Because the heart is between the lungs, the left lung is smaller than the right lung and has a cardiac notch in its border to accommodate the heart.

The heart is cone-shaped, with its base positioned upwards and tapering down to the apex. 

An adult heart has a mass of 250–350 grams (9–12 oz). 

The heart is often described as the size of a fist: 12 cm (5 in) in length, 8 cm (3.5 in) wide, and 6 cm (2.5 in) in thickness, although this description is disputed, as the heart is likely to be slightly larger. 

Well-trained athletes can have much larger hearts due to the effects of exercise on the heart muscle, similar to the response of skeletal muscle.


=== Chambers ===


The heart has four chambers, two upper atria, the receiving chambers, and two lower ventricles, the discharging chambers. 

The atria open into the ventricles via the atrioventricular valves, present in the atrioventricular septum. 

This distinction is visible also on the surface of the heart as the coronary sulcus. 

There is an ear-shaped structure in the upper right atrium called the right atrial appendage, or auricle, and another in the upper left atrium, the left atrial appendage. 

The right atrium and the right ventricle together are sometimes referred to as the right heart. 

Similarly, the left atrium and the left ventricle together are sometimes referred to as the left heart. 

The ventricles are separated from each other by the interventricular septum, visible on the surface of the heart as the anterior longitudinal sulcus and the posterior interventricular sulcus.

The fibrous cardiac skeleton gives structure to the heart. 

It forms the atrioventricular septum, which separates the atria from the ventricles, and the fibrous rings, which serve as bases for the four heart valves. 

The cardiac skeleton also provides an important boundary in the heart's electrical conduction system since collagen cannot conduct electricity. 

The interatrial septum separates the atria, and the interventricular septum separates the ventricles. 

The interventricular septum is much thicker than the interatrial septum since the ventricles need to generate greater pressure when they contract.


==== Valves ====

The heart has four valves, which separate its chambers. 

One valve lies between each atrium and ventricle, and one valve rests at the exit of each ventricle.

The valves between the atria and ventricles are called the atrioventricular valves. 

Between the right atrium and the right ventricle is the tricuspid valve. 

The tricuspid valve has three cusps, which connect to chordae tendinae and three papillary muscles named the anterior, posterior, and septal muscles, after their relative positions. 

The mitral valve lies between the left atrium and left ventricle. 

It is also known as the bicuspid valve due to its having two cusps, an anterior and a posterior cusp. 

These cusps are also attached via chordae tendinae to two papillary muscles projecting from the ventricular wall.

The papillary muscles extend from the walls of the heart to valves by cartilaginous connections called chordae tendinae. 

These muscles prevent the valves from falling too far back when they close. 

During the relaxation phase of the cardiac cycle, the papillary muscles are also relaxed and the tension on the chordae tendineae is slight. 

As the heart chambers contract, so do the papillary muscles. 

This creates tension on the chordae tendineae, helping to hold the cusps of the atrioventricular valves in place and preventing them from being blown back into the atria. 

Two additional semilunar valves sit at the exit of each of the ventricles. 

The pulmonary valve is located at the base of the pulmonary artery. 

This has three cusps which are not attached to any papillary muscles. 

When the ventricle relaxes blood flows back into the ventricle from the artery and this flow of blood fills the pocket-like valve, pressing against the cusps which close to seal the valve. 

The semilunar aortic valve is at the base of the aorta and also is not attached to papillary muscles. 

This too has three cusps which close with the pressure of the blood flowing back from the aorta.


==== Right heart ====

The right heart consists of two chambers, the right atrium and the right ventricle, separated by a valve, the tricuspid valve.

The right atrium receives blood almost continuously from the body's two major veins, the superior and inferior venae cavae. 

A small amount of blood from the coronary circulation also drains into the right atrium via the coronary sinus, which is immediately above and to the middle of the opening of the inferior vena cava. 

In the wall of the right atrium is an oval-shaped depression known as the fossa ovalis, which is a remnant of an opening in the fetal heart known as the foramen ovale. 

Most of the internal surface of the right atrium is smooth, the depression of the fossa ovalis is medial, and the anterior surface has prominent ridges of pectinate muscles, which are also present in the right atrial appendage.

The right atrium is connected to the right ventricle by the tricuspid valve. 

The walls of the right ventricle are lined with trabeculae carneae, ridges of cardiac muscle covered by endocardium. 

In addition to these muscular ridges, a band of cardiac muscle, also covered by endocardium, known as the moderator band reinforces the thin walls of the right ventricle and plays a crucial role in cardiac conduction. 

It arises from the lower part of the interventricular septum and crosses the interior space of the right ventricle to connect with the inferior papillary muscle. 

The right ventricle tapers into the pulmonary trunk, into which it ejects blood when contracting. 

The pulmonary trunk branches into the left and right pulmonary arteries that carry the blood to each lung. 

The pulmonary valve lies between the right heart and the pulmonary trunk.


==== Left heart ====

The left heart has two chambers: the left atrium and the left ventricle, separated by the mitral valve.The left atrium receives oxygenated blood back from the lungs via one of the four pulmonary veins. 

The left atrium has an outpouching called the left atrial appendage. 

Like the right atrium, the left atrium is lined by pectinate muscles. 

The left atrium is connected to the left ventricle by the mitral valve.The left ventricle is much thicker as compared with the right, due to the greater force needed to pump blood to the entire body. 

Like the right ventricle, the left also has trabeculae carneae, but there is no moderator band. 

The left ventricle pumps blood to the body through the aortic valve and into the aorta. 

Two small openings above the aortic valve carry blood to the heart muscle; the left coronary artery is above the left cusp of the valve, and the right coronary artery is above the right cusp.


=== Wall ===


The heart wall is made up of three layers: the inner endocardium, middle myocardium and outer epicardium. 

These are surrounded by a double-membraned sac called the pericardium.
The innermost layer of the heart is called the endocardium. 

It is made up of a lining of simple squamous epithelium and covers heart chambers and valves. 

It is continuous with the endothelium of the veins and arteries of the heart, and is joined to the myocardium with a thin layer of connective tissue. 

The endocardium, by secreting endothelins, may also play a role in regulating the contraction of the myocardium.

The middle layer of the heart wall is the myocardium, which is the cardiac muscle—a layer of involuntary striated muscle tissue surrounded by a framework of collagen. 

The cardiac muscle pattern is elegant and complex, as the muscle cells swirl and spiral around the chambers of the heart, with the outer muscles forming a figure 8 pattern around the atria and around the bases of the great vessels and the inner muscles, forming a figure 8 around the two ventricles and proceeding toward the apex. 

This complex swirling pattern allows the heart to pump blood more effectively.

There are two types of cells in cardiac muscle: muscle cells which have the ability to contract easily, and pacemaker cells of the conducting system. 

The muscle cells make up the bulk (99%) of cells in the atria and ventricles. 

These contractile cells are connected by intercalated discs which allow a rapid response to impulses of action potential from the pacemaker cells. 

The intercalated discs allow the cells to act as a syncytium and enable the contractions that pump blood through the heart and into the major arteries. 

The pacemaker cells make up 1% of cells and form the conduction system of the heart. 

They are generally much smaller than the contractile cells and have few myofibrils which gives them limited contractibility. 

Their function is similar in many respects to neurons. 

Cardiac muscle tissue has autorhythmicity, the unique ability to initiate a cardiac action potential at a fixed rate—spreading the impulse rapidly from cell to cell to trigger the contraction of the entire heart.

There are specific proteins expressed in cardiac muscle cells. 

These are mostly associated with muscle contraction, and bind with actin, myosin, tropomyosin, and troponin. 

They include MYH6, ACTC1, TNNI3, CDH2 and PKP2. 

Other proteins expressed are MYH7 and LDB3 that are also expressed in skeletal muscle.


=== Pericardium ===

The pericardium is the sac that surrounds the heart. 

The tough outer surface of the pericardium is called the fibrous membrane. 

This is lined by a double inner membrane called the serous membrane that produces pericardial fluid to lubricate the surface of the heart. 

The part of the serous membrane attached to the fibrous membrane is called the parietal pericardium, while the part of the serous membrane attached to the heart is known as the visceral pericardium. 

The pericardium is present in order to lubricate its movement against other structures within the chest, to keep the heart's position stabilised within the chest, and to protect the heart from infection.


=== Coronary circulation ===


Heart tissue, like all cells in the body, needs to be supplied with oxygen, nutrients and a way of removing metabolic wastes. 

This is achieved by the coronary circulation, which includes arteries, veins, and lymphatic vessels. 

Blood flow through the coronary vessels occurs in peaks and troughs relating to the heart muscle's relaxation or contraction.

Heart tissue receives blood from two arteries which arise just above the aortic valve. 

These are the left main coronary artery and the right coronary artery. 

The left main coronary artery splits shortly after leaving the aorta into two vessels, the left anterior descending and the left circumflex artery. 

The left anterior descending artery supplies heart tissue and the front, outer side, and septum of the left ventricle. 

It does this by branching into smaller arteries—diagonal and septal branches. 

The left circumflex supplies the back and underneath of the left ventricle. 

The right coronary artery supplies the right atrium, right ventricle, and lower posterior sections of the left ventricle. 

The right coronary artery also supplies blood to the atrioventricular node (in about 90% of people) and the sinoatrial node (in about 60% of people). 

The right coronary artery runs in a groove at the back of the heart and the left anterior descending artery runs in a groove at the front. 

There is significant variation between people in the anatomy of the arteries that supply the heart.

The arteries divide at their furthest reaches into smaller branches that join together at the edges of each arterial distribution.The coronary sinus is a large vein that drains into the right atrium, and receives most of the venous drainage of the heart. 

It receives blood from the great cardiac vein (receiving the left atrium and both ventricles), the posterior cardiac vein (draining the back of the left ventricle), the middle cardiac vein (draining the bottom of the left and right ventricles), and small cardiac veins. 

The anterior cardiac veins drain the front of the right ventricle and drain directly into the right atrium.Small lymphatic networks called plexuses exist beneath each of the three layers of the heart. 

These networks collect into a main left and a main right trunk, which travel up the groove between the ventricles that exists on the heart's surface, receiving smaller vessels as they travel up. 

These vessels then travel into the atrioventricular groove, and receive a third vessel which drains the section of the left ventricle sitting on the diaphragm. 

The left vessel joins with this third vessel, and travels along the pulmonary artery and left atrium, ending in the inferior tracheobronchial node. 

The right vessel travels along the right atrium and the part of the right ventricle sitting on the diaphragm. 

It usually then travels in front of the ascending aorta and then ends in a brachiocephalic node.


=== Nerve supply ===


The heart receives nerve signals from the vagus nerve and from nerves arising from the sympathetic trunk. 

These nerves act to influence, but not control, the heart rate. 

Sympathetic nerves also influence the force of heart contraction. 

Signals that travel along these nerves arise from two paired cardiovascular centres in the medulla oblongata. 

The vagus nerve of the parasympathetic nervous system acts to decrease the heart rate, and nerves from the sympathetic trunk act to increase the heart rate. 

These nerves form a network of nerves that lies over the heart called the cardiac plexus.

The vagus nerve is a long, wandering nerve that emerges from the brainstem and provides parasympathetic stimulation to a large number of organs in the thorax and abdomen, including the heart. 

The nerves from the sympathetic trunk emerge through the T1-T4 thoracic ganglia and travel to both the sinoatrial and atrioventricular nodes, as well as to the atria and ventricles. 

The ventricles are more richly innervated by sympathetic fibers than parasympathetic fibers. 

Sympathetic stimulation causes the release of the neurotransmitter norepinephrine (also known as noradrenaline) at the neuromuscular junction of the cardiac nerves. 

This shortens the repolarization period, thus speeding the rate of depolarization and contraction, which results in an increased heart rate. 

It opens chemical or ligand-gated sodium and calcium ion channels, allowing an influx of positively charged ions. 

Norepinephrine binds to the beta–1 receptor.


== Development ==


The heart is the first functional organ to develop and starts to beat and pump blood at about three weeks into embryogenesis. 

This early start is crucial for subsequent embryonic and prenatal development.
The heart derives from splanchnopleuric mesenchyme in the neural plate which forms the cardiogenic region. 

Two endocardial tubes form here that fuse to form a primitive heart tube known as the tubular heart. 

Between the third and fourth week, the heart tube lengthens, and begins to fold to form an S-shape within the pericardium. 

This places the chambers and major vessels into the correct alignment for the developed heart. 

Further development will include the formation of the septa and the valves and the remodeling of the heart chambers. 

By the end of the fifth week, the septa are complete, and by the ninth week, the heart valves are complete.Before the fifth week, there is an opening in the fetal heart known as the foramen ovale. 

The foramen ovale allowed blood in the fetal heart to pass directly from the right atrium to the left atrium, allowing some blood to bypass the lungs. 

Within seconds after birth, a flap of tissue known as the septum primum that previously acted as a valve closes the foramen ovale and establishes the typical cardiac circulation pattern. 

A depression in the surface of the right atrium remains where the foramen ovale was, called the fossa ovalis.

The embryonic heart begins beating at around 22 days after conception (5 weeks after the last normal menstrual period, LMP). 

It starts to beat at a rate near to the mother's which is about 75–80 beats per minute (bpm). 

The embryonic heart rate then accelerates and reaches a peak rate of 165–185 bpm early in the early 7th week (early 9th week after the LMP). 

After 9 weeks (start of the fetal stage) it starts to decelerate, slowing to around 145 (±25) bpm at birth. 

There is no difference in female and male heart rates before birth.


== Physiology ==

=== Blood flow ===


The heart functions as a pump in the circulatory system to provide a continuous flow of blood throughout the body. 

This circulation consists of the systemic circulation to and from the body and the pulmonary circulation to and from the lungs. 

Blood in the pulmonary circulation exchanges carbon dioxide for oxygen in the lungs through the process of respiration. 

The systemic circulation then transports oxygen to the body and returns carbon dioxide and relatively deoxygenated blood to the heart for transfer to the lungs.

The right heart collects deoxygenated blood from two large veins, the superior and inferior venae cavae. 

Blood collects in the right and left atrium continuously. 

The superior vena cava drains blood from above the diaphragm and empties into the upper back part of the right atrium. 

The inferior vena cava drains the blood from below the diaphragm and empties into the back part of the atrium below the opening for the superior vena cava. 

Immediately above and to the middle of the opening of the inferior vena cava is the opening of the thin-walled coronary sinus. 

Additionally, the coronary sinus returns deoxygenated blood from the myocardium to the right atrium. 

The blood collects in the right atrium. 

When the right atrium contracts, the blood is pumped through the tricuspid valve into the right ventricle. 

As the right ventricle contracts, the tricuspid valve closes and the blood is pumped into the pulmonary trunk through the pulmonary valve. 

The pulmonary trunk divides into pulmonary arteries and progressively smaller arteries throughout the lungs, until it reaches capillaries. 

As these pass by alveoli carbon dioxide is exchanged for oxygen. 

This happens through the passive process of diffusion.
In the left heart, oxygenated blood is returned to the left atrium via the pulmonary veins. 

It is then pumped into the left ventricle through the mitral valve and into the aorta through the aortic valve for systemic circulation. 

The aorta is a large artery that branches into many smaller arteries, arterioles, and ultimately capillaries. 

In the capillaries, oxygen and nutrients from blood are supplied to body cells for metabolism, and exchanged for carbon dioxide and waste products. 

Capillary blood, now deoxygenated, travels into venules and veins that ultimately collect in the superior and inferior vena cavae, and into the right heart.


==== Cardiac cycle ====

The cardiac cycle refers to the sequence of events in which the heart contracts and relaxes with every heartbeat. 

The period of time during which the ventricles contract, forcing blood out into the aorta and main pulmonary artery, is known as systole, while the period during which the ventricles relax and refill with blood is known as diastole. 

The atria and ventricles work in concert, so in systole when the ventricles are contracting, the atria are relaxed and collecting blood. 

When the ventricles are relaxed in diastole, the atria contract to pump blood to the ventricles. 

This coordination ensures blood is pumped efficiently to the body.At the beginning of the cardiac cycle, the ventricles are relaxing. 

As they do so, they are filled by blood passing through the open mitral and tricuspid valves. 

After the ventricles have completed most of their filling, the atria contract, forcing further blood into the ventricles and priming the pump. 

Next, the ventricles start to contract. 

As the pressure rises within the cavities of the ventricles, the mitral and tricuspid valves are forced shut. 

As the pressure within the ventricles rises further, exceeding the pressure with the aorta and pulmonary arteries, the aortic and pulmonary valves open. 

Blood is ejected from the heart, causing the pressure within the ventricles to fall. 

Simultaneously, the atria refill as blood flows into the right atrium through the superior and inferior vena cavae, and into the left atrium through the pulmonary veins. 

Finally, when the pressure within the ventricles falls below the pressure within the aorta and pulmonary arteries, the aortic and pulmonary valves close. 

The ventricles start to relax, the mitral and tricuspid valves open, and the cycle begins again.


==== Cardiac output ====

Cardiac output (CO) is a measurement of the amount of blood pumped by each ventricle (stroke volume) in one minute. 

This is calculated by multiplying the stroke volume (SV) by the beats per minute of the heart rate (HR). 

So that: CO = SV x HR.

The cardiac output is normalized to body size through body surface area and is called the cardiac index.

The average cardiac output, using an average stroke volume of about 70mL, is 5.25 L/min, with a normal range of 4.0–8.0 L/min. 

The stroke volume is normally measured using an echocardiogram and can be influenced by the size of the heart, physical and mental condition of the individual, sex, contractility, duration of contraction, preload and afterload.Preload refers to the filling pressure of the atria at the end of diastole, when the ventricles are at their fullest. 

A main factor is how long it takes the ventricles to fill: if the ventricles contract more frequently, then there is less time to fill and the preload will be less. 

Preload can also be affected by a person's blood volume. 

The force of each contraction of the heart muscle is proportional to the preload, described as the Frank-Starling mechanism. 

This states that the force of contraction is directly proportional to the initial length of muscle fiber, meaning a ventricle will contract more forcefully, the more it is stretched.

Afterload, or how much pressure the heart must generate to eject blood at systole, is influenced by vascular resistance. 

It can be influenced by narrowing of the heart valves (stenosis) or contraction or relaxation of the peripheral blood vessels.The strength of heart muscle contractions controls the stroke volume. 

This can be influenced positively or negatively by agents termed inotropes. 

These agents can be a result of changes within the body, or be given as drugs as part of treatment for a medical disorder, or as a form of life support, particularly in intensive care units. 

Inotropes that increase the force of contraction are "positive" inotropes, and include sympathetic agents such as adrenaline, noradrenaline and dopamine. 

"Negative" inotropes decrease the force of contraction and include calcium channel blockers.


=== Electrical conduction ===

The normal rhythmical heart beat, called sinus rhythm, is established by the heart's own pacemaker, the sinoatrial node (also known as the sinus node or the SA node). 

Here an electrical signal is created that travels through the heart, causing the heart muscle to contract. 

The sinoatrial node is found in the upper part of the right atrium near to the junction with the superior vena cava. 

The electrical signal generated by the sinoatrial node travels through the right atrium in a radial way that is not completely understood. 

It travels to the left atrium via Bachmann's bundle, such that the muscles of the left and right atria contract together. 

The signal then travels to the atrioventricular node. 

This is found at the bottom of the right atrium in the atrioventricular septum—the boundary between the right atrium and the left ventricle. 

The septum is part of the cardiac skeleton, tissue within the heart that the electrical signal cannot pass through, which forces the signal to pass through the atrioventricular node only. 

The signal then travels along the bundle of His to left and right bundle branches through to the ventricles of the heart. 

In the ventricles the signal is carried by specialized tissue called the Purkinje fibers which then transmit the electric charge to the heart muscle.


=== Heart rate ===


The normal resting heart rate is called the sinus rhythm, created and sustained by the sinoatrial node, a group of pacemaking cells found in the wall of the right atrium. 

Cells in the sinoatrial node do this by creating an action potential. 

The cardiac action potential is created by the movement of specific electrolytes into and out of the pacemaker cells. 

The action potential then spreads to nearby cells.When the sinoatrial cells are resting, they have a negative charge on their membranes. 

However a rapid influx of sodium ions causes the membrane's charge to become positive. 

This is called depolarisation and occurs spontaneously. 

Once the cell has a sufficiently high charge, the sodium channels close and calcium ions then begin to enter the cell, shortly after which potassium begins to leave it. 

All the ions travel through ion channels in the membrane of the sinoatrial cells. 

The potassium and calcium start to move out of and into the cell only once it has a sufficiently high charge, and so are called voltage-gated. 

Shortly after this, the calcium channels close and potassium channels open, allowing potassium to leave the cell. 

This causes the cell to have a negative resting charge and is called repolarization. 

When the membrane potential reaches approximately −60 mV, the potassium channels close and the process may begin again.

The ions move from areas where they are concentrated to where they are not. 

For this reason sodium moves into the cell from outside, and potassium moves from within the cell to outside the cell. 

Calcium also plays a critical role. 

Their influx through slow channels means that the sinoatrial cells have a prolonged "plateau" phase when they have a positive charge. 

A part of this is called the absolute refractory period. 

Calcium ions also combine with the regulatory protein troponin C in the troponin complex to enable contraction of the cardiac muscle, and separate from the protein to allow relaxation.

The adult resting heart rate ranges from 60 to 100 bpm. 

The resting heart rate of a newborn can be 129 beats per minute (bpm) and this gradually decreases until maturity. 

An athlete's heart rate can be lower than 60 bpm. 

During exercise the rate can be 150 bpm with maximum rates reaching from 200 to 220 bpm.


==== Influences ====
The normal sinus rhythm of the heart, giving the resting heart rate, is influenced by a number of factors. 

The cardiovascular centres in the brainstem control the sympathetic and parasympathetic influences to the heart through the vagus nerve and sympathetic trunk. 

These cardiovascular centres receive input from a series of receptors including baroreceptors, sensing stretch the stretching of blood vessels and chemoreceptors, sensing the amount of oxygen and carbon dioxide in the blood and its pH. 

Through a series of reflexes these help regulate and sustain blood flow.

Baroreceptors are stretch receptors located in the aortic sinus, carotid bodies, the venae cavae, and other locations, including pulmonary vessels and the right side of the heart itself. 

Baroreceptors fire at a rate determined by how much they are stretched, which is influenced by blood pressure, level of physical activity, and the relative distribution of blood. 

With increased pressure and stretch, the rate of baroreceptor firing increases, and the cardiac centers decrease sympathetic stimulation and increase parasympathetic stimulation. 

As pressure and stretch decrease, the rate of baroreceptor firing decreases, and the cardiac centers increase sympathetic stimulation and decrease parasympathetic stimulation. 

There is a similar reflex, called the atrial reflex or Bainbridge reflex, associated with varying rates of blood flow to the atria. 

Increased venous return stretches the walls of the atria where specialized baroreceptors are located. 

However, as the atrial baroreceptors increase their rate of firing and as they stretch due to the increased blood pressure, the cardiac center responds by increasing sympathetic stimulation and inhibiting parasympathetic stimulation to increase heart rate. 

The opposite is also true. 

Chemoreceptors present in the carotid body or adjacent to the aorta in an aortic body respond to the blood's oxygen, carbon dioxide levels. 

Low oxygen or high carbon dioxide will stimulate firing of the receptors.Exercise and fitness levels, age, body temperature, basal metabolic rate, and even a person's emotional state can all affect the heart rate. 

High levels of the hormones epinephrine, norepinephrine, and thyroid hormones can increase the heart rate. 

The levels of electrolytes including calcium, potassium, and sodium can also influence the speed and regularity of the heart rate; low blood oxygen, low blood pressure and dehydration may increase it.


== Clinical significance ==

=== Diseases ===


Cardiovascular diseases, which include diseases of the heart, are the leading cause of death worldwide. 

The majority of cardiovascular disease is noncommunicable and related to lifestyle and other factors, becoming more prevalent with ageing. 

Heart disease is a major cause of death, accounting for an average of 30% of all deaths in 2008, globally. 

This rate varies from a lower 28% to a high 40% in high-income countries. 

Doctors that specialise in the heart are called cardiologists. 

Many other medical professionals are involved in treating diseases of the heart, including doctors, cardiothoracic surgeons, intensivists, and allied health practitioners including physiotherapists and dieticians.


==== Ischaemic heart disease ====

Coronary artery disease, also known as ischaemic heart disease, is caused by atherosclerosis—a build-up of fatty material along the inner walls of the arteries. 

These fatty deposits known as atherosclerotic plaques narrow the coronary arteries, and if severe may reduce blood flow to the heart. 

If a narrowing (or stenosis) is relatively minor then the patient may not experience any symptoms. 

Severe narrowings may cause chest pain (angina) or breathlessness during exercise or even at rest. 

The thin covering of an atherosclerotic plaque can rupture, exposing the fatty centre to the circulating blood. 

In this case a clot or thrombus can form, blocking the artery, and restricting blood flow to an area of heart muscle causing a myocardial infarction (a heart attack) or unstable angina. 

In the worst case this may cause cardiac arrest, a sudden and utter loss of output from the heart. 

Obesity, high blood pressure, uncontrolled diabetes, smoking and high cholesterol can all increase the risk of developing atherosclerosis and coronary artery disease.


==== Heart failure ====

Heart failure is defined as a condition in which the heart is unable to pump enough blood to meet the demands of the body. 

Patients with heart failure may experience breathlessness especially when lying flat, as well as ankle swelling, known as peripheral oedema. 

Heart failure is the end result of many diseases affecting the heart, but is most commonly associated with ischaemic heart disease, valvular heart disease, or high blood pressure. 

Less common causes include various cardiomyopathies. 

Heart failure is frequently associated with weakness of the heart muscle in the ventricles (systolic heart failure), but can also be seen in patients with heart muscle that is strong but stiff (diastolic heart failure). 

The condition may affect the left ventricle (causing predominantly breathlessness), the right ventricle (causing predominantly swelling of the legs and an elevated jugular venous pressure), or both ventricles. 

Patients with heart failure are at higher risk of developing dangerous heart rhythm disturbances or arrhythmias.


==== Cardiomyopathies ====
Cardiomyopathies are diseases affecting the muscle of the heart. 

Some cause abnormal thickening of the heart muscle (hypertrophic cardiomyopathy), some cause the heart to abnormally expand and weaken (dilated cardiomyopathy), some cause the heart muscle to become stiff and unable to fully relax between contractions (restrictive cardiomyopathy) and some make the heart prone to abnormal heart rhythms (arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy). 

These conditions are often genetic and can be inherited, but some such as dilated cardiomyopathy may be caused by damage from toxins such as alcohol. 

Some cardiomyopathies such as hypertrophic cardiomopathy are linked to a higher risk of sudden cardiac death, particularly in athletes. 

Many cardiomyopathies can lead to heart failure in the later stages of the disease.


==== Valvular heart disease ====

Healthy heart valves allow blood to flow easily in one direction, but prevent it from flowing in the other direction. 

Diseased heart valves may have a narrow opening and therefore restrict the flow of blood in the forward direction (referred to as a stenotic valve), or may allow blood to leak in the reverse direction (referred to as valvular regurgitation). 

Valvular heart disease may cause breathlessness, blackouts, or chest pain, but may be asymptomatic and only detected on a routine examination by hearing abnormal heart sounds or a heart murmur. 

In the developed world, valvular heart disease is most commonly caused by degeneration secondary to old age, but may also be caused by infection of the heart valves (endocarditis). 

In some parts of the world rheumatic heart disease is a major cause of valvular heart disease, typically leading to mitral or aortic stenosis and caused by the body's immune system reacting to a streptococcal throat infection.


==== Cardiac arrhythmias ====

While in the healthy heart, waves of electrical impulses originate in the sinus node before spreading to the rest of the atria, the atrioventricular node, and finally the ventricles (referred to as a normal sinus rhythm), this normal rhythm can be disrupted. 

Abnormal heart rhythms or arrhythmias may be asymptomatic or may cause palpitations, blackouts, or breathlessness. 

Some types of arrhythmia such as atrial fibrillation increase the long term risk of stroke.

Some arrhythmias cause the heart to beat abnormally slowly, referred to as a bradycardia or bradyarrhythmia. 

This may be caused by an abnormally slow sinus node or damage within the cardiac conduction system (heart block). 

In other arrhythmias the heart may beat abnormally rapidly, referred to as a tachycardia or tachyarrhythmia. 

These arrhythmias can take many forms and can originate from different structures within the heart—some arise from the atria (e.g. atrial flutter), some from the atrioventricular node (e.g. 

AV nodal re-entrant tachycardia) whilst others arise from the ventricles (e.g. ventricular tachycardia). 

Some tachyarrhythmias are caused by scarring within the heart (e.g. some forms of ventricular tachycardia), others by an irritable focus (e.g. focal atrial tachycardia), while others are caused by additional abnormal conduction tissue that has been present since birth (e.g. 

Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome). 

The most dangerous form of heart racing is ventricular fibrillation, in which the ventricles quiver rather than contract, and which if untreated is rapidly fatal.


==== Pericardial disease ====

The sac which surrounds the heart, called the pericardium, can become inflamed in a condition known as pericarditis. 

This condition typically causes chest pain that may spread to the back, and is often caused by a viral infection (glandular fever, cytomegalovirus, or coxsackievirus). 

Fluid can build up within the pericardial sac, referred to as a pericardial effusion. 

Pericardial effusions often occur secondary to pericarditis, kidney failure, or tumours, and frequently do not cause any symptoms. 

However, large effusions or effusions which accumulate rapidly can compress the heart in a condition known as cardiac tamponade, causing breathlessness and potentially fatal low blood pressure. 

Fluid can be removed from the pericardial space for diagnosis or to relieve tamponade using a syringe in a procedure called pericardiocentesis.


==== Congenital heart disease ====

Some people are born with hearts that are abnormal and these abnormalities are known as congenital heart defects. 

They may range from the relatively minor (e.g. patent foramen ovale, arguably a variant of normal) to serious life-threatening abnormalities (e.g. hypoplastic left heart syndrome). 

Common abnormalities include those that affect the heart muscle that separates the two side of the heart (a "hole in the heart" - e.g., ventricular septal defect). 

Other defects include those affecting the heart valves (e.g. congenital aortic stenosis), or the main blood vessels that lead from the heart (e.g. coarctation of the aorta). 

More complex syndromes are seen that affect more than one part of the heart (e.g. 

Tetralogy of Fallot).

Some congenital heart defects allow blood that is low in oxygen that would normally be returned to the lungs to instead be pumped back to the rest of the body. 

These are known as cyanotic congenital heart defects and are often more serious. 

Major congenital heart defects are often picked up in childhood, shortly after birth, or even before a child is born (e.g. transposition of the great arteries), causing breathlessness and a lower rate of growth. 

More minor forms of congenital heart disease may remain undetected for many years and only reveal themselves in adult life (e.g., atrial septal defect).


=== Diagnosis ===

Heart disease is diagnosed by the taking of a medical history, a cardiac examination, and further investigations, including blood tests, echocardiograms, ECGs and imaging. 

Other invasive procedures such as cardiac catheterisation can also play a role.


==== Examination ====

The cardiac examination includes inspection, feeling the chest with the hands (palpation) and listening with a stethoscope (auscultation). 

It involves assessment of signs that may be visible on a person's hands (such as splinter haemorrhages), joints and other areas. 

A person's pulse is taken, usually at the radial artery near the wrist, in order to assess for the rhythm and strength of the pulse. 

The blood pressure is taken, using either a manual or automatic sphygmomanometer or using a more invasive measurement from within the artery. 

Any elevation of the jugular venous pulse is noted. 

A person's chest is felt for any transmitted vibrations from the heart, and then listened to with a stethoscope.


==== Heart sounds ====

Typically, healthy hearts have only two audible heart sounds, called S1 and S2. 

The first heart sound S1, is the sound created by the closing of the atrioventricular valves during ventricular contraction and is normally described as "lub". 

The second heart sound, S2, is the sound of the semilunar valves closing during ventricular diastole and is described as "dub". 

Each sound consists of two components, reflecting the slight difference in time as the two valves close. 

S2 may split into two distinct sounds, either as a result of inspiration or different valvular or cardiac problems. 

Additional heart sounds may also be present and these give rise to gallop rhythms. 

A third heart sound, S3 usually indicates an increase in ventricular blood volume. 

A fourth heart sound S4 is referred to as an atrial gallop and is produced by the sound of blood being forced into a stiff ventricle. 

The combined presence of S3 and S4 give a quadruple gallop.

Heart murmurs are abnormal heart sounds which can be either related to disease or benign, and there are several kinds. 

There are normally two heart sounds, and abnormal heart sounds can either be extra sounds, or "murmurs" related to the flow of blood between the sounds. 

Murmurs are graded by volume, from 1 (the quietest), to 6 (the loudest), and evaluated by their relationship to the heart sounds, position in the cardiac cycle, and additional features such as their radiation to other sites, changes with a person's position, the frequency of the sound as determined by the side of the stethoscope by which they are heard, and site at which they are heard loudest. 

Murmurs may be caused by damaged heart valves or congenital heart disease such as ventricular septal defects, or may be heard in normal hearts. 

A different type of sound, a pericardial friction rub can be heard in cases of pericarditis where the inflamed membranes can rub together.


==== Blood tests ====

Blood tests play an important role in the diagnosis and treatment of many cardiovascular conditions.
Troponin is a sensitive biomarker for a heart with insufficient blood supply. 

It is released 4–6 hours after injury, and usually peaks at about 12–24 hours. 

Two tests of troponin are often taken—one at the time of initial presentation, and another within 3–6 hours, with either a high level or a significant rise being diagnostic. 

A test for brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) can be used to evaluate for the presence of heart failure, and rises when there is increased demand on the left ventricle. 

These tests are considered biomarkers because they are highly specific for cardiac disease. 

Testing for the MB form of creatine kinase provides information about the heart's blood supply, but is used less frequently because it is less specific and sensitive.

Other blood tests are often taken to help understand a person's general health and risk factors that may contribute to heart disease. 

These often include a full blood count investigating for anaemia, and basic metabolic panel that may reveal any disturbances in electrolytes. 

A coagulation screen is often required to ensure that the right level of anticoagulation is given. 

Fasting lipids and fasting blood glucose (or an HbA1c level) are often ordered to evaluate a person's cholesterol and diabetes status, respectively.


==== Electrocardiogram ====

Using surface electrodes on the body, it is possible to record the electrical activity of the heart. 

This tracing of the electrical signal is the electrocardiogram (ECG) or (EKG). 

An ECG is a bedside test and involves the placement of ten leads on the body. 

This produces a "12 lead" ECG (three extra leads are calculated mathematically, and one lead is electrically ground (earthed)).

There are five prominent features on the ECG: the P wave (atrial depolarisation), the QRS complex (ventricular depolarisation) and the T wave (ventricular repolarisation). 

As the heart cells contract, they create a current that travels through the heart. 

A downward deflection on the ECG implies cells are becoming more positive in charge ("depolarising") in the direction of that lead, whereas an upward inflection implies cells are becoming more negative ("repolarising") in the direction of the lead. 

This depends on the position of the lead, so if a wave of depolarising moved from left to right, a lead on the left would show a negative deflection, and a lead on the right would show a positive deflection. 

The ECG is a useful tool in detecting rhythm disturbances and in detecting insufficient blood supply to the heart. 

Sometimes abnormalities are suspected, but not immediately visible on the ECG. 

Testing when exercising can be used to provoke an abnormality, or an ECG can be worn for a longer period such as a 24-hour Holter monitor if a suspected rhythm abnormality is not present at the time of assessment.


==== Imaging ====

Several imaging methods can be used to assess the anatomy and function of the heart, including ultrasound (echocardiography), angiography, CT, MRI, and PET, scans. 

An echocardiogram is an ultrasound of the heart used to measure the heart's function, assess for valve disease, and look for any abnormalities. 

Echocardiography can be conducted by a probe on the chest (transthoracic), or by a probe in the esophagus (transesophageal). 

A typical echocardiography report will include information about the width of the valves noting any stenosis, whether there is any backflow of blood (regurgitation) and information about the blood volumes at the end of systole and diastole, including an ejection fraction, which describes how much blood is ejected from the left and right ventricles after systole. 

Ejection fraction can then be obtained by dividing the volume ejected by the heart (stroke volume) by the volume of the filled heart (end-diastolic volume). 

Echocardiograms can also be conducted under circumstances when the body is more stressed, in order to examine for signs of lack of blood supply. 

This cardiac stress test involves either direct exercise, or where this is not possible, injection of a drug such as dobutamine.

CT scans, chest X-rays and other forms of imaging can help evaluate the heart's size, evaluate for signs of pulmonary oedema, and indicate whether there is fluid around the heart. 

They are also useful for evaluating the aorta, the major blood vessel which leaves the heart.


=== Treatment ===

Diseases affecting the heart can be treated by a variety of methods including lifestyle modification, drug treatment, and surgery.


==== Ischaemic heart disease ====

Narrowings of the coronary arteries (ischaemic heart disease) are treated to relieve symptoms of chest pain caused by a partially narrowed artery (angina pectoris), to minimise heart muscle damage when an artery is completely occluded (myocardial infarction), or to prevent a myocardial infarction from occurring. 

Medications to improve angina symptoms include nitroglycerin, beta blockers, and calcium channel blockers, while preventative treatments include antiplatelets such as aspirin and statins, lifestyle measures such as stopping smoking and weight loss, and treatment of risk factors such as high blood pressure and diabetes.

In addition to using medications, narrowed heart arteries can be treated by expanding the narrowings or redirecting the flow of blood to bypass an obstruction. 

This may be performed using a percutaneous coronary intervention, during which narrowings can be expanded by passing small balloon-tipped wires into the coronary arteries, inflating the balloon to expand the narrowing, and sometimes leaving behind a metal scaffold known as a stent to keep the artery open.

If the narrowings in coronary arteries are unsuitable for treatment with a percutaneous coronary intervention, open surgery may be required. 

A coronary artery bypass graft can be performed, whereby a blood vessel from another part of the body (the saphenous vein, radial artery, or internal mammary artery) is used to redirect blood from a point before the narrowing (typically the aorta) to a point beyond the obstruction.


==== Valvular heart disease ====

Diseased heart valves that have become abnormally narrow or abnormally leaky may require surgery. 

This is traditionally performed as an open surgical procedure to replace the damaged heart valve with a tissue or metallic prosthetic valve. 

In some circumstances, the tricuspid or mitral valves can be repaired surgically, avoiding the need for a valve replacement. 

Heart valves can also be treated percutaneously, using techniques that share many similarities with percutaneous coronary intervention. 

Transcatheter aortic valve replacement is increasingly used for patients consider very high risk for open valve replacement.


==== Cardiac arrhythmias ====
Abnormal heart rhythms (arrhythmias) can be treated using antiarrhythmic drugs. 

These may work by manipulating the flow of electrolytes across the cell membrane (such as calcium channel blockers, sodium channel blockers, amiodarone, or digoxin), or modify the autonomic nervous system's effect on the heart (beta blockers and atropine). 

In some arrhythmias such as atrial fibrillation which increase the risk of stroke, this risk can be reduced using anticoagulants such as warfarin or novel oral anticoagulants.

If medications fail to control an arrhythmia, another treatment option may be catheter ablation. 

In these procedures, wires are passed from a vein or artery in the leg to the heart to find the abnormal area of tissue that is causing the arrhythmia. 

The abnormal tissue can be intentionally damaged, or ablated, by heating or freezing to prevent further heart rhythm disturbances. 

Whilst the majority of arrhythmias can be treated using minimally invasive catheter techniques, some arrhythmias (particularly atrial fibrillation) can also be treated using open or thoracoscopic surgery, either at the time of other cardiac surgery or as a standalone procedure. 

A cardioversion, whereby an electric shock is used to stun the heart out of an abnormal rhythm, may also be used.

Cardiac devices in the form of pacemakers or implantable defibrillators may also be required to treat arrhythmias. 

Pacemakers, comprising a small battery powered generator implanted under the skin and one or more leads that extend to the heart, are most commonly used to treat abnormally slow heart rhythms. 

Implantable defibrillators are used to treat serious life-threatening rapid heart rhythms. 

These devices monitor the heart, and if dangerous heart racing is detected can automatically deliver a shock to restore the heart to a normal rhythm. 

Implantable defibrillators are most commonly used in patients with heart failure, cardiomyopathies, or inherited arrhythmia syndromes.


==== Heart failure ====

As well as addressing the underlying cause for a patient's heart failure (most commonly ischaemic heart disease or hypertension), the mainstay of heart failure treatment is with medication. 

These include drugs to prevent fluid from accumulating in the lungs by increasing the amount of urine a patient produces (diuretics), and drugs that attempt to preserve the pumping function of the heart (beta blockers, ACE inhibitors and mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists).

In some patients with heart failure, a specialised pacemaker known as cardiac resynchronisation therapy can be used to improve the heart's pumping efficiency. 

These devices are frequently combined with a defibrillator. 

In very severe cases of heart failure, a small pump called a ventricular assist device may be implanted which supplements the heart's own pumping ability. 

In the most severe cases, a cardiac transplant may be considered.


== History ==

=== Ancient ===


Humans have known about the heart since ancient times, although its precise function and anatomy were not clearly understood. 

From the primarily religious views of earlier societies towards the heart, ancient Greeks are considered to have been the primary seat of scientific understanding of the heart in the ancient world. 

Aristotle considered the heart to be the organ responsible for creating blood; Plato considered the heart as the source of circulating blood and Hippocrates noted blood circulating cyclically from the body through the heart to the lungs. 

Erasistratos (304–250 BCE) noted the heart as a pump, causing dilation of blood vessels, and noted that arteries and veins both radiate from the heart, becoming progressively smaller with distance, although he believed they were filled with air and not blood. 

He also discovered the heart valves.The Greek physician Galen (2nd century CE) knew blood vessels carried blood and identified venous (dark red) and arterial (brighter and thinner) blood, each with distinct and separate functions. 

Galen, noting the heart as the hottest organ in the body, concluded that it provided heat to the body. 

The heart did not pump blood around, the heart's motion sucked blood in during diastole and the blood moved by the pulsation of the arteries themselves. 

Galen believed the arterial blood was created by venous blood passing from the left ventricle to the right through 'pores' between the ventricles. 

Air from the lungs passed from the lungs via the pulmonary artery to the left side of the heart and created arterial blood.These ideas went unchallenged for almost a thousand years.


=== Pre-modern ===

The earliest descriptions of the coronary and pulmonary circulation systems can be found in the Commentary on Anatomy in Avicenna's Canon, published in 1242 by Ibn al-Nafis. 

In his manuscript, al-Nafis wrote that blood passes through the pulmonary circulation instead of moving from the right to the left ventricle as previously believed by Galen. 

His work was later translated into Latin by Andrea Alpago.In Europe, the teachings of Galen continued to dominate the academic community and his doctrines were adopted as the official canon of the Church. 

Andreas Vesalius questioned some of Galen's beliefs of the heart in De humani corporis fabrica (1543), but his magnum opus was interpreted as a challenge to the authorities and he was subjected to a number of attacks. 

Michael Servetus wrote in Christianismi Restitutio (1553) that blood flows from one side of the heart to the other via the lungs.


=== Modern ===

A breakthrough in understanding the flow of blood through the heart and body came with the publication of De Motu Cordis (1628) by the English physician William Harvey. 

Harvey's book completely describes the systemic circulation and the mechanical force of the heart, leading to an overhaul of the Galenic doctrines. 

Otto Frank (1865–1944) was a German physiologist; among his many published works are detailed studies of this important heart relationship. 

Ernest Starling (1866–1927) was an important English physiologist who also studied the heart. 

Although they worked largely independently, their combined efforts and similar conclusions have been recognized in the name "Frank–Starling mechanism".Although Purkinje fibers and the bundle of His were discovered as early as the 19th century, their specific role in the electrical conduction system of the heart remained unknown until Sunao Tawara published his monograph, titled Das Reizleitungssystem des Säugetierherzens, in 1906. 

Tawara's discovery of the atrioventricular node prompted Arthur Keith and Martin Flack to look for similar structures in the heart, leading to their discovery of the sinoatrial node several months later. 

These structures form the anatomical basis of the electrocardiogram, whose inventor, Willem Einthoven, was awarded the Nobel Prize in Medicine or Physiology in 1924.The first successful heart transplantation was performed in 1967 by the South African surgeon Christiaan Barnard at Groote Schuur Hospital in Cape Town. 

This marked an important milestone in cardiac surgery, capturing the attention of both the medical profession and the world at large. 

However, long-term survival rates of patients were initially very low. 

Louis Washkansky, the first recipient of a donated heart, died 18 days after the operation while other patients did not survive for more than a few weeks. 

The American surgeon Norman Shumway has been credited for his efforts to improve transplantation techniques, along with pioneers Richard Lower, Vladimir Demikhov and Adrian Kantrowitz. 

As of March 2000, more than 55,000 heart transplantations have been performed worldwide.By the middle of the 20th century, heart disease had surpassed infectious disease as the leading cause of death in the United States, and it is currently the leading cause of deaths worldwide. 

Since 1948, the ongoing Framingham Heart Study has shed light on the effects of various influences on the heart, including diet, exercise, and common medications such as aspirin. 

Although the introduction of ACE inhibitors and beta blockers has improved the management of chronic heart failure, the disease continues to be an enormous medical and societal burden, with 30 to 40% of patients dying within a year of receiving the diagnosis.


== Transplantation of pig heart to human ==

The first successful transplant of a heart from a genetically modified pig to a human, was performed January 7, 2022 in Baltimore by heart surgeon Bartley P. 

Griffith, recipient was David Bennett (57).


== Society and culture ==

=== Symbolism ===

As one of the vital organs, the heart was long identified as the center of the entire body, the seat of life, or emotion, or reason, will, intellect, purpose or the mind. 

The heart is an emblematic symbol in many religions, signifying "truth, conscience or moral courage in many religions—the temple or throne of God in Islamic and Judeo-Christian thought; the divine centre, or atman, and the third eye of transcendent wisdom in Hinduism; the diamond of purity and essence of the Buddha; the Taoist centre of understanding."In the Hebrew Bible, the word for heart, lev, is used in these meanings, as the seat of emotion, the mind, and referring to the anatomical organ. 

It is also connected in function and symbolism to the stomach.An important part of the concept of the soul in Ancient Egyptian religion was thought to be the heart, or ib. 

The ib or metaphysical heart was believed to be formed from one drop of blood from the child's mother's heart, taken at conception. 

To ancient Egyptians, the heart was the seat of emotion, thought, will, and intention. 

This is evidenced by Egyptian expressions which incorporate the word ib, such as Awi-ib for "happy" (literally, "long of heart"), Xak-ib for "estranged" (literally, "truncated of heart"). 

In Egyptian religion, the heart was the key to the afterlife. 

It was conceived as surviving death in the nether world, where it gave evidence for, or against, its possessor. 

It was thought that the heart was examined by Anubis and a variety of deities during the Weighing of the Heart ceremony. 

If the heart weighed more than the feather of Maat, which symbolized the ideal standard of behavior. 

If the scales balanced, it meant the heart's possessor had lived a just life and could enter the afterlife; if the heart was heavier, it would be devoured by the monster Ammit.

The Chinese character for "heart", 心, derives from a comparatively realistic depiction of a heart (indicating the heart chambers) in seal script. 

The Chinese word xīn also takes the metaphorical meanings of "mind", "intention", or "core". 

In Chinese medicine, the heart is seen as the center of 神 shén "spirit, consciousness". 

The heart is associated with the small intestine, tongue, governs the six organs and five viscera, and belongs to fire in the five elements.

The Sanskrit word for heart is hṛd or hṛdaya, found in the oldest surviving Sanskrit text, the Rigveda. 

In Sanskrit, it may mean both the anatomical object and "mind" or "soul", representing the seat of emotion. 

Hrd may be a cognate of the word for heart in Greek, Latin, and English.Many classical philosophers and scientists, including Aristotle, considered the heart the seat of thought, reason, or emotion, often disregarding the brain as contributing to those functions. 

The identification of the heart as the seat of emotions in particular is due to the Roman physician Galen, who also located the seat of the passions in the liver, and the seat of reason in the brain.

The heart also played a role in the Aztec system of belief. 

The most common form of human sacrifice practiced by the Aztecs was heart-extraction. 

The Aztec believed that the heart (tona) was both the seat of the individual and a fragment of the Sun's heat (istli). 

To this day, the Nahua consider the Sun to be a heart-soul (tona-tiuh): "round, hot, pulsating".

In Catholicism, there has been a long tradition of veneration of the heart, stemming from worship of the wounds of Jesus Christ which gained prominence from the mid sixteenth century. 

This tradition influenced the development of the medieval Christian devotion to the Sacred Heart of Jesus and the parallel veneration of the Immaculate Heart of Mary, made popular by John Eudes.

The expression of a broken heart is a cross-cultural reference to grief for a lost one or to unfulfilled romantic love.

The notion of "Cupid's arrows" is ancient, due to Ovid, but while Ovid describes Cupid as wounding his victims with his arrows, it is not made explicit that it is the heart that is wounded. 

The familiar iconography of Cupid shooting little heart symbols is a Renaissance theme that became tied to Valentine's day.


=== Food ===


Animal hearts are widely consumed as food. 

As they are almost entirely muscle, they are high in protein. 

They are often included in dishes with other offal, for example in the pan-Ottoman kokoretsi.

Chicken hearts are considered to be giblets, and are often grilled on skewers; examples of this are Japanese hāto yakitori, Brazilian churrasco de coração, and Indonesian chicken heart satay. 

They can also be pan-fried, as in Jerusalem mixed grill. 

In Egyptian cuisine, they can be used, finely chopped, as part of stuffing for chicken. 

Many recipes combined them with other giblets, such as the Mexican pollo en menudencias and the Russian ragu iz kurinyikh potrokhov.The hearts of beef, pork, and mutton can generally be interchanged in recipes. 

As heart is a hard-working muscle, it makes for "firm and rather dry" meat, so is generally slow-cooked. 

Another way of dealing with toughness is to julienne the meat, as in Chinese stir-fried heart.Beef heart may be grilled or braised. 

In the Peruvian anticuchos de corazón, barbecued beef hearts are grilled after being tenderized through long marination in a spice and vinegar mixture. 

An Australian recipe for "mock goose" is actually braised stuffed beef heart.

Pig heart is stewed, poached, braised, or made into sausage. 

The Balinese oret is a sort of blood sausage made with pig heart and blood. 

A French recipe for cœur de porc à l'orange is made of braised heart with an orange sauce.


== Other animals ==

=== Vertebrates ===

The size of the heart varies among the different animal groups, with hearts in vertebrates ranging from those of the smallest mice (12 mg) to the blue whale (600 kg). 

In vertebrates, the heart lies in the middle of the ventral part of the body, surrounded by a pericardium. which in some fish may be connected to the peritoneum.

The sinoatrial node is found in all amniotes but not in more primitive vertebrates. 

In these animals, the muscles of the heart are relatively continuous, and the sinus venosus coordinates the beat, which passes in a wave through the remaining chambers. 

Since the sinus venosus is incorporated into the right atrium in amniotes, it is likely homologous with the SA node. 

In teleosts, with their vestigial sinus venosus, the main centre of coordination is, instead, in the atrium. 

The rate of heartbeat varies enormously between different species, ranging from around 20 beats per minute in codfish to around 600 in hummingbirds and up to 1200 bpm in the ruby-throated hummingbird.


=== Double circulatory systems ===

Adult amphibians and most reptiles have a double circulatory system, meaning a circulatory system divided into arterial and venous parts. 

However, the heart itself is not completely separated into two sides. 

Instead, it is separated into three chambers—two atria and one ventricle. 

Blood returning from both the systemic circulation and the lungs is returned, and blood is pumped simultaneously into the systemic circulation and the lungs. 

The double system allows blood to circulate to and from the lungs which deliver oxygenated blood directly to the heart.

In reptiles, other than snakes, the heart is usually situated around the middle of the thorax. 

In terrestrial and arborial snakes it is usually located nearer to the head; in aquatic species the heart is more centrally located. 

There is a heart with three chambers: two atria and one ventricle. 

The form and function of these hearts are different than mammalian hearts due to the fact that snakes have an elongated body, and thus are affected by different environmental factors. 

In particular, the snake's heart relative to the position in their body has been influenced greatly by gravity. 

Therefore, snakes that are larger in size tend to have a higher blood pressure due to gravitational change. 

The ventricle is incompletely separated into two-halves by a wall (septum), with a considerable gap near the pulmonary artery and aortic openings. 

In most reptilian species, there appears to be little, if any, mixing between the bloodstreams, so the aorta receives, essentially, only oxygenated blood. 

The exception to this rule is crocodiles, which have a four-chambered heart.In the heart of lungfish, the septum extends partway into the ventricle. 

This allows for some degree of separation between the de-oxygenated bloodstream destined for the lungs and the oxygenated stream that is delivered to the rest of the body. 

The absence of such a division in living amphibian species may be partly due to the amount of respiration that occurs through the skin; thus, the blood returned to the heart through the venae cavae is already partially oxygenated. 

As a result, there may be less need for a finer division between the two bloodstreams than in lungfish or other tetrapods. 

Nonetheless, in at least some species of amphibian, the spongy nature of the ventricle does seem to maintain more of a separation between the bloodstreams. 

Also, the original valves of the conus arteriosus have been replaced by a spiral valve that divides it into two parallel parts, thereby helping to keep the two bloodstreams separate.


=== Full division ===

Archosaurs (crocodilians and birds) and mammals show complete separation of the heart into two pumps for a total of four heart chambers; it is thought that the four-chambered heart of archosaurs evolved independently from that of mammals. 

In crocodilians, there is a small opening, the foramen of Panizza, at the base of the arterial trunks and there is some degree of mixing between the blood in each side of the heart, during a dive underwater; thus, only in birds and mammals are the two streams of blood—those to the pulmonary and systemic circulations—permanently kept entirely separate by a physical barrier.


=== Fish ===

Fish have what is often described as a two-chambered heart, consisting of one atrium to receive blood and one ventricle to pump it. 

However, the fish heart has entry and exit compartments that may be called chambers, so it is also sometimes described as three-chambered or four-chambered, depending on what is counted as a chamber. 

The atrium and ventricle are sometimes considered "true chambers", while the others are considered "accessory chambers".Primitive fish have a four-chambered heart, but the chambers are arranged sequentially so that this primitive heart is quite unlike the four-chambered hearts of mammals and birds. 

The first chamber is the sinus venosus, which collects deoxygenated blood from the body through the hepatic and cardinal veins. 

From here, blood flows into the atrium and then to the powerful muscular ventricle where the main pumping action will take place. 

The fourth and final chamber is the conus arteriosus, which contains several valves and sends blood to the ventral aorta. 

The ventral aorta delivers blood to the gills where it is oxygenated and flows, through the dorsal aorta, into the rest of the body. 

(In tetrapods, the ventral aorta has divided in two; one half forms the ascending aorta, while the other forms the pulmonary artery).

In the adult fish, the four chambers are not arranged in a straight row but instead form an S-shape, with the latter two chambers lying above the former two. 

This relatively simple pattern is found in cartilaginous fish and in the ray-finned fish. 

In teleosts, the conus arteriosus is very small and can more accurately be described as part of the aorta rather than of the heart proper. 

The conus arteriosus is not present in any amniotes, presumably having been absorbed into the ventricles over the course of evolution. 

Similarly, while the sinus venosus is present as a vestigial structure in some reptiles and birds, it is otherwise absorbed into the right atrium and is no longer distinguishable.


=== Invertebrates ===

Arthropods and most mollusks have an open circulatory system. 

In this system, deoxygenated blood collects around the heart in cavities (sinuses). 

This blood slowly permeates the heart through many small one-way channels. 

The heart then pumps the blood into the hemocoel, a cavity between the organs. 

The heart in arthropods is typically a muscular tube that runs the length of the body, under the back and from the base of the head. 

Instead of blood the circulatory fluid is haemolymph which carries the most commonly used respiratory pigment, copper-based haemocyanin as the oxygen transporter. 

Haemoglobin is only used by a few arthropods.In some other invertebrates such as earthworms, the circulatory system is not used to transport oxygen and so is much reduced, having no veins or arteries and consisting of two connected tubes. 

Oxygen travels by diffusion and there are five small muscular vessels that connect these vessels that contract at the front of the animals that can be thought of as "hearts".

Squids and other cephalopods have two "gill hearts" also known as branchial hearts, and one "systemic heart". 

The branchial hearts have two atria and one ventricle each, and pump to the gills, whereas the systemic heart pumps to the body.

Only the chordates (including vertebrates) and the hemichordates have a central "heart", which is a vesicle formed from the thickening of the aorta and contracts to pump blood. 

This suggests a presence of it in the last common ancestor of these groups (may have been lost in the echinoderms).



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Heart
;;;ES;;;



CORAZÓN


El corazón es un órgano muscular en la mayoría de los animales que bombea sangre a través de los vasos sanguíneos del sistema circulatorio.

La sangre bombeada transporta oxígeno y nutrientes al cuerpo, mientras transporta desechos metabólicos como el dióxido de carbono a los pulmones.

En los humanos, el corazón tiene aproximadamente el tamaño de un puño cerrado y está ubicado entre los pulmones, en el compartimiento medio del tórax.

En los seres humanos, otros mamíferos y aves, el corazón se divide en cuatro cámaras: las aurículas superiores izquierda y derecha y los ventrículos inferiores izquierdo y derecho.

Comúnmente, la aurícula y el ventrículo derechos se conocen juntos como el corazón derecho y sus contrapartes izquierdas como el corazón izquierdo.

Los peces, en cambio, tienen dos cámaras, una aurícula y un ventrículo, mientras que los reptiles tienen tres cámaras.

En un corazón sano, la sangre fluye en una sola dirección a través del corazón debido a las válvulas cardíacas, que evitan el reflujo.

El corazón está encerrado en un saco protector, el pericardio, que también contiene una pequeña cantidad de líquido.

La pared del corazón está formada por tres capas: epicardio, miocardio y endocardio. El corazón bombea sangre con un ritmo determinado por un grupo de células marcapasos en el nódulo sinoauricular.

Estos generan una corriente que provoca la contracción del corazón, viajando a través del nódulo auriculoventricular ya lo largo del sistema de conducción del corazón.

El corazón recibe sangre baja en oxígeno de la circulación sistémica, que ingresa a la aurícula derecha desde las venas cavas superior e inferior y pasa al ventrículo derecho.

Desde aquí se bombea a la circulación pulmonar, a través de los pulmones donde recibe oxígeno y desprende dióxido de carbono.

Luego, la sangre oxigenada regresa a la aurícula izquierda, pasa por el ventrículo izquierdo y se bombea a través de la aorta hacia la circulación sistémica, donde el oxígeno se usa y se metaboliza en dióxido de carbono.

El corazón late a un ritmo de reposo cercano a los 72 latidos por minuto.

El ejercicio aumenta temporalmente la frecuencia cardíaca, pero reduce la frecuencia cardíaca en reposo a largo plazo y es bueno para la salud del corazón.

Las enfermedades cardiovasculares (ECV) son la causa más común de muerte en todo el mundo desde 2008 y representan el 30 % de las muertes.

De estos, más de las tres cuartas partes son el resultado de una enfermedad de las arterias coronarias y un accidente cerebrovascular.

Los factores de riesgo incluyen: fumar, tener sobrepeso, poco ejercicio, colesterol alto, presión arterial alta y diabetes mal controlada, entre otros.

Las enfermedades cardiovasculares con frecuencia no tienen síntomas o pueden causar dolor en el pecho o dificultad para respirar.

El diagnóstico de enfermedades cardíacas a menudo se realiza tomando un historial médico, escuchando los sonidos cardíacos con un estetoscopio, ECG, ecocardiograma y ultrasonido.

Los especialistas que se enfocan en las enfermedades del corazón se llaman cardiólogos, aunque muchas especialidades de la medicina pueden estar involucradas en el tratamiento.


== Estructura ==



=== Ubicación y forma ===


El corazón humano está situado en el mediastino, al nivel de las vértebras torácicas T5-T8.

Un saco de doble membrana llamado pericardio rodea el corazón y se adhiere al mediastino.

La superficie posterior del corazón se encuentra cerca de la columna vertebral y la superficie frontal se encuentra detrás del esternón y los cartílagos de las costillas.

La parte superior del corazón es el punto de unión de varios vasos sanguíneos grandes: las venas cavas, la aorta y el tronco pulmonar.

La parte superior del corazón se encuentra a nivel del tercer cartílago costal.

La punta inferior del corazón, el vértice, se encuentra a la izquierda del esternón (8 a 9 cm desde la línea medioesternal) entre la unión de la cuarta y quinta costillas cerca de su articulación con los cartílagos costales.

La parte más grande del corazón suele estar ligeramente desviada hacia el lado izquierdo del tórax (aunque en ocasiones puede estar desviada hacia la derecha) y se siente que está a la izquierda porque el corazón izquierdo es más fuerte y más grande, ya que bombea hacia todos los sentidos. partes del cuerpo.

Debido a que el corazón está entre los pulmones, el pulmón izquierdo es más pequeño que el pulmón derecho y tiene una muesca cardíaca en su borde para acomodar el corazón.

El corazón tiene forma de cono, con su base colocada hacia arriba y estrechándose hacia el vértice.

El corazón de un adulto tiene una masa de 250 a 350 gramos (9 a 12 onzas).

El corazón a menudo se describe como del tamaño de un puño: 12 cm (5 pulgadas) de largo, 8 cm (3,5 pulgadas) de ancho y 6 cm (2,5 pulgadas) de grosor, aunque esta descripción es discutida, ya que es probable que el corazón ser un poco más grande.

Los atletas bien entrenados pueden tener corazones mucho más grandes debido a los efectos del ejercicio sobre el músculo cardíaco, similar a la respuesta del músculo esquelético.


=== Cámaras ===


El corazón tiene cuatro cámaras, dos aurículas superiores, las cámaras receptoras y dos ventrículos inferiores, las cámaras de descarga.

Las aurículas se abren hacia los ventrículos a través de las válvulas auriculoventriculares, presentes en el tabique auriculoventricular.

Esta distinción es visible también en la superficie del corazón como el surco coronario.

Hay una estructura en forma de oreja en la aurícula superior derecha llamada apéndice auricular derecho, o aurícula, y otra en la aurícula superior izquierda, el apéndice auricular izquierdo.

La aurícula derecha y el ventrículo derecho juntos a veces se denominan corazón derecho.

De manera similar, la aurícula izquierda y el ventrículo izquierdo juntos a veces se denominan corazón izquierdo.

Los ventrículos están separados entre sí por el tabique interventricular, visible en la superficie del corazón como el surco longitudinal anterior y el surco interventricular posterior.

El esqueleto cardíaco fibroso da estructura al corazón.

Forma el tabique auriculoventricular, que separa las aurículas de los ventrículos, y los anillos fibrosos, que sirven de base para las cuatro válvulas del corazón.

El esqueleto cardíaco también proporciona un límite importante en el sistema de conducción eléctrica del corazón, ya que el colágeno no puede conducir la electricidad.

El tabique interauricular separa las aurículas y el tabique interventricular separa los ventrículos.

El tabique interventricular es mucho más grueso que el tabique interauricular ya que los ventrículos necesitan generar mayor presión cuando se contraen.


==== Válvulas ====

El corazón tiene cuatro válvulas, que separan sus cámaras.

Una válvula se encuentra entre cada aurícula y ventrículo, y una válvula descansa a la salida de cada ventrículo.

Las válvulas entre las aurículas y los ventrículos se denominan válvulas auriculoventriculares.

Entre la aurícula derecha y el ventrículo derecho se encuentra la válvula tricúspide.

La válvula tricúspide tiene tres cúspides, que se conectan a las cuerdas tendinosas y tres músculos papilares denominados músculos anterior, posterior y septal, por sus posiciones relativas.

La válvula mitral se encuentra entre la aurícula izquierda y el ventrículo izquierdo.

También se la conoce como válvula bicúspide debido a que tiene dos cúspides, una anterior y otra posterior.

Estas cúspides también se unen a través de cuerdas tendinosas a dos músculos papilares que se proyectan desde la pared ventricular.

Los músculos papilares se extienden desde las paredes del corazón hasta las válvulas mediante conexiones cartilaginosas denominadas cuerdas tendinosas.

Estos músculos evitan que las válvulas caigan demasiado hacia atrás cuando se cierran.

Durante la fase de relajación del ciclo cardíaco, los músculos papilares también están relajados y la tensión en las cuerdas tendinosas es leve.

A medida que se contraen las cámaras del corazón, también lo hacen los músculos papilares.

Esto crea tensión en las cuerdas tendinosas, lo que ayuda a mantener las cúspides de las válvulas auriculoventriculares en su lugar y evita que vuelvan a las aurículas.

Dos válvulas semilunares adicionales se sientan a la salida de cada uno de los ventrículos.

La válvula pulmonar se encuentra en la base de la arteria pulmonar.

Tiene tres cúspides que no están unidas a ningún músculo papilar.

Cuando el ventrículo se relaja, la sangre regresa al ventrículo desde la arteria y este flujo de sangre llena la válvula con forma de bolsillo, presionando contra las cúspides que se cierran para sellar la válvula.

La válvula aórtica semilunar está en la base de la aorta y tampoco está unida a los músculos papilares.

Este también tiene tres cúspides que se cierran con la presión de la sangre que regresa de la aorta.


==== Corazón derecho ====

El corazón derecho consta de dos cámaras, la aurícula derecha y el ventrículo derecho, separadas por una válvula, la válvula tricúspide.

La aurícula derecha recibe sangre casi continuamente de las dos venas principales del cuerpo, las venas cavas superior e inferior.

Una pequeña cantidad de sangre de la circulación coronaria también drena hacia la aurícula derecha a través del seno coronario, que está inmediatamente arriba y en el medio de la abertura de la vena cava inferior.

En la pared de la aurícula derecha hay una depresión de forma ovalada conocida como fosa oval, que es un remanente de una abertura en el corazón fetal conocida como foramen oval.

La mayor parte de la superficie interna de la aurícula derecha es lisa, la depresión de la fosa oval es medial y la superficie anterior tiene crestas prominentes de músculos pectíneos, que también están presentes en el apéndice auricular derecho.

La aurícula derecha está conectada con el ventrículo derecho por la válvula tricúspide.

Las paredes del ventrículo derecho están revestidas de trabéculas carneae, crestas de músculo cardíaco cubiertas por endocardio.

Además de estas crestas musculares, una banda de músculo cardíaco, también cubierta por endocardio, conocida como banda moderadora, refuerza las delgadas paredes del ventrículo derecho y desempeña un papel crucial en la conducción cardíaca.

Surge de la parte inferior del tabique interventricular y atraviesa el espacio interior del ventrículo derecho para conectarse con el músculo papilar inferior.

El ventrículo derecho se estrecha hacia el tronco pulmonar, en el que expulsa sangre cuando se contrae.

El tronco pulmonar se ramifica en las arterias pulmonares izquierda y derecha que llevan la sangre a cada pulmón.

La válvula pulmonar se encuentra entre el corazón derecho y el tronco pulmonar.


==== Corazón izquierdo ====

El corazón izquierdo tiene dos cámaras: la aurícula izquierda y el ventrículo izquierdo, separadas por la válvula mitral. La aurícula izquierda recibe sangre oxigenada de los pulmones a través de una de las cuatro venas pulmonares.

La aurícula izquierda tiene una evaginación llamada apéndice auricular izquierdo.

Al igual que la aurícula derecha, la aurícula izquierda está revestida por músculos pectinados.

La aurícula izquierda está conectada con el ventrículo izquierdo por la válvula mitral. El ventrículo izquierdo es mucho más grueso que el derecho, debido a la mayor fuerza necesaria para bombear sangre a todo el cuerpo.

Al igual que el ventrículo derecho, el izquierdo también tiene trabeculae carneae, pero no hay una banda moderadora.

El ventrículo izquierdo bombea sangre al cuerpo a través de la válvula aórtica y hacia la aorta.

Dos pequeñas aberturas por encima de la válvula aórtica llevan sangre al músculo cardíaco; la arteria coronaria izquierda está por encima de la cúspide izquierda de la válvula y la arteria coronaria derecha está por encima de la cúspide derecha.


=== Muro ===


La pared del corazón está formada por tres capas: el endocardio interno, el miocardio medio y el epicardio externo.

Estos están rodeados por un saco de doble membrana llamado pericardio.
La capa más interna del corazón se llama endocardio.

Está formado por un revestimiento de epitelio escamoso simple y cubre las cámaras y válvulas del corazón.

Se continúa con el endotelio de las venas y arterias del corazón, y se une al miocardio con una fina capa de tejido conjuntivo.

El endocardio, al secretar endotelinas, también puede desempeñar un papel en la regulación de la contracción del miocardio.

La capa intermedia de la pared del corazón es el miocardio, que es el músculo cardíaco, una capa de tejido muscular estriado involuntario rodeado por una estructura de colágeno.

El patrón del músculo cardíaco es elegante y complejo, ya que las células musculares se arremolinan y giran en espiral alrededor de las cámaras del corazón, con los músculos externos formando un patrón en forma de 8 alrededor de las aurículas y alrededor de las bases de los grandes vasos y los músculos internos, formando un figura 8 alrededor de los dos ventrículos y avanzando hacia el vértice.

Este complejo patrón de remolinos permite que el corazón bombee sangre con mayor eficacia.

Hay dos tipos de células en el músculo cardíaco: las células musculares que tienen la capacidad de contraerse fácilmente y las células marcapasos del sistema de conducción.

Las células musculares constituyen la mayor parte (99 %) de las células de las aurículas y los ventrículos.

Estas células contráctiles están conectadas por discos intercalados que permiten una respuesta rápida a los impulsos del potencial de acción de las células marcapasos.

Los discos intercalados permiten que las células actúen como un sincitio y permiten las contracciones que bombean sangre a través del corazón y hacia las arterias principales.

Las células marcapasos constituyen el 1% de las células y forman el sistema de conducción del corazón.

Por lo general, son mucho más pequeñas que las células contráctiles y tienen pocas miofibrillas, lo que les confiere una contractibilidad limitada.

Su función es similar en muchos aspectos a las neuronas.

El tejido del músculo cardíaco tiene autorritmicidad, la capacidad única de iniciar un potencial de acción cardíaco a un ritmo fijo, propagando el impulso rápidamente de una célula a otra para desencadenar la contracción de todo el corazón.

Hay proteínas específicas expresadas en las células del músculo cardíaco.

Estos se asocian principalmente con la contracción muscular y se unen con actina, miosina, tropomiosina y troponina.

Incluyen MYH6, ACTC1, TNNI3, CDH2 y PKP2.

Otras proteínas expresadas son MYH7 y LDB3 que también se expresan en el músculo esquelético.


=== Pericardio ===

El pericardio es el saco que rodea el corazón.

La superficie externa dura del pericardio se llama membrana fibrosa.

Está revestido por una membrana interna doble llamada membrana serosa que produce líquido pericárdico para lubricar la superficie del corazón.

La parte de la membrana serosa unida a la membrana fibrosa se denomina pericardio parietal, mientras que la parte de la membrana serosa unida al corazón se conoce como pericardio visceral.

El pericardio está presente para lubricar su movimiento contra otras estructuras dentro del tórax, para mantener estabilizada la posición del corazón dentro del tórax y para protegerlo de infecciones.


=== Circulación coronaria ===


El tejido cardíaco, como todas las células del cuerpo, necesita recibir oxígeno, nutrientes y una forma de eliminar los desechos metabólicos.

Esto se logra mediante la circulación coronaria, que incluye arterias, venas y vasos linfáticos.

El flujo de sangre a través de los vasos coronarios se produce en picos y valles relacionados con la relajación o contracción del músculo cardíaco.

El tejido del corazón recibe sangre de dos arterias que nacen justo encima de la válvula aórtica.

Estas son la arteria coronaria principal izquierda y la arteria coronaria derecha.

La arteria coronaria principal izquierda se divide poco después de salir de la aorta en dos vasos, la descendente anterior izquierda y la arteria circunfleja izquierda.

La arteria descendente anterior izquierda irriga el tejido cardíaco y el frente, el lado externo y el tabique del ventrículo izquierdo.

Lo hace ramificándose en arterias más pequeñas: ramas diagonales y septales.

El circunflejo izquierdo irriga la parte posterior y la parte inferior del ventrículo izquierdo.

La arteria coronaria derecha irriga la aurícula derecha, el ventrículo derecho y las secciones inferiores posteriores del ventrículo izquierdo.

La arteria coronaria derecha también suministra sangre al nódulo auriculoventricular (en aproximadamente el 90 % de las personas) y al nódulo sinoauricular (en aproximadamente el 60 % de las personas).

La arteria coronaria derecha discurre por un surco en la parte posterior del corazón y la arteria descendente anterior izquierda discurre por un surco en la parte delantera.

Existe una variación significativa entre las personas en la anatomía de las arterias que irrigan el corazón.

Las arterias se dividen en sus tramos más alejados en ramas más pequeñas que se unen en los bordes de cada distribución arterial. El seno coronario es una vena grande que desemboca en la aurícula derecha y recibe la mayor parte del drenaje venoso del corazón.

Recibe sangre de la gran vena cardíaca (que recibe la aurícula izquierda y ambos ventrículos), la vena cardíaca posterior (que drena la parte posterior del ventrículo izquierdo), la vena cardíaca media (que drena la parte inferior de los ventrículos izquierdo y derecho) y la pequeña venas cardíacas.

Las venas cardíacas anteriores drenan la parte frontal del ventrículo derecho y drenan directamente en la aurícula derecha. Existen pequeñas redes linfáticas llamadas plexos debajo de cada una de las tres capas del corazón.

Estas redes se juntan en un tronco principal izquierdo y uno principal derecho, que viajan por el surco entre los ventrículos que existe en la superficie del corazón, recibiendo vasos más pequeños a medida que viajan hacia arriba.

Estos vasos luego viajan hacia el surco auriculoventricular y reciben un tercer vaso que drena la sección del ventrículo izquierdo que se asienta sobre el diafragma.

El vaso izquierdo se une a este tercer vaso y discurre a lo largo de la arteria pulmonar y la aurícula izquierda, finalizando en el nódulo traqueobronquial inferior.

El vaso derecho viaja a lo largo de la aurícula derecha y la parte del ventrículo derecho que se asienta sobre el diafragma.

Por lo general, luego viaja por delante de la aorta ascendente y luego termina en un nódulo braquiocefálico.


=== Suministro nervioso ===


El corazón recibe señales nerviosas del nervio vago y de los nervios que surgen del tronco simpático.

Estos nervios actúan para influir, pero no controlar, la frecuencia cardíaca.

Los nervios simpáticos también influyen en la fuerza de contracción del corazón.

Las señales que viajan a lo largo de estos nervios surgen de dos centros cardiovasculares emparejados en el bulbo raquídeo.

El nervio vago del sistema nervioso parasimpático actúa para disminuir la frecuencia cardíaca y los nervios del tronco simpático actúan para aumentar la frecuencia cardíaca.

Estos nervios forman una red de nervios que se encuentra sobre el corazón llamada plexo cardíaco.

El nervio vago es un nervio largo y errante que emerge del tronco encefálico y proporciona estimulación parasimpática a una gran cantidad de órganos en el tórax y el abdomen, incluido el corazón.

Los nervios del tronco simpático emergen a través de los ganglios torácicos T1-T4 y viajan a los nódulos sinoauricular y auriculoventricular, así como a las aurículas y los ventrículos.

Los ventrículos están más ricamente inervados por fibras simpáticas que por fibras parasimpáticas.

La estimulación simpática provoca la liberación del neurotransmisor norepinefrina (también conocido como noradrenalina) en la unión neuromuscular de los nervios cardíacos.

Esto acorta el período de repolarización, acelerando así la tasa de despolarización y contracción, lo que da como resultado un aumento de la frecuencia cardíaca.

Abre canales de iones de sodio y calcio activados por ligandos o químicos, lo que permite la entrada de iones cargados positivamente.

La norepinefrina se une al receptor beta-1.


== Desarrollo ==


El corazón es el primer órgano funcional en desarrollarse y comienza a latir y bombear sangre alrededor de las tres semanas de embriogénesis.

Este comienzo temprano es crucial para el posterior desarrollo embrionario y prenatal.
El corazón se deriva del mesénquima esplacnopleúrico en la placa neural que forma la región cardiogénica.

Aquí se forman dos tubos endocárdicos que se fusionan para formar un tubo cardíaco primitivo conocido como corazón tubular.

Entre la tercera y la cuarta semana, el tubo cardíaco se alarga y comienza a plegarse para formar una S dentro del pericardio.

Esto coloca las cámaras y los vasos principales en la alineación correcta para el corazón desarrollado.

El desarrollo adicional incluirá la formación de los tabiques y las válvulas y la remodelación de las cámaras del corazón.

Al final de la quinta semana, los tabiques están completos y, para la novena semana, las válvulas cardíacas están completas. Antes de la quinta semana, hay una abertura en el corazón del feto conocida como foramen oval.

El foramen oval permitió que la sangre del corazón fetal pasara directamente de la aurícula derecha a la aurícula izquierda, lo que permitió que parte de la sangre no pasara por los pulmones.

Segundos después del nacimiento, un colgajo de tejido conocido como septum primum, que antes actuaba como válvula, cierra el foramen oval y establece el patrón típico de circulación cardíaca.

Queda una depresión en la superficie de la aurícula derecha donde estaba el foramen oval, llamada fosa oval.

El corazón embrionario comienza a latir alrededor de los 22 días después de la concepción (5 semanas después del último período menstrual normal, FUM).

Empieza a latir a un ritmo cercano al de la madre, que es de unos 75 a 80 latidos por minuto (lpm).

Luego, la frecuencia cardíaca embrionaria se acelera y alcanza una frecuencia máxima de 165 a 185 lpm a principios de la séptima semana (principios de la novena semana después de la FUM).

Después de las 9 semanas (inicio de la etapa fetal) comienza a desacelerarse, frenándose a alrededor de 145 (±25) lpm al nacer.

No hay diferencia en las frecuencias cardíacas femeninas y masculinas antes del nacimiento.


== Fisiología ==

=== Flujo sanguíneo ===


El corazón funciona como una bomba en el sistema circulatorio para proporcionar un flujo continuo de sangre por todo el cuerpo.

Esta circulación consiste en la circulación sistémica hacia y desde el cuerpo y la circulación pulmonar hacia y desde los pulmones.

La sangre en la circulación pulmonar intercambia dióxido de carbono por oxígeno en los pulmones a través del proceso de respiración.

La circulación sistémica luego transporta oxígeno al cuerpo y devuelve dióxido de carbono y sangre relativamente desoxigenada al corazón para su transferencia a los pulmones.

El corazón derecho recoge sangre desoxigenada de dos grandes venas, las venas cavas superior e inferior.

La sangre se acumula en la aurícula derecha e izquierda continuamente.

La vena cava superior drena sangre por encima del diafragma y desemboca en la parte superior trasera de la aurícula derecha.

La vena cava inferior drena la sangre debajo del diafragma y desemboca en la parte posterior de la aurícula debajo de la abertura de la vena cava superior.

Inmediatamente arriba ya la mitad de la abertura de la vena cava inferior se encuentra la abertura del seno coronario de paredes delgadas.

Además, el seno coronario devuelve sangre desoxigenada del miocardio a la aurícula derecha.

La sangre se acumula en la aurícula derecha.

Cuando la aurícula derecha se contrae, la sangre se bombea a través de la válvula tricúspide hacia el ventrículo derecho.

A medida que el ventrículo derecho se contrae, la válvula tricúspide se cierra y la sangre se bombea hacia el tronco pulmonar a través de la válvula pulmonar.

El tronco pulmonar se divide en arterias pulmonares y arterias progresivamente más pequeñas a lo largo de los pulmones, hasta llegar a los capilares.

A medida que estos pasan por los alvéolos, el dióxido de carbono se intercambia por oxígeno.

Esto sucede a través del proceso pasivo de difusión.
En el corazón izquierdo, la sangre oxigenada regresa a la aurícula izquierda a través de las venas pulmonares.

Luego se bombea hacia el ventrículo izquierdo a través de la válvula mitral y hacia la aorta a través de la válvula aórtica para la circulación sistémica.

La aorta es una arteria grande que se ramifica en muchas arterias más pequeñas, arteriolas y, en última instancia, capilares.

En los capilares, el oxígeno y los nutrientes de la sangre se suministran a las células del cuerpo para su metabolismo y se intercambian por dióxido de carbono y productos de desecho.

La sangre capilar, ahora desoxigenada, viaja hacia las vénulas y las venas que finalmente se acumulan en las venas cavas superior e inferior y hacia el corazón derecho.


==== Ciclo cardiaco ====

El ciclo cardíaco se refiere a la secuencia de eventos en los que el corazón se contrae y se relaja con cada latido.

El período de tiempo durante el cual los ventrículos se contraen, forzando la salida de sangre hacia la aorta y la arteria pulmonar principal, se conoce como sístole, mientras que el período durante el cual los ventrículos se relajan y se vuelven a llenar de sangre se conoce como diástole.

Las aurículas y los ventrículos trabajan en conjunto, por lo que en la sístole, cuando los ventrículos se contraen, las aurículas se relajan y recolectan sangre.

Cuando los ventrículos se relajan en diástole, las aurículas se contraen para bombear sangre a los ventrículos.

Esta coordinación asegura que la sangre se bombee eficientemente al cuerpo. Al comienzo del ciclo cardíaco, los ventrículos se relajan.

Al hacerlo, se llenan de sangre que pasa a través de las válvulas mitral y tricúspide abiertas.

Una vez que los ventrículos han completado la mayor parte de su llenado, las aurículas se contraen, forzando más sangre a los ventrículos y cebando la bomba.

Luego, los ventrículos comienzan a contraerse.

A medida que aumenta la presión dentro de las cavidades de los ventrículos, las válvulas mitral y tricúspide se cierran a la fuerza.

A medida que la presión dentro de los ventrículos aumenta aún más, superando la presión con la aorta y las arterias pulmonares, las válvulas aórtica y pulmonar se abren.

La sangre es expulsada del corazón, lo que hace que disminuya la presión dentro de los ventrículos.

Simultáneamente, las aurículas se rellenan a medida que la sangre fluye hacia la aurícula derecha a través de las venas cavas superior e inferior, y hacia la aurícula izquierda a través de las venas pulmonares.

Finalmente, cuando la presión dentro de los ventrículos cae por debajo de la presión dentro de las arterias aorta y pulmonar, las válvulas aórtica y pulmonar se cierran.

Los ventrículos comienzan a relajarse, las válvulas mitral y tricúspide se abren y el ciclo comienza de nuevo.


==== Gasto cardíaco ====

El gasto cardíaco (CO) es una medida de la cantidad de sangre bombeada por cada ventrículo (volumen sistólico) en un minuto.

Esto se calcula multiplicando el volumen sistólico (SV) por los latidos por minuto de la frecuencia cardíaca (FC).

De modo que: CO = SV x HR.

El gasto cardíaco se normaliza al tamaño corporal a través del área de superficie corporal y se denomina índice cardíaco.

El gasto cardíaco promedio, utilizando un volumen sistólico promedio de alrededor de 70 ml, es de 5,25 l/min, con un rango normal de 4,0 a 8,0 l/min.

El volumen sistólico normalmente se mide mediante un ecocardiograma y puede estar influenciado por el tamaño del corazón, la condición física y mental del individuo, el sexo, la contractilidad, la duración de la contracción, la precarga y la poscarga. La precarga se refiere a la presión de llenado de las aurículas en el final de la diástole, cuando los ventrículos están al máximo.

Un factor principal es el tiempo que tardan los ventrículos en llenarse: si los ventrículos se contraen con más frecuencia, entonces hay menos tiempo para llenarse y la precarga será menor.

La precarga también puede verse afectada por el volumen de sangre de una persona.

La fuerza de cada contracción del músculo cardíaco es proporcional a la precarga, descrita como el mecanismo de Frank-Starling.

Esto establece que la fuerza de contracción es directamente proporcional a la longitud inicial de la fibra muscular, lo que significa que un ventrículo se contraerá con más fuerza cuanto más se estire.

La poscarga, o cuánta presión debe generar el corazón para expulsar sangre en la sístole, está influenciada por la resistencia vascular.

Puede verse influenciado por el estrechamiento de las válvulas cardíacas (estenosis) o la contracción o relajación de los vasos sanguíneos periféricos. La fuerza de las contracciones del músculo cardíaco controla el volumen sistólico.

Esto puede verse influenciado positiva o negativamente por agentes denominados inotrópicos.

Estos agentes pueden ser el resultado de cambios dentro del cuerpo, o administrarse como medicamentos como parte del tratamiento de un trastorno médico, o como una forma de soporte vital, particularmente en las unidades de cuidados intensivos.

Los inotrópicos que aumentan la fuerza de contracción son inotrópicos "positivos" e incluyen agentes simpáticos como la adrenalina, la noradrenalina y la dopamina.

Los inotrópicos "negativos" disminuyen la fuerza de contracción e incluyen bloqueadores de los canales de calcio.


=== Conducción eléctrica ===

El latido cardíaco rítmico normal, llamado ritmo sinusal, lo establece el propio marcapasos del corazón, el nódulo sinoauricular (también conocido como nódulo sinusal o nódulo SA).

Aquí se crea una señal eléctrica que viaja a través del corazón y hace que el músculo cardíaco se contraiga.

El nódulo sinoauricular se encuentra en la parte superior de la aurícula derecha cerca de la unión con la vena cava superior.

La señal eléctrica generada por el nódulo sinoauricular viaja a través de la aurícula derecha de una forma radial que no se comprende por completo.

Viaja a la aurícula izquierda a través del haz de Bachmann, de modo que los músculos de las aurículas izquierda y derecha se contraen juntos.

La señal luego viaja al nódulo auriculoventricular.

Se encuentra en la parte inferior de la aurícula derecha en el tabique auriculoventricular, el límite entre la aurícula derecha y el ventrículo izquierdo.

El tabique es parte del esqueleto cardíaco, tejido dentro del corazón por el que no puede pasar la señal eléctrica, lo que obliga a la señal a pasar solo por el nódulo auriculoventricular.

Luego, la señal viaja a lo largo del haz de His hacia las ramas izquierda y derecha del haz hasta los ventrículos del corazón.

En los ventrículos, la señal es transportada por un tejido especializado llamado fibras de Purkinje que luego transmite la carga eléctrica al músculo cardíaco.


=== Frecuencia cardíaca ===


La frecuencia cardíaca normal en reposo se llama ritmo sinusal, creado y sostenido por el nódulo sinoauricular, un grupo de células marcapasos que se encuentran en la pared de la aurícula derecha.

Las células del nódulo sinoauricular hacen esto creando un potencial de acción.

El potencial de acción cardiaco es creado por el movimiento de electrolitos específicos dentro y fuera de las células del marcapasos.

Luego, el potencial de acción se propaga a las células cercanas. Cuando las células sinoauriculares están en reposo, tienen una carga negativa en sus membranas.

Sin embargo, una entrada rápida de iones de sodio hace que la carga de la membrana se vuelva positiva.

Esto se llama despolarización y ocurre espontáneamente.

Una vez que la célula tiene una carga lo suficientemente alta, los canales de sodio se cierran y los iones de calcio comienzan a ingresar a la célula, poco después de lo cual el potasio comienza a salir de ella.

Todos los iones viajan a través de canales iónicos en la membrana de las células sinoauriculares.

El potasio y el calcio comienzan a salir y entrar en la celda solo cuando tiene una carga lo suficientemente alta, por lo que se denominan activados por voltaje.

Poco tiempo después, los canales de calcio se cierran y los canales de potasio se abren, lo que permite que el potasio salga de la célula.

Esto hace que la célula tenga una carga negativa en reposo y se denomina repolarización.

Cuando el potencial de membrana alcanza aproximadamente -60 mV, los canales de potasio se cierran y el proceso puede comenzar de nuevo.

Los iones se mueven de áreas donde están concentrados a donde no lo están.

Por esta razón, el sodio se mueve hacia la célula desde el exterior y el potasio se mueve desde el interior de la célula hacia el exterior de la célula.

El calcio también juega un papel fundamental.

Su entrada a través de canales lentos significa que las células sinoauriculares tienen una fase de "meseta" prolongada cuando tienen una carga positiva.

Una parte de esto se llama período refractario absoluto.

Los iones de calcio también se combinan con la proteína reguladora troponina C en el complejo de troponina para permitir la contracción del músculo cardíaco y se separan de la proteína para permitir la relajación.

La frecuencia cardíaca en reposo de un adulto oscila entre 60 y 100 lpm.

La frecuencia cardíaca en reposo de un recién nacido puede ser de 129 latidos por minuto (lpm) y esta disminuye gradualmente hasta la madurez.

La frecuencia cardíaca de un atleta puede ser inferior a 60 lpm.

Durante el ejercicio, la frecuencia puede ser de 150 lpm con frecuencias máximas que van de 200 a 220 lpm.


==== Influencias ====
El ritmo sinusal normal del corazón, que da la frecuencia cardíaca en reposo, está influenciado por una serie de factores.

Los centros cardiovasculares en el tronco del encéfalo controlan las influencias simpáticas y parasimpáticas del corazón a través del nervio vago y el tronco simpático.

Estos centros cardiovasculares reciben información de una serie de receptores, incluidos los barorreceptores, que detectan el estiramiento de los vasos sanguíneos y los quimiorreceptores, detectan la cantidad de oxígeno y dióxido de carbono en la sangre y su pH.

A través de una serie de reflejos, estos ayudan a regular y mantener el flujo sanguíneo.

Los barorreceptores son receptores de estiramiento ubicados en el seno aórtico, los cuerpos carotídeos, las venas cavas y otros lugares, incluidos los vasos pulmonares y el lado derecho del corazón.

Los barorreceptores disparan a un ritmo determinado por cuánto se estiran, lo que está influenciado por la presión arterial, el nivel de actividad física y la distribución relativa de la sangre.

Con el aumento de la presión y el estiramiento, aumenta la tasa de activación de los barorreceptores y los centros cardíacos disminuyen la estimulación simpática y aumentan la estimulación parasimpática.

A medida que disminuyen la presión y el estiramiento, disminuye la tasa de activación de los barorreceptores y los centros cardíacos aumentan la estimulación simpática y disminuyen la estimulación parasimpática.

Existe un reflejo similar, llamado reflejo auricular o reflejo de Bainbridge, asociado con tasas variables de flujo sanguíneo a las aurículas.

El aumento del retorno venoso estira las paredes de las aurículas donde se encuentran los barorreceptores especializados.

Sin embargo, a medida que los barorreceptores auriculares aumentan su frecuencia de activación y se estiran debido al aumento de la presión arterial, el centro cardíaco responde aumentando la estimulación simpática e inhibiendo la estimulación parasimpática para aumentar la frecuencia cardíaca.

Lo opuesto también es cierto.

Los quimiorreceptores presentes en el cuerpo carotídeo o adyacentes a la aorta en un cuerpo aórtico responden a los niveles de oxígeno y dióxido de carbono de la sangre.

El oxígeno bajo o el dióxido de carbono alto estimularán la activación de los receptores. Los niveles de ejercicio y condición física, la edad, la temperatura corporal, la tasa metabólica basal e incluso el estado emocional de una persona pueden afectar la frecuencia cardíaca.

Los altos niveles de las hormonas epinefrina, norepinefrina y hormonas tiroideas pueden aumentar la frecuencia cardíaca.

Los niveles de electrolitos, incluidos el calcio, el potasio y el sodio, también pueden influir en la velocidad y la regularidad de la frecuencia cardíaca; el nivel bajo de oxígeno en la sangre, la presión arterial baja y la deshidratación pueden aumentarlo.


== Importancia clínica ==

=== Enfermedades ===


Las enfermedades cardiovasculares, que incluyen enfermedades del corazón, son la principal causa de muerte en todo el mundo.

La mayoría de las enfermedades cardiovasculares no son transmisibles y están relacionadas con el estilo de vida y otros factores, y se vuelven más prevalentes con el envejecimiento.

Las enfermedades cardíacas son una de las principales causas de muerte y representan un promedio del 30 % de todas las muertes en 2008 en todo el mundo.

Esta tasa varía desde un 28% más bajo hasta un 40% más alto en los países de ingresos altos.

Los médicos que se especializan en el corazón se llaman cardiólogos.

Muchos otros profesionales médicos están involucrados en el tratamiento de enfermedades del corazón, incluidos médicos, cirujanos cardiotorácicos, intensivistas y profesionales de la salud afines, incluidos fisioterapeutas y dietistas.


==== Cardiopatía isquémica ====

La enfermedad de las arterias coronarias, también conocida como cardiopatía isquémica, es causada por aterosclerosis, una acumulación de material graso a lo largo de las paredes internas de las arterias.

Estos depósitos de grasa conocidos como placas ateroscleróticas estrechan las arterias coronarias y, si son graves, pueden reducir el flujo de sangre al corazón.

Si un estrechamiento (o estenosis) es relativamente menor, es posible que el paciente no experimente ningún síntoma.

Los estrechamientos severos pueden causar dolor en el pecho (angina) o dificultad para respirar durante el ejercicio o incluso en reposo.

La delgada cubierta de una placa aterosclerótica puede romperse, exponiendo el centro graso a la sangre circulante.

En este caso, se puede formar un coágulo o un trombo que obstruye la arteria y restringe el flujo de sangre a un área del músculo cardíaco, lo que provoca un infarto de miocardio (ataque cardíaco) o una angina inestable.

En el peor de los casos, esto puede causar un paro cardíaco, una pérdida repentina y total del gasto del corazón.

La obesidad, la presión arterial alta, la diabetes no controlada, el tabaquismo y el colesterol alto pueden aumentar el riesgo de desarrollar aterosclerosis y enfermedad de las arterias coronarias.


==== Insuficiencia cardiaca ====

La insuficiencia cardíaca se define como una condición en la que el corazón no puede bombear suficiente sangre para satisfacer las demandas del cuerpo.

Los pacientes con insuficiencia cardíaca pueden experimentar dificultad para respirar, especialmente cuando están acostados, así como hinchazón de los tobillos, conocida como edema periférico.

La insuficiencia cardíaca es el resultado final de muchas enfermedades que afectan al corazón, pero se asocia más comúnmente con la enfermedad cardíaca isquémica, la enfermedad cardíaca valvular o la presión arterial alta.

Las causas menos comunes incluyen varias cardiomiopatías.

La insuficiencia cardíaca se asocia con frecuencia a la debilidad del músculo cardíaco en los ventrículos (insuficiencia cardíaca sistólica), pero también se puede observar en pacientes con un músculo cardíaco fuerte pero rígido (insuficiencia cardíaca diastólica).

La afección puede afectar el ventrículo izquierdo (causando predominantemente disnea), el ventrículo derecho (causando predominantemente hinchazón de las piernas y aumento de la presión venosa yugular) o ambos ventrículos.

Los pacientes con insuficiencia cardíaca corren un mayor riesgo de desarrollar alteraciones peligrosas del ritmo cardíaco o arritmias.


==== Miocardiopatías ====
Las miocardiopatías son enfermedades que afectan al músculo del corazón.

Algunos causan un engrosamiento anormal del músculo cardíaco (miocardiopatía hipertrófica), otros hacen que el corazón se expanda y se debilite de manera anormal (miocardiopatía dilatada), algunos hacen que el músculo cardíaco se vuelva rígido y no pueda relajarse por completo entre las contracciones (miocardiopatía restrictiva) y algunos hacen que el corazón propenso a ritmos cardíacos anormales (miocardiopatía arritmogénica).

Estas condiciones a menudo son genéticas y pueden heredarse, pero algunas, como la miocardiopatía dilatada, pueden ser causadas por daños causados ​​por toxinas como el alcohol.

Algunas miocardiopatías, como la miocardiopatía hipertrófica, están vinculadas a un mayor riesgo de muerte súbita cardíaca, especialmente en deportistas.

Muchas miocardiopatías pueden provocar insuficiencia cardíaca en las últimas etapas de la enfermedad.


==== Cardiopatía valvular ====

Las válvulas cardíacas saludables permiten que la sangre fluya fácilmente en una dirección, pero evitan que fluya en la otra dirección.

Las válvulas cardíacas enfermas pueden tener una abertura estrecha y, por lo tanto, restringir el flujo de sangre en la dirección de avance (denominada válvula estenótica) o pueden permitir que la sangre se filtre en la dirección inversa (denominada regurgitación valvular).

La enfermedad cardíaca valvular puede causar dificultad para respirar, desmayos o dolor en el pecho, pero puede ser asintomática y solo detectarse en un examen de rutina al escuchar sonidos cardíacos anormales o un soplo cardíaco.

En el mundo desarrollado, la enfermedad cardíaca valvular es causada con mayor frecuencia por la degeneración secundaria a la vejez, pero también puede ser causada por una infección de las válvulas cardíacas (endocarditis).

En algunas partes del mundo, la cardiopatía reumática es una de las principales causas de la enfermedad valvular del corazón, que normalmente provoca estenosis mitral o aórtica y es causada por la reacción del sistema inmunitario del cuerpo a una infección de garganta por estreptococos.


==== Arritmias cardíacas ====

Mientras que en el corazón sano, las ondas de impulsos eléctricos se originan en el nódulo sinusal antes de extenderse al resto de las aurículas, el nódulo auriculoventricular y finalmente los ventrículos (lo que se conoce como ritmo sinusal normal), este ritmo normal puede verse interrumpido.

Los ritmos cardíacos anormales o las arritmias pueden ser asintomáticos o pueden causar palpitaciones, desmayos o dificultad para respirar.

Algunos tipos de arritmia, como la fibrilación auricular, aumentan el riesgo de accidente cerebrovascular a largo plazo.

Algunas arritmias hacen que el corazón lata con una lentitud anormal, lo que se conoce como bradicardia o bradiarritmia.

Esto puede ser causado por un nódulo sinusal anormalmente lento o daño dentro del sistema de conducción cardiaco (bloqueo cardiaco).

En otras arritmias, el corazón puede latir anormalmente rápido, lo que se conoce como taquicardia o taquiarritmia.

Estas arritmias pueden adoptar muchas formas y pueden originarse en diferentes estructuras dentro del corazón: algunas surgen de las aurículas (p. ej., aleteo auricular), otras del nódulo auriculoventricular (p. ej.,

taquicardia de reentrada del nódulo AV), mientras que otras surgen de los ventrículos (p. ej., taquicardia ventricular).

Algunas taquiarritmias son causadas por cicatrices dentro del corazón (p. ej., algunas formas de taquicardia ventricular), otras por un foco irritable (p. ej., taquicardia auricular focal), mientras que otras son causadas por tejido de conducción anormal adicional que ha estado presente desde el nacimiento (p. ej.,

síndrome de Wolff-Parkinson-White).

La forma más peligrosa de aceleración del corazón es la fibrilación ventricular, en la que los ventrículos tiemblan en lugar de contraerse y que, si no se trata, es rápidamente mortal.


==== Enfermedad pericárdica ====

El saco que rodea el corazón, llamado pericardio, puede inflamarse en una condición conocida como pericarditis.

Esta afección generalmente causa dolor en el pecho que puede extenderse a la espalda y, a menudo, es causada por una infección viral (fiebre glandular, citomegalovirus o coxsackievirus).

El líquido puede acumularse dentro del saco pericárdico, lo que se conoce como derrame pericárdico.

Los derrames pericárdicos a menudo ocurren como consecuencia de pericarditis, insuficiencia renal o tumores, y con frecuencia no causan ningún síntoma.

Sin embargo, los derrames grandes o los derrames que se acumulan rápidamente pueden comprimir el corazón en una condición conocida como taponamiento cardíaco, lo que provoca dificultad para respirar y una presión arterial baja potencialmente fatal.

Se puede extraer líquido del espacio pericárdico para el diagnóstico o para aliviar el taponamiento usando una jeringa en un procedimiento llamado pericardiocentesis.


==== Cardiopatías congénitas ====

Algunas personas nacen con corazones anormales y estas anomalías se conocen como defectos cardíacos congénitos.

Pueden variar desde anomalías relativamente menores (p. ej., foramen oval permeable, posiblemente una variante de lo normal) hasta anomalías graves que amenazan la vida (p. ej., síndrome del corazón izquierdo hipoplásico).

Las anomalías comunes incluyen aquellas que afectan el músculo cardíaco que separa los dos lados del corazón (un "agujero en el corazón", por ejemplo, un defecto del tabique ventricular).

Otros defectos incluyen los que afectan las válvulas cardíacas (p. ej., estenosis aórtica congénita) o los principales vasos sanguíneos que salen del corazón (p. ej., coartación de la aorta).

Se observan síndromes más complejos que afectan a más de una parte del corazón (p.

Tetralogía de Fallot).

Algunos defectos cardíacos congénitos permiten que la sangre con bajo contenido de oxígeno que normalmente regresaría a los pulmones sea bombeada de regreso al resto del cuerpo.

Estos se conocen como defectos cardíacos congénitos cianóticos y, a menudo, son más graves.

Los defectos cardíacos congénitos importantes a menudo se detectan en la infancia, poco después del nacimiento o incluso antes de que nazca un niño (p. ej., transposición de las grandes arterias), lo que provoca dificultad para respirar y una tasa de crecimiento más baja.

Otras formas menores de cardiopatías congénitas pueden pasar desapercibidas durante muchos años y solo se revelan en la vida adulta (p. ej., comunicación interauricular).


=== Diagnóstico ===

La enfermedad cardíaca se diagnostica mediante la elaboración de un historial médico, un examen cardíaco y otras investigaciones, que incluyen análisis de sangre, ecocardiogramas, ECG e imágenes.

Otros procedimientos invasivos como el cateterismo cardíaco también pueden desempeñar un papel.


==== Examen ====

El examen cardíaco incluye inspección, sentir el tórax con las manos (palpación) y escuchar con un estetoscopio (auscultación).

Implica la evaluación de signos que pueden ser visibles en las manos de una persona (como hemorragias en astillas), articulaciones y otras áreas.

Se toma el pulso de una persona, generalmente en la arteria radial cerca de la muñeca, para evaluar el ritmo y la fuerza del pulso.

La presión arterial se toma con un esfigmomanómetro manual o automático o con una medición más invasiva desde el interior de la arteria.

Se observa cualquier elevación del pulso venoso yugular.

Se siente el pecho de una persona en busca de vibraciones transmitidas desde el corazón y luego se escucha con un estetoscopio.


==== Sonidos del corazón ====

Por lo general, los corazones sanos solo tienen dos sonidos cardíacos audibles, llamados S1 y S2.

El primer sonido cardíaco S1 es el sonido creado por el cierre de las válvulas auriculoventriculares durante la contracción ventricular y normalmente se describe como "lub".

El segundo sonido cardíaco, S2, es el sonido de las válvulas semilunares cerrándose durante la diástole ventricular y se describe como "dub".

Cada sonido consta de dos componentes, lo que refleja la ligera diferencia de tiempo a medida que se cierran las dos válvulas.

S2 puede dividirse en dos sonidos distintos, ya sea como resultado de la inspiración o de diferentes problemas valvulares o cardíacos.

También pueden estar presentes sonidos cardíacos adicionales y estos dan lugar a ritmos de galope.

Un tercer ruido cardíaco, S3, generalmente indica un aumento en el volumen de sangre ventricular.

Un cuarto sonido cardíaco S4 se conoce como galope auricular y se produce por el sonido de la sangre que entra a la fuerza en un ventrículo rígido.

La presencia combinada de S3 y S4 dan un galope cuádruple.

Los soplos cardíacos son sonidos cardíacos anormales que pueden estar relacionados con una enfermedad o ser benignos, y existen varios tipos.

Normalmente hay dos sonidos cardíacos y los sonidos cardíacos anormales pueden ser sonidos adicionales o "soplos" relacionados con el flujo de sangre entre los sonidos.

Los soplos se clasifican por volumen, del 1 (el más bajo) al 6 (el más fuerte), y se evalúan por su relación con los sonidos cardíacos, la posición en el ciclo cardíaco y características adicionales como su radiación a otros sitios, cambios con un la posición de la persona, la frecuencia del sonido determinada por el lado del estetoscopio por el que se escuchan y el lugar en el que se escuchan más fuerte.

Los soplos pueden ser causados ​​por válvulas cardíacas dañadas o enfermedades cardíacas congénitas, como defectos del tabique ventricular, o pueden escucharse en corazones normales.

Un tipo diferente de sonido, un roce pericárdico, se puede escuchar en casos de pericarditis donde las membranas inflamadas pueden frotarse entre sí.


==== Análisis de sangre ====

Los análisis de sangre juegan un papel importante en el diagnóstico y tratamiento de muchas enfermedades cardiovasculares.
La troponina es un biomarcador sensible para un corazón con suministro de sangre insuficiente.

Se libera de 4 a 6 horas después de la lesión y, por lo general, alcanza su punto máximo alrededor de las 12 a 24 horas.

A menudo se toman dos pruebas de troponina: una en el momento de la presentación inicial y otra dentro de las 3 a 6 horas, con un nivel alto o un aumento significativo como diagnóstico.

Se puede usar una prueba de péptido natriurético cerebral (BNP) para evaluar la presencia de insuficiencia cardíaca, y aumenta cuando hay una mayor demanda en el ventrículo izquierdo.

Estas pruebas se consideran biomarcadores porque son altamente específicas para enfermedades cardíacas.

La prueba de la forma MB de la creatina quinasa proporciona información sobre el suministro de sangre al corazón, pero se usa con menos frecuencia porque es menos específica y sensible.

A menudo se toman otros análisis de sangre para ayudar a comprender la salud general de una persona y los factores de riesgo que pueden contribuir a la enfermedad cardíaca.

Estos a menudo incluyen un conteo sanguíneo completo que investiga la anemia y un panel metabólico básico que puede revelar cualquier alteración en los electrolitos.

A menudo se requiere una prueba de coagulación para garantizar que se administre el nivel correcto de anticoagulación.

Los lípidos en ayunas y la glucosa en sangre en ayunas (o un nivel de HbA1c) a menudo se solicitan para evaluar el estado de colesterol y diabetes de una persona, respectivamente.


==== Electrocardiograma ====

Usando electrodos de superficie en el cuerpo, es posible registrar la actividad eléctrica del corazón.

Este trazado de la señal eléctrica es el electrocardiograma (ECG) o (EKG).

Un ECG es una prueba de cabecera e implica la colocación de diez derivaciones en el cuerpo.

Esto produce un ECG de "12 derivaciones" (tres derivaciones adicionales se calculan matemáticamente y una derivación está eléctricamente conectada a tierra).

Hay cinco características destacadas en el ECG: la onda P (despolarización auricular), el complejo QRS (despolarización ventricular) y la onda T (repolarización ventricular).

A medida que las células del corazón se contraen, crean una corriente que viaja a través del corazón.

Una desviación hacia abajo en el ECG implica que las células tienen una carga más positiva ("despolarización") en la dirección de esa derivación, mientras que una desviación hacia arriba implica que las células se vuelven más negativas ("repolarización") en la dirección de la derivación.

Esto depende de la posición de la derivación, por lo que si una onda de despolarización se moviera de izquierda a derecha, una derivación a la izquierda mostraría una desviación negativa y una derivación a la derecha mostraría una desviación positiva.

El ECG es una herramienta útil para detectar alteraciones del ritmo y para detectar un suministro sanguíneo insuficiente al corazón.

A veces se sospechan anomalías, pero no son inmediatamente visibles en el ECG.

Las pruebas durante el ejercicio se pueden usar para provocar una anomalía, o se puede usar un ECG durante un período más prolongado, como un monitor Holter de 24 horas, si no se sospecha una anomalía del ritmo presente en el momento de la evaluación.


==== Imágenes ====

Se pueden usar varios métodos de imágenes para evaluar la anatomía y la función del corazón, incluidos el ultrasonido (ecocardiografía), la angiografía, la tomografía computarizada, la resonancia magnética y la tomografía por emisión de positrones.

Un ecocardiograma es una ecografía del corazón que se usa para medir la función del corazón, evaluar la enfermedad de las válvulas y buscar anomalías.

La ecocardiografía se puede realizar con una sonda en el tórax (transtorácica) o con una sonda en el esófago (transesofágica).

Un informe de ecocardiografía típico incluirá información sobre el ancho de las válvulas, notando cualquier estenosis, si hay reflujo de sangre (regurgitación) e información sobre los volúmenes de sangre al final de la sístole y la diástole, incluida una fracción de eyección, que describe cuánto la sangre es expulsada de los ventrículos izquierdo y derecho después de la sístole.

La fracción de eyección se puede obtener dividiendo el volumen expulsado por el corazón (volumen sistólico) por el volumen del corazón lleno (volumen diastólico final).

Los ecocardiogramas también se pueden realizar en circunstancias en las que el cuerpo está más estresado, para examinar signos de falta de suministro de sangre.

Esta prueba de esfuerzo cardíaco implica ejercicio directo o, cuando esto no es posible, la inyección de un fármaco como la dobutamina.

Las tomografías computarizadas, las radiografías de tórax y otras formas de imágenes pueden ayudar a evaluar el tamaño del corazón, evaluar signos de edema pulmonar e indicar si hay líquido alrededor del corazón.

También son útiles para evaluar la aorta, el principal vaso sanguíneo que sale del corazón.


=== Tratamiento ===

Las enfermedades que afectan al corazón pueden tratarse mediante una variedad de métodos que incluyen la modificación del estilo de vida, el tratamiento farmacológico y la cirugía.


==== Cardiopatía isquémica ====

Los estrechamientos de las arterias coronarias (cardiopatía isquémica) se tratan para aliviar los síntomas del dolor torácico causado por una arteria parcialmente estrechada (angina de pecho), para minimizar el daño del músculo cardíaco cuando una arteria está completamente ocluida (infarto de miocardio) o para prevenir un infarto de miocardio. ocurra un infarto.

Los medicamentos para mejorar los síntomas de la angina incluyen nitroglicerina, bloqueadores beta y bloqueadores de los canales de calcio, mientras que los tratamientos preventivos incluyen antiplaquetarios como aspirina y estatinas, medidas de estilo de vida como dejar de fumar y pérdida de peso y tratamiento de factores de riesgo como presión arterial alta y diabetes.

Además de usar medicamentos, las arterias del corazón estrechadas se pueden tratar expandiendo los estrechamientos o redirigiendo el flujo de sangre para sortear una obstrucción.

Esto se puede realizar mediante una intervención coronaria percutánea, durante la cual se pueden expandir los estrechamientos pasando pequeños cables con punta de globo en las arterias coronarias, inflando el globo para expandir el estrechamiento y, a veces, dejando atrás un andamio de metal conocido como stent para mantener el arteria abierta.

Si los estrechamientos de las arterias coronarias no son adecuados para el tratamiento con una intervención coronaria percutánea, puede ser necesaria una cirugía abierta.

Se puede realizar un injerto de derivación de arteria coronaria, mediante el cual se usa un vaso sanguíneo de otra parte del cuerpo (la vena safena, la arteria radial o la arteria mamaria interna) para redirigir la sangre desde un punto antes del estrechamiento (generalmente la aorta) a un punto más allá de la obstrucción.


==== Cardiopatía valvular ====

Las válvulas cardíacas enfermas que se han vuelto anormalmente estrechas o con fugas anormales pueden requerir cirugía.

Esto se realiza tradicionalmente como un procedimiento quirúrgico abierto para reemplazar la válvula cardíaca dañada con una válvula protésica metálica o de tejido.

En algunas circunstancias, las válvulas tricúspide o mitral pueden repararse quirúrgicamente, evitando la necesidad de un reemplazo de válvula.

Las válvulas cardíacas también se pueden tratar de forma percutánea, utilizando técnicas que comparten muchas similitudes con la intervención coronaria percutánea.

El reemplazo de válvula aórtica transcatéter se usa cada vez más para pacientes que se consideran de muy alto riesgo para el reemplazo de válvula abierta.


==== Arritmias cardíacas ====
Los ritmos cardíacos anormales (arritmias) se pueden tratar con medicamentos antiarrítmicos.

Estos pueden funcionar manipulando el flujo de electrolitos a través de la membrana celular (como bloqueadores de los canales de calcio, bloqueadores de los canales de sodio, amiodarona o digoxina) o modifican el efecto del sistema nervioso autónomo en el corazón (bloqueadores beta y atropina).

En algunas arritmias, como la fibrilación auricular, que aumentan el riesgo de accidente cerebrovascular, este riesgo se puede reducir con anticoagulantes como la warfarina o nuevos anticoagulantes orales.

Si los medicamentos no logran controlar una arritmia, otra opción de tratamiento puede ser la ablación con catéter.

En estos procedimientos, se pasan cables desde una vena o arteria de la pierna hasta el corazón para encontrar el área anormal de tejido que está causando la arritmia.

El tejido anormal puede dañarse intencionalmente o extirparse calentándolo o congelándolo para evitar más alteraciones del ritmo cardíaco.

Si bien la mayoría de las arritmias se pueden tratar con técnicas de catéter mínimamente invasivas, algunas arritmias (en particular, la fibrilación auricular) también se pueden tratar con cirugía abierta o toracoscópica, ya sea en el momento de otra cirugía cardíaca o como un procedimiento independiente.

También se puede usar una cardioversión, mediante la cual se usa una descarga eléctrica para aturdir el corazón y quitarle un ritmo anormal.

Los dispositivos cardíacos en forma de marcapasos o desfibriladores implantables también pueden ser necesarios para tratar las arritmias.

Los marcapasos, que consisten en un pequeño generador alimentado por batería implantado debajo de la piel y uno o más cables que se extienden hasta el corazón, se usan más comúnmente para tratar los ritmos cardíacos anormalmente lentos.

Los desfibriladores implantables se utilizan para tratar los ritmos cardíacos rápidos graves y potencialmente mortales.

Estos dispositivos monitorean el corazón y, si se detectan aceleraciones peligrosas, pueden administrar automáticamente una descarga para restaurar el ritmo normal del corazón.

Los desfibriladores implantables se utilizan con mayor frecuencia en pacientes con insuficiencia cardíaca, miocardiopatías o síndromes de arritmia hereditarios.


==== Insuficiencia cardiaca ====

Además de abordar la causa subyacente de la insuficiencia cardíaca de un paciente (por lo general, cardiopatía isquémica o hipertensión), el pilar del tratamiento de la insuficiencia cardíaca es la medicación.

Estos incluyen medicamentos para evitar que se acumule líquido en los pulmones al aumentar la cantidad de orina que produce un paciente (diuréticos) y medicamentos que intentan preservar la función de bombeo del corazón (bloqueadores beta, inhibidores de la ECA y antagonistas de los receptores de mineralocorticoides).

En algunos pacientes con insuficiencia cardíaca, se puede usar un marcapasos especializado conocido como terapia de resincronización cardíaca para mejorar la eficiencia de bombeo del corazón.

Estos dispositivos se combinan frecuentemente con un desfibrilador.

En casos muy graves de insuficiencia cardíaca, se puede implantar una pequeña bomba llamada dispositivo de asistencia ventricular que complementa la capacidad de bombeo del propio corazón.

En los casos más graves, se puede considerar un trasplante cardíaco.


== Historia ==

=== Antiguo ===


Los seres humanos conocen el corazón desde la antigüedad, aunque su función y anatomía precisas no se entendían claramente.

Desde los puntos de vista principalmente religiosos de las sociedades anteriores hacia el corazón, se considera que los antiguos griegos fueron la sede principal de la comprensión científica del corazón en el mundo antiguo.

Aristóteles consideraba que el corazón era el órgano encargado de crear la sangre; Platón consideró el corazón como la fuente de circulación de la sangre e Hipócrates observó que la sangre circula cíclicamente desde el cuerpo a través del corazón hasta los pulmones.

Erasistratos (304-250 a. C.) notó que el corazón era una bomba que causaba la dilatación de los vasos sanguíneos, y notó que las arterias y las venas irradiaban desde el corazón y se volvían progresivamente más pequeñas con la distancia, aunque creía que estaban llenas de aire y no de sangre.

También descubrió las válvulas del corazón. El médico griego Galeno (siglo II EC) sabía que los vasos sanguíneos transportaban sangre e identificó la sangre venosa (rojo oscuro) y arterial (más brillante y más delgada), cada una con funciones distintas y separadas.

Galeno, al señalar que el corazón es el órgano más caliente del cuerpo, concluyó que proporcionaba calor al cuerpo.

El corazón no bombeaba sangre, el movimiento del corazón aspiraba sangre durante la diástole y la sangre se movía por la pulsación de las propias arterias.

Galen creía que la sangre arterial se creaba por la sangre venosa que pasaba del ventrículo izquierdo al derecho a través de "poros" entre los ventrículos.

El aire de los pulmones pasó de los pulmones a través de la arteria pulmonar al lado izquierdo del corazón y creó sangre arterial. Estas ideas no fueron cuestionadas durante casi mil años.


=== Pre-moderno ===

Las descripciones más antiguas de los sistemas de circulación coronaria y pulmonar se pueden encontrar en el Comentario de anatomía del Canon de Avicena, publicado en 1242 por Ibn al-Nafis.

En su manuscrito, al-Nafis escribió que la sangre pasa a través de la circulación pulmonar en lugar de moverse del ventrículo derecho al izquierdo como creía anteriormente Galeno.

Su obra fue posteriormente traducida al latín por Andrea Alpago. En Europa, las enseñanzas de Galeno continuaron dominando la comunidad académica y sus doctrinas fueron adoptadas como canon oficial de la Iglesia.

Andreas Vesalius cuestionó algunas de las creencias de Galeno sobre el corazón en De humani corporis fabrica (1543), pero su obra magna fue interpretada como un desafío a las autoridades y fue objeto de una serie de ataques.

Miguel Servet escribió en Christianismi Restitutio (1553) que la sangre fluye de un lado del corazón al otro a través de los pulmones.


=== Moderno ===

Un gran avance en la comprensión del flujo de sangre a través del corazón y el cuerpo se produjo con la publicación de De Motu Cordis (1628) por el médico inglés William Harvey.

El libro de Harvey describe completamente la circulación sistémica y la fuerza mecánica del corazón, lo que lleva a una revisión de las doctrinas galénicas.

Otto Frank (1865-1944) fue un fisiólogo alemán; entre sus muchos trabajos publicados se encuentran estudios detallados de esta importante relación del corazón.

Ernest Starling (1866-1927) fue un importante fisiólogo inglés que también estudió el corazón.

Aunque trabajaron en gran medida de forma independiente, sus esfuerzos combinados y conclusiones similares han sido reconocidos con el nombre de "mecanismo de Frank-Starling". Aunque las fibras de Purkinje y el haz de His se descubrieron ya en el siglo XIX, su función específica en el sistema de conducción eléctrica del corazón permaneció desconocido hasta que Sunao Tawara publicó su monografía, titulada Das Reizleitungssystem des Säugetierherzens, en 1906.

El descubrimiento de Tawara del nódulo auriculoventricular llevó a Arthur Keith y Martin Flack a buscar estructuras similares en el corazón, lo que llevó al descubrimiento del nódulo sinoauricular varios meses después.

Estas estructuras forman la base anatómica del electrocardiograma, cuyo inventor, Willem Einthoven, recibió el Premio Nobel de Medicina o Fisiología en 1924. El primer trasplante de corazón exitoso fue realizado en 1967 por el cirujano sudafricano Christiaan Barnard en el Hospital Groote Schuur en Cape Pueblo.

Esto marcó un hito importante en la cirugía cardíaca, captando la atención tanto de la profesión médica como del mundo en general.

Sin embargo, las tasas de supervivencia a largo plazo de los pacientes fueron inicialmente muy bajas.

Louis Washkansky, el primer receptor de un corazón donado, murió 18 días después de la operación, mientras que otros pacientes no sobrevivieron más que unas pocas semanas.

El cirujano estadounidense Norman Shumway ha sido acreditado por sus esfuerzos para mejorar las técnicas de trasplante, junto con los pioneros Richard Lower, Vladimir Demikhov y Adrian Kantrowitz.

Hasta marzo de 2000, se han realizado más de 55 000 trasplantes de corazón en todo el mundo. A mediados del siglo XX, las enfermedades cardíacas habían superado a las enfermedades infecciosas como la principal causa de muerte en los Estados Unidos, y actualmente es la principal causa de muerte en todo el mundo. .

Desde 1948, el Estudio del corazón de Framingham en curso ha arrojado luz sobre los efectos de diversas influencias en el corazón, incluida la dieta, el ejercicio y los medicamentos comunes como la aspirina.

Aunque la introducción de los inhibidores de la ECA y los bloqueadores beta ha mejorado el tratamiento de la insuficiencia cardíaca crónica, la enfermedad continúa siendo una enorme carga médica y social, con un 30 a 40 % de pacientes que mueren dentro del año posterior a recibir el diagnóstico.


== Trasplante de corazón de cerdo a humano ==

El primer trasplante exitoso de un corazón de un cerdo modificado genéticamente a un humano fue realizado el 7 de enero de 2022 en Baltimore por el cirujano cardíaco Bartley P.

Griffith, el destinatario fue David Bennett (57).


== Sociedad y cultura ==

=== Simbolismo ===

Como uno de los órganos vitales, el corazón fue identificado durante mucho tiempo como el centro de todo el cuerpo, el asiento de la vida, la emoción, la razón, la voluntad, el intelecto, el propósito o la mente.

El corazón es un símbolo emblemático en muchas religiones, y significa "verdad, conciencia o coraje moral en muchas religiones: el templo o trono de Dios en el pensamiento islámico y judeocristiano; el centro divino, o atman, y el tercer ojo de la sabiduría trascendente en el hinduismo; el diamante de la pureza y la esencia de Buda; el centro taoísta del entendimiento". En la Biblia hebrea, la palabra corazón, lev, se usa en estos significados, como el asiento de la emoción, la mente, el órgano anatómico.

También está relacionado en función y simbolismo con el estómago. Se pensaba que una parte importante del concepto del alma en la religión del Antiguo Egipto era el corazón, o ib.

Se creía que el ib o corazón metafísico se formaba a partir de una gota de sangre del corazón de la madre del niño, tomada en la concepción.

Para los antiguos egipcios, el corazón era el asiento de la emoción, el pensamiento, la voluntad y la intención.

Esto se evidencia en expresiones egipcias que incorporan la palabra ib, como Awi-ib para "feliz" (literalmente, "largo de corazón"), Xak-ib para "extrañado" (literalmente, "cortado de corazón").

En la religión egipcia, el corazón era la llave del más allá.

Fue concebido como sobreviviente de la muerte en el mundo inferior, donde dio evidencia a favor o en contra de su poseedor.

Se pensó que el corazón fue examinado por Anubis y una variedad de deidades durante la ceremonia de pesaje del corazón.

Si el corazón pesaba más que la pluma de Maat, que simbolizaba la norma ideal de comportamiento.

Si la balanza se equilibraba, significaba que el poseedor del corazón había vivido una vida justa y podía entrar en el más allá; si el corazón fuera más pesado, sería devorado por el monstruo Ammit.

El carácter chino para "corazón", 心, se deriva de una representación comparativamente realista de un corazón (que indica las cámaras del corazón) en escritura de sello.

La palabra china xīn también toma los significados metafóricos de "mente", "intención" o "núcleo".

En la medicina china, el corazón se considera el centro de 神 shén "espíritu, conciencia".

El corazón está asociado con el intestino delgado, la lengua, gobierna los seis órganos y las cinco vísceras, y pertenece al fuego en los cinco elementos.

La palabra sánscrita para corazón es hṛd o hṛdaya, que se encuentra en el texto sánscrito más antiguo que se conserva, el Rigveda.

En sánscrito, puede significar tanto el objeto anatómico como "mente" o "alma", que representa el asiento de la emoción.

Hrd puede ser un cognado de la palabra corazón en griego, latín e inglés. Muchos filósofos y científicos clásicos, incluido Aristóteles, consideraban que el corazón era el asiento del pensamiento, la razón o la emoción, y a menudo ignoraban que el cerebro contribuye a esas funciones.

La identificación del corazón como sede de las emociones en particular se debe al médico romano Galeno, quien también ubicó la sede de las pasiones en el hígado y la sede de la razón en el cerebro.

El corazón también jugó un papel en el sistema de creencias azteca.

La forma más común de sacrificio humano practicada por los aztecas era la extracción de corazones.

Los aztecas creían que el corazón (tona) era tanto el asiento del individuo como un fragmento del calor del sol (istli).

Hasta el día de hoy, los nahuas consideran al Sol como un corazón-alma (tona-tiuh): "redondo, caliente, palpitante".

En el catolicismo ha existido una larga tradición de veneración del corazón, derivada del culto a las llagas de Jesucristo que adquirió protagonismo a partir de mediados del siglo XVI.

Esta tradición influyó en el desarrollo de la devoción cristiana medieval al Sagrado Corazón de Jesús y la veneración paralela del Inmaculado Corazón de María, popularizada por Juan Eudes.

La expresión de un corazón roto es una referencia transcultural al dolor por la pérdida o al amor romántico insatisfecho.

La noción de "flechas de Cupido" es antigua, debido a Ovidio, pero mientras Ovidio describe a Cupido hiriendo a sus víctimas con sus flechas, no se hace explícito que es el corazón el que está herido.

La iconografía familiar de Cupido disparando pequeños símbolos de corazón es un tema renacentista que se relacionó con el día de San Valentín.


=== Comida ===


Los corazones de animales se consumen ampliamente como alimento.

Como son casi en su totalidad músculo, tienen un alto contenido de proteínas.

A menudo se incluyen en platos con otras vísceras, por ejemplo, en el kokoretsi pan-otomano.

Los corazones de pollo se consideran menudencias y, a menudo, se asan en brochetas; ejemplos de esto son el hāto yakitori japonés, el churrasco de coração brasileño y el satay de corazón de pollo de Indonesia.

También se pueden freír, como en la parrillada mixta de Jerusalén.

En la cocina egipcia, se pueden utilizar, finamente picados, como parte del relleno de pollo.

Muchas recetas los combinaron con otras menudencias, como el pollo en menudencias mexicano y el ragu iz kurinyikh potrokhov ruso. Los corazones de res, cerdo y cordero generalmente se pueden intercambiar en las recetas.

Como el corazón es un músculo que trabaja duro, hace que la carne sea "firme y bastante seca", por lo que generalmente se cocina a fuego lento.

Otra forma de lidiar con la dureza es cortar la carne en juliana, como en el corazón salteado chino. El corazón de res se puede asar a la parrilla o estofado.

En los anticuchos de corazón peruanos, los corazones de res asados ​​se asan a la parrilla después de ablandarlos mediante un largo adobo en una mezcla de especias y vinagre.

Una receta australiana de "simulacro de ganso" es en realidad corazón de res relleno estofado.

El corazón de cerdo se guisa, se escalfa, se estofa o se convierte en salchicha.

El oret balinés es una especie de morcilla elaborada con corazón y sangre de cerdo.

Una receta francesa de cœur de porc à l'orange está hecha de corazón estofado con salsa de naranja.


== Otros animales ==

=== Vertebrados ===

El tamaño del corazón varía entre los diferentes grupos de animales, con corazones en vertebrados que van desde los de los ratones más pequeños (12 mg) hasta la ballena azul (600 kg).

En los vertebrados, el corazón se encuentra en el medio de la parte ventral del cuerpo, rodeado por un pericardio. que en algunos peces puede estar conectado al peritoneo.

El nódulo sinoauricular se encuentra en todos los amniotas pero no en los vertebrados más primitivos.

En estos animales, los músculos del corazón son relativamente continuos y el seno venoso coordina el latido, que pasa en forma de onda a través de las cámaras restantes.

Dado que el seno venoso se incorpora a la aurícula derecha en los amniotas, es probable que sea homólogo con el nódulo SA.

En los teleósteos, con su seno venoso vestigial, el principal centro de coordinación está, en cambio, en el atrio.

La frecuencia de los latidos del corazón varía enormemente entre las diferentes especies, desde alrededor de 20 latidos por minuto en el bacalao hasta alrededor de 600 en los colibríes y hasta 1200 latidos por minuto en el colibrí garganta rubí.


=== Sistemas circulatorios dobles ===

Los anfibios adultos y la mayoría de los reptiles tienen un sistema circulatorio doble, es decir, un sistema circulatorio dividido en partes arteriales y venosas.

Sin embargo, el corazón en sí no está completamente separado en dos lados.

En cambio, está separado en tres cámaras: dos aurículas y un ventrículo.

La sangre que regresa tanto de la circulación sistémica como de los pulmones regresa, y la sangre se bombea simultáneamente hacia la circulación sistémica y los pulmones.

El sistema doble permite que la sangre circule hacia y desde los pulmones, que entregan sangre oxigenada directamente al corazón.

En los reptiles, aparte de las serpientes, el corazón suele estar situado en la mitad del tórax.

En las serpientes terrestres y arborícolas suele estar más cerca de la cabeza; en las especies acuáticas, el corazón está más centralmente ubicado.

Hay un corazón con tres cámaras: dos aurículas y un ventrículo.

La forma y la función de estos corazones son diferentes a las de los corazones de los mamíferos debido al hecho de que las serpientes tienen un cuerpo alargado y, por lo tanto, se ven afectadas por diferentes factores ambientales.

En particular, el corazón de la serpiente en relación con la posición de su cuerpo ha sido influenciado en gran medida por la gravedad.

Por lo tanto, las serpientes de mayor tamaño tienden a tener una presión arterial más alta debido al cambio gravitacional.

El ventrículo está incompletamente separado en dos mitades por una pared (tabique), con un espacio considerable cerca de la arteria pulmonar y las aberturas aórticas.

En la mayoría de las especies de reptiles, parece haber poca o ninguna mezcla entre los torrentes sanguíneos, por lo que la aorta recibe, esencialmente, solo sangre oxigenada.

La excepción a esta regla son los cocodrilos, que tienen un corazón de cuatro cámaras. En el corazón del pez pulmonado, el tabique se extiende hasta la mitad del ventrículo.

Esto permite cierto grado de separación entre el torrente sanguíneo desoxigenado destinado a los pulmones y el flujo oxigenado que llega al resto del cuerpo.

La ausencia de tal división en las especies de anfibios vivos puede deberse en parte a la cantidad de respiración que ocurre a través de la piel; por lo tanto, la sangre que regresa al corazón a través de las venas cavas ya está parcialmente oxigenada.

Como resultado, puede haber menos necesidad de una división más fina entre los dos torrentes sanguíneos que en el pez pulmonado u otros tetrápodos.

No obstante, en al menos algunas especies de anfibios, la naturaleza esponjosa del ventrículo parece mantener una mayor separación entre los torrentes sanguíneos.

Además, las válvulas originales del cono arterioso han sido reemplazadas por una válvula en espiral que lo divide en dos partes paralelas, lo que ayuda a mantener separados los dos torrentes sanguíneos.


=== División completa ===

Los arcosaurios (cocodrilos y aves) y los mamíferos muestran una separación completa del corazón en dos bombas para un total de cuatro cámaras cardíacas; se cree que el corazón de cuatro cámaras de los arcosaurios evolucionó independientemente del de los mamíferos.

En los cocodrilos, hay una pequeña abertura, el foramen de Panizza, en la base de los troncos arteriales y hay cierto grado de mezcla entre la sangre a cada lado del corazón, durante una inmersión bajo el agua; por lo tanto, solo en las aves y los mamíferos las dos corrientes de sangre, las circulaciones pulmonar y sistémica, se mantienen permanentemente separadas por una barrera física.


=== Pescado ===

Los peces tienen lo que a menudo se describe como un corazón de dos cámaras, que consta de una aurícula para recibir sangre y un ventrículo para bombearla.

Sin embargo, el corazón del pez tiene compartimentos de entrada y salida que pueden llamarse cámaras, por lo que a veces también se describe como de tres o cuatro cámaras, según lo que se cuente como cámara.

La aurícula y el ventrículo a veces se consideran "cámaras verdaderas", mientras que las otras se consideran "cámaras accesorias". Los peces primitivos tienen un corazón de cuatro cámaras, pero las cámaras están dispuestas secuencialmente de modo que este corazón primitivo es bastante diferente a los corazones de cuatro cámaras. de mamíferos y aves.

La primera cámara es el seno venoso, que recoge la sangre desoxigenada del cuerpo a través de las venas hepática y cardinal.

Desde aquí, la sangre fluye hacia la aurícula y luego hacia el potente ventrículo muscular, donde tendrá lugar la principal acción de bombeo.

La cuarta y última cámara es el cono arterioso, que contiene varias válvulas y envía sangre a la aorta ventral.

La aorta ventral lleva sangre a las branquias donde se oxigena y fluye, a través de la aorta dorsal, hacia el resto del cuerpo.

(En los tetrápodos, la aorta ventral se ha dividido en dos; una mitad forma la aorta ascendente, mientras que la otra forma la arteria pulmonar).

En los peces adultos, las cuatro cámaras no están dispuestas en una fila recta, sino que tienen forma de S, con las dos últimas cámaras sobre las dos anteriores.

Este patrón relativamente simple se encuentra en los peces cartilaginosos y en los peces con aletas radiadas.

En los teleósteos, el cono arterioso es muy pequeño y se puede describir con mayor precisión como parte de la aorta en lugar del corazón propiamente dicho.

El cono arterioso no está presente en ningún amniota, presumiblemente habiendo sido absorbido en los ventrículos a lo largo de la evolución.

De manera similar, mientras que el seno venoso está presente como una estructura vestigial en algunos reptiles y aves, se absorbe en la aurícula derecha y ya no se distingue.


=== Invertebrados ===

Los artrópodos y la mayoría de los moluscos tienen un sistema circulatorio abierto.

En este sistema, la sangre desoxigenada se acumula alrededor del corazón en las cavidades (los senos paranasales).

Esta sangre impregna lentamente el corazón a través de muchos pequeños canales unidireccionales.

Luego, el corazón bombea la sangre al hemocoel, una cavidad entre los órganos.

El corazón de los artrópodos es típicamente un tubo muscular que corre a lo largo del cuerpo, debajo de la espalda y desde la base de la cabeza.

En lugar de sangre, el fluido circulatorio es hemolinfa, que transporta el pigmento respiratorio más utilizado, la hemocianina a base de cobre, como transportador de oxígeno.

La hemoglobina solo es utilizada por unos pocos artrópodos. En algunos otros invertebrados, como las lombrices de tierra, el sistema circulatorio no se utiliza para transportar oxígeno y, por lo tanto, está muy reducido, no tiene venas ni arterias y consta de dos tubos conectados.

El oxígeno viaja por difusión y hay cinco pequeños vasos musculares que conectan estos vasos que se contraen en la parte delantera de los animales que se pueden considerar como "corazones".

Los calamares y otros cefalópodos tienen dos "corazones branquiales", también conocidos como corazones branquiales, y un "corazón sistémico".

Los corazones branquiales tienen dos aurículas y un ventrículo cada uno, y bombean hacia las branquias, mientras que el corazón sistémico bombea hacia el cuerpo.

Solo los cordados (incluidos los vertebrados) y los hemicordados tienen un "corazón" central, que es una vesícula formada por el engrosamiento de la aorta y se contrae para bombear sangre.

Esto sugiere una presencia en el último ancestro común de estos grupos (puede haberse perdido en los equinodermos).



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Corazón

;;;PT;;;



CORAÇÃO


O coração é um órgão muscular na maioria dos animais que bombeia o sangue através dos vasos sanguíneos do sistema circulatório.

O sangue bombeado transporta oxigênio e nutrientes para o corpo, enquanto transporta resíduos metabólicos, como dióxido de carbono, para os pulmões.

Nos humanos, o coração tem aproximadamente o tamanho de um punho fechado e está localizado entre os pulmões, no compartimento médio do tórax.

Em humanos, outros mamíferos e pássaros, o coração é dividido em quatro câmaras: átrios esquerdo e direito superiores e ventrículos esquerdo e direito inferiores.

Comumente, o átrio e o ventrículo direitos são referidos juntos como o coração direito e suas contrapartes esquerdas como o coração esquerdo.

Os peixes, em contraste, têm duas câmaras, um átrio e um ventrículo, enquanto os répteis têm três câmaras.

Em um coração saudável, o sangue flui através do coração devido às válvulas cardíacas, que impedem o refluxo.

O coração está envolto em um saco protetor, o pericárdio, que também contém uma pequena quantidade de líquido.

A parede do coração é composta por três camadas: epicárdio, miocárdio e endocárdio. O coração bombeia o sangue com um ritmo determinado por um grupo de células marca-passo no nó sinoatrial.

Estes geram uma corrente que causa a contração do coração, percorrendo o nó atrioventricular e ao longo do sistema de condução do coração.

O coração recebe sangue pobre em oxigênio da circulação sistêmica, que entra no átrio direito das veias cavas superior e inferior e passa para o ventrículo direito.

A partir daqui é bombeado para a circulação pulmonar, através dos pulmões, onde recebe oxigénio e liberta dióxido de carbono.

O sangue oxigenado então retorna ao átrio esquerdo, passa pelo ventrículo esquerdo e é bombeado pela aorta para a circulação sistêmica – onde o oxigênio é usado e metabolizado em dióxido de carbono.

O coração bate a uma taxa de repouso próxima a 72 batimentos por minuto.

O exercício aumenta temporariamente a frequência cardíaca, mas diminui a frequência cardíaca em repouso a longo prazo e é bom para a saúde do coração.

As doenças cardiovasculares (DCV) são a causa mais comum de morte em todo o mundo desde 2008, respondendo por 30% das mortes.

Destes, mais de três quartos são resultado de doença arterial coronariana e acidente vascular cerebral.

Os fatores de risco incluem: tabagismo, excesso de peso, pouco exercício, colesterol alto, pressão alta e diabetes mal controlado, entre outros.

As doenças cardiovasculares frequentemente não apresentam sintomas ou podem causar dor no peito ou falta de ar.

O diagnóstico de doenças cardíacas é muitas vezes feito por meio de um histórico médico, ouvindo os sons do coração com um estetoscópio, ECG, ecocardiograma e ultra-som.

Especialistas que se concentram em doenças do coração são chamados de cardiologistas, embora muitas especialidades da medicina possam estar envolvidas no tratamento.


== Estrutura ==



=== Localização e forma ===


O coração humano está situado no mediastino, ao nível das vértebras torácicas T5-T8.

Um saco de membrana dupla chamado pericárdio envolve o coração e se liga ao mediastino.

A superfície posterior do coração fica perto da coluna vertebral, e a superfície frontal fica atrás das cartilagens do esterno e das costelas.

A parte superior do coração é o ponto de fixação de vários grandes vasos sanguíneos – as veias cavas, aorta e tronco pulmonar.

A parte superior do coração está localizada ao nível da terceira cartilagem costal.

A ponta inferior do coração, o ápice, situa-se à esquerda do esterno (8 a 9 cm da linha médio-esternal) entre a junção da quarta e quinta costelas, perto de sua articulação com as cartilagens costais.

A maior parte do coração é geralmente ligeiramente deslocada para o lado esquerdo do tórax (embora ocasionalmente possa ser deslocada para a direita) e parece estar à esquerda porque o coração esquerdo é mais forte e maior, uma vez que bombeia para todos. partes do corpo.

Como o coração está entre os pulmões, o pulmão esquerdo é menor que o pulmão direito e possui uma incisura cardíaca em sua borda para acomodar o coração.

O coração é em forma de cone, com sua base posicionada para cima e afunilando até o ápice.

Um coração adulto tem uma massa de 250 a 350 gramas (9 a 12 onças).

O coração é frequentemente descrito como o tamanho de um punho: 12 cm (5 pol) de comprimento, 8 cm (3,5 pol) de largura e 6 cm (2,5 pol) de espessura, embora esta descrição seja contestada, pois o coração provavelmente ser um pouco maior.

Atletas bem treinados podem ter corações muito maiores devido aos efeitos do exercício no músculo cardíaco, semelhante à resposta do músculo esquelético.


=== Câmaras ===


O coração tem quatro câmaras, dois átrios superiores, as câmaras de recepção e dois ventrículos inferiores, as câmaras de descarga.

Os átrios abrem-se para os ventrículos através das válvulas atrioventriculares, presentes no septo atrioventricular.

Esta distinção é visível também na superfície do coração como o sulco coronário.

Existe uma estrutura em forma de orelha no átrio direito superior chamada de apêndice atrial direito, ou aurícula, e outra no átrio esquerdo superior, o apêndice atrial esquerdo.

O átrio direito e o ventrículo direito juntos às vezes são chamados de coração direito.

Da mesma forma, o átrio esquerdo e o ventrículo esquerdo juntos às vezes são chamados de coração esquerdo.

Os ventrículos são separados uns dos outros pelo septo interventricular, visível na superfície do coração como o sulco longitudinal anterior e o sulco interventricular posterior.

O esqueleto cardíaco fibroso dá estrutura ao coração.

Forma o septo atrioventricular, que separa os átrios dos ventrículos, e os anéis fibrosos, que servem de base para as quatro válvulas cardíacas.

O esqueleto cardíaco também fornece um importante limite no sistema de condução elétrica do coração, uma vez que o colágeno não pode conduzir eletricidade.

O septo interatrial separa os átrios e o septo interventricular separa os ventrículos.

O septo interventricular é muito mais espesso que o septo interatrial, pois os ventrículos precisam gerar uma pressão maior quando se contraem.


==== Válvulas ====

O coração tem quatro válvulas, que separam suas câmaras.

Uma válvula situa-se entre cada átrio e ventrículo, e uma válvula repousa na saída de cada ventrículo.

As válvulas entre os átrios e os ventrículos são chamadas de válvulas atrioventriculares.

Entre o átrio direito e o ventrículo direito está a válvula tricúspide.

A valva tricúspide possui três cúspides, que se conectam às cordas tendíneas e três músculos papilares denominados músculos anterior, posterior e septal, de acordo com suas posições relativas.

A válvula mitral situa-se entre o átrio esquerdo e o ventrículo esquerdo.

Também é conhecida como valva bicúspide por possuir duas cúspides, uma anterior e outra posterior.

Essas cúspides também estão ligadas por meio de cordas tendíneas a dois músculos papilares que se projetam da parede ventricular.

Os músculos papilares estendem-se das paredes do coração às válvulas por conexões cartilaginosas chamadas cordas tendíneas.

Esses músculos impedem que as válvulas caiam muito para trás quando se fecham.

Durante a fase de relaxamento do ciclo cardíaco, os músculos papilares também estão relaxados e a tensão nas cordas tendíneas é leve.

À medida que as câmaras cardíacas se contraem, os músculos papilares também se contraem.

Isso cria tensão nas cordas tendíneas, ajudando a manter as cúspides das válvulas atrioventriculares no lugar e evitando que sejam sopradas de volta para os átrios.

Duas válvulas semilunares adicionais ficam na saída de cada um dos ventrículos.

A válvula pulmonar está localizada na base da artéria pulmonar.

Este tem três cúspides que não estão ligadas a nenhum músculo papilar.

Quando o ventrículo relaxa, o sangue flui de volta para o ventrículo da artéria e esse fluxo de sangue enche a válvula em forma de bolsa, pressionando as cúspides que se fecham para selar a válvula.

A válvula aórtica semilunar está na base da aorta e também não está ligada aos músculos papilares.

Esta também tem três cúspides que se fecham com a pressão do sangue que retorna da aorta.


==== Coração direito ====

O coração direito consiste em duas câmaras, o átrio direito e o ventrículo direito, separados por uma válvula, a válvula tricúspide.

O átrio direito recebe sangue quase continuamente das duas principais veias do corpo, as veias cavas superior e inferior.

Uma pequena quantidade de sangue da circulação coronária também drena para o átrio direito através do seio coronário, que está imediatamente acima e no meio da abertura da veia cava inferior.

Na parede do átrio direito há uma depressão oval conhecida como fossa oval, que é um remanescente de uma abertura no coração fetal conhecida como forame oval.

A maior parte da superfície interna do átrio direito é lisa, a depressão da fossa oval é medial e a superfície anterior apresenta cristas proeminentes de músculos pectíneos, que também estão presentes no apêndice atrial direito.

O átrio direito está conectado ao ventrículo direito pela válvula tricúspide.

As paredes do ventrículo direito são revestidas com trabéculas cárneas, cristas de músculo cardíaco cobertas por endocárdio.

Além dessas cristas musculares, uma faixa de músculo cardíaco, também recoberta pelo endocárdio, conhecida como banda moderadora, reforça as paredes finas do ventrículo direito e desempenha um papel crucial na condução cardíaca.

Origina-se da parte inferior do septo interventricular e atravessa o espaço interior do ventrículo direito para se conectar com o músculo papilar inferior.

O ventrículo direito afunila no tronco pulmonar, no qual ejeta sangue ao se contrair.

O tronco pulmonar se ramifica nas artérias pulmonares esquerda e direita que transportam o sangue para cada pulmão.

A válvula pulmonar situa-se entre o coração direito e o tronco pulmonar.


==== Coração esquerdo ====

O coração esquerdo tem duas câmaras: o átrio esquerdo e o ventrículo esquerdo, separados pela válvula mitral. O átrio esquerdo recebe o sangue oxigenado dos pulmões através de uma das quatro veias pulmonares.

O átrio esquerdo tem uma bolsa chamada apêndice atrial esquerdo.

Assim como o átrio direito, o átrio esquerdo é revestido por músculos pectíneos.

O átrio esquerdo está conectado ao ventrículo esquerdo pela válvula mitral. O ventrículo esquerdo é muito mais espesso que o direito, devido à maior força necessária para bombear sangue para todo o corpo.

Assim como o ventrículo direito, o esquerdo também possui trabéculas cárneas, mas não há banda moderadora.

O ventrículo esquerdo bombeia sangue para o corpo através da válvula aórtica e para a aorta.

Duas pequenas aberturas acima da válvula aórtica levam sangue ao músculo cardíaco; a artéria coronária esquerda está acima da cúspide esquerda da válvula e a artéria coronária direita está acima da cúspide direita.


=== Muro ===


A parede do coração é composta por três camadas: o endocárdio interno, o miocárdio médio e o epicárdio externo.

Estes são cercados por um saco de membrana dupla chamado pericárdio.
A camada mais interna do coração é chamada de endocárdio.

É constituído por um revestimento de epitélio escamoso simples e cobre as câmaras e válvulas cardíacas.

Ele é contínuo com o endotélio das veias e artérias do coração e se une ao miocárdio com uma fina camada de tecido conjuntivo.

O endocárdio, ao secretar endotelinas, também pode desempenhar um papel na regulação da contração do miocárdio.

A camada média da parede do coração é o miocárdio, que é o músculo cardíaco – uma camada de tecido muscular estriado involuntário cercado por uma estrutura de colágeno.

O padrão do músculo cardíaco é elegante e complexo, pois as células musculares giram e espiralam ao redor das câmaras do coração, com os músculos externos formando um padrão em forma de 8 ao redor dos átrios e ao redor das bases dos grandes vasos e dos músculos internos, formando um figura 8 ao redor dos dois ventrículos e prosseguindo em direção ao ápice.

Este padrão de redemoinho complexo permite que o coração bombeie o sangue de forma mais eficaz.

Existem dois tipos de células no músculo cardíaco: células musculares que têm a capacidade de se contrair facilmente e células marca-passo do sistema de condução.

As células musculares compõem a maior parte (99%) das células nos átrios e ventrículos.

Essas células contráteis são conectadas por discos intercalados que permitem uma resposta rápida aos impulsos do potencial de ação das células marcapasso.

Os discos intercalados permitem que as células atuem como um sincício e permitem as contrações que bombeiam o sangue através do coração e nas artérias principais.

As células marcapasso compõem 1% das células e formam o sistema de condução do coração.

São geralmente muito menores do que as células contráteis e têm poucas miofibrilas, o que lhes confere uma contratilidade limitada.

Sua função é semelhante em muitos aspectos aos neurônios.

O tecido muscular cardíaco tem autorritmicidade, a capacidade única de iniciar um potencial de ação cardíaco a uma taxa fixa - espalhando o impulso rapidamente de célula para célula para desencadear a contração de todo o coração.

Existem proteínas específicas expressas nas células do músculo cardíaco.

Estes estão principalmente associados à contração muscular e se ligam à actina, miosina, tropomiosina e troponina.

Eles incluem MYH6, ACTC1, TNNI3, CDH2 e PKP2.

Outras proteínas expressas são MYH7 e LDB3 que também são expressas no músculo esquelético.


=== Pericárdio ===

O pericárdio é o saco que envolve o coração.

A superfície externa resistente do pericárdio é chamada de membrana fibrosa.

Este é revestido por uma membrana interna dupla chamada membrana serosa que produz líquido pericárdico para lubrificar a superfície do coração.

A parte da membrana serosa ligada à membrana fibrosa é chamada de pericárdio parietal, enquanto a parte da membrana serosa ligada ao coração é conhecida como pericárdio visceral.

O pericárdio está presente para lubrificar seu movimento contra outras estruturas dentro do tórax, para manter a posição do coração estabilizada dentro do tórax e para proteger o coração de infecções.


=== Circulação coronária ===


O tecido cardíaco, como todas as células do corpo, precisa ser suprido com oxigênio, nutrientes e uma maneira de remover os resíduos metabólicos.

Isto é conseguido pela circulação coronária, que inclui artérias, veias e vasos linfáticos.

O fluxo sanguíneo através dos vasos coronários ocorre em picos e vales relacionados ao relaxamento ou contração do músculo cardíaco.

O tecido cardíaco recebe sangue de duas artérias que surgem logo acima da válvula aórtica.

Estes são o tronco da artéria coronária esquerda e a artéria coronária direita.

O tronco da artéria coronária esquerda se divide logo após deixar a aorta em dois vasos, o descendente anterior esquerdo e a artéria circunflexa esquerda.

A artéria descendente anterior esquerda supre o tecido cardíaco e a parte frontal, externa e septo do ventrículo esquerdo.

Ele faz isso ramificando-se em artérias menores – ramos diagonais e septais.

O circunflexo esquerdo supre a parte posterior e inferior do ventrículo esquerdo.

A artéria coronária direita supre o átrio direito, o ventrículo direito e as seções posteriores inferiores do ventrículo esquerdo.

A artéria coronária direita também fornece sangue ao nó atrioventricular (em cerca de 90% das pessoas) e ao nó sinoatrial (em cerca de 60% das pessoas).

A artéria coronária direita corre em um sulco na parte de trás do coração e a artéria descendente anterior esquerda corre em um sulco na frente.

Há uma variação significativa entre as pessoas na anatomia das artérias que irrigam o coração.

As artérias dividem-se em suas extremidades em ramos menores que se unem nas bordas de cada distribuição arterial. O seio coronário é uma grande veia que drena para o átrio direito e recebe a maior parte da drenagem venosa do coração.

Recebe sangue da grande veia cardíaca (recebendo o átrio esquerdo e ambos os ventrículos), a veia cardíaca posterior (drenando a parte posterior do ventrículo esquerdo), a veia cardíaca média (drenando o fundo dos ventrículos esquerdo e direito) e pequenas veias cardíacas. veias cardíacas.

As veias cardíacas anteriores drenam a frente do ventrículo direito e drenam diretamente para o átrio direito. Pequenas redes linfáticas chamadas plexos existem abaixo de cada uma das três camadas do coração.

Essas redes se reúnem em um tronco principal esquerdo e um tronco principal direito, que percorrem o sulco entre os ventrículos que existe na superfície do coração, recebendo vasos menores à medida que sobem.

Esses vasos então viajam para o sulco atrioventricular e recebem um terceiro vaso que drena a seção do ventrículo esquerdo situada no diafragma.

O vaso esquerdo se une a este terceiro vaso e segue ao longo da artéria pulmonar e átrio esquerdo, terminando no nó traqueobrônquico inferior.

O vaso direito percorre o átrio direito e a parte do ventrículo direito que fica no diafragma.

Geralmente, segue em frente à aorta ascendente e termina em um nó braquiocefálico.


=== Suprimento nervoso ===


O coração recebe sinais nervosos do nervo vago e de nervos que surgem do tronco simpático.

Esses nervos agem para influenciar, mas não controlar, a frequência cardíaca.

Os nervos simpáticos também influenciam a força de contração do coração.

Os sinais que viajam ao longo desses nervos surgem de dois centros cardiovasculares pareados na medula oblonga.

O nervo vago do sistema nervoso parassimpático atua para diminuir a frequência cardíaca, e os nervos do tronco simpático atuam para aumentar a frequência cardíaca.

Esses nervos formam uma rede de nervos que fica sobre o coração chamada plexo cardíaco.

O nervo vago é um nervo longo e errante que emerge do tronco encefálico e fornece estimulação parassimpática a um grande número de órgãos no tórax e no abdome, incluindo o coração.

Os nervos do tronco simpático emergem através dos gânglios torácicos T1-T4 e viajam para os nódulos sinoatrial e atrioventricular, bem como para os átrios e ventrículos.

Os ventrículos são mais ricamente inervados por fibras simpáticas do que por fibras parassimpáticas.

A estimulação simpática causa a liberação do neurotransmissor norepinefrina (também conhecido como noradrenalina) na junção neuromuscular dos nervos cardíacos.

Isso encurta o período de repolarização, acelerando assim a taxa de despolarização e contração, o que resulta em um aumento da frequência cardíaca.

Ele abre canais de íons de sódio e cálcio controlados por ligantes ou químicos, permitindo um influxo de íons carregados positivamente.

A norepinefrina se liga ao receptor beta-1.


== Desenvolvimento ==


O coração é o primeiro órgão funcional a se desenvolver e começa a bater e bombear sangue em cerca de três semanas na embriogênese.

Este início precoce é crucial para o desenvolvimento embrionário e pré-natal subsequente.
O coração deriva do mesênquima esplancnopleúrico na placa neural que forma a região cardiogênica.

Dois tubos endocárdicos se formam aqui que se fundem para formar um tubo cardíaco primitivo conhecido como coração tubular.

Entre a terceira e a quarta semana, o tubo cardíaco se alonga e começa a se dobrar para formar uma forma de S dentro do pericárdio.

Isso coloca as câmaras e os vasos principais no alinhamento correto para o coração desenvolvido.

O desenvolvimento adicional incluirá a formação dos septos e das válvulas e a remodelação das câmaras cardíacas.

Ao final da quinta semana, os septos estão completos e, na nona semana, as válvulas cardíacas estão completas. Antes da quinta semana, há uma abertura no coração fetal conhecida como forame oval.

O forame oval permitiu que o sangue no coração fetal passasse diretamente do átrio direito para o esquerdo, permitindo que algum sangue desviasse dos pulmões.

Alguns segundos após o nascimento, um retalho de tecido conhecido como septum primum, que anteriormente atuava como válvula, fecha o forame oval e estabelece o padrão típico de circulação cardíaca.

Uma depressão na superfície do átrio direito permanece onde estava o forame oval, chamada de fossa oval.

O coração embrionário começa a bater cerca de 22 dias após a concepção (5 semanas após o último período menstrual normal, DUM).

Começa a bater a uma taxa próxima à da mãe, que é de cerca de 75 a 80 batimentos por minuto (bpm).

A frequência cardíaca embrionária então acelera e atinge uma frequência máxima de 165-185 bpm no início da 7ª semana (início da 9ª semana após a DUM).

Após 9 semanas (início da fase fetal) começa a desacelerar, diminuindo para cerca de 145 (±25) bpm ao nascimento.

Não há diferença nas frequências cardíacas femininas e masculinas antes do nascimento.


== Fisiologia ==

=== Fluxo sanguíneo ===


O coração funciona como uma bomba no sistema circulatório para fornecer um fluxo contínuo de sangue por todo o corpo.

Essa circulação consiste na circulação sistêmica de e para o corpo e na circulação pulmonar de e para os pulmões.

O sangue na circulação pulmonar troca dióxido de carbono por oxigênio nos pulmões através do processo de respiração.

A circulação sistêmica então transporta oxigênio para o corpo e devolve dióxido de carbono e sangue relativamente desoxigenado ao coração para transferência para os pulmões.

O coração direito coleta sangue desoxigenado de duas grandes veias, as veias cavas superior e inferior.

O sangue é coletado nos átrios direito e esquerdo continuamente.

A veia cava superior drena o sangue acima do diafragma e desemboca na parte superior das costas do átrio direito.

A veia cava inferior drena o sangue abaixo do diafragma e deságua na parte posterior do átrio abaixo da abertura para a veia cava superior.

Imediatamente acima e no meio da abertura da veia cava inferior está a abertura do seio coronário de parede fina.

Além disso, o seio coronário devolve o sangue desoxigenado do miocárdio para o átrio direito.

O sangue se acumula no átrio direito.

Quando o átrio direito se contrai, o sangue é bombeado através da válvula tricúspide para o ventrículo direito.

À medida que o ventrículo direito se contrai, a válvula tricúspide se fecha e o sangue é bombeado para o tronco pulmonar através da válvula pulmonar.

O tronco pulmonar se divide em artérias pulmonares e artérias progressivamente menores ao longo dos pulmões, até atingir os capilares.

À medida que estes passam pelos alvéolos, o dióxido de carbono é trocado por oxigênio.

Isso acontece através do processo passivo de difusão.
No coração esquerdo, o sangue oxigenado é devolvido ao átrio esquerdo através das veias pulmonares.

Em seguida, é bombeado para o ventrículo esquerdo através da válvula mitral e para a aorta através da válvula aórtica para circulação sistêmica.

A aorta é uma grande artéria que se ramifica em muitas artérias menores, arteríolas e, finalmente, capilares.

Nos capilares, oxigênio e nutrientes do sangue são fornecidos às células do corpo para o metabolismo e trocados por dióxido de carbono e produtos residuais.

O sangue capilar, agora desoxigenado, viaja para vênulas e veias que finalmente se acumulam nas veias cavas superior e inferior e no coração direito.


==== Ciclo cardíaco ====

O ciclo cardíaco refere-se à sequência de eventos em que o coração se contrai e relaxa a cada batimento cardíaco.

O período de tempo durante o qual os ventrículos se contraem, forçando o sangue para a aorta e a artéria pulmonar principal, é conhecido como sístole, enquanto o período durante o qual os ventrículos relaxam e se enchem de sangue é conhecido como diástole.

Os átrios e os ventrículos trabalham em conjunto, portanto, na sístole, quando os ventrículos estão se contraindo, os átrios estão relaxados e coletando sangue.

Quando os ventrículos estão relaxados na diástole, os átrios se contraem para bombear sangue para os ventrículos.

Essa coordenação garante que o sangue seja bombeado de forma eficiente para o corpo. No início do ciclo cardíaco, os ventrículos estão relaxando.

Ao fazê-lo, eles são preenchidos pelo sangue que passa pelas válvulas mitral e tricúspide abertas.

Depois que os ventrículos completaram a maior parte de seu enchimento, os átrios se contraem, forçando mais sangue a entrar nos ventrículos e acionando a bomba.

Em seguida, os ventrículos começam a se contrair.

À medida que a pressão aumenta dentro das cavidades dos ventrículos, as válvulas mitral e tricúspide são forçadas a fechar.

À medida que a pressão dentro dos ventrículos aumenta ainda mais, excedendo a pressão com a aorta e as artérias pulmonares, as válvulas aórtica e pulmonar se abrem.

O sangue é ejetado do coração, fazendo com que a pressão dentro dos ventrículos caia.

Simultaneamente, os átrios se enchem à medida que o sangue flui para o átrio direito através das veias cavas superior e inferior, e para o átrio esquerdo através das veias pulmonares.

Finalmente, quando a pressão dentro dos ventrículos cai abaixo da pressão dentro da aorta e das artérias pulmonares, as válvulas aórtica e pulmonar se fecham.

Os ventrículos começam a relaxar, as válvulas mitral e tricúspide se abrem e o ciclo recomeça.


==== Débito cardíaco ====

O débito cardíaco (DC) é uma medida da quantidade de sangue bombeada por cada ventrículo (volume sistólico) em um minuto.

Isto é calculado multiplicando o volume sistólico (SV) pelos batimentos por minuto da frequência cardíaca (FC).

Então: CO = SV x HR.

O débito cardíaco é normalizado para o tamanho do corpo através da área de superfície corporal e é chamado de índice cardíaco.

O débito cardíaco médio, usando um volume sistólico médio de cerca de 70mL, é de 5,25 L/min, com uma faixa normal de 4,0-8,0 L/min.

O volume sistólico é normalmente medido por meio de um ecocardiograma e pode ser influenciado pelo tamanho do coração, condição física e mental do indivíduo, sexo, contratilidade, duração da contração, pré-carga e pós-carga. no final da diástole, quando os ventrículos estão em sua plenitude.

Um fator principal é quanto tempo leva para os ventrículos se encherem: se os ventrículos se contraírem com mais frequência, há menos tempo para encher e a pré-carga será menor.

A pré-carga também pode ser afetada pelo volume sanguíneo de uma pessoa.

A força de cada contração do músculo cardíaco é proporcional à pré-carga, descrita como mecanismo de Frank-Starling.

Isso afirma que a força de contração é diretamente proporcional ao comprimento inicial da fibra muscular, o que significa que um ventrículo se contrairá com mais força, quanto mais for esticado.

A pós-carga, ou quanta pressão o coração deve gerar para ejetar o sangue na sístole, é influenciada pela resistência vascular.

Pode ser influenciado pelo estreitamento das válvulas cardíacas (estenose) ou pela contração ou relaxamento dos vasos sanguíneos periféricos. A força das contrações do músculo cardíaco controla o volume sistólico.

Isso pode ser influenciado positiva ou negativamente por agentes denominados inotrópicos.

Esses agentes podem ser resultado de alterações no corpo ou ser administrados como medicamentos como parte do tratamento de um distúrbio médico ou como forma de suporte à vida, principalmente em unidades de terapia intensiva.

Os inotrópicos que aumentam a força de contração são inotrópicos "positivos" e incluem agentes simpáticos como adrenalina, noradrenalina e dopamina.

Os inotrópicos "negativos" diminuem a força de contração e incluem bloqueadores dos canais de cálcio.


=== Condução elétrica ===

O batimento cardíaco rítmico normal, chamado ritmo sinusal, é estabelecido pelo próprio marcapasso do coração, o nó sinoatrial (também conhecido como nó sinusal ou nó SA).

Aqui é criado um sinal elétrico que viaja através do coração, fazendo com que o músculo cardíaco se contraia.

O nó sinoatrial é encontrado na parte superior do átrio direito próximo à junção com a veia cava superior.

O sinal elétrico gerado pelo nó sinoatrial percorre o átrio direito de forma radial que não é completamente compreendida.

Ele viaja para o átrio esquerdo através do feixe de Bachmann, de modo que os músculos dos átrios esquerdo e direito se contraem juntos.

O sinal então viaja para o nó atrioventricular.

Isso é encontrado na parte inferior do átrio direito no septo atrioventricular – o limite entre o átrio direito e o ventrículo esquerdo.

O septo faz parte do esqueleto cardíaco, tecido dentro do coração pelo qual o sinal elétrico não pode passar, o que força o sinal a passar apenas pelo nó atrioventricular.

O sinal então viaja ao longo do feixe de His para os ramos esquerdo e direito até os ventrículos do coração.

Nos ventrículos, o sinal é transportado por tecido especializado chamado fibras de Purkinje, que transmitem a carga elétrica ao músculo cardíaco.


=== Frequência cardíaca ===


A frequência cardíaca normal de repouso é chamada de ritmo sinusal, criada e sustentada pelo nó sinoatrial, um grupo de células marca-passo encontradas na parede do átrio direito.

As células do nó sinoatrial fazem isso criando um potencial de ação.

O potencial de ação cardíaco é criado pelo movimento de eletrólitos específicos para dentro e para fora das células marcapasso.

O potencial de ação então se espalha para as células vizinhas. Quando as células sinoatriais estão em repouso, elas têm uma carga negativa em suas membranas.

No entanto, um influxo rápido de íons de sódio faz com que a carga da membrana se torne positiva.

Isso é chamado de despolarização e ocorre espontaneamente.

Uma vez que a célula tenha uma carga suficientemente alta, os canais de sódio se fecham e os íons de cálcio começam a entrar na célula, logo após o que o potássio começa a sair.

Todos os íons viajam através de canais iônicos na membrana das células sinoatriais.

O potássio e o cálcio começam a se mover para fora e para dentro da célula apenas quando ela tem uma carga suficientemente alta e, portanto, são chamados de dependentes de voltagem.

Pouco depois disso, os canais de cálcio se fecham e os canais de potássio se abrem, permitindo que o potássio saia da célula.

Isso faz com que a célula tenha uma carga de repouso negativa e é chamado de repolarização.

Quando o potencial de membrana atinge aproximadamente -60 mV, os canais de potássio se fecham e o processo pode recomeçar.

Os íons se movem de áreas onde estão concentrados para onde não estão.

Por esta razão, o sódio se move para dentro da célula de fora, e o potássio se move de dentro para fora da célula.

O cálcio também desempenha um papel crítico.

Seu influxo através de canais lentos significa que as células sinoatrial têm uma fase de "platô" prolongada quando têm carga positiva.

Uma parte disso é chamada de período refratário absoluto.

Os íons cálcio também se combinam com a proteína reguladora troponina C no complexo troponina para permitir a contração do músculo cardíaco e se separam da proteína para permitir o relaxamento.

A frequência cardíaca de repouso do adulto varia de 60 a 100 bpm.

A frequência cardíaca de repouso de um recém-nascido pode ser de 129 batimentos por minuto (bpm) e isso diminui gradativamente até a maturidade.

A frequência cardíaca de um atleta pode ser inferior a 60 bpm.

Durante o exercício a frequência pode ser de 150 bpm com frequências máximas chegando de 200 a 220 bpm.


==== Influências ====
O ritmo sinusal normal do coração, que dá a frequência cardíaca de repouso, é influenciado por vários fatores.

Os centros cardiovasculares no tronco cerebral controlam as influências simpáticas e parassimpáticas para o coração através do nervo vago e do tronco simpático.

Esses centros cardiovasculares recebem informações de uma série de receptores, incluindo barorreceptores, sentindo o estiramento dos vasos sanguíneos e quimiorreceptores, detectando a quantidade de oxigênio e dióxido de carbono no sangue e seu pH.

Através de uma série de reflexos, eles ajudam a regular e sustentar o fluxo sanguíneo.

Os barorreceptores são receptores de estiramento localizados no seio aórtico, corpos carotídeos, veias cavas e outros locais, incluindo vasos pulmonares e o lado direito do próprio coração.

Os barorreceptores disparam a uma taxa determinada pelo quanto eles são esticados, o que é influenciado pela pressão arterial, nível de atividade física e distribuição relativa do sangue.

Com o aumento da pressão e do estiramento, a taxa de disparo dos barorreceptores aumenta e os centros cardíacos diminuem a estimulação simpática e aumentam a estimulação parassimpática.

À medida que a pressão e o estiramento diminuem, a taxa de disparo dos barorreceptores diminui e os centros cardíacos aumentam a estimulação simpática e diminuem a estimulação parassimpática.

Existe um reflexo semelhante, chamado reflexo atrial ou reflexo de Bainbridge, associado a taxas variáveis ​​de fluxo sanguíneo para os átrios.

O aumento do retorno venoso alonga as paredes dos átrios onde estão localizados os barorreceptores especializados.

No entanto, à medida que os barorreceptores atriais aumentam sua taxa de disparo e à medida que se esticam devido ao aumento da pressão arterial, o centro cardíaco responde aumentando a estimulação simpática e inibindo a estimulação parassimpática para aumentar a frequência cardíaca.

O oposto também é verdade.

Os quimiorreceptores presentes no corpo carotídeo ou adjacentes à aorta em um corpo aórtico respondem aos níveis de oxigênio e dióxido de carbono do sangue.

Baixo oxigênio ou alto dióxido de carbono estimularão o disparo dos receptores. Níveis de exercício e condicionamento físico, idade, temperatura corporal, taxa metabólica basal e até mesmo o estado emocional de uma pessoa podem afetar a freqüência cardíaca.

Altos níveis dos hormônios epinefrina, norepinefrina e hormônios da tireoide podem aumentar a frequência cardíaca.

Os níveis de eletrólitos, incluindo cálcio, potássio e sódio, também podem influenciar a velocidade e a regularidade da frequência cardíaca; baixo oxigênio no sangue, pressão arterial baixa e desidratação podem aumentá-lo.


== Significado clínico ==

=== Doenças ===


As doenças cardiovasculares, que incluem doenças do coração, são a principal causa de morte em todo o mundo.

A maioria das doenças cardiovasculares é não transmissível e está relacionada ao estilo de vida e outros fatores, tornando-se mais prevalente com o envelhecimento.

A doença cardíaca é uma das principais causas de morte, representando uma média de 30% de todas as mortes em 2008, globalmente.

Essa taxa varia de 28% mais baixos a 40% mais altos em países de alta renda.

Os médicos que se especializam no coração são chamados de cardiologistas.

Muitos outros profissionais médicos estão envolvidos no tratamento de doenças do coração, incluindo médicos, cirurgiões cardiotorácicos, intensivistas e profissionais de saúde aliados, incluindo fisioterapeutas e nutricionistas.


==== Cardiopatia isquêmica ====

A doença arterial coronariana, também conhecida como doença cardíaca isquêmica, é causada pela aterosclerose – um acúmulo de material gorduroso ao longo das paredes internas das artérias.

Esses depósitos de gordura conhecidos como placas ateroscleróticas estreitam as artérias coronárias e, se graves, podem reduzir o fluxo sanguíneo para o coração.

Se um estreitamento (ou estenose) for relativamente pequeno, o paciente pode não apresentar nenhum sintoma.

Estreitamentos graves podem causar dor no peito (angina) ou falta de ar durante o exercício ou mesmo em repouso.

A fina cobertura de uma placa aterosclerótica pode se romper, expondo o centro gorduroso ao sangue circulante.

Nesse caso, um coágulo ou trombo pode se formar, bloqueando a artéria e restringindo o fluxo sanguíneo para uma área do músculo cardíaco, causando um infarto do miocárdio (ataque cardíaco) ou angina instável.

Na pior das hipóteses, isso pode causar parada cardíaca, uma perda súbita e total de saída do coração.

Obesidade, pressão alta, diabetes não controlado, tabagismo e colesterol alto podem aumentar o risco de desenvolver aterosclerose e doença arterial coronariana.


==== Insuficiência cardíaca ====

A insuficiência cardíaca é definida como uma condição na qual o coração não consegue bombear sangue suficiente para atender às demandas do corpo.

Pacientes com insuficiência cardíaca podem sentir falta de ar, especialmente quando deitados, bem como inchaço no tornozelo, conhecido como edema periférico.

A insuficiência cardíaca é o resultado final de muitas doenças que afetam o coração, mas é mais comumente associada a doença cardíaca isquêmica, doença cardíaca valvar ou pressão alta.

Causas menos comuns incluem várias cardiomiopatias.

A insuficiência cardíaca está frequentemente associada à fraqueza do músculo cardíaco nos ventrículos (insuficiência cardíaca sistólica), mas também pode ser observada em pacientes com músculo cardíaco forte, mas rígido (insuficiência cardíaca diastólica).

A condição pode afetar o ventrículo esquerdo (causando predominantemente falta de ar), o ventrículo direito (causando predominantemente inchaço das pernas e uma pressão venosa jugular elevada) ou ambos os ventrículos.

Pacientes com insuficiência cardíaca correm maior risco de desenvolver distúrbios perigosos do ritmo cardíaco ou arritmias.


==== Cardiomiopatias ====
As cardiomiopatias são doenças que afetam o músculo do coração.

Alguns causam espessamento anormal do músculo cardíaco (cardiomiopatia hipertrófica), alguns fazem com que o coração se expanda e enfraqueça anormalmente (cardiomiopatia dilatada), alguns fazem com que o músculo cardíaco fique rígido e incapaz de relaxar completamente entre as contrações (cardiomiopatia restritiva) e alguns fazem com que o coração propenso a ritmos cardíacos anormais (cardiomiopatia arritmogênica).

Essas condições geralmente são genéticas e podem ser herdadas, mas algumas, como a cardiomiopatia dilatada, podem ser causadas por danos causados ​​por toxinas como o álcool.

Algumas cardiomiopatias, como a cardiomopatia hipertrófica, estão associadas a um maior risco de morte súbita cardíaca, principalmente em atletas.

Muitas cardiomiopatias podem levar à insuficiência cardíaca nos estágios posteriores da doença.


==== Doença cardíaca valvular ====

Válvulas cardíacas saudáveis ​​permitem que o sangue flua facilmente em uma direção, mas impedem que ele flua na outra direção.

As válvulas cardíacas doentes podem ter uma abertura estreita e, portanto, restringir o fluxo de sangue na direção frontal (referida como válvula estenótica) ou podem permitir que o sangue vaze na direção reversa (regurgitação valvar).

A doença cardíaca valvar pode causar falta de ar, desmaios ou dor no peito, mas pode ser assintomática e detectada apenas em um exame de rotina pela audição de sons cardíacos anormais ou sopro cardíaco.

No mundo desenvolvido, a doença cardíaca valvular é mais comumente causada por degeneração secundária à idade avançada, mas também pode ser causada por infecção das válvulas cardíacas (endocardite).

Em algumas partes do mundo, a doença cardíaca reumática é uma das principais causas de doença cardíaca valvular, geralmente levando à estenose mitral ou aórtica e causada pela reação do sistema imunológico do corpo a uma infecção estreptocócica na garganta.


==== Arritmias cardíacas ====

Enquanto no coração saudável, as ondas de impulsos elétricos se originam no nó sinusal antes de se espalhar para o resto dos átrios, nó atrioventricular e, finalmente, os ventrículos (referido como ritmo sinusal normal), esse ritmo normal pode ser interrompido.

Ritmos cardíacos anormais ou arritmias podem ser assintomáticos ou podem causar palpitações, desmaios ou falta de ar.

Alguns tipos de arritmia, como a fibrilação atrial, aumentam o risco de acidente vascular cerebral a longo prazo.

Algumas arritmias fazem com que o coração bata de forma anormalmente lenta, conhecida como bradicardia ou bradiarritmia.

Isso pode ser causado por um nó sinusal anormalmente lento ou dano no sistema de condução cardíaco (bloqueio cardíaco).

Em outras arritmias, o coração pode bater de forma anormalmente rápida, conhecida como taquicardia ou taquiarritmia.

Essas arritmias podem assumir muitas formas e se originar de diferentes estruturas dentro do coração – algumas surgem dos átrios (por exemplo, flutter atrial), algumas do nó atrioventricular (por exemplo,

taquicardia reentrante nodal AV), enquanto outras surgem dos ventrículos (por exemplo, taquicardia ventricular).

Algumas taquiarritmias são causadas por cicatrizes no coração (por exemplo, algumas formas de taquicardia ventricular), outras por um foco irritável (por exemplo, taquicardia atrial focal), enquanto outras são causadas por tecido de condução anormal adicional que está presente desde o nascimento (por exemplo,

Síndrome de Wolff-Parkinson-White).

A forma mais perigosa de corrida cardíaca é a fibrilação ventricular, na qual os ventrículos estremecem em vez de se contrair e que, se não tratada, é rapidamente fatal.


==== Doença pericárdica ====

O saco que envolve o coração, chamado pericárdio, pode ficar inflamado em uma condição conhecida como pericardite.

Essa condição geralmente causa dor no peito que pode se espalhar para as costas e geralmente é causada por uma infecção viral (febre glandular, citomegalovírus ou vírus coxsackie).

O líquido pode se acumular dentro do saco pericárdico, conhecido como derrame pericárdico.

Os derrames pericárdicos geralmente ocorrem secundariamente a pericardite, insuficiência renal ou tumores, e frequentemente não causam nenhum sintoma.

No entanto, grandes derrames ou derrames que se acumulam rapidamente podem comprimir o coração em uma condição conhecida como tamponamento cardíaco, causando falta de ar e pressão arterial baixa potencialmente fatal.

O líquido pode ser removido do espaço pericárdico para diagnóstico ou para aliviar o tamponamento usando uma seringa em um procedimento chamado pericardiocentese.


==== Cardiopatia congênita ====

Algumas pessoas nascem com corações anormais e essas anormalidades são conhecidas como defeitos cardíacos congênitos.

Eles podem variar desde anormalidades relativamente menores (por exemplo, forame oval patente, possivelmente uma variante do normal) até anormalidades graves com risco de vida (por exemplo, síndrome do coração esquerdo hipoplásico).

Anormalidades comuns incluem aquelas que afetam o músculo cardíaco que separa os dois lados do coração (um "buraco no coração" - por exemplo, defeito do septo ventricular).

Outros defeitos incluem aqueles que afetam as válvulas cardíacas (por exemplo, estenose aórtica congênita) ou os principais vasos sanguíneos que saem do coração (por exemplo, coarctação da aorta).

São observadas síndromes mais complexas que afetam mais de uma parte do coração (p.

Tetralogia de Fallot).

Alguns defeitos cardíacos congênitos permitem que o sangue com pouco oxigênio, que normalmente seria devolvido aos pulmões, seja bombeado de volta para o resto do corpo.

Estes são conhecidos como defeitos cardíacos congênitos cianóticos e geralmente são mais graves.

Defeitos cardíacos congênitos maiores são frequentemente detectados na infância, logo após o nascimento, ou mesmo antes de uma criança nascer (por exemplo, transposição das grandes artérias), causando falta de ar e uma menor taxa de crescimento.

Outras formas menores de cardiopatia congênita podem permanecer indetectáveis ​​por muitos anos e só se revelar na vida adulta (por exemplo, defeito do septo atrial).


=== Diagnóstico ===

A doença cardíaca é diagnosticada pela obtenção de um histórico médico, um exame cardíaco e outras investigações, incluindo exames de sangue, ecocardiogramas, ECGs e imagens.

Outros procedimentos invasivos, como cateterismo cardíaco, também podem desempenhar um papel.


==== Exame ====

O exame cardíaco inclui inspeção, sensação do tórax com as mãos (palpação) e escuta com estetoscópio (auscultação).

Envolve a avaliação de sinais que podem ser visíveis nas mãos de uma pessoa (como hemorragias por estilhaços), articulações e outras áreas.

O pulso de uma pessoa é medido, geralmente na artéria radial perto do pulso, para avaliar o ritmo e a força do pulso.

A pressão arterial é medida, usando um esfigmomanômetro manual ou automático ou usando uma medida mais invasiva de dentro da artéria.

Qualquer elevação do pulso venoso jugular é observada.

O peito de uma pessoa é sentido por quaisquer vibrações transmitidas do coração e, em seguida, ouvido com um estetoscópio.


==== Sons do coração ====

Normalmente, corações saudáveis ​​têm apenas dois sons cardíacos audíveis, chamados S1 e S2.

O primeiro som cardíaco S1, é o som criado pelo fechamento das válvulas atrioventriculares durante a contração ventricular e é normalmente descrito como "lub".

A segunda bulha cardíaca, S2, é o som das válvulas semilunares se fechando durante a diástole ventricular e é descrita como "dub".

Cada som consiste em dois componentes, refletindo a ligeira diferença de tempo à medida que as duas válvulas se fecham.

S2 pode se dividir em dois sons distintos, seja como resultado da inspiração ou de diferentes problemas valvulares ou cardíacos.

Sons cardíacos adicionais também podem estar presentes e estes dão origem a ritmos de galope.

Uma terceira bulha cardíaca, S3, geralmente indica um aumento no volume sanguíneo ventricular.

Uma quarta bulha cardíaca S4 é chamada de galope atrial e é produzida pelo som do sangue sendo forçado a entrar em um ventrículo rígido.

A presença combinada de S3 e S4 dá um galope quádruplo.

Os sopros cardíacos são sons cardíacos anormais que podem estar relacionados a doenças ou benignos, e existem vários tipos.

Normalmente existem dois sons cardíacos, e sons cardíacos anormais podem ser sons extras ou "murmúrios" relacionados ao fluxo de sangue entre os sons.

Os sopros são classificados por volume, de 1 (o mais baixo) a 6 (o mais alto), e avaliados por sua relação com os sons cardíacos, posição no ciclo cardíaco e características adicionais, como radiação para outros locais, alterações com um a posição da pessoa, a frequência do som conforme determinado pelo lado do estetoscópio pelo qual eles são ouvidos e o local em que eles são ouvidos mais alto.

Os sopros podem ser causados ​​por válvulas cardíacas danificadas ou doenças cardíacas congênitas, como defeitos do septo ventricular, ou podem ser ouvidos em corações normais.

Um tipo diferente de som, um atrito pericárdico pode ser ouvido em casos de pericardite, onde as membranas inflamadas podem se esfregar.


==== Exames de sangue ====

Os exames de sangue desempenham um papel importante no diagnóstico e tratamento de muitas doenças cardiovasculares.
A troponina é um biomarcador sensível para um coração com suprimento sanguíneo insuficiente.

É liberado 4 a 6 horas após a lesão e geralmente atinge o pico em cerca de 12 a 24 horas.

Dois testes de troponina são frequentemente realizados - um no momento da apresentação inicial e outro dentro de 3 a 6 horas, com um nível alto ou um aumento significativo sendo diagnóstico.

Um teste para peptídeo natriurético cerebral (BNP) pode ser usado para avaliar a presença de insuficiência cardíaca e aumenta quando há aumento da demanda no ventrículo esquerdo.

Esses testes são considerados biomarcadores porque são altamente específicos para doenças cardíacas.

O teste para a forma MB da creatina quinase fornece informações sobre o suprimento sanguíneo do coração, mas é usado com menos frequência porque é menos específico e sensível.

Outros exames de sangue são frequentemente realizados para ajudar a entender a saúde geral de uma pessoa e os fatores de risco que podem contribuir para doenças cardíacas.

Estes geralmente incluem um hemograma completo investigando anemia e um painel metabólico básico que pode revelar quaisquer distúrbios nos eletrólitos.

Uma tela de coagulação é frequentemente necessária para garantir que o nível correto de anticoagulação seja administrado.

Os lipídios em jejum e a glicemia de jejum (ou um nível de HbA1c) são frequentemente solicitados para avaliar o status de colesterol e diabetes de uma pessoa, respectivamente.


==== Eletrocardiograma ====

Usando eletrodos de superfície no corpo, é possível registrar a atividade elétrica do coração.

Este traçado do sinal elétrico é o eletrocardiograma (ECG) ou (ECG).

Um ECG é um teste de cabeceira e envolve a colocação de dez derivações no corpo.

Isso produz um ECG de "12 derivações" (três derivações extras são calculadas matematicamente e uma derivação é eletricamente aterrada).

Existem cinco características proeminentes no ECG: a onda P (despolarização atrial), o complexo QRS (despolarização ventricular) e a onda T (repolarização ventricular).

À medida que as células do coração se contraem, elas criam uma corrente que viaja pelo coração.

Uma deflexão para baixo no ECG indica que as células estão se tornando mais positivas em carga ("despolarizando") na direção dessa derivação, enquanto uma inflexão para cima implica que as células estão se tornando mais negativas ("repolarizando") na direção da derivação.

Isso depende da posição do eletrodo, portanto, se uma onda de despolarização se move da esquerda para a direita, um eletrodo à esquerda mostraria uma deflexão negativa e um eletrodo à direita mostraria uma deflexão positiva.

O ECG é uma ferramenta útil na detecção de distúrbios do ritmo e na detecção de suprimento insuficiente de sangue para o coração.

Às vezes, há suspeita de anormalidades, mas não imediatamente visíveis no ECG.

O teste durante o exercício pode ser usado para provocar uma anormalidade, ou um ECG pode ser usado por um período mais longo, como um monitor Holter de 24 horas, se uma suspeita de anormalidade de ritmo não estiver presente no momento da avaliação.


==== Imagens ====

Vários métodos de imagem podem ser usados ​​para avaliar a anatomia e a função do coração, incluindo ultrassonografia (ecocardiografia), angiografia, tomografia computadorizada, ressonância magnética e PET.

Um ecocardiograma é um ultra-som do coração usado para medir a função do coração, avaliar a doença valvar e procurar quaisquer anormalidades.

A ecocardiografia pode ser realizada por uma sonda no tórax (transtorácica) ou por uma sonda no esôfago (transesofágica).

Um relatório típico de ecocardiografia incluirá informações sobre a largura das válvulas observando qualquer estenose, se há algum refluxo de sangue (regurgitação) e informações sobre os volumes de sangue no final da sístole e diástole, incluindo uma fração de ejeção, que descreve quanto o sangue é ejetado dos ventrículos esquerdo e direito após a sístole.

A fração de ejeção pode ser obtida dividindo-se o volume ejetado pelo coração (volume sistólico) pelo volume do coração cheio (volume diastólico final).

Os ecocardiogramas também podem ser realizados em circunstâncias em que o corpo está mais estressado, a fim de examinar sinais de falta de suprimento sanguíneo.

Este teste de estresse cardíaco envolve exercício direto ou, quando isso não for possível, injeção de uma droga como a dobutamina.

Tomografias computadorizadas, radiografias de tórax e outras formas de imagem podem ajudar a avaliar o tamanho do coração, avaliar sinais de edema pulmonar e indicar se há líquido ao redor do coração.

Eles também são úteis para avaliar a aorta, o principal vaso sanguíneo que sai do coração.


=== Tratamento ===

As doenças que afetam o coração podem ser tratadas por uma variedade de métodos, incluindo modificação do estilo de vida, tratamento medicamentoso e cirurgia.


==== Cardiopatia isquêmica ====

Os estreitamentos das artérias coronárias (doença isquêmica do coração) são tratados para aliviar os sintomas de dor torácica causada por uma artéria parcialmente estreitada (angina pectoris), para minimizar os danos ao músculo cardíaco quando uma artéria está completamente ocluída (infarto do miocárdio) ou para prevenir um infarto do miocárdio. infarto ocorra.

Medicamentos para melhorar os sintomas da angina incluem nitroglicerina, betabloqueadores e bloqueadores dos canais de cálcio, enquanto os tratamentos preventivos incluem antiplaquetários, como aspirina e estatinas, medidas de estilo de vida, como parar de fumar e perder peso, e tratamento de fatores de risco, como pressão alta e diabetes.

Além do uso de medicamentos, as artérias cardíacas estreitadas podem ser tratadas expandindo os estreitamentos ou redirecionando o fluxo de sangue para contornar uma obstrução.

Isso pode ser realizado usando uma intervenção coronária percutânea, durante a qual os estreitamentos podem ser expandidos passando pequenos fios com ponta de balão nas artérias coronárias, inflando o balão para expandir o estreitamento e, às vezes, deixando para trás um suporte de metal conhecido como stent para manter o artéria aberta.

Se os estreitamentos nas artérias coronárias forem inadequados para tratamento com intervenção coronária percutânea, pode ser necessária cirurgia aberta.

Uma cirurgia de revascularização do miocárdio pode ser realizada, em que um vaso sanguíneo de outra parte do corpo (veia safena, artéria radial ou artéria mamária interna) é usado para redirecionar o sangue de um ponto antes do estreitamento (normalmente a aorta) para um ponto além da obstrução.


==== Doença cardíaca valvular ====

Válvulas cardíacas doentes que se tornaram anormalmente estreitas ou com vazamento anormal podem exigir cirurgia.

Isso é tradicionalmente realizado como um procedimento cirúrgico aberto para substituir a válvula cardíaca danificada por uma válvula de tecido ou prótese metálica.

Em algumas circunstâncias, as valvas tricúspide ou mitral podem ser reparadas cirurgicamente, evitando a necessidade de troca valvar.

As válvulas cardíacas também podem ser tratadas por via percutânea, usando técnicas que compartilham muitas semelhanças com a intervenção coronária percutânea.

A substituição valvar aórtica transcateter é cada vez mais utilizada para pacientes considerados de risco muito alto para substituição valvar aberta.


==== Arritmias cardíacas ====
Ritmos cardíacos anormais (arritmias) podem ser tratados com medicamentos antiarrítmicos.

Estes podem funcionar manipulando o fluxo de eletrólitos através da membrana celular (como bloqueadores dos canais de cálcio, bloqueadores dos canais de sódio, amiodarona ou digoxina) ou modificar o efeito do sistema nervoso autônomo no coração (bloqueadores beta e atropina).

Em algumas arritmias, como a fibrilação atrial, que aumentam o risco de acidente vascular cerebral, esse risco pode ser reduzido usando anticoagulantes como a varfarina ou novos anticoagulantes orais.

Se os medicamentos não controlarem uma arritmia, outra opção de tratamento pode ser a ablação por cateter.

Nesses procedimentos, os fios são passados ​​de uma veia ou artéria na perna para o coração para encontrar a área anormal do tecido que está causando a arritmia.

O tecido anormal pode ser intencionalmente danificado, ou ablado, por aquecimento ou congelamento para evitar mais distúrbios do ritmo cardíaco.

Embora a maioria das arritmias possa ser tratada com técnicas de cateter minimamente invasivas, algumas arritmias (particularmente fibrilação atrial) também podem ser tratadas com cirurgia aberta ou toracoscópica, seja no momento de outra cirurgia cardíaca ou como procedimento autônomo.

Uma cardioversão, em que um choque elétrico é usado para atordoar o coração de um ritmo anormal, também pode ser usada.

Dispositivos cardíacos na forma de marcapassos ou desfibriladores implantáveis ​​também podem ser necessários para tratar arritmias.

Os marcapassos, compostos por um pequeno gerador alimentado por bateria implantado sob a pele e um ou mais eletrodos que se estendem até o coração, são mais comumente usados ​​para tratar ritmos cardíacos anormalmente lentos.

Desfibriladores implantáveis ​​são usados ​​para tratar ritmos cardíacos rápidos com risco de vida grave.

Esses dispositivos monitoram o coração e, se uma corrida cardíaca perigosa for detectada, podem aplicar automaticamente um choque para restaurar o coração a um ritmo normal.

Desfibriladores implantáveis ​​são mais comumente usados ​​em pacientes com insuficiência cardíaca, cardiomiopatias ou síndromes de arritmia hereditária.


==== Insuficiência cardíaca ====

Além de abordar a causa subjacente da insuficiência cardíaca de um paciente (mais comumente doença cardíaca isquêmica ou hipertensão), a base do tratamento da insuficiência cardíaca é com medicamentos.

Estes incluem medicamentos para evitar o acúmulo de líquido nos pulmões, aumentando a quantidade de urina que um paciente produz (diuréticos) e medicamentos que tentam preservar a função de bombeamento do coração (betabloqueadores, inibidores da ECA e antagonistas dos receptores mineralocorticóides).

Em alguns pacientes com insuficiência cardíaca, um marcapasso especializado conhecido como terapia de ressincronização cardíaca pode ser usado para melhorar a eficiência de bombeamento do coração.

Esses dispositivos são frequentemente combinados com um desfibrilador.

Em casos muito graves de insuficiência cardíaca, pode ser implantada uma pequena bomba chamada dispositivo de assistência ventricular que complementa a capacidade de bombeamento do próprio coração.

Nos casos mais graves, um transplante cardíaco pode ser considerado.


== História ==

=== Antigo ===


Os seres humanos conhecem o coração desde os tempos antigos, embora sua função e anatomia precisas não fossem claramente compreendidas.

Das visões principalmente religiosas das sociedades anteriores em relação ao coração, os gregos antigos são considerados a sede principal da compreensão científica do coração no mundo antigo.

Aristóteles considerava o coração o órgão responsável pela criação do sangue; Platão considerava o coração como a fonte do sangue circulante e Hipócrates notou o sangue circulando ciclicamente do corpo através do coração para os pulmões.

Erasistratos (304-250 aC) observou o coração como uma bomba, causando dilatação dos vasos sanguíneos, e observou que as artérias e veias irradiam do coração, tornando-se progressivamente menores com a distância, embora acreditasse que estavam cheias de ar e não de sangue.

Ele também descobriu as válvulas cardíacas. O médico grego Galeno (século II dC) sabia que os vasos sanguíneos transportavam sangue e identificou o sangue venoso (vermelho escuro) e arterial (mais brilhante e mais fino), cada um com funções distintas e separadas.

Galeno, observando o coração como o órgão mais quente do corpo, concluiu que fornecia calor ao corpo.

O coração não bombeava sangue, o movimento do coração sugava o sangue durante a diástole e o sangue movia-se pela pulsação das próprias artérias.

Galeno acreditava que o sangue arterial era criado pelo sangue venoso que passava do ventrículo esquerdo para o direito através de 'poros' entre os ventrículos.

O ar dos pulmões passava dos pulmões através da artéria pulmonar para o lado esquerdo do coração e criava sangue arterial. Essas idéias não foram contestadas por quase mil anos.


=== Pré-moderno ===

As primeiras descrições dos sistemas de circulação coronariana e pulmonar podem ser encontradas no Commentary on Anatomy in Avicena's Canon, publicado em 1242 por Ibn al-Nafis.

Em seu manuscrito, al-Nafis escreveu que o sangue passa pela circulação pulmonar em vez de se mover do ventrículo direito para o esquerdo, como acreditava anteriormente Galeno.

Sua obra foi posteriormente traduzida para o latim por Andrea Alpago. Na Europa, os ensinamentos de Galeno continuaram a dominar a comunidade acadêmica e suas doutrinas foram adotadas como o cânone oficial da Igreja.

Andreas Vesalius questionou algumas das crenças de Galeno sobre o coração em De humani corporis fabrica (1543), mas sua magnum opus foi interpretada como um desafio às autoridades e ele foi submetido a vários ataques.

Michael Servetus escreveu em Christianismi Restitutio (1553) que o sangue flui de um lado do coração para o outro através dos pulmões.


=== Moderno ===

Um avanço na compreensão do fluxo de sangue através do coração e do corpo veio com a publicação de De Motu Cordis (1628) pelo médico inglês William Harvey.

O livro de Harvey descreve completamente a circulação sistêmica e a força mecânica do coração, levando a uma revisão das doutrinas galênicas.

Otto Frank (1865–1944) foi um fisiologista alemão; entre seus muitos trabalhos publicados estão estudos detalhados dessa importante relação do coração.

Ernest Starling (1866-1927) foi um importante fisiologista inglês que também estudou o coração.

Embora eles tenham trabalhado em grande parte de forma independente, seus esforços combinados e conclusões semelhantes foram reconhecidos no nome "mecanismo de Frank-Starling". do coração permaneceu desconhecido até Sunao Tawara publicar sua monografia, intitulada Das Reizleitungssystem des Säugetierherzens, em 1906.

A descoberta do nó atrioventricular por Tawara levou Arthur Keith e Martin Flack a procurar estruturas semelhantes no coração, levando à descoberta do nó sinoatrial vários meses depois.

Essas estruturas formam a base anatômica do eletrocardiograma, cujo inventor, Willem Einthoven, recebeu o Prêmio Nobel de Medicina ou Fisiologia em 1924. Cidade.

Isso marcou um marco importante na cirurgia cardíaca, capturando a atenção da classe médica e do mundo em geral.

No entanto, as taxas de sobrevida a longo prazo dos pacientes foram inicialmente muito baixas.

Louis Washkansky, o primeiro receptor de um coração doado, morreu 18 dias após a operação, enquanto outros pacientes não sobreviveram por mais de algumas semanas.

O cirurgião americano Norman Shumway foi creditado por seus esforços para melhorar as técnicas de transplante, juntamente com os pioneiros Richard Lower, Vladimir Demikhov e Adrian Kantrowitz.

Em março de 2000, mais de 55.000 transplantes cardíacos foram realizados em todo o mundo. Em meados do século 20, as doenças cardíacas ultrapassaram as doenças infecciosas como a principal causa de morte nos Estados Unidos e atualmente é a principal causa de mortes no mundo .

Desde 1948, o Framingham Heart Study em andamento esclarece os efeitos de várias influências no coração, incluindo dieta, exercícios e medicamentos comuns, como a aspirina.

Embora a introdução de inibidores da ECA e betabloqueadores tenha melhorado o manejo da insuficiência cardíaca crônica, a doença continua sendo um enorme fardo médico e social, com 30 a 40% dos pacientes morrendo dentro de um ano após o diagnóstico.


== Transplante de coração de porco para humano ==

O primeiro transplante bem-sucedido de um coração de um porco geneticamente modificado para um humano foi realizado em 7 de janeiro de 2022 em Baltimore pelo cirurgião cardíaco Bartley P.

Griffith, o destinatário foi David Bennett (57).


== Sociedade e cultura ==

=== Simbolismo ===

Como um dos órgãos vitais, o coração foi por muito tempo identificado como o centro de todo o corpo, a sede da vida, ou emoção, ou razão, vontade, intelecto, propósito ou mente.

O coração é um símbolo emblemático em muitas religiões, significando "verdade, consciência ou coragem moral em muitas religiões - o templo ou trono de Deus no pensamento islâmico e judaico-cristão; o centro divino, ou atman, e o terceiro olho da sabedoria transcendente no hinduísmo; o diamante da pureza e essência do Buda; o centro taoísta da compreensão." Na Bíblia hebraica, a palavra para coração, lev, é usada nestes significados, como a sede da emoção, a mente, e referindo-se o órgão anatômico.

Também está ligado em função e simbolismo ao estômago. Uma parte importante do conceito de alma na religião egípcia antiga era o coração, ou ib.

Acreditava-se que o ib ou coração metafísico era formado a partir de uma gota de sangue do coração da mãe da criança, colhida na concepção.

Para os antigos egípcios, o coração era a sede da emoção, pensamento, vontade e intenção.

Isso é evidenciado por expressões egípcias que incorporam a palavra ib, como Awi-ib para "feliz" (literalmente, "longo de coração"), Xak-ib para "afastado" (literalmente, "truncado de coração").

Na religião egípcia, o coração era a chave para a vida após a morte.

Foi concebido como sobrevivente da morte no mundo inferior, onde dava evidências a favor ou contra seu possuidor.

Pensava-se que o coração foi examinado por Anúbis e uma variedade de divindades durante a cerimônia de Pesagem do Coração.

Se o coração pesava mais que a pena de Maat, que simbolizava o padrão ideal de comportamento.

Se a balança estivesse equilibrada, significava que o possuidor do coração tinha vivido uma vida justa e poderia entrar na vida após a morte; se o coração fosse mais pesado, seria devorado pelo monstro Ammit.

O caractere chinês para "coração", 心, deriva de uma representação comparativamente realista de um coração (indicando as câmaras do coração) na escrita do selo.

A palavra chinesa xīn também tem os significados metafóricos de "mente", "intenção" ou "núcleo".

Na medicina chinesa, o coração é visto como o centro de 神 shén "espírito, consciência".

O coração está associado ao intestino delgado, à língua, rege os seis órgãos e as cinco vísceras, e pertence ao fogo nos cinco elementos.

A palavra sânscrita para coração é hṛd ou hṛdaya, encontrada no mais antigo texto sânscrito sobrevivente, o Rigveda.

Em sânscrito, pode significar tanto o objeto anatômico quanto "mente" ou "alma", representando a sede da emoção.

Hrd pode ser um cognato da palavra para coração em grego, latim e inglês. Muitos filósofos e cientistas clássicos, incluindo Aristóteles, consideravam o coração a sede do pensamento, razão ou emoção, muitas vezes desconsiderando o cérebro como contribuinte para essas funções.

A identificação do coração como sede das emoções, em particular, deve-se ao médico romano Galeno, que também localizou a sede das paixões no fígado e a sede da razão no cérebro.

O coração também desempenhou um papel no sistema de crença asteca.

A forma mais comum de sacrifício humano praticada pelos astecas era a extração do coração.

Os astecas acreditavam que o coração (tona) era tanto a sede do indivíduo quanto um fragmento do calor do Sol (istli).

Até hoje, os Nahua consideram o Sol uma alma-coração (tona-tiuh): "redondo, quente, pulsante".

No catolicismo, existe uma longa tradição de veneração do coração, decorrente do culto às chagas de Jesus Cristo, que ganhou destaque a partir de meados do século XVI.

Esta tradição influenciou o desenvolvimento da devoção cristã medieval ao Sagrado Coração de Jesus e a veneração paralela do Imaculado Coração de Maria, popularizado por João Eudes.

A expressão de um coração partido é uma referência transcultural ao luto por um perdido ou ao amor romântico não realizado.

A noção de "flechas de Cupido" é antiga, devido a Ovídio, mas enquanto Ovídio descreve Cupido como ferindo suas vítimas com suas flechas, não é explicitado que é o coração que está ferido.

A iconografia familiar do Cupido atirando em pequenos símbolos de coração é um tema renascentista que se tornou vinculado ao Dia dos Namorados.


=== Comida ===


Corações de animais são amplamente consumidos como alimento.

Como eles são quase inteiramente musculares, eles são ricos em proteínas.

Eles são frequentemente incluídos em pratos com outras miudezas, por exemplo, no kokoretsi pan-otomano.

Os corações de frango são considerados miúdos e são frequentemente grelhados em espetos; exemplos disso são o hato yakitori japonês, o churrasco de coração brasileiro e o satay de coração de frango indonésio.

Eles também podem ser fritos, como na grelha mista de Jerusalém.

Na culinária egípcia, eles podem ser usados, finamente picados, como parte do recheio de frango.

Muitas receitas os combinavam com outros miúdos, como o mexicano pollo en menudencias e o russo ragu iz kurinyikh potrokhov. Os corações de carne bovina, suína e de carneiro geralmente podem ser trocados em receitas.

Como o coração é um músculo que trabalha duro, torna a carne "firme e bastante seca", por isso geralmente é cozida lentamente.

Outra maneira de lidar com a dureza é fazer julienne da carne, como no coração refogado chinês. O coração de boi pode ser grelhado ou refogado.

Nos anticuchos de corazón peruanos, os corações de carne grelhada são grelhados após serem amaciados através de uma longa marinada em uma mistura de especiarias e vinagre.

Uma receita australiana para "ganso simulado" é, na verdade, coração de boi recheado refogado.

O coração de porco é cozido, escalfado, refogado ou transformado em salsicha.

O oreto balinês é uma espécie de chouriço feito com coração e sangue de porco.

Uma receita francesa para cœur de porc à l'orange é feita de coração braseado com molho de laranja.


== Outros animais ==

=== Vertebrados ===

O tamanho do coração varia entre os diferentes grupos de animais, com corações em vertebrados variando dos menores camundongos (12 mg) até a baleia azul (600 kg).

Nos vertebrados, o coração fica no meio da parte ventral do corpo, cercado por um pericárdio. que em alguns peixes pode estar ligado ao peritônio.

O nó sinoatrial é encontrado em todos os amniotas, mas não nos vertebrados mais primitivos.

Nesses animais, os músculos do coração são relativamente contínuos, e o seio venoso coordena o batimento, que passa em onda pelas demais câmaras.

Como o seio venoso é incorporado ao átrio direito em amniotas, é provável que seja homólogo ao nó SA.

Nos teleósteos, com seu seio venoso vestigial, o principal centro de coordenação está, em vez disso, no átrio.

A taxa de batimentos cardíacos varia enormemente entre as diferentes espécies, variando de cerca de 20 batimentos por minuto em bacalhau a cerca de 600 em beija-flores e até 1200 bpm no beija-flor-de-garganta-rubi.


=== Sistemas circulatórios duplos ===

Anfíbios adultos e a maioria dos répteis têm um sistema circulatório duplo, ou seja, um sistema circulatório dividido em partes arterial e venosa.

No entanto, o coração em si não está completamente separado em dois lados.

Em vez disso, é separado em três câmaras - dois átrios e um ventrículo.

O sangue que retorna da circulação sistêmica e dos pulmões é devolvido, e o sangue é bombeado simultaneamente para a circulação sistêmica e para os pulmões.

O sistema duplo permite que o sangue circule de e para os pulmões, que fornecem sangue oxigenado diretamente para o coração.

Nos répteis, com exceção das cobras, o coração geralmente está situado no meio do tórax.

Em cobras terrestres e arborícolas, geralmente está localizado mais próximo da cabeça; nas espécies aquáticas o coração está localizado mais centralmente.

Há um coração com três câmaras: dois átrios e um ventrículo.

A forma e a função desses corações são diferentes dos corações de mamíferos devido ao fato de que as cobras têm um corpo alongado e, portanto, são afetadas por diferentes fatores ambientais.

Em particular, o coração da cobra em relação à posição em seu corpo foi muito influenciado pela gravidade.

Portanto, cobras maiores em tamanho tendem a ter uma pressão arterial mais alta devido à mudança gravitacional.

O ventrículo é incompletamente separado em duas metades por uma parede (septo), com uma lacuna considerável perto da artéria pulmonar e aberturas aórticas.

Na maioria das espécies reptilianas, parece haver pouca ou nenhuma mistura entre as correntes sanguíneas, de modo que a aorta recebe, essencialmente, apenas sangue oxigenado.

A exceção a esta regra são os crocodilos, que têm um coração de quatro câmaras. No coração do peixe pulmonado, o septo se estende parcialmente para o ventrículo.

Isso permite algum grau de separação entre a corrente sanguínea desoxigenada destinada aos pulmões e a corrente oxigenada que é entregue ao resto do corpo.

A ausência de tal divisão em espécies vivas de anfíbios pode ser em parte devido à quantidade de respiração que ocorre através da pele; assim, o sangue retornado ao coração pelas veias cavas já está parcialmente oxigenado.

Como resultado, pode haver menos necessidade de uma divisão mais fina entre as duas correntes sanguíneas do que em peixes pulmonados ou outros tetrápodes.

No entanto, pelo menos em algumas espécies de anfíbios, a natureza esponjosa do ventrículo parece manter mais uma separação entre as correntes sanguíneas.

Além disso, as válvulas originais do cone arterioso foram substituídas por uma válvula espiral que o divide em duas partes paralelas, ajudando assim a manter as duas correntes sanguíneas separadas.


=== Divisão completa ===

Arcossauros (crocodilianos e pássaros) e mamíferos mostram a separação completa do coração em duas bombas para um total de quatro câmaras cardíacas; acredita-se que o coração de quatro câmaras dos arcossauros evoluiu independentemente do dos mamíferos.

Nos crocodilianos, há uma pequena abertura, o forame de Panizza, na base dos troncos arteriais e há algum grau de mistura entre o sangue de cada lado do coração, durante um mergulho subaquático; assim, apenas em aves e mamíferos as duas correntes sanguíneas — as circulações pulmonar e sistêmica — são mantidas inteiramente separadas por uma barreira física.


=== Peixe ===

Os peixes têm o que é frequentemente descrito como um coração de duas câmaras, consistindo em um átrio para receber sangue e um ventrículo para bombeá-lo.

No entanto, o coração de peixe tem compartimentos de entrada e saída que podem ser chamados de câmaras, por isso às vezes também é descrito como três ou quatro câmaras, dependendo do que é contado como uma câmara.

O átrio e o ventrículo às vezes são considerados “câmaras verdadeiras”, enquanto os outros são considerados “câmaras acessórias”. de mamíferos e aves.

A primeira câmara é o seio venoso, que coleta sangue desoxigenado do corpo através das veias hepática e cardinal.

A partir daqui, o sangue flui para o átrio e depois para o poderoso ventrículo muscular, onde ocorrerá a principal ação de bombeamento.

A quarta e última câmara é o cone arteriosus, que contém várias válvulas e envia sangue para a aorta ventral.

A aorta ventral fornece sangue para as brânquias onde é oxigenado e flui, através da aorta dorsal, para o resto do corpo.

(Nos tetrápodes, a aorta ventral se dividiu em duas; uma metade forma a aorta ascendente, enquanto a outra forma a artéria pulmonar).

No peixe adulto, as quatro câmaras não estão dispostas em linha reta, mas formam uma forma de S, com as duas últimas câmaras situadas acima das duas primeiras.

Este padrão relativamente simples é encontrado em peixes cartilaginosos e nos peixes com nadadeiras raiadas.

Nos teleósteos, o cone arterioso é muito pequeno e pode ser descrito com mais precisão como parte da aorta e não do coração propriamente dito.

O cone arterioso não está presente em nenhum amniota, presumivelmente tendo sido absorvido pelos ventrículos ao longo da evolução.

Da mesma forma, enquanto o seio venoso está presente como uma estrutura vestigial em alguns répteis e aves, ele é absorvido pelo átrio direito e não é mais distinguível.


=== Invertebrados ===

Artrópodes e a maioria dos moluscos têm um sistema circulatório aberto.

Neste sistema, o sangue desoxigenado se acumula ao redor do coração em cavidades (seios).

Este sangue permeia lentamente o coração através de muitos pequenos canais unidirecionais.

O coração bombeia então o sangue para a hemocele, uma cavidade entre os órgãos.

O coração nos artrópodes é tipicamente um tubo muscular que percorre o comprimento do corpo, sob as costas e da base da cabeça.

Em vez de sangue, o fluido circulatório é a hemolinfa que transporta o pigmento respiratório mais comumente usado, a hemocianina à base de cobre como transportador de oxigênio.

A hemoglobina é usada apenas por alguns artrópodes. Em alguns outros invertebrados, como as minhocas, o sistema circulatório não é usado para transportar oxigênio e, portanto, é muito reduzido, não tendo veias ou artérias e consistindo de dois tubos conectados.

O oxigênio viaja por difusão e existem cinco pequenos vasos musculares que conectam esses vasos que se contraem na frente dos animais que podem ser pensados ​​como "corações".

Lulas e outros cefalópodes têm dois "corações branquiais", também conhecidos como corações branquiais, e um "coração sistêmico".

Os corações branquiais têm dois átrios e um ventrículo cada, e bombeiam para as brânquias, enquanto o coração sistêmico bombeia para o corpo.

Apenas os cordados (incluindo os vertebrados) e os hemicordados possuem um "coração" central, que é uma vesícula formada a partir do espessamento da aorta e se contrai para bombear o sangue.

Isso sugere uma presença dele no último ancestral comum desses grupos (pode ter sido perdido nos equinodermos).



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Heart

;;;FR;;;



CŒUR


Le cœur est un organe musculaire chez la plupart des animaux qui pompe le sang dans les vaisseaux sanguins du système circulatoire.

Le sang pompé transporte de l'oxygène et des nutriments vers le corps, tout en transportant des déchets métaboliques tels que le dioxyde de carbone vers les poumons.

Chez l'homme, le cœur a approximativement la taille d'un poing fermé et est situé entre les poumons, dans le compartiment central de la poitrine.

Chez les humains, les autres mammifères et les oiseaux, le cœur est divisé en quatre cavités : les oreillettes supérieures gauche et droite et les ventricules inférieurs gauche et droit.

Généralement, l'oreillette et le ventricule droits sont appelés cœur droit et leurs homologues gauches cœur gauche.

Les poissons, en revanche, ont deux chambres, une oreillette et un ventricule, tandis que les reptiles ont trois chambres.

Dans un cœur en bonne santé, le sang circule dans le cœur à sens unique grâce aux valves cardiaques, qui empêchent le reflux.

Le cœur est enfermé dans un sac protecteur, le péricarde, qui contient également une petite quantité de liquide.

La paroi du cœur est composée de trois couches : l'épicarde, le myocarde et l'endocarde. Le cœur pompe le sang à un rythme déterminé par un groupe de cellules du stimulateur cardiaque dans le nœud sino-auriculaire.

Ceux-ci génèrent un courant qui provoque la contraction du cœur, voyageant à travers le nœud auriculo-ventriculaire et le long du système de conduction du cœur.

Le cœur reçoit du sang pauvre en oxygène de la circulation systémique, qui pénètre dans l'oreillette droite par les veines caves supérieure et inférieure et passe dans le ventricule droit.

De là, il est pompé dans la circulation pulmonaire, à travers les poumons où il reçoit de l'oxygène et dégage du dioxyde de carbone.

Le sang oxygéné retourne ensuite dans l'oreillette gauche, traverse le ventricule gauche et est pompé à travers l'aorte vers la circulation systémique, où l'oxygène est utilisé et métabolisé en dioxyde de carbone.

Le cœur bat à un rythme au repos proche de 72 battements par minute.

L'exercice augmente temporairement la fréquence, mais diminue la fréquence cardiaque au repos à long terme et est bon pour la santé cardiaque.

Les maladies cardiovasculaires (MCV) sont la cause la plus fréquente de décès dans le monde en 2008, représentant 30 % des décès.

Parmi ceux-ci, plus des trois quarts sont le résultat d'une maladie coronarienne et d'un accident vasculaire cérébral.

Les facteurs de risque comprennent : le tabagisme, le surpoids, le peu d'exercice, l'hypercholestérolémie, l'hypertension artérielle et le diabète mal contrôlé, entre autres.

Les maladies cardiovasculaires sont souvent asymptomatiques ou peuvent provoquer des douleurs thoraciques ou un essoufflement.

Le diagnostic de maladie cardiaque se fait souvent par la prise d'antécédents médicaux, l'écoute des bruits cardiaques avec un stéthoscope, un ECG, un échocardiogramme et une échographie.

Les spécialistes qui se concentrent sur les maladies cardiaques sont appelés cardiologues, bien que de nombreuses spécialités médicales puissent être impliquées dans le traitement.


== Structure ==



=== Emplacement et forme ===


Le cœur humain est situé dans le médiastin, au niveau des vertèbres thoraciques T5-T8.

Un sac à double membrane appelé péricarde entoure le cœur et se fixe au médiastin.

La surface arrière du cœur se trouve près de la colonne vertébrale et la surface avant se trouve derrière les cartilages du sternum et des côtes.

La partie supérieure du cœur est le point d'attache de plusieurs gros vaisseaux sanguins : les veines caves, l'aorte et le tronc pulmonaire.

La partie supérieure du cœur est située au niveau du troisième cartilage costal.

La pointe inférieure du cœur, l'apex, se situe à gauche du sternum (à 8 à 9 cm de la ligne médiane) entre la jonction des quatrième et cinquième côtes près de leur articulation avec les cartilages costaux.

La plus grande partie du cœur est généralement légèrement décalée vers le côté gauche de la poitrine (bien qu'elle puisse parfois être décalée vers la droite) et est ressentie comme étant à gauche car le cœur gauche est plus fort et plus gros, car il pompe à tous parties du corps.

Parce que le cœur est entre les poumons, le poumon gauche est plus petit que le poumon droit et a une encoche cardiaque dans sa bordure pour accueillir le cœur.

Le cœur est en forme de cône, avec sa base positionnée vers le haut et se rétrécissant jusqu'au sommet.

Un cœur adulte a une masse de 250 à 350 grammes (9 à 12 oz).

Le cœur est souvent décrit comme la taille d'un poing : 12 cm (5 po) de longueur, 8 cm (3,5 po) de largeur et 6 cm (2,5 po) d'épaisseur, bien que cette description soit contestée, car le cœur est probablement être légèrement plus grand.

Les athlètes bien entraînés peuvent avoir un cœur beaucoup plus gros en raison des effets de l'exercice sur le muscle cardiaque, similaires à la réponse du muscle squelettique.


=== Chambres ===


Le cœur a quatre chambres, deux oreillettes supérieures, les chambres de réception, et deux ventricules inférieurs, les chambres de décharge.

Les oreillettes débouchent dans les ventricules via les valves auriculo-ventriculaires, présentes dans le septum auriculo-ventriculaire.

Cette distinction est visible également à la surface du cœur comme le sillon coronaire.

Il y a une structure en forme d'oreille dans l'oreillette supérieure droite appelée appendice auriculaire droit, ou oreillette, et une autre dans l'oreillette supérieure gauche, l'appendice auriculaire gauche.

L'oreillette droite et le ventricule droit ensemble sont parfois appelés le cœur droit.

De même, l'oreillette gauche et le ventricule gauche sont parfois appelés le cœur gauche.

Les ventricules sont séparés les uns des autres par le septum interventriculaire, visible à la surface du cœur comme le sillon longitudinal antérieur et le sillon interventriculaire postérieur.

Le squelette cardiaque fibreux structure le cœur.

Il forme le septum auriculo-ventriculaire, qui sépare les oreillettes des ventricules, et les anneaux fibreux, qui servent de bases aux quatre valves cardiaques.

Le squelette cardiaque fournit également une frontière importante dans le système de conduction électrique du cœur puisque le collagène ne peut pas conduire l'électricité.

Le septum interauriculaire sépare les oreillettes et le septum interventriculaire sépare les ventricules.

Le septum interventriculaire est beaucoup plus épais que le septum interauriculaire puisque les ventricules doivent générer une plus grande pression lorsqu'ils se contractent.


==== Vannes ====

Le cœur a quatre valves, qui séparent ses chambres.

Une valve se trouve entre chaque oreillette et ventricule, et une valve repose à la sortie de chaque ventricule.

Les valves situées entre les oreillettes et les ventricules sont appelées valves auriculo-ventriculaires.

Entre l'oreillette droite et le ventricule droit se trouve la valve tricuspide.

La valve tricuspide a trois cuspides, qui se connectent aux cordes tendineuses et trois muscles papillaires appelés muscles antérieur, postérieur et septal, d'après leurs positions relatives.

La valve mitrale se situe entre l'oreillette gauche et le ventricule gauche.

Elle est également connue sous le nom de valve bicuspide en raison de ses deux cuspides, une cuspide antérieure et une cuspide postérieure.

Ces cuspides sont également attachées via des cordes tendineuses à deux muscles papillaires faisant saillie de la paroi ventriculaire.

Les muscles papillaires s'étendent des parois du cœur aux valves par des connexions cartilagineuses appelées cordes tendineuses.

Ces muscles empêchent les valves de tomber trop en arrière lorsqu'elles se ferment.

Pendant la phase de relaxation du cycle cardiaque, les muscles papillaires sont également détendus et la tension sur les cordes tendineuses est faible.

Lorsque les cavités cardiaques se contractent, les muscles papillaires aussi.

Cela crée une tension sur les cordes tendineuses, aidant à maintenir les cuspides des valves auriculo-ventriculaires en place et les empêchant d'être renvoyées dans les oreillettes.

Deux valves semi-lunaires supplémentaires siègent à la sortie de chacun des ventricules.

La valve pulmonaire est située à la base de l'artère pulmonaire.

Celui-ci a trois cuspides qui ne sont attachées à aucun muscle papillaire.

Lorsque le ventricule se détend, le sang retourne dans le ventricule à partir de l'artère et ce flux de sang remplit la valve en forme de poche, appuyant contre les cuspides qui se ferment pour sceller la valve.

La valve aortique semi-lunaire est à la base de l'aorte et n'est pas non plus attachée aux muscles papillaires.

Celui-ci a aussi trois cuspides qui se ferment avec la pression du sang refluant de l'aorte.


==== Cœur droit ====

Le cœur droit est constitué de deux cavités, l'oreillette droite et le ventricule droit, séparées par une valve, la valve tricuspide.

L'oreillette droite reçoit le sang presque continuellement des deux veines principales du corps, les veines caves supérieure et inférieure.

Une petite quantité de sang de la circulation coronaire s'écoule également dans l'oreillette droite via le sinus coronaire, qui est immédiatement au-dessus et au milieu de l'ouverture de la veine cave inférieure.

Dans la paroi de l'oreillette droite se trouve une dépression de forme ovale connue sous le nom de fossa ovalis, qui est un vestige d'une ouverture dans le cœur fœtal connue sous le nom de foramen ovale.

La majeure partie de la surface interne de l'oreillette droite est lisse, la dépression de la fosse ovale est médiale et la surface antérieure présente des crêtes proéminentes de muscles pectinés, qui sont également présents dans l'appendice auriculaire droit.

L'oreillette droite est reliée au ventricule droit par la valve tricuspide.

Les parois du ventricule droit sont tapissées de trabécules charnues, crêtes du muscle cardiaque recouvertes d'endocarde.

En plus de ces crêtes musculaires, une bande de muscle cardiaque, également recouverte d'endocarde, appelée bande modératrice, renforce les parois minces du ventricule droit et joue un rôle crucial dans la conduction cardiaque.

Il naît de la partie inférieure du septum interventriculaire et traverse l'espace intérieur du ventricule droit pour se connecter au muscle papillaire inférieur.

Le ventricule droit se rétrécit dans le tronc pulmonaire, dans lequel il éjecte du sang lors de la contraction.

Le tronc pulmonaire se ramifie dans les artères pulmonaires gauche et droite qui transportent le sang vers chaque poumon.

La valve pulmonaire se situe entre le cœur droit et le tronc pulmonaire.


==== Cœur gauche ====

Le cœur gauche comporte deux cavités : l'oreillette gauche et le ventricule gauche, séparés par la valve mitrale. L'oreillette gauche reçoit le sang oxygéné des poumons via l'une des quatre veines pulmonaires.

L'oreillette gauche a une poche appelée l'appendice auriculaire gauche.

Comme l'oreillette droite, l'oreillette gauche est bordée de muscles pectinés.

L'oreillette gauche est reliée au ventricule gauche par la valve mitrale. Le ventricule gauche est beaucoup plus épais que le droit, en raison de la plus grande force nécessaire pour pomper le sang dans tout le corps.

Comme le ventricule droit, le gauche a aussi des trabécules carnées, mais il n'y a pas de bande modératrice.

Le ventricule gauche pompe le sang vers le corps à travers la valve aortique et dans l'aorte.

Deux petites ouvertures au-dessus de la valve aortique transportent le sang vers le muscle cardiaque ; l'artère coronaire gauche est au-dessus de la cuspide gauche de la valve et l'artère coronaire droite est au-dessus de la cuspide droite.


=== Mur ===


La paroi cardiaque est composée de trois couches : l'endocarde interne, le myocarde moyen et l'épicarde externe.

Ceux-ci sont entourés d'un sac à double membrane appelé péricarde.
La couche la plus interne du cœur s'appelle l'endocarde.

Il est constitué d'un revêtement d'épithélium squameux simple et recouvre les cavités cardiaques et les valves.

Il est continu avec l'endothélium des veines et des artères du cœur et est relié au myocarde par une fine couche de tissu conjonctif.

L'endocarde, en sécrétant des endothélines, peut également jouer un rôle dans la régulation de la contraction du myocarde.

La couche intermédiaire de la paroi cardiaque est le myocarde, qui est le muscle cardiaque - une couche de tissu musculaire strié involontaire entourée d'une charpente de collagène.

Le motif du muscle cardiaque est élégant et complexe, car les cellules musculaires tourbillonnent et s'enroulent autour des cavités du cœur, les muscles externes formant un motif en 8 autour des oreillettes et autour des bases des gros vaisseaux et des muscles internes, formant un figure 8 autour des deux ventricules et se dirigeant vers l'apex.

Ce motif tourbillonnant complexe permet au cœur de pomper le sang plus efficacement.

Il existe deux types de cellules dans le muscle cardiaque : les cellules musculaires qui ont la capacité de se contracter facilement et les cellules du stimulateur cardiaque du système conducteur.

Les cellules musculaires constituent la majeure partie (99 %) des cellules des oreillettes et des ventricules.

Ces cellules contractiles sont reliées par des disques intercalés qui permettent une réponse rapide aux impulsions de potentiel d'action des cellules du stimulateur cardiaque.

Les disques intercalés permettent aux cellules d'agir comme un syncytium et permettent les contractions qui pompent le sang à travers le cœur et dans les artères principales.

Les cellules du stimulateur cardiaque représentent 1 % des cellules et forment le système de conduction du cœur.

Elles sont généralement beaucoup plus petites que les cellules contractiles et possèdent peu de myofibrilles, ce qui leur confère une contractilité limitée.

Leur fonction est similaire à bien des égards aux neurones.

Le tissu musculaire cardiaque a une autorythmicité, la capacité unique d'initier un potentiel d'action cardiaque à un rythme fixe, propageant rapidement l'impulsion d'une cellule à l'autre pour déclencher la contraction de tout le cœur.

Il existe des protéines spécifiques exprimées dans les cellules du muscle cardiaque.

Ceux-ci sont principalement associés à la contraction musculaire et se lient à l'actine, à la myosine, à la tropomyosine et à la troponine.

Ils comprennent MYH6, ACTC1, TNNI3, CDH2 et PKP2.

Les autres protéines exprimées sont MYH7 et LDB3 qui sont également exprimées dans le muscle squelettique.


=== Péricarde ===

Le péricarde est le sac qui entoure le cœur.

La surface externe dure du péricarde s'appelle la membrane fibreuse.

Celle-ci est tapissée d'une double membrane interne appelée membrane séreuse qui produit du liquide péricardique pour lubrifier la surface du cœur.

La partie de la membrane séreuse attachée à la membrane fibreuse est appelée péricarde pariétal, tandis que la partie de la membrane séreuse attachée au cœur est appelée péricarde viscéral.

Le péricarde est présent afin de lubrifier son mouvement contre d'autres structures dans la poitrine, pour maintenir la position du cœur stabilisée dans la poitrine et pour protéger le cœur contre les infections.


=== Circulation coronaire ===


Le tissu cardiaque, comme toutes les cellules du corps, a besoin d'être alimenté en oxygène, en nutriments et en un moyen d'éliminer les déchets métaboliques.

Ceci est réalisé par la circulation coronarienne, qui comprend les artères, les veines et les vaisseaux lymphatiques.

Le flux sanguin dans les vaisseaux coronaires se produit par pics et creux liés à la relaxation ou à la contraction du muscle cardiaque.

Le tissu cardiaque reçoit le sang de deux artères qui naissent juste au-dessus de la valve aortique.

Ce sont l'artère coronaire principale gauche et l'artère coronaire droite.

L'artère coronaire principale gauche se divise peu après avoir quitté l'aorte en deux vaisseaux, l'artère descendante antérieure gauche et l'artère circonflexe gauche.

L'artère interventriculaire antérieure gauche alimente le tissu cardiaque ainsi que l'avant, la face externe et le septum du ventricule gauche.

Pour ce faire, il se ramifie en artères plus petites - branches diagonales et septales.

Le circonflexe gauche alimente l'arrière et le dessous du ventricule gauche.

L'artère coronaire droite alimente l'oreillette droite, le ventricule droit et les sections postérieures inférieures du ventricule gauche.

L'artère coronaire droite fournit également du sang au nœud auriculo-ventriculaire (chez environ 90 % des personnes) et au nœud sino-auriculaire (chez environ 60 % des personnes).

L'artère coronaire droite passe dans un sillon à l'arrière du cœur et l'artère interventriculaire antérieure gauche passe dans un sillon à l'avant.

Il existe des variations significatives entre les personnes dans l'anatomie des artères qui irriguent le cœur.

Les artères se divisent à leur portée la plus éloignée en branches plus petites qui se rejoignent aux bords de chaque distribution artérielle. Le sinus coronaire est une grosse veine qui se déverse dans l'oreillette droite et reçoit la majeure partie du drainage veineux du cœur.

Il reçoit le sang de la grande veine cardiaque (recevant l'oreillette gauche et les deux ventricules), de la veine cardiaque postérieure (drainant l'arrière du ventricule gauche), de la veine cardiaque moyenne (drainant le bas des ventricules gauche et droit) et du petit veines cardiaques.

Les veines cardiaques antérieures drainent l'avant du ventricule droit et se drainent directement dans l'oreillette droite. De petits réseaux lymphatiques appelés plexus existent sous chacune des trois couches du cœur.

Ces réseaux se rassemblent dans un tronc principal gauche et un tronc principal droit, qui remontent la rainure entre les ventricules qui existe à la surface du cœur, recevant des vaisseaux plus petits à mesure qu'ils remontent.

Ces vaisseaux voyagent ensuite dans la rainure auriculo-ventriculaire et reçoivent un troisième vaisseau qui draine la section du ventricule gauche reposant sur le diaphragme.

Le vaisseau gauche se joint à ce troisième vaisseau et se déplace le long de l'artère pulmonaire et de l'oreillette gauche, se terminant par le nœud trachéobronchique inférieur.

Le vaisseau droit se déplace le long de l'oreillette droite et de la partie du ventricule droit reposant sur le diaphragme.

Il se déplace ensuite généralement devant l'aorte ascendante et se termine ensuite par un nœud brachiocéphalique.


=== Innervation ===


Le cœur reçoit des signaux nerveux du nerf vague et des nerfs issus du tronc sympathique.

Ces nerfs agissent pour influencer, mais pas pour contrôler, la fréquence cardiaque.

Les nerfs sympathiques influencent également la force de contraction du cœur.

Les signaux qui voyagent le long de ces nerfs proviennent de deux centres cardiovasculaires appariés dans le bulbe rachidien.

Le nerf vague du système nerveux parasympathique agit pour diminuer la fréquence cardiaque, et les nerfs du tronc sympathique agissent pour augmenter la fréquence cardiaque.

Ces nerfs forment un réseau de nerfs qui se trouve sur le cœur appelé le plexus cardiaque.

Le nerf vague est un long nerf vagabond qui émerge du tronc cérébral et fournit une stimulation parasympathique à un grand nombre d'organes du thorax et de l'abdomen, y compris le cœur.

Les nerfs du tronc sympathique émergent à travers les ganglions thoraciques T1-T4 et se déplacent vers les nœuds sino-auriculaires et auriculo-ventriculaires, ainsi que vers les oreillettes et les ventricules.

Les ventricules sont plus richement innervés par des fibres sympathiques que par des fibres parasympathiques.

La stimulation sympathique provoque la libération du neurotransmetteur noradrénaline (également connu sous le nom de noradrénaline) à la jonction neuromusculaire des nerfs cardiaques.

Cela raccourcit la période de repolarisation, accélérant ainsi le taux de dépolarisation et de contraction, ce qui entraîne une augmentation du rythme cardiaque.

Il ouvre des canaux ioniques sodium et calcium chimiques ou ligand-dépendants, permettant un afflux d'ions chargés positivement.

La noradrénaline se lie au récepteur bêta-1.


== Développement ==


Le cœur est le premier organe fonctionnel à se développer et commence à battre et à pomper le sang environ trois semaines après le début de l'embryogenèse.

Ce démarrage précoce est crucial pour le développement embryonnaire et prénatal ultérieur.
Le cœur dérive du mésenchyme splanchnopleurique de la plaque neurale qui forme la région cardiogénique.

Deux tubes endocardiques se forment ici qui fusionnent pour former un tube cardiaque primitif connu sous le nom de cœur tubulaire.

Entre la troisième et la quatrième semaine, le tube cardiaque s'allonge et commence à se plier pour former une forme de S dans le péricarde.

Cela place les chambres et les principaux vaisseaux dans l'alignement correct pour le cœur développé.

Le développement ultérieur comprendra la formation des septa et des valves et le remodelage des cavités cardiaques.

À la fin de la cinquième semaine, les cloisons sont complètes et à la neuvième semaine, les valves cardiaques sont complètes. Avant la cinquième semaine, il y a une ouverture dans le cœur du fœtus appelée foramen ovale.

Le foramen ovale permettait au sang du cœur fœtal de passer directement de l'oreillette droite à l'oreillette gauche, permettant à une partie du sang de contourner les poumons.

Quelques secondes après la naissance, un lambeau de tissu connu sous le nom de septum primum qui agissait auparavant comme une valve ferme le foramen ovale et établit le schéma de circulation cardiaque typique.

Une dépression à la surface de l'oreillette droite reste là où se trouvait le foramen ovale, appelée fosse ovale.

Le cœur embryonnaire commence à battre environ 22 jours après la conception (5 semaines après la dernière période menstruelle normale, LMP).

Il commence à battre à un rythme proche de celui de la mère qui est d'environ 75 à 80 battements par minute (bpm).

La fréquence cardiaque embryonnaire s'accélère alors et atteint une fréquence maximale de 165 à 185 bpm au début de la 7e semaine (début de la 9e semaine après le LMP).

Après 9 semaines (début du stade fœtal), il commence à décélérer, ralentissant à environ 145 (± 25) bpm à la naissance.

Il n'y a pas de différence entre les fréquences cardiaques féminines et masculines avant la naissance.


== Physiologie ==

=== Flux sanguin ===


Le cœur fonctionne comme une pompe dans le système circulatoire pour fournir un flux sanguin continu dans tout le corps.

Cette circulation comprend la circulation systémique vers et depuis le corps et la circulation pulmonaire vers et depuis les poumons.

Le sang dans la circulation pulmonaire échange du dioxyde de carbone contre de l'oxygène dans les poumons par le processus de respiration.

La circulation systémique transporte ensuite l'oxygène vers le corps et renvoie le dioxyde de carbone et le sang relativement désoxygéné vers le cœur pour le transfert vers les poumons.

Le cœur droit recueille le sang désoxygéné de deux grosses veines, les veines caves supérieure et inférieure.

Le sang s'accumule continuellement dans l'oreillette droite et gauche.

La veine cave supérieure draine le sang au-dessus du diaphragme et se jette dans la partie supérieure du dos de l'oreillette droite.

La veine cave inférieure draine le sang du dessous du diaphragme et se jette dans la partie arrière de l'oreillette sous l'ouverture de la veine cave supérieure.

Immédiatement au-dessus et au milieu de l'ouverture de la veine cave inférieure se trouve l'ouverture du sinus coronaire à paroi mince.

De plus, le sinus coronaire renvoie le sang désoxygéné du myocarde vers l'oreillette droite.

Le sang s'accumule dans l'oreillette droite.

Lorsque l'oreillette droite se contracte, le sang est pompé à travers la valve tricuspide dans le ventricule droit.

Lorsque le ventricule droit se contracte, la valve tricuspide se ferme et le sang est pompé dans le tronc pulmonaire à travers la valve pulmonaire.

Le tronc pulmonaire se divise en artères pulmonaires et en artères progressivement plus petites dans les poumons, jusqu'à ce qu'il atteigne les capillaires.

Lorsque ceux-ci passent par les alvéoles, le dioxyde de carbone est échangé contre de l'oxygène.

Cela se produit par le processus passif de diffusion.
Dans le cœur gauche, le sang oxygéné est renvoyé dans l'oreillette gauche via les veines pulmonaires.

Il est ensuite pompé dans le ventricule gauche par la valve mitrale et dans l'aorte par la valve aortique pour la circulation systémique.

L'aorte est une grosse artère qui se ramifie en de nombreuses artères plus petites, artérioles et finalement capillaires.

Dans les capillaires, l'oxygène et les nutriments du sang sont fournis aux cellules du corps pour le métabolisme et échangés contre le dioxyde de carbone et les déchets.

Le sang capillaire, maintenant désoxygéné, se déplace dans les veinules et les veines qui finissent par s'accumuler dans les veines caves supérieures et inférieures et dans le cœur droit.


==== Cycle cardiaque ====

Le cycle cardiaque fait référence à la séquence d'événements au cours desquels le cœur se contracte et se détend à chaque battement de cœur.

La période pendant laquelle les ventricules se contractent, forçant le sang dans l'aorte et l'artère pulmonaire principale, est appelée systole, tandis que la période pendant laquelle les ventricules se détendent et se remplissent de sang est appelée diastole.

Les oreillettes et les ventricules fonctionnent de concert, donc en systole lorsque les ventricules se contractent, les oreillettes sont détendues et recueillent le sang.

Lorsque les ventricules sont détendus en diastole, les oreillettes se contractent pour pomper le sang vers les ventricules.

Cette coordination assure que le sang est pompé efficacement vers le corps. Au début du cycle cardiaque, les ventricules se détendent.

Ce faisant, ils sont remplis de sang passant par les valves mitrale et tricuspide ouvertes.

Une fois que les ventricules ont terminé la majeure partie de leur remplissage, les oreillettes se contractent, forçant davantage de sang dans les ventricules et amorçant la pompe.

Ensuite, les ventricules commencent à se contracter.

Lorsque la pression augmente dans les cavités des ventricules, les valves mitrale et tricuspide sont forcées de se fermer.

Au fur et à mesure que la pression dans les ventricules augmente, dépassant la pression avec l'aorte et les artères pulmonaires, les valves aortiques et pulmonaires s'ouvrent.

Le sang est éjecté du cœur, provoquant une chute de la pression dans les ventricules.

Simultanément, les oreillettes se remplissent à mesure que le sang circule dans l'oreillette droite par les veines caves supérieure et inférieure, et dans l'oreillette gauche par les veines pulmonaires.

Enfin, lorsque la pression dans les ventricules tombe en dessous de la pression dans l'aorte et les artères pulmonaires, les valves aortique et pulmonaire se ferment.

Les ventricules commencent à se détendre, les valves mitrale et tricuspide s'ouvrent et le cycle recommence.


==== Débit cardiaque ====

Le débit cardiaque (CO) est une mesure de la quantité de sang pompée par chaque ventricule (volume systolique) en une minute.

Ceci est calculé en multipliant le volume systolique (SV) par les battements par minute de la fréquence cardiaque (FC).

Donc : CO = SV x HR.

Le débit cardiaque est normalisé à la taille du corps par la surface corporelle et s'appelle l'indice cardiaque.

Le débit cardiaque moyen, en utilisant un volume systolique moyen d'environ 70 ml, est de 5,25 L/min, avec une plage normale de 4,0 à 8,0 L/min.

Le volume systolique est normalement mesuré à l'aide d'un échocardiogramme et peut être influencé par la taille du cœur, l'état physique et mental de l'individu, le sexe, la contractilité, la durée de la contraction, la précharge et la postcharge. La précharge fait référence à la pression de remplissage des oreillettes à la fin de la diastole, lorsque les ventricules sont à leur maximum.

Un facteur principal est le temps qu'il faut aux ventricules pour se remplir : si les ventricules se contractent plus fréquemment, alors il y a moins de temps pour se remplir et la précharge sera moindre.

La précharge peut également être affectée par le volume sanguin d'une personne.

La force de chaque contraction du muscle cardiaque est proportionnelle à la précharge, décrite comme le mécanisme de Frank-Starling.

Cela indique que la force de contraction est directement proportionnelle à la longueur initiale de la fibre musculaire, ce qui signifie qu'un ventricule se contractera avec plus de force, plus il est étiré.

La postcharge, ou la pression que le cœur doit générer pour éjecter le sang à la systole, est influencée par la résistance vasculaire.

Elle peut être influencée par le rétrécissement des valves cardiaques (sténose) ou la contraction ou la relaxation des vaisseaux sanguins périphériques. La force des contractions du muscle cardiaque contrôle le volume d'éjection systolique.

Celle-ci peut être influencée positivement ou négativement par des agents appelés inotropes.

Ces agents peuvent être le résultat de changements dans le corps ou être administrés sous forme de médicaments dans le cadre du traitement d'un trouble médical ou comme forme de maintien de la vie, en particulier dans les unités de soins intensifs.

Les inotropes qui augmentent la force de contraction sont des inotropes "positifs" et comprennent des agents sympathiques tels que l'adrénaline, la noradrénaline et la dopamine.

Les inotropes "négatifs" diminuent la force de contraction et comprennent les inhibiteurs calciques.


=== Conduction électrique ===

Le rythme cardiaque normal, appelé rythme sinusal, est établi par le propre stimulateur cardiaque du cœur, le nœud sino-auriculaire (également appelé nœud sinusal ou nœud SA).

Ici, un signal électrique est créé qui traverse le cœur, provoquant la contraction du muscle cardiaque.

Le nœud sino-auriculaire se trouve dans la partie supérieure de l'oreillette droite près de la jonction avec la veine cave supérieure.

Le signal électrique généré par le nœud sino-auriculaire traverse l'oreillette droite d'une manière radiale qui n'est pas complètement comprise.

Il se déplace vers l'oreillette gauche via le faisceau de Bachmann, de sorte que les muscles des oreillettes gauche et droite se contractent ensemble.

Le signal se déplace ensuite vers le nœud auriculo-ventriculaire.

Cela se trouve au bas de l'oreillette droite dans le septum auriculo-ventriculaire, la limite entre l'oreillette droite et le ventricule gauche.

Le septum fait partie du squelette cardiaque, un tissu à l'intérieur du cœur que le signal électrique ne peut pas traverser, ce qui oblige le signal à passer uniquement par le nœud auriculo-ventriculaire.

Le signal se déplace ensuite le long du faisceau de ses branches gauche et droite jusqu'aux ventricules du cœur.

Dans les ventricules, le signal est transporté par des tissus spécialisés appelés fibres de Purkinje qui transmettent ensuite la charge électrique au muscle cardiaque.


=== Fréquence cardiaque ===


Le rythme cardiaque normal au repos est appelé rythme sinusal, créé et soutenu par le nœud sino-auriculaire, un groupe de cellules stimulatrices trouvées dans la paroi de l'oreillette droite.

Les cellules du nœud sino-auriculaire le font en créant un potentiel d'action.

Le potentiel d'action cardiaque est créé par le mouvement d'électrolytes spécifiques dans et hors des cellules du stimulateur cardiaque.

Le potentiel d'action se propage ensuite aux cellules voisines. Lorsque les cellules sino-auriculaires sont au repos, elles ont une charge négative sur leurs membranes.

Cependant, un afflux rapide d'ions sodium fait que la charge de la membrane devient positive.

Ceci s'appelle la dépolarisation et se produit spontanément.

Une fois que la cellule a une charge suffisamment élevée, les canaux sodiques se ferment et les ions calcium commencent alors à pénétrer dans la cellule, peu de temps après, le potassium commence à en sortir.

Tous les ions voyagent à travers des canaux ioniques dans la membrane des cellules sino-auriculaires.

Le potassium et le calcium ne commencent à sortir et à entrer dans la cellule qu'une fois qu'elle a une charge suffisamment élevée, et sont donc appelés voltage-dépendants.

Peu de temps après, les canaux calciques se ferment et les canaux potassiques s'ouvrent, permettant au potassium de quitter la cellule.

Cela amène la cellule à avoir une charge négative au repos et s'appelle la repolarisation.

Lorsque le potentiel de membrane atteint environ -60 mV, les canaux potassiques se ferment et le processus peut recommencer.

Les ions se déplacent des zones où ils sont concentrés vers celles où ils ne le sont pas.

Pour cette raison, le sodium pénètre dans la cellule depuis l'extérieur et le potassium se déplace de l'intérieur de la cellule vers l'extérieur de la cellule.

Le calcium joue également un rôle essentiel.

Leur afflux par des canaux lents signifie que les cellules sino-auriculaires ont une phase de "plateau" prolongée lorsqu'elles ont une charge positive.

Une partie de celle-ci s'appelle la période réfractaire absolue.

Les ions calcium se combinent également avec la protéine régulatrice troponine C dans le complexe troponine pour permettre la contraction du muscle cardiaque et se séparent de la protéine pour permettre la relaxation.

La fréquence cardiaque au repos adulte varie de 60 à 100 bpm.

La fréquence cardiaque au repos d'un nouveau-né peut être de 129 battements par minute (bpm) et cela diminue progressivement jusqu'à la maturité.

La fréquence cardiaque d'un athlète peut être inférieure à 60 bpm.

Pendant l'exercice, la fréquence peut être de 150 bpm avec des fréquences maximales allant de 200 à 220 bpm.


==== Influence ====
Le rythme sinusal normal du cœur, qui donne la fréquence cardiaque au repos, est influencé par un certain nombre de facteurs.

Les centres cardiovasculaires du tronc cérébral contrôlent les influences sympathiques et parasympathiques vers le cœur par l'intermédiaire du nerf vague et du tronc sympathique.

Ces centres cardiovasculaires reçoivent des informations d'une série de récepteurs, notamment des barorécepteurs, détectant l'étirement des vaisseaux sanguins et des chimiorécepteurs, détectant la quantité d'oxygène et de dioxyde de carbone dans le sang et son pH.

Grâce à une série de réflexes, ceux-ci aident à réguler et à maintenir le flux sanguin.

Les barorécepteurs sont des récepteurs d'étirement situés dans le sinus aortique, les corps carotidiens, les veines caves et d'autres endroits, y compris les vaisseaux pulmonaires et le côté droit du cœur lui-même.

Les barorécepteurs se déclenchent à une vitesse déterminée par leur degré d'étirement, qui est influencé par la pression artérielle, le niveau d'activité physique et la distribution relative du sang.

Avec une pression et un étirement accrus, le taux de déclenchement des barorécepteurs augmente et les centres cardiaques diminuent la stimulation sympathique et augmentent la stimulation parasympathique.

À mesure que la pression et l'étirement diminuent, le taux de déclenchement des barorécepteurs diminue et les centres cardiaques augmentent la stimulation sympathique et diminuent la stimulation parasympathique.

Il existe un réflexe similaire, appelé réflexe auriculaire ou réflexe de Bainbridge, associé à des taux variables de flux sanguin vers les oreillettes.

L'augmentation du retour veineux étire les parois des oreillettes où se trouvent les barorécepteurs spécialisés.

Cependant, à mesure que les barorécepteurs auriculaires augmentent leur taux de déclenchement et qu'ils s'étirent en raison de l'augmentation de la pression artérielle, le centre cardiaque répond en augmentant la stimulation sympathique et en inhibant la stimulation parasympathique pour augmenter la fréquence cardiaque.

L'inverse est également vrai.

Les chimiorécepteurs présents dans le corps carotidien ou adjacents à l'aorte dans un corps aortique répondent aux niveaux d'oxygène et de dioxyde de carbone du sang.

Une faible teneur en oxygène ou une forte teneur en dioxyde de carbone stimuleront le déclenchement des récepteurs. Les niveaux d'exercice et de forme physique, l'âge, la température corporelle, le taux métabolique de base et même l'état émotionnel d'une personne peuvent tous affecter la fréquence cardiaque.

Des niveaux élevés d'épinéphrine, de norépinéphrine et d'hormones thyroïdiennes peuvent augmenter la fréquence cardiaque.

Les niveaux d'électrolytes, y compris le calcium, le potassium et le sodium, peuvent également influencer la vitesse et la régularité du rythme cardiaque ; un faible taux d'oxygène dans le sang, une pression artérielle basse et une déshydratation peuvent l'augmenter.


== Signification clinique ==

=== Maladies ===


Les maladies cardiovasculaires, qui incluent les maladies cardiaques, sont la principale cause de décès dans le monde.

La majorité des maladies cardiovasculaires sont non transmissibles et liées au mode de vie et à d'autres facteurs, devenant plus fréquentes avec l'âge.

Les maladies cardiaques sont une cause majeure de décès, représentant en moyenne 30 % de tous les décès en 2008, dans le monde.

Ce taux varie de 28 % à 40 % dans les pays à revenu élevé.

Les médecins spécialisés dans le cœur sont appelés cardiologues.

De nombreux autres professionnels de la santé sont impliqués dans le traitement des maladies cardiaques, notamment les médecins, les chirurgiens cardiothoraciques, les intensivistes et les praticiens paramédicaux, notamment les physiothérapeutes et les diététiciens.


==== Cardiopathie ischémique ====

La maladie coronarienne, également connue sous le nom de cardiopathie ischémique, est causée par l'athérosclérose, une accumulation de matière grasse le long des parois internes des artères.

Ces dépôts graisseux connus sous le nom de plaques d'athérosclérose rétrécissent les artères coronaires et, s'ils sont graves, peuvent réduire le flux sanguin vers le cœur.

Si un rétrécissement (ou une sténose) est relativement mineur, le patient peut ne ressentir aucun symptôme.

Des rétrécissements sévères peuvent provoquer des douleurs thoraciques (angine de poitrine) ou un essoufflement pendant l'exercice ou même au repos.

Le mince revêtement d'une plaque d'athérosclérose peut se rompre, exposant le centre graisseux au sang circulant.

Dans ce cas, un caillot ou un thrombus peut se former, bloquant l'artère et restreignant le flux sanguin vers une zone du muscle cardiaque, provoquant un infarctus du myocarde (une crise cardiaque) ou une angine de poitrine instable.

Dans le pire des cas, cela peut provoquer un arrêt cardiaque, une perte soudaine et totale de débit du cœur.

L'obésité, l'hypertension artérielle, le diabète non contrôlé, le tabagisme et l'hypercholestérolémie peuvent tous augmenter le risque de développer l'athérosclérose et la maladie coronarienne.


==== Insuffisance cardiaque ====

L'insuffisance cardiaque est définie comme une condition dans laquelle le cœur est incapable de pomper suffisamment de sang pour répondre aux exigences de l'organisme.

Les patients souffrant d'insuffisance cardiaque peuvent présenter un essoufflement, en particulier lorsqu'ils sont allongés, ainsi qu'un gonflement de la cheville, connu sous le nom d'œdème périphérique.

L'insuffisance cardiaque est le résultat final de nombreuses maladies affectant le cœur, mais elle est le plus souvent associée à une cardiopathie ischémique, une cardiopathie valvulaire ou une hypertension artérielle.

Les causes moins fréquentes comprennent diverses cardiomyopathies.

L'insuffisance cardiaque est fréquemment associée à une faiblesse du muscle cardiaque dans les ventricules (insuffisance cardiaque systolique), mais peut également être observée chez les patients dont le muscle cardiaque est fort mais raide (insuffisance cardiaque diastolique).

La condition peut affecter le ventricule gauche (provoquant principalement un essoufflement), le ventricule droit (provoquant principalement un gonflement des jambes et une pression veineuse jugulaire élevée) ou les deux ventricules.

Les patients souffrant d'insuffisance cardiaque courent un risque plus élevé de développer des troubles dangereux du rythme cardiaque ou des arythmies.


==== Cardiomyopathies ====
Les cardiomyopathies sont des maladies affectant le muscle du cœur.

Certains provoquent un épaississement anormal du muscle cardiaque (cardiomyopathie hypertrophique), certains provoquent une dilatation et un affaiblissement anormaux du cœur (cardiomyopathie dilatée), certains provoquent une raideur du muscle cardiaque et l'empêchent de se détendre complètement entre les contractions (cardiomyopathie restrictive) et certains cœur sujet à des rythmes cardiaques anormaux (cardiomyopathie arythmogène).

Ces conditions sont souvent génétiques et peuvent être héréditaires, mais certaines, comme la cardiomyopathie dilatée, peuvent être causées par des dommages causés par des toxines telles que l'alcool.

Certaines cardiomyopathies telles que la cardiomopathie hypertrophique sont liées à un risque plus élevé de mort subite cardiaque, en particulier chez les sportifs.

De nombreuses cardiomyopathies peuvent entraîner une insuffisance cardiaque aux derniers stades de la maladie.


==== Cardiopathie valvulaire ====

Des valves cardiaques saines permettent au sang de circuler facilement dans un sens, mais l'empêchent de circuler dans l'autre sens.

Les valves cardiaques malades peuvent avoir une ouverture étroite et donc restreindre le flux sanguin vers l'avant (appelée valve sténosée), ou peuvent permettre au sang de fuir dans la direction inverse (appelée régurgitation valvulaire).

La cardiopathie valvulaire peut provoquer un essoufflement, des pertes de connaissance ou des douleurs thoraciques, mais peut être asymptomatique et uniquement détectée lors d'un examen de routine en entendant des bruits cardiaques anormaux ou un souffle cardiaque.

Dans le monde développé, la cardiopathie valvulaire est le plus souvent causée par une dégénérescence secondaire à la vieillesse, mais peut également être causée par une infection des valves cardiaques (endocardite).

Dans certaines parties du monde, la cardiopathie rhumatismale est une cause majeure de cardiopathie valvulaire, entraînant généralement une sténose mitrale ou aortique et causée par la réaction du système immunitaire à une infection streptococcique de la gorge.


==== Arythmies cardiaques ====

Alors que dans le cœur sain, les ondes d'impulsions électriques proviennent du nœud sinusal avant de se propager au reste des oreillettes, au nœud auriculo-ventriculaire et enfin aux ventricules (appelé rythme sinusal normal), ce rythme normal peut être perturbé.

Les rythmes cardiaques anormaux ou les arythmies peuvent être asymptomatiques ou provoquer des palpitations, des pertes de connaissance ou un essoufflement.

Certains types d'arythmie comme la fibrillation auriculaire augmentent le risque à long terme d'accident vasculaire cérébral.

Certaines arythmies entraînent un rythme cardiaque anormalement lent, appelé bradycardie ou bradyarythmie.

Cela peut être causé par un nœud sinusal anormalement lent ou par des dommages dans le système de conduction cardiaque (bloc cardiaque).

Dans d'autres arythmies, le cœur peut battre anormalement rapidement, ce que l'on appelle une tachycardie ou une tachyarythmie.

Ces arythmies peuvent prendre de nombreuses formes et peuvent provenir de différentes structures dans le cœur - certaines proviennent des oreillettes (par exemple, flutter auriculaire), d'autres du nœud auriculo-ventriculaire (par exemple

tachycardie réentrante nodale AV) tandis que d'autres proviennent des ventricules (par exemple, tachycardie ventriculaire).

Certaines tachyarythmies sont causées par des cicatrices dans le cœur (par exemple, certaines formes de tachycardie ventriculaire), d'autres par un foyer irritable (par exemple, la tachycardie auriculaire focale), tandis que d'autres sont causées par un tissu de conduction anormal supplémentaire présent depuis la naissance (par exemple,

Syndrome de Wolff-Parkinson-White).

La forme la plus dangereuse d'accélération du rythme cardiaque est la fibrillation ventriculaire, dans laquelle les ventricules tremblent au lieu de se contracter, et qui, si elle n'est pas traitée, est rapidement mortelle.


==== Maladie péricardique ====

Le sac qui entoure le cœur, appelé péricarde, peut s'enflammer dans une affection connue sous le nom de péricardite.

Cette affection provoque généralement des douleurs thoraciques qui peuvent se propager au dos et est souvent causée par une infection virale (fièvre glandulaire, cytomégalovirus ou coxsackievirus).

Du liquide peut s'accumuler dans le sac péricardique, appelé épanchement péricardique.

Les épanchements péricardiques surviennent souvent à la suite d'une péricardite, d'une insuffisance rénale ou de tumeurs et ne provoquent souvent aucun symptôme.

Cependant, des épanchements importants ou des épanchements qui s'accumulent rapidement peuvent comprimer le cœur dans un état connu sous le nom de tamponnade cardiaque, provoquant un essoufflement et une hypotension artérielle potentiellement mortelle.

Le liquide peut être retiré de l'espace péricardique pour le diagnostic ou pour soulager la tamponnade à l'aide d'une seringue lors d'une procédure appelée péricardiocentèse.


==== Cardiopathie congénitale ====

Certaines personnes naissent avec des cœurs anormaux et ces anomalies sont connues sous le nom de malformations cardiaques congénitales.

Elles peuvent aller d'anomalies relativement mineures (par exemple, un foramen ovale perméable, sans doute une variante de la normale) à des anomalies graves potentiellement mortelles (par exemple, le syndrome hypoplasique du cœur gauche).

Les anomalies courantes comprennent celles qui affectent le muscle cardiaque qui sépare les deux côtés du cœur (un "trou dans le cœur" - par exemple, une communication interventriculaire).

D'autres défauts comprennent ceux affectant les valves cardiaques (par exemple, la sténose aortique congénitale) ou les principaux vaisseaux sanguins qui partent du cœur (par exemple, la coarctation de l'aorte).

On observe des syndromes plus complexes qui affectent plus d'une partie du cœur (par ex.

Tétralogie de Fallot).

Certaines malformations cardiaques congénitales permettent au sang pauvre en oxygène qui serait normalement renvoyé vers les poumons d'être pompé vers le reste du corps.

Celles-ci sont connues sous le nom de malformations cardiaques congénitales cyanotiques et sont souvent plus graves.

Les malformations cardiaques congénitales majeures sont souvent détectées dans l'enfance, peu de temps après la naissance, voire avant la naissance d'un enfant (par exemple, transposition des grosses artères), entraînant un essoufflement et un ralentissement de la croissance.

Des formes plus mineures de cardiopathie congénitale peuvent passer inaperçues pendant de nombreuses années et ne se révéler qu'à l'âge adulte (p. ex. communication interauriculaire).


=== Diagnostic ===

Les maladies cardiaques sont diagnostiquées par la prise d'antécédents médicaux, un examen cardiaque et d'autres investigations, y compris des tests sanguins, des échocardiogrammes, des ECG et l'imagerie.

D'autres procédures invasives telles que le cathétérisme cardiaque peuvent également jouer un rôle.


==== Examen ====

L'examen cardiaque comprend l'inspection, le toucher de la poitrine avec les mains (palpation) et l'écoute avec un stéthoscope (auscultation).

Elle implique l'évaluation des signes qui peuvent être visibles sur les mains d'une personne (comme les hémorragies par éclats), les articulations et d'autres zones.

Le pouls d'une personne est pris, généralement au niveau de l'artère radiale près du poignet, afin d'évaluer le rythme et la force du pouls.

La pression artérielle est prise, soit à l'aide d'un sphygmomanomètre manuel ou automatique, soit à l'aide d'une mesure plus invasive à l'intérieur de l'artère.

Toute élévation du pouls veineux jugulaire est notée.

La poitrine d'une personne est ressentie pour toutes les vibrations transmises par le cœur, puis écoutée avec un stéthoscope.


==== Bruits cardiaques ====

En règle générale, les cœurs sains n'ont que deux sons cardiaques audibles, appelés S1 et S2.

Le premier bruit cardiaque S1, est le son créé par la fermeture des valves auriculo-ventriculaires pendant la contraction ventriculaire et est normalement décrit comme "lub".

Le deuxième son cardiaque, S2, est le son de la fermeture des valves semi-lunaires pendant la diastole ventriculaire et est décrit comme "dub".

Chaque son se compose de deux composants, reflétant la légère différence de temps lorsque les deux vannes se ferment.

S2 peut se scinder en deux sons distincts, soit à la suite d'une inspiration, soit à cause de problèmes valvulaires ou cardiaques différents.

Des bruits cardiaques supplémentaires peuvent également être présents et ceux-ci donnent lieu à des rythmes de galop.

Un troisième bruit cardiaque, S3 indique généralement une augmentation du volume sanguin ventriculaire.

Un quatrième bruit cardiaque S4 est appelé galop auriculaire et est produit par le son du sang forcé dans un ventricule raide.

La présence combinée de S3 et S4 donne un quadruple galop.

Les souffles cardiaques sont des bruits cardiaques anormaux qui peuvent être liés à une maladie ou bénins, et il en existe plusieurs types.

Il y a normalement deux bruits cardiaques, et les bruits cardiaques anormaux peuvent être soit des sons supplémentaires, soit des « murmures » liés à la circulation du sang entre les sons.

Les souffles sont classés par volume, de 1 (le plus silencieux) à 6 (le plus fort) et évalués par leur relation avec les bruits cardiaques, leur position dans le cycle cardiaque et des caractéristiques supplémentaires telles que leur rayonnement vers d'autres sites, change avec un la position de la personne, la fréquence du son telle que déterminée par le côté du stéthoscope par lequel elle est entendue et l'endroit où elle est entendue le plus fort.

Les souffles peuvent être causés par des valvules cardiaques endommagées ou une cardiopathie congénitale telle que des malformations septales ventriculaires, ou peuvent être entendus dans des cœurs normaux.

Un autre type de son, un frottement péricardique peut être entendu en cas de péricardite où les membranes enflammées peuvent se frotter.


==== Tests sanguins ====

Les tests sanguins jouent un rôle important dans le diagnostic et le traitement de nombreuses maladies cardiovasculaires.
La troponine est un biomarqueur sensible pour un cœur dont l'apport sanguin est insuffisant.

Il est libéré 4 à 6 heures après la blessure et culmine généralement à environ 12 à 24 heures.

Deux tests de troponine sont souvent effectués - un au moment de la présentation initiale et un autre dans les 3 à 6 heures, avec un niveau élevé ou une augmentation significative comme diagnostic.

Un test pour le peptide natriurétique cérébral (BNP) peut être utilisé pour évaluer la présence d'une insuffisance cardiaque et augmente lorsqu'il y a une demande accrue sur le ventricule gauche.

Ces tests sont considérés comme des biomarqueurs car ils sont hautement spécifiques des maladies cardiaques.

Le test de la forme MB de la créatine kinase fournit des informations sur l'approvisionnement en sang du cœur, mais est utilisé moins fréquemment car il est moins spécifique et sensible.

D'autres tests sanguins sont souvent effectués pour aider à comprendre l'état de santé général d'une personne et les facteurs de risque qui peuvent contribuer aux maladies cardiaques.

Ceux-ci comprennent souvent une numération globulaire complète pour rechercher l'anémie et un panel métabolique de base qui peut révéler toute perturbation des électrolytes.

Un dépistage de la coagulation est souvent nécessaire pour s'assurer que le bon niveau d'anticoagulation est administré.

Les lipides à jeun et la glycémie à jeun (ou un taux d'HbA1c) sont souvent prescrits pour évaluer respectivement le taux de cholestérol et le statut diabétique d'une personne.


==== Électrocardiogramme ====

En utilisant des électrodes de surface sur le corps, il est possible d'enregistrer l'activité électrique du cœur.

Ce tracé du signal électrique est l'électrocardiogramme (ECG) ou (EKG).

Un ECG est un test au chevet du patient et implique le placement de dix dérivations sur le corps.

Cela produit un ECG "12 dérivations" (trois dérivations supplémentaires sont calculées mathématiquement et une dérivation est électriquement mise à la terre).

Il existe cinq caractéristiques importantes sur l'ECG : l'onde P (dépolarisation auriculaire), le complexe QRS (dépolarisation ventriculaire) et l'onde T (repolarisation ventriculaire).

Lorsque les cellules cardiaques se contractent, elles créent un courant qui traverse le cœur.

Une déviation vers le bas sur l'ECG implique que les cellules deviennent plus positives en charge ("dépolarisation") dans la direction de cette dérivation, tandis qu'une inflexion vers le haut implique que les cellules deviennent plus négatives ("repolarisation") dans la direction de la dérivation.

Cela dépend de la position de la dérivation, donc si une onde de dépolarisation se déplaçait de gauche à droite, une dérivation à gauche montrerait une déviation négative, et une dérivation à droite montrerait une déviation positive.

L'ECG est un outil utile pour détecter les troubles du rythme et pour détecter un apport sanguin insuffisant au cœur.

Parfois, des anomalies sont suspectées, mais pas immédiatement visibles sur l'ECG.

Les tests pendant l'exercice peuvent être utilisés pour provoquer une anomalie, ou un ECG peut être porté pendant une période plus longue, comme un moniteur Holter 24 heures sur 24, si une anomalie du rythme suspectée n'est pas présente au moment de l'évaluation.


==== Imagerie ====

Plusieurs méthodes d'imagerie peuvent être utilisées pour évaluer l'anatomie et la fonction du cœur, notamment l'échographie (échocardiographie), l'angiographie, la tomodensitométrie, l'IRM et la TEP.

Un échocardiogramme est une échographie du cœur utilisée pour mesurer la fonction cardiaque, évaluer les maladies valvulaires et rechercher toute anomalie.

L'échocardiographie peut être réalisée par une sonde sur la poitrine (transthoracique) ou par une sonde dans l'œsophage (transœsophagienne).

Un rapport d'échocardiographie typique comprendra des informations sur la largeur des valves notant toute sténose, s'il y a un reflux de sang (régurgitation) et des informations sur les volumes de sang à la fin de la systole et de la diastole, y compris une fraction d'éjection, qui décrit combien le sang est éjecté des ventricules gauche et droit après la systole.

La fraction d'éjection peut alors être obtenue en divisant le volume éjecté par le cœur (volume systolique) par le volume du cœur rempli (volume télédiastolique).

Des échocardiogrammes peuvent également être effectués dans des circonstances où le corps est plus stressé, afin d'examiner les signes de manque d'approvisionnement en sang.

Ce test de stress cardiaque implique soit un exercice direct, soit, lorsque cela n'est pas possible, l'injection d'un médicament tel que la dobutamine.

Les tomodensitogrammes, les radiographies pulmonaires et d'autres formes d'imagerie peuvent aider à évaluer la taille du cœur, à rechercher des signes d'œdème pulmonaire et à indiquer s'il y a du liquide autour du cœur.

Ils sont également utiles pour évaluer l'aorte, le principal vaisseau sanguin qui quitte le cœur.


=== Traitement ===

Les maladies affectant le cœur peuvent être traitées par diverses méthodes, notamment la modification du mode de vie, le traitement médicamenteux et la chirurgie.


==== Cardiopathie ischémique ====

Les rétrécissements des artères coronaires (cardiopathie ischémique) sont traités pour soulager les symptômes de douleur thoracique causée par une artère partiellement rétrécie (angine de poitrine), pour minimiser les dommages au muscle cardiaque lorsqu'une artère est complètement obstruée (infarctus du myocarde) ou pour prévenir une infarctus de se produire.

Les médicaments pour améliorer les symptômes de l'angine comprennent la nitroglycérine, les bêta-bloquants et les inhibiteurs calciques, tandis que les traitements préventifs comprennent les antiplaquettaires tels que l'aspirine et les statines, les mesures de style de vie telles que l'arrêt du tabac et la perte de poids, et le traitement des facteurs de risque tels que l'hypertension artérielle et le diabète.

En plus d'utiliser des médicaments, les artères cardiaques rétrécies peuvent être traitées en élargissant les rétrécissements ou en redirigeant le flux sanguin pour contourner une obstruction.

Cela peut être effectué à l'aide d'une intervention coronarienne percutanée, au cours de laquelle les rétrécissements peuvent être élargis en faisant passer de petits fils à bout de ballon dans les artères coronaires, en gonflant le ballon pour élargir le rétrécissement et en laissant parfois derrière un échafaudage métallique appelé stent pour maintenir le artère ouverte.

Si les rétrécissements des artères coronaires ne conviennent pas au traitement par une intervention coronarienne percutanée, une chirurgie ouverte peut être nécessaire.

Un pontage aortocoronarien peut être réalisé, dans lequel un vaisseau sanguin d'une autre partie du corps (la veine saphène, l'artère radiale ou l'artère mammaire interne) est utilisé pour rediriger le sang d'un point avant le rétrécissement (généralement l'aorte) vers un point au-delà de l'obstacle.


==== Cardiopathie valvulaire ====

Les valves cardiaques malades qui sont devenues anormalement étroites ou qui fuient anormalement peuvent nécessiter une intervention chirurgicale.

Ceci est traditionnellement réalisé comme une intervention chirurgicale ouverte pour remplacer la valve cardiaque endommagée par une valve prothétique tissulaire ou métallique.

Dans certaines circonstances, les valves tricuspide ou mitrale peuvent être réparées chirurgicalement, évitant ainsi la nécessité d'un remplacement valvulaire.

Les valves cardiaques peuvent également être traitées par voie percutanée, en utilisant des techniques qui partagent de nombreuses similitudes avec l'intervention coronarienne percutanée.

Le remplacement valvulaire aortique transcathéter est de plus en plus utilisé pour les patients qui considèrent un risque très élevé de remplacement valvulaire ouvert.


==== Arythmies cardiaques ====
Les rythmes cardiaques anormaux (arythmies) peuvent être traités à l'aide de médicaments anti-arythmiques.

Ceux-ci peuvent fonctionner en manipulant le flux d'électrolytes à travers la membrane cellulaire (tels que les inhibiteurs des canaux calciques, les inhibiteurs des canaux sodiques, l'amiodarone ou la digoxine), ou modifier l'effet du système nerveux autonome sur le cœur (bêta-bloquants et atropine).

Dans certaines arythmies telles que la fibrillation auriculaire qui augmentent le risque d'accident vasculaire cérébral, ce risque peut être réduit en utilisant des anticoagulants tels que la warfarine ou de nouveaux anticoagulants oraux.

Si les médicaments ne parviennent pas à contrôler une arythmie, une autre option de traitement peut être l'ablation par cathéter.

Dans ces procédures, des fils sont passés d'une veine ou d'une artère de la jambe au cœur pour trouver la zone anormale de tissu qui cause l'arythmie.

Le tissu anormal peut être intentionnellement endommagé ou enlevé par chauffage ou congélation pour prévenir d'autres perturbations du rythme cardiaque.

Alors que la majorité des arythmies peuvent être traitées à l'aide de techniques de cathéter mini-invasives, certaines arythmies (en particulier la fibrillation auriculaire) peuvent également être traitées par chirurgie ouverte ou thoracoscopique, soit au moment d'une autre chirurgie cardiaque, soit en tant que procédure autonome.

Une cardioversion, par laquelle un choc électrique est utilisé pour étourdir le cœur d'un rythme anormal, peut également être utilisée.

Des dispositifs cardiaques sous la forme de stimulateurs cardiaques ou de défibrillateurs implantables peuvent également être nécessaires pour traiter les arythmies.

Les stimulateurs cardiaques, comprenant un petit générateur alimenté par batterie implanté sous la peau et une ou plusieurs dérivations qui s'étendent jusqu'au cœur, sont le plus souvent utilisés pour traiter les rythmes cardiaques anormalement lents.

Les défibrillateurs implantables sont utilisés pour traiter les rythmes cardiaques rapides graves et potentiellement mortels.

Ces appareils surveillent le cœur et, si une accélération cardiaque dangereuse est détectée, peuvent automatiquement délivrer un choc pour rétablir le cœur à un rythme normal.

Les défibrillateurs implantables sont le plus souvent utilisés chez les patients souffrant d'insuffisance cardiaque, de cardiomyopathies ou de syndromes d'arythmie héréditaire.


==== Insuffisance cardiaque ====

En plus de traiter la cause sous-jacente de l'insuffisance cardiaque d'un patient (le plus souvent une cardiopathie ischémique ou une hypertension), le pilier du traitement de l'insuffisance cardiaque est la prise de médicaments.

Ceux-ci comprennent des médicaments pour empêcher l'accumulation de liquide dans les poumons en augmentant la quantité d'urine produite par un patient (diurétiques) et des médicaments qui tentent de préserver la fonction de pompage du cœur (bêta-bloquants, inhibiteurs de l'ECA et antagonistes des récepteurs minéralocorticoïdes).

Chez certains patients souffrant d'insuffisance cardiaque, un stimulateur cardiaque spécialisé connu sous le nom de thérapie de resynchronisation cardiaque peut être utilisé pour améliorer l'efficacité de pompage du cœur.

Ces appareils sont fréquemment associés à un défibrillateur.

Dans les cas très graves d'insuffisance cardiaque, une petite pompe appelée dispositif d'assistance ventriculaire peut être implantée pour compléter la capacité de pompage du cœur.

Dans les cas les plus graves, une transplantation cardiaque peut être envisagée.


== Historique ==

=== Ancien ===


Les humains connaissent le cœur depuis l'Antiquité, bien que sa fonction et son anatomie précises n'aient pas été clairement comprises.

Des vues principalement religieuses des sociétés antérieures vers le cœur, les Grecs anciens sont considérés comme le siège principal de la compréhension scientifique du cœur dans le monde antique.

Aristote considérait le cœur comme l'organe responsable de la création du sang ; Platon considérait le cœur comme la source du sang circulant et Hippocrate notait que le sang circulait cycliquement du corps à travers le cœur jusqu'aux poumons.

Erasistratos (304-250 avant notre ère) a noté que le cœur était une pompe, provoquant une dilatation des vaisseaux sanguins, et a noté que les artères et les veines rayonnaient toutes deux du cœur, devenant progressivement plus petites avec la distance, bien qu'il croyait qu'elles étaient remplies d'air et non de sang.

Il a également découvert les valvules cardiaques. Le médecin grec Galen (IIe siècle de notre ère) savait que les vaisseaux sanguins transportaient le sang et identifiait le sang veineux (rouge foncé) et artériel (plus brillant et plus mince), chacun ayant des fonctions distinctes et séparées.

Galen, notant que le cœur était l'organe le plus chaud du corps, a conclu qu'il fournissait de la chaleur au corps.

Le cœur ne pompait pas le sang, le mouvement du cœur aspirait le sang pendant la diastole et le sang se déplaçait par la pulsation des artères elles-mêmes.

Galen croyait que le sang artériel était créé par le sang veineux passant du ventricule gauche au droit à travers des «pores» entre les ventricules.

L'air des poumons est passé des poumons via l'artère pulmonaire au côté gauche du cœur et a créé du sang artériel. Ces idées sont restées incontestées pendant près de mille ans.


=== Pré-moderne ===

Les premières descriptions des systèmes de circulation coronaire et pulmonaire se trouvent dans le Commentaire sur l'anatomie dans le Canon d'Avicenne, publié en 1242 par Ibn al-Nafis.

Dans son manuscrit, al-Nafis a écrit que le sang traverse la circulation pulmonaire au lieu de se déplacer du ventricule droit au ventricule gauche comme le croyait auparavant Galen.

Son travail a ensuite été traduit en latin par Andrea Alpago. En Europe, les enseignements de Galien ont continué à dominer la communauté universitaire et ses doctrines ont été adoptées comme canon officiel de l'Église.

Andreas Vesalius a remis en question certaines des croyances de Galien sur le cœur dans De humani corporis fabrica (1543), mais son magnum opus a été interprété comme un défi aux autorités et il a été soumis à un certain nombre d'attaques.

Michael Servet a écrit dans Christianismi Restitutio (1553) que le sang circule d'un côté du cœur à l'autre via les poumons.


=== Moderne ===

Une percée dans la compréhension du flux sanguin à travers le cœur et le corps est venue avec la publication de De Motu Cordis (1628) par le médecin anglais William Harvey.

Le livre de Harvey décrit complètement la circulation systémique et la force mécanique du cœur, conduisant à une refonte des doctrines galéniques.

Otto Frank (1865–1944) était un physiologiste allemand ; parmi ses nombreux ouvrages publiés figurent des études détaillées de cette importante relation cardiaque.

Ernest Starling (1866–1927) était un physiologiste anglais important qui a également étudié le cœur.

Bien qu'ils aient travaillé en grande partie de manière indépendante, leurs efforts combinés et leurs conclusions similaires ont été reconnus sous le nom de "mécanisme Frank-Starling". Bien que les fibres de Purkinje et le faisceau de His aient été découverts dès le 19ème siècle, leur rôle spécifique dans le système de conduction électrique du cœur est restée inconnue jusqu'à ce que Sunao Tawara publie sa monographie, intitulée Das Reizleitungssystem des Säugetierherzens, en 1906.

La découverte par Tawara du nœud auriculo-ventriculaire a incité Arthur Keith et Martin Flack à rechercher des structures similaires dans le cœur, ce qui a conduit à leur découverte du nœud sino-auriculaire plusieurs mois plus tard.

Ces structures forment la base anatomique de l'électrocardiogramme, dont l'inventeur, Willem Einthoven, a reçu le prix Nobel de médecine ou de physiologie en 1924. La première transplantation cardiaque réussie a été réalisée en 1967 par le chirurgien sud-africain Christiaan Barnard à l'hôpital Groote Schuur au Cap Ville.

Cela a marqué une étape importante dans la chirurgie cardiaque, captant l'attention à la fois de la profession médicale et du monde entier.

Cependant, les taux de survie à long terme des patients étaient initialement très faibles.

Louis Washkansky, le premier receveur d'un cœur donné, est décédé 18 jours après l'opération tandis que d'autres patients n'ont pas survécu plus de quelques semaines.

Le chirurgien américain Norman Shumway a été reconnu pour ses efforts visant à améliorer les techniques de transplantation, aux côtés des pionniers Richard Lower, Vladimir Demikhov et Adrian Kantrowitz.

En mars 2000, plus de 55 000 transplantations cardiaques avaient été effectuées dans le monde. Au milieu du 20e siècle, les maladies cardiaques avaient dépassé les maladies infectieuses en tant que principale cause de décès aux États-Unis et sont actuellement la principale cause de décès dans le monde. .

Depuis 1948, la Framingham Heart Study en cours a mis en lumière les effets de diverses influences sur le cœur, notamment l'alimentation, l'exercice et les médicaments courants tels que l'aspirine.

Bien que l'introduction des inhibiteurs de l'ECA et des bêta-bloquants ait amélioré la prise en charge de l'insuffisance cardiaque chronique, la maladie continue d'être un énorme fardeau médical et sociétal, 30 à 40 % des patients décédant dans l'année suivant le diagnostic.


== Transplantation de coeur de porc à l'homme ==

La première greffe réussie d'un cœur d'un porc génétiquement modifié à un humain a été réalisée le 7 janvier 2022 à Baltimore par le chirurgien cardiaque Bartley P.

Griffith, récipiendaire était David Bennett (57 ans).


== Société et culture ==

=== Symbolisme ===

En tant que l'un des organes vitaux, le cœur a longtemps été identifié comme le centre de tout le corps, le siège de la vie, ou de l'émotion, ou de la raison, de la volonté, de l'intellect, du but ou de l'esprit.

Le cœur est un symbole emblématique dans de nombreuses religions, signifiant "la vérité, la conscience ou le courage moral dans de nombreuses religions - le temple ou le trône de Dieu dans la pensée islamique et judéo-chrétienne ; le centre divin, ou atman, et le troisième œil de la sagesse transcendante. dans l'hindouisme ; le diamant de la pureté et de l'essence du Bouddha ; le centre taoïste de la compréhension." l'organe anatomique.

Il est également lié en fonction et en symbolisme à l'estomac. Une partie importante du concept de l'âme dans la religion égyptienne antique était considérée comme le cœur, ou ib.

On croyait que le cœur ib ou métaphysique était formé d'une goutte de sang du cœur de la mère de l'enfant, prélevé à la conception.

Pour les anciens Égyptiens, le cœur était le siège de l'émotion, de la pensée, de la volonté et de l'intention.

Ceci est démontré par des expressions égyptiennes qui incorporent le mot ib, comme Awi-ib pour « heureux » (littéralement, « long de cœur »), Xak-ib pour « étranger » (littéralement, « tronqué de cœur »).

Dans la religion égyptienne, le cœur était la clé de l'au-delà.

Il a été conçu comme survivant à la mort dans le monde inférieur, où il a témoigné pour ou contre son possesseur.

On pensait que le cœur avait été examiné par Anubis et diverses divinités lors de la cérémonie de la pesée du cœur.

Si le cœur pesait plus que la plume de Maat, qui symbolisait le standard idéal de comportement.

Si la balance s'équilibrait, cela signifiait que le possesseur du cœur avait vécu une vie juste et pouvait entrer dans l'au-delà ; si le cœur était plus lourd, il serait dévoré par le monstre Ammit.

Le caractère chinois pour "cœur", 心, dérive d'une représentation relativement réaliste d'un cœur (indiquant les cavités cardiaques) en écriture de sceau.

Le mot chinois xīn prend également les significations métaphoriques de «l'esprit», «l'intention» ou «le noyau».

En médecine chinoise, le cœur est considéré comme le centre de 神 shén « esprit, conscience ».

Le cœur est associé à l'intestin grêle, à la langue, gouverne les six organes et les cinq viscères, et appartient au feu dans les cinq éléments.

Le mot sanskrit pour cœur est hṛd ou hṛdaya, trouvé dans le plus ancien texte sanskrit encore en vie, le Rigveda.

En sanskrit, cela peut signifier à la fois l'objet anatomique et "l'esprit" ou "l'âme", représentant le siège de l'émotion.

Hrd peut être apparenté au mot cœur en grec, en latin et en anglais. De nombreux philosophes et scientifiques classiques, dont Aristote, considéraient le cœur comme le siège de la pensée, de la raison ou de l'émotion, ignorant souvent le cerveau comme contribuant à ces fonctions.

L'identification du cœur comme siège des émotions est due en particulier au médecin romain Galien, qui a également localisé le siège des passions dans le foie, et le siège de la raison dans le cerveau.

Le cœur a également joué un rôle dans le système de croyance aztèque.

La forme la plus courante de sacrifice humain pratiquée par les Aztèques était l'extraction du cœur.

Les Aztèques croyaient que le cœur (tona) était à la fois le siège de l'individu et un fragment de la chaleur solaire (istli).

À ce jour, les Nahua considèrent le Soleil comme une âme-cœur (tona-tiuh) : "rond, chaud, pulsant".

Dans le catholicisme, il existe une longue tradition de vénération du cœur, issue du culte des plaies de Jésus-Christ qui a pris de l'importance à partir du milieu du XVIe siècle.

Cette tradition a influencé le développement de la dévotion chrétienne médiévale au Sacré-Cœur de Jésus et la vénération parallèle du Cœur Immaculé de Marie, rendue populaire par Jean Eudes.

L'expression d'un cœur brisé est une référence interculturelle au chagrin d'une personne perdue ou à un amour romantique insatisfait.

La notion de "flèches de Cupidon" est ancienne, due à Ovide, mais alors qu'Ovide décrit Cupidon comme blessant ses victimes avec ses flèches, il n'est pas précisé que c'est le cœur qui est blessé.

L'iconographie familière de Cupidon tirant de petits symboles de cœur est un thème de la Renaissance qui est devenu lié à la Saint-Valentin.


=== Nourriture ===


Les cœurs d'animaux sont largement consommés comme nourriture.

Comme ils sont presque entièrement constitués de muscles, ils sont riches en protéines.

Ils sont souvent inclus dans des plats avec d'autres abats, par exemple dans le kokoretsi pan-ottoman.

Les cœurs de poulet sont considérés comme des abats et sont souvent grillés sur des brochettes; des exemples de ceci sont le hāto yakitori japonais , le churrasco de coração brésilien et le satay de cœur de poulet indonésien .

Ils peuvent également être poêlés, comme dans le grill mixte de Jérusalem.

Dans la cuisine égyptienne, ils peuvent être utilisés, finement hachés, dans la farce du poulet.

De nombreuses recettes les combinaient avec d'autres abats, comme le pollo en menudencias mexicain et le ragu iz kurinyikh potrokhov russe. Les cœurs de bœuf, de porc et de mouton peuvent généralement être interchangés dans les recettes.

Comme le cœur est un muscle qui travaille dur, il donne une viande "ferme et plutôt sèche", donc généralement cuite lentement.

Une autre façon de traiter la dureté est de couper la viande en julienne, comme dans le cœur sauté chinois. Le cœur de bœuf peut être grillé ou braisé.

Dans les anticuchos de corazón péruviens, les cœurs de bœuf grillés au barbecue sont grillés après avoir été attendris par une longue marinade dans un mélange d'épices et de vinaigre.

Une recette australienne de "mock goose" est en fait un cœur de bœuf farci braisé.

Le cœur de porc est mijoté, poché, braisé ou transformé en saucisse.

L'oret balinais est une sorte de boudin à base de cœur et de sang de porc.

Une recette française de cœur de porc à l'orange est faite de cœur braisé avec une sauce à l'orange.


== Autres animaux ==

=== Vertébrés ===

La taille du cœur varie selon les différents groupes d'animaux, les cœurs des vertébrés allant de ceux des plus petites souris (12 mg) à la baleine bleue (600 kg).

Chez les vertébrés, le cœur se situe au milieu de la partie ventrale du corps, entouré d'un péricarde. qui, chez certains poissons, peut être relié au péritoine.

Le nœud sino-auriculaire se trouve chez tous les amniotes mais pas chez les vertébrés plus primitifs.

Chez ces animaux, les muscles du cœur sont relativement continus et le sinus veineux coordonne le battement, qui passe en onde à travers les cavités restantes.

Étant donné que le sinus veineux est incorporé dans l'oreillette droite chez les amniotes, il est probablement homologue au nœud SA.

Chez les téléostéens, avec leur vestigial sinus venosus, le principal centre de coordination se trouve plutôt dans l'oreillette.

Le rythme cardiaque varie énormément entre les différentes espèces, allant d'environ 20 battements par minute chez la morue à environ 600 chez les colibris et jusqu'à 1200 bpm chez le colibri à gorge rubis.


=== Systèmes circulatoires doubles ===

Les amphibiens adultes et la plupart des reptiles ont un système circulatoire double, c'est-à-dire un système circulatoire divisé en parties artérielle et veineuse.

Cependant, le cœur lui-même n'est pas complètement séparé en deux parties.

Au lieu de cela, il est séparé en trois chambres, deux oreillettes et un ventricule.

Le sang revenant à la fois de la circulation systémique et des poumons est renvoyé, et le sang est pompé simultanément dans la circulation systémique et les poumons.

Le double système permet au sang de circuler vers et depuis les poumons qui délivrent du sang oxygéné directement au cœur.

Chez les reptiles, autres que les serpents, le cœur est généralement situé au milieu du thorax.

Chez les serpents terrestres et arboricoles, il est généralement situé plus près de la tête; chez les espèces aquatiques, le cœur est situé plus au centre.

Il y a un cœur à trois chambres : deux oreillettes et un ventricule.

La forme et la fonction de ces cœurs sont différentes de celles des cœurs de mammifères en raison du fait que les serpents ont un corps allongé et sont donc affectés par différents facteurs environnementaux.

En particulier, le cœur du serpent par rapport à la position dans son corps a été fortement influencé par la gravité.

Par conséquent, les serpents de plus grande taille ont tendance à avoir une tension artérielle plus élevée en raison du changement gravitationnel.

Le ventricule est incomplètement séparé en deux moitiés par une paroi (septum), avec un espace considérable près de l'artère pulmonaire et des ouvertures aortiques.

Chez la plupart des espèces reptiliennes, il semble y avoir peu ou pas de mélange entre les circulations sanguines, de sorte que l'aorte ne reçoit essentiellement que du sang oxygéné.

L'exception à cette règle concerne les crocodiles, qui ont un cœur à quatre chambres. Au cœur du poisson-poumon, le septum s'étend à mi-chemin dans le ventricule.

Cela permet un certain degré de séparation entre le flux sanguin désoxygéné destiné aux poumons et le flux oxygéné qui est délivré au reste du corps.

L'absence d'une telle division chez les espèces d'amphibiens vivants peut être en partie due à la quantité de respiration qui se produit à travers la peau; ainsi, le sang renvoyé au cœur par les veines caves est déjà partiellement oxygéné.

En conséquence, il peut y avoir moins besoin d'une division plus fine entre les deux circulations sanguines que chez le poisson-poumon ou d'autres tétrapodes.

Néanmoins, chez au moins certaines espèces d'amphibiens, la nature spongieuse du ventricule semble maintenir davantage une séparation entre les circulations sanguines.

De plus, les valves d'origine du cône artériel ont été remplacées par une valve en spirale qui la divise en deux parties parallèles, aidant ainsi à maintenir les deux circulations sanguines séparées.


=== Division complète ===

Les archosaures (crocodiliens et oiseaux) et les mammifères montrent une séparation complète du cœur en deux pompes pour un total de quatre cavités cardiaques ; on pense que le cœur à quatre chambres des archosaures a évolué indépendamment de celui des mammifères.

Chez les crocodiliens, il y a une petite ouverture, le foramen de Panizza, à la base des troncs artériels et il y a un certain degré de mélange entre le sang de chaque côté du cœur, lors d'une plongée sous-marine ; ainsi, ce n'est que chez les oiseaux et les mammifères que les deux flux sanguins - ceux des circulations pulmonaire et systémique - sont en permanence entièrement séparés par une barrière physique.


=== Poisson ===

Les poissons ont ce qui est souvent décrit comme un cœur à deux chambres, composé d'une oreillette pour recevoir le sang et d'un ventricule pour le pomper.

Cependant, le cœur du poisson a des compartiments d'entrée et de sortie qui peuvent être appelés chambres, il est donc parfois décrit comme à trois ou quatre chambres, selon ce qui est compté comme une chambre.

L'oreillette et le ventricule sont parfois considérés comme de "vraies chambres", tandis que les autres sont considérés comme des "chambres accessoires". Les poissons primitifs ont un cœur à quatre chambres, mais les chambres sont disposées séquentiellement de sorte que ce cœur primitif est assez différent des cœurs à quatre chambres. de mammifères et d'oiseaux.

La première chambre est le sinus veineux, qui recueille le sang désoxygéné du corps par les veines hépatiques et cardinales.

De là, le sang s'écoule dans l'oreillette puis dans le puissant ventricule musculaire où se déroulera l'action de pompage principale.

La quatrième et dernière chambre est le cône artériel, qui contient plusieurs valves et envoie le sang vers l'aorte ventrale.

L'aorte ventrale délivre le sang aux branchies où il est oxygéné et s'écoule, à travers l'aorte dorsale, dans le reste du corps.

(Chez les tétrapodes, l'aorte ventrale s'est divisée en deux ; une moitié forme l'aorte ascendante, tandis que l'autre forme l'artère pulmonaire).

Chez le poisson adulte, les quatre chambres ne sont pas disposées en ligne droite mais forment plutôt une forme de S, les deux dernières chambres se trouvant au-dessus des deux premières.

Ce schéma relativement simple se retrouve chez les poissons cartilagineux et chez les poissons à nageoires rayonnées.

Chez les téléostéens, le cône artériel est très petit et peut être décrit plus précisément comme faisant partie de l'aorte plutôt que du cœur proprement dit.

Le cône artériel n'est présent chez aucun amniote, ayant vraisemblablement été absorbé dans les ventricules au cours de l'évolution.

De même, alors que le sinus veineux est présent sous forme de structure résiduelle chez certains reptiles et oiseaux, il est autrement absorbé dans l'oreillette droite et ne se distingue plus.


=== Invertébrés ===

Les arthropodes et la plupart des mollusques ont un système circulatoire ouvert.

Dans ce système, le sang désoxygéné s'accumule autour du cœur dans des cavités (sinus).

Ce sang imprègne lentement le cœur à travers de nombreux petits canaux à sens unique.

Le cœur pompe ensuite le sang dans l'hémocèle, une cavité entre les organes.

Le cœur des arthropodes est généralement un tube musculaire qui s'étend sur toute la longueur du corps, sous le dos et à partir de la base de la tête.

Au lieu du sang, le liquide circulatoire est l'hémolymphe qui transporte le pigment respiratoire le plus couramment utilisé, l'hémocyanine à base de cuivre comme transporteur d'oxygène.

L'hémoglobine n'est utilisée que par quelques arthropodes. Chez certains autres invertébrés tels que les vers de terre, le système circulatoire n'est pas utilisé pour transporter l'oxygène et est donc très réduit, n'ayant ni veines ni artères et composé de deux tubes connectés.

L'oxygène se déplace par diffusion et il y a cinq petits vaisseaux musculaires qui relient ces vaisseaux qui se contractent à l'avant des animaux qui peuvent être considérés comme des "cœurs".

Les calmars et autres céphalopodes ont deux "cœurs branchiaux", également appelés cœurs branchiaux, et un "cœur systémique".

Les cœurs branchiaux ont chacun deux oreillettes et un ventricule et pompent vers les branchies, tandis que le cœur systémique pompe vers le corps.

Seuls les cordés (y compris les vertébrés) et les hémichordés ont un "cœur" central, qui est une vésicule formée à partir de l'épaississement de l'aorte et se contracte pour pomper le sang.

Cela suggère une présence de celui-ci dans le dernier ancêtre commun de ces groupes (peut-être perdu chez les échinodermes).



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coeur
