

HUMERUS


The humerus (plural: humeri) is a long bone in the arm that runs from the shoulder to the elbow. 

It connects the scapula and the two bones of the lower arm, the radius and ulna, and consists of three sections. 

The humeral upper extremity consists of a rounded head, a narrow neck, and two short processes (tubercles, sometimes called tuberosities). 

The body is cylindrical in its upper portion, and more prismatic below. The lower extremity consists of 2 epicondyles, 2 processes (trochlea & capitulum), and 3 fossae (radial fossa, coronoid fossa, and olecranon fossa). 

As well as its true anatomical neck, the constriction below the greater and lesser tubercles of the humerus is referred to as its surgical neck due to its tendency to fracture, thus often becoming the focus of surgeons.


=== Upper extremity ===

The upper or proximal extremity of the humerus consists of the bone's large rounded head joined to the body by a constricted portion called the neck, and two eminences, the greater and lesser tubercles.


==== Head ====

The head (caput humeri), is nearly hemispherical in form. It is directed upward, medialward, and a little backward, and articulates with the glenoid cavity of the scapula to form the glenohumeral joint (shoulder joint). 

The circumference of its articular surface is slightly constricted and is termed the anatomical neck, in contradistinction to a constriction below the tubercles called the surgical neck which is frequently the seat of fracture. 

Fracture of the anatomical neck rarely occurs.

The diameter of the humeral head is generally larger in men than in women.


==== Anatomical neck ====

The anatomical neck (collum anatomicum) is obliquely directed, forming an obtuse angle with the body. 

It is best marked in the lower half of its circumference; in the upper half it is represented by a narrow groove separating the head from the tubercles. 

The line separating the head from the rest of the upper end is called the anatomical neck. 

It affords attachment to the articular capsule of the shoulder-joint, and is perforated by numerous vascular foramina. Fracture of the anatomical neck rarely occurs.

The anatomical neck of the humerus is an indentation distal to the head of the humerus on which the articular capsule attaches.


==== Surgical neck ====

The surgical neck is a narrow area distal to the tubercles that is a common site of fracture.

It makes contact with the axillary nerve and the posterior humeral circumflex artery.


==== Greater tubercle ====

The greater tubercle (tuberculum majus; greater tuberosity) is a large, posteriorly placed projection that is placed laterally. 

The greater tubercle is where supraspinatus, infraspinatus and teres minor muscles are attached. 

The crest of the greater tubercle forms the lateral lip of the bicipital groove and is the site for insertion of pectoralis major.

The greater tubercle is just lateral to the anatomical neck.

Its upper surface is rounded and marked by three flat impressions: the highest of these gives insertion to the supraspinatus muscle; the middle to the infraspinatus muscle; the lowest one, and the body of the bone for about 2.5 cm. below it, to the teres minor muscle. 

The lateral surface of the greater tubercle is convex, rough, and continuous with the lateral surface of the body.


==== Lesser tubercle ====

The lesser tubercle (tuberculum minus; lesser tuberosity) is smaller, anterolaterally placed to the head of the humerus. 

The lesser tubercle provides insertion to subscapularis muscle. 

Both these tubercles are found in the proximal part of the shaft. 

The crest of the lesser tubercle forms the medial lip of the bicipital groove and is the site for insertion of teres major and latissimus dorsi muscles.

The lesser tuberosity, is more prominent than the greater: it is situated in front, and is directed medialward and forward. 

Above and in front it presents an impression for the insertion of the tendon of the subscapularis muscle.


==== Bicipital groove ====

The tubercles are separated from each other by a deep groove, the bicipital groove (intertubercular groove; bicipital sulcus), which lodges the long tendon of the biceps brachii muscle and transmits a branch of the anterior humeral circumflex artery to the shoulder-joint. 

It runs obliquely downward, and ends near the junction of the upper with the middle third of the bone. 

In the fresh state its upper part is covered with a thin layer of cartilage, lined by a prolongation of the synovial membrane of the shoulder-joint; its lower portion gives insertion to the tendon of the latissimus dorsi muscle. 

It is deep and narrow above, and becomes shallow and a little broader as it descends. 

Its lips are called, respectively, the crests of the greater and lesser tubercles (bicipital ridges), and form the upper parts of the anterior and medial borders of the body of the bone.


=== Shaft ===

The body or shaft of the humerus is triangular to cylindrical in cut section and is compressed anteroposteriorly. It has 3 surfaces, namely:

Anterolateral surface: the area between the lateral border of the humerus to the line drawn as a continuation of the crest of the greater tubercle. 

The antero-lateral surface is directed lateralward above, where it is smooth, rounded, and covered by the deltoid muscle; forward and lateralward below, where it is slightly concave from above downward, and gives origin to part of the Brachialis. 

About the middle of this surface is a rough, rectangular elevation, the deltoid tuberosity for the insertion of the deltoid muscle; below this is the radial sulcus, directed obliquely from behind, forward, and downward, and transmitting the radial nerve and profunda artery.


Anteromedial surface: the area between the medial border of the humerus to the line drawn as a continuation of the crest of the greater tubercle. 

The antero-medial surface, less extensive than the antero-lateral, is directed medialward above, forward and medialward below; its upper part is narrow, and forms the floor of the intertubercular groove which gives insertion to the tendon of the latissimus dorsi muscle; its middle part is slightly rough for the attachment of some of the fibers of the tendon of insertion of the coracobrachialis muscle; its lower part is smooth, concave from above downward, and gives origin to the brachialis muscle.

Posterior surface: the area between the medial and lateral borders. 

The posterior surface appears somewhat twisted, so that its upper part is directed a little medialward, its lower part backward and a little lateralward. 

Nearly the whole of this surface is covered by the lateral and medial heads of the Triceps brachii, the former arising above, the latter below the radial sulcus.

Its three borders are:

Anterior border of humerus: 
    the anterior border runs from the front of the greater tubercle above to the coronoid fossa below, separating the antero-medial from the antero-lateral surface. 

Its upper part is a prominent ridge, the crest of the greater tubercle; it serves for the insertion of the tendon of the pectoralis major muscle. 

About its center it forms the anterior boundary of the deltoid tuberosity, on which the deltoid muscle attaches; below, it is smooth and rounded, affording attachment to the brachialis muscle.

Lateral border of humerus: 
    the lateral border runs from the back part of the greater tubercle to the lateral epicondyle, and separates the anterolateral from the posterior surface. 

Its upper half is rounded and indistinctly marked, serving for the attachment of the lower part of the insertion of the teres minor muscle, and below this giving origin to the lateral head of the triceps brachii muscle; its center is traversed by a broad but shallow oblique depression, the spiral groove (musculospiral groove). 

The radial nerve runs in the spiral groove.  

Its lower part forms a prominent, rough margin, a little curved from backward, forward the lateral supracondylar ridge, which presents an anterior lip for the origin of the brachioradialis muscle above, and extensor carpi radialis longus muscle above, a posterior lip for the triceps brachii muscle, and an intermediate ridge for the attachment of the lateral intermuscular septum.

Medial border of humerus: 
    the medial border extends from the lesser tubercle to the medial epicondyle. 

Its upper third consists of a prominent ridge, the crest of the lesser tubercle, which gives insertion to the tendon of the teres major muscle. 

About its center is a slight impression for the insertion of the coracobrachialis muscle, and just below this is the entrance of the nutrient canal, directed downward; sometimes there is a second nutrient canal at the commencement of the radial sulcus. 

The inferior third of this border is raised into a slight ridge, the medial supracondylar ridge, which became very prominent below; it presents an anterior lip for the origins of the brachialis muscle and the pronator teres muscle, a posterior lip for the medial head of the triceps brachii muscle, and an intermediate ridge for the attachment of the medial intermuscular septum.

The Deltoid tuberosity is a roughened surface on the lateral surface of the shaft of the Humerus and acts as the site of insertion of deltoideus muscle. 

The posteror superior part of the shaft has a crest, beginning just below the surgical neck of the humerus and extends till the superior tip of the deltoid tuberosity. This is where the lateral head of triceps brachii  is attached.

The radial sulcus, also known as the spiral groove is found on the posterior surface of the shaft and is a shallow oblique groove through which the radial nerve passes along with deep vessels. 

This is located posteroinferior to the deltoid tuberosity. The inferior boundary of the spiral groove is continuous distally with the lateral border of the shaft.

The nutrient foramen of the humerus is located in the anteromedial surface of the humerus. The nutrient arteries enter the humerus through this foramen.


=== Distal humerus ===

The distal or lower extremity of the humerus is flattened from before backward, and curved slightly forward; it ends below in a broad, articular surface, which is divided into two parts by a slight ridge. 

Projecting on either side are the lateral and medial epicondyles.


==== Articular surface ====

The articular surface extends a little lower than the epicondyles, and is curved slightly forward; its medial extremity occupies a lower level than the lateral. 

The lateral portion of this surface consists of a smooth, rounded eminence, named the capitulum of the humerus; it articulates with the cup-shaped depression on the head of the radius, and is limited to the front and lower part of the bone.


=== Fossae ===

Above the front part of the trochlea is a small depression, the coronoid fossa, which receives the coronoid process of the ulna during flexion of the forearm.

Above the back part of the trochlea is a deep triangular depression, the olecranon fossa, in which the summit of the olecranon is received in extension of the forearm.

The coronoid fossa is the medial hollow part on the anterior surface of the distal humerus. 

The coronoid fossa is smaller than the olecranon fossa and receives the coronoid process of the ulna during maximum flexion of the elbow.

Above the front part of the capitulum is a slight depression, the radial fossa, which receives the anterior border of the head of the radius, when the forearm is flexed.

These fossæ are separated from one another by a thin, transparent lamina of bone, which is sometimes perforated by a supratrochlear foramen; they are lined in the fresh state by the synovial membrane of the elbow-joint, and their margins afford attachment to the anterior and posterior ligaments of this articulation.

The Capitulum is a rounded eminence forming the lateral part of the distal humerus. The head of the radius articulates with the capitulum.

The trochlea is spool-shaped medial portion of the distal humerus and articulates with the ulna.


==== Epicondyles ====

The epicondyles are continuous above with the supracondylar ridges.

The lateral epicondyle is a small, tuberculated eminence, curved a little forward, and giving attachment to the radial collateral ligament of the elbow-joint, and to a tendon common to the origin of the Supinator and some of the Extensor muscles.

The medial epicondyle, larger and more prominent than the lateral, is directed a little backward; it gives attachment to the ulnar collateral ligament of the elbow-joint, to the Pronator teres, and to a common tendon of origin of some of the Flexor muscles of the forearm; the ulnar nerve runs in a groove on the back of this epicondyle.

The Medial supracondylar crest forms the sharp medial border of the distal humerus continuing superiorly from the medial epicondyle. 

The Lateral Supracondylar crest forms the sharp lateral border of the distal humerus continuing superiorly from the lateral epicondyle.


==== Borders ====

The medial portion of the articular surface is named the trochlea, and presents a deep depression between two well-marked borders; it is convex from before backward, concave from side to side, and occupies the anterior, lower, and posterior parts of the extremity.

The lateral border separates it from the groove which articulates with the margin of the head of the radius.

The medial border is thicker, of greater length, and consequently more prominent, than the lateral.

The grooved portion of the articular surface fits accurately within the semilunar notch of the ulna; it is broader and deeper on the posterior than on the anterior aspect of the bone, and is inclined obliquely downward and forward toward the medial side.


=== Articulations ===

At the shoulder, the head of the humerus articulates with the glenoid fossa of the scapula. 

More distally, at the elbow, the capitulum of the humerus articulates with the head of the radius, and the trochlea of the humerus articulates with the trochlear notch of the ulna.


=== Nerves ===

The axillary nerve is located at the proximal end, against the shoulder girdle. 

Dislocation of the humerus's glenohumeral joint has the potential to injure the axillary nerve or the axillary artery. Signs and symptoms of this dislocation include a loss of the normal shoulder contour and a palpable depression under the acromion.

The radial nerve follows the humerus closely. 

At the midshaft of the humerus, the radial nerve travels from the posterior to the anterior aspect of the bone in the spiral groove. A fracture of the humerus in this region can result in radial nerve injury.

The ulnar nerve lies at the distal end of the humerus near the elbow. 

When struck, it can cause a distinct tingling sensation, and sometimes a significant amount of pain. 

It is sometimes popularly referred to as 'the funny bone', possibly due to this sensation (a "funny" feeling), as well as the fact that the bone's name is a homophone of 'humorous'. 

It lies posterior to the medial epicondyle, and is easily damaged in elbow injuries.


=== Muscular attachment ===

The deltoid originates on the lateral third of the clavicle, acromion and the crest of the spine of the scapula. 

It is inserted on the deltoid tuberosity of the humerus and has several actions including abduction, extension, and circumduction of the shoulder. 

The supraspinatus also originates on the spine of the scapula. It inserts on the greater tubercle of the humerus, and assists in abduction of the shoulder.

The pectoralis major, teres major, and latissimus dorsi insert at the intertubercular groove of the humerus. 

They work to adduct and medially, or internally, rotate the humerus.

The infraspinatus and teres minor insert on the greater tubercle, and work to laterally, or externally, rotate the humerus. 

In contrast, the subscapularis muscle inserts onto the lesser tubercle and works to medially, or internally, rotate the humerus.

The biceps brachii, brachialis, and brachioradialis (which attaches distally) act to flex the elbow. 

(The biceps do not attach to the humerus.) The triceps brachii and anconeus extend the elbow, and attach to the posterior side of the humerus.

The four muscles of supraspinatus, infraspinatus, teres minor and subscapularis form a musculo-ligamentous girdle called the rotator cuff. 

This cuff stabilizes the very mobile but inherently unstable glenohumeral joint. 

The other muscles are used as counterbalances for the actions of lifting/pulling and pressing/pushing.


== Other animals ==

Primitive fossils of amphibians had little, if any, shaft connecting the upper and lower extremities, making their limbs very short. 

In most living tetrapods, however, the humerus has a similar form to that of humans. 

In many reptiles and some primitive mammals, the lower extremity includes a large foramen, or opening,  which allows nerves and blood vessels pass through.
	
		
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Humerus		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		


== Ossification ==

During embryonic development, the humerus is one of the first structures to ossify, beginning with the first ossification center in the shaft of the bone. Ossification of the humerus occurs predictably in the embryo and fetus, and is therefore used as a fetal biometric measurement when determining gestational age of a fetus. At birth, the neonatal humerus is only ossified in the shaft. The epiphyses are cartilaginous at birth. The medial humeral head develops an ossification center around 4 months of age and the greater tuberosity around 10 months of age. These ossification centers begin to fuse at 3 years of age. The process of ossification is complete by 13 years of age, though the epiphyseal plate (growth plate) persists until skeletal maturity, usually around 17 years of age.


== See also ==
Humerus fracture


== References ==

 This article incorporates text in the public domain from page 209 of the 20th edition of Gray's Anatomy (1918)


== External links ==
"Humerus" . New International Encyclopedia. 1905.
Humerus - BlueLink Anatomy, University of Michigan Medical School


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Humerus
;;;ES;;;



HÚMERO


El húmero (plural: humeri) es un hueso largo en el brazo que se extiende desde el hombro hasta el codo.

Conecta la escápula y los dos huesos de la parte inferior del brazo, el radio y el cúbito, y consta de tres secciones.

La extremidad superior humeral consta de una cabeza redondeada, un cuello estrecho y dos procesos cortos (tubérculos, a veces llamados tuberosidades).

El cuerpo es cilíndrico en su parte superior y más prismático en la inferior. La extremidad inferior consta de 2 epicóndilos, 2 procesos (tróclea y capítulo) y 3 fosas (fosa radial, fosa coronoides y fosa olecraneana).

Además de su verdadero cuello anatómico, la constricción debajo de los tubérculos mayor y menor del húmero se denomina cuello quirúrgico debido a su tendencia a fracturarse, por lo que a menudo se convierte en el foco de atención de los cirujanos.


=== Extremidad superior ===

El extremo superior o proximal del húmero consiste en la cabeza grande y redondeada del hueso unida al cuerpo por una porción constreñida llamada cuello, y dos eminencias, los tubérculos mayor y menor.


==== Cabeza ====

La cabeza (caput humeri) tiene una forma casi hemisférica. Se dirige hacia arriba, medialmente y un poco hacia atrás, y se articula con la cavidad glenoidea de la escápula para formar la articulación glenohumeral (articulación del hombro).

La circunferencia de su superficie articular está ligeramente constreñida y se denomina cuello anatómico, en contraposición a una constricción debajo de los tubérculos denominada cuello quirúrgico, que suele ser el lugar de la fractura.

La fractura del cuello anatómico rara vez ocurre.

El diámetro de la cabeza humeral es generalmente mayor en hombres que en mujeres.


==== Cuello anatómico ====

El cuello anatómico (collum anatomicum) está dirigido oblicuamente, formando un ángulo obtuso con el cuerpo.

Se marca mejor en la mitad inferior de su circunferencia; en la mitad superior está representado por un estrecho surco que separa la cabeza de los tubérculos.

La línea que separa la cabeza del resto del extremo superior se denomina cuello anatómico.

Proporciona unión a la cápsula articular de la articulación del hombro y está perforada por numerosos agujeros vasculares. La fractura del cuello anatómico rara vez ocurre.

El cuello anatómico del húmero es una hendidura distal a la cabeza del húmero en la que se une la cápsula articular.


==== Cuello quirúrgico ====

El cuello quirúrgico es un área estrecha distal a los tubérculos que es un sitio común de fractura.

Hace contacto con el nervio axilar y la arteria circunfleja humeral posterior.


==== Tubérculo mayor ====

El tubérculo mayor (tuberculum majus; tuberosidad mayor) es una gran proyección posterior que se coloca lateralmente.

El tubérculo mayor es donde se unen los músculos supraespinoso, infraespinoso y redondo menor.

La cresta del tubérculo mayor forma el labio lateral del surco bicipital y es el sitio de inserción del pectoral mayor.

El tubérculo mayor está justo lateral al cuello anatómico.

Su superficie superior es redondeada y está marcada por tres impresiones planas: la más alta de ellas da inserción al músculo supraespinoso; el medio al músculo infraespinoso; el más bajo, y el cuerpo del hueso por unos 2,5 cm. debajo de él, al músculo redondo menor.

La superficie lateral del tubérculo mayor es convexa, rugosa y continúa con la superficie lateral del cuerpo.


==== tubérculo menor ====

El tubérculo menor (tuberculum minus; tuberosidad menor) es más pequeño, colocado anterolateralmente a la cabeza del húmero.

El tubérculo menor proporciona inserción al músculo subescapular.

Ambos tubérculos se encuentran en la parte proximal del eje.

La cresta del tubérculo menor forma el labio medial del surco bicipital y es el sitio de inserción de los músculos redondo mayor y dorsal ancho.

La tuberosidad menor es más prominente que la mayor: está situada al frente y se dirige hacia medial y hacia adelante.

Arriba y al frente presenta una impresión para la inserción del tendón del músculo subescapular.


==== Surco bicipital ====

Los tubérculos están separados entre sí por un surco profundo, el surco bicipital (surco intertubercular; surco bicipital), que aloja el tendón largo del músculo bíceps braquial y transmite una rama de la arteria circunfleja humeral anterior a la articulación del hombro.

Corre oblicuamente hacia abajo y termina cerca de la unión del tercio superior con el tercio medio del hueso.

En estado fresco, su parte superior está cubierta con una fina capa de cartílago, revestida por una prolongación de la membrana sinovial de la articulación del hombro; su parte inferior da inserción al tendón del músculo dorsal ancho.

Es profundo y angosto arriba, y se vuelve poco profundo y un poco más ancho a medida que desciende.

Sus labios se denominan, respectivamente, las crestas de los tubérculos mayor y menor (crestas bicipitales), y forman las partes superiores de los bordes anterior y medial del cuerpo del hueso.


=== Eje ===

El cuerpo o diáfisis del húmero tiene una sección triangular a cilíndrica y está comprimido anteroposteriormente. Tiene 3 superficies, a saber:

Superficie anterolateral: el área comprendida entre el borde lateral del húmero hasta la línea trazada como continuación de la cresta del tubérculo mayor.

La superficie anterolateral se dirige lateralmente hacia arriba, donde es lisa, redondeada y cubierta por el músculo deltoides; adelante y lateral hacia abajo, donde es ligeramente cóncavo desde arriba hacia abajo, y da origen a parte del Brachialis.

Alrededor de la mitad de esta superficie hay una elevación rectangular rugosa, la tuberosidad deltoidea para la inserción del músculo deltoides; debajo de esto está el surco radial, dirigido oblicuamente desde atrás, hacia adelante y hacia abajo, y que transmite el nervio radial y la arteria profunda.


Superficie anteromedial: el área entre el borde medial del húmero hasta la línea trazada como continuación de la cresta del tubérculo mayor.

La superficie anteromedial, menos extensa que la anterolateral, se dirige medialmente arriba, adelante y medialmente abajo; su parte superior es estrecha y forma el suelo del surco intertubercular que da inserción al tendón del músculo dorsal ancho; su parte media es ligeramente rugosa para la inserción de algunas de las fibras del tendón de inserción del músculo coracobraquial; su parte inferior es lisa, cóncava de arriba hacia abajo, y da origen al músculo braquial.

Superficie posterior: el área entre los bordes medial y lateral.

La superficie posterior aparece algo torcida, de modo que su parte superior se dirige un poco hacia el centro, su parte inferior hacia atrás y un poco hacia los lados.

Casi la totalidad de esta superficie está cubierta por las cabezas lateral y medial del tríceps braquial, la primera surge por encima y la última por debajo del surco radial.

Sus tres fronteras son:

Borde anterior del húmero:
el borde anterior va desde el frente del tubérculo mayor arriba hasta la fosa coronoides abajo, separando la superficie anteromedial de la anterolateral.

Su parte superior es una cresta prominente, la cresta del tubérculo mayor; sirve para la inserción del tendón del músculo pectoral mayor.

Alrededor de su centro forma el límite anterior de la tuberosidad deltoidea, en la que se inserta el músculo deltoides; por debajo, es suave y redondeado, lo que permite su inserción en el músculo braquial.

Borde lateral del húmero:
el borde lateral va desde la parte posterior del tubérculo mayor hasta el epicóndilo lateral y separa la superficie anterolateral de la posterior.

Su mitad superior es redondeada e indistintamente marcada, sirviendo para la inserción de la parte inferior de la inserción del músculo redondo menor, y debajo de ésta dando origen a la cabeza lateral del músculo tríceps braquial; su centro está atravesado por una depresión oblicua ancha pero poco profunda, el surco espiral (surco musculoespiral).

El nervio radial discurre por el surco espiral.

Su parte inferior forma un margen rugoso y prominente, un poco curvado desde atrás, hacia adelante la cresta supracondílea lateral, que presenta un labio anterior para el origen del músculo braquiorradial arriba, y el músculo extensor carpi radialis longus arriba, un labio posterior para el tríceps. músculo braquial y una cresta intermedia para la unión del tabique intermuscular lateral.

Borde medial del húmero:
el borde medial se extiende desde el tubérculo menor hasta el epicóndilo medial.

Su tercio superior consta de una cresta prominente, la cresta del tubérculo menor, que da inserción al tendón del músculo redondo mayor.

Sobre su centro hay una ligera impresión para la inserción del músculo coracobrachialis, y justo debajo está la entrada del canal de nutrientes, dirigida hacia abajo; a veces hay un segundo canal de nutrientes al comienzo del surco radial.

El tercio inferior de este borde se eleva en una ligera cresta, la cresta supracondílea medial, que se hizo muy prominente por debajo; presenta un labio anterior para los orígenes del músculo braquial y el músculo pronador redondo, un labio posterior para la cabeza medial del músculo tríceps braquial y una cresta intermedia para la inserción del tabique intermuscular medial.

La tuberosidad deltoidea es una superficie rugosa en la superficie lateral de la diáfisis del húmero y actúa como sitio de inserción del músculo deltoides.

La parte posterior o superior de la diáfisis tiene una cresta que comienza justo debajo del cuello quirúrgico del húmero y se extiende hasta la punta superior de la tuberosidad deltoidea. Aquí es donde se une la cabeza lateral del tríceps braquial.

El surco radial, también conocido como surco en espiral, se encuentra en la superficie posterior del eje y es un surco oblicuo poco profundo a través del cual pasa el nervio radial junto con los vasos profundos.

Está situado posteroinferior a la tuberosidad deltoidea. El límite inferior del surco en espiral se continúa distalmente con el borde lateral de la diáfisis.

El agujero de nutrientes del húmero se encuentra en la superficie anteromedial del húmero. Las arterias nutricias entran en el húmero a través de este agujero.


=== Húmero distal ===

La extremidad distal o inferior del húmero está aplanada desde delante hacia atrás y ligeramente curvada hacia delante; termina por debajo en una amplia superficie articular, que está dividida en dos partes por una ligera cresta.

Proyectando a ambos lados están los epicóndilos lateral y medial.


==== Superficie articular ====

La superficie articular se extiende un poco más abajo que los epicóndilos y está ligeramente curvada hacia adelante; su extremidad medial ocupa un nivel más bajo que el lateral.

La porción lateral de esta superficie consta de una eminencia redondeada y lisa, denominada capitulum del húmero; se articula con la depresión en forma de copa en la cabeza del radio y se limita a la parte anterior e inferior del hueso.


=== Fosas ===

Por encima de la parte anterior de la tróclea hay una pequeña depresión, la fosa coronoides, que recibe la apófisis coronoides del cúbito durante la flexión del antebrazo.

Encima de la parte posterior de la tróclea hay una profunda depresión triangular, la fosa olecraneana, en la que se recibe el vértice del olécranon en extensión del antebrazo.

La fosa coronoides es la parte hueca medial en la superficie anterior del húmero distal.

La fosa coronoides es más pequeña que la fosa del olécranon y recibe la apófisis coronoides del cúbito durante la flexión máxima del codo.

Por encima de la parte anterior del capítulo hay una ligera depresión, la fosa radial, que recibe el borde anterior de la cabeza del radio, cuando se flexiona el antebrazo.

Estas fosas están separadas entre sí por una fina lámina de hueso transparente, que a veces está perforada por un agujero supratroclear; están revestidos en estado fresco por la membrana sinovial de la articulación del codo, y sus márgenes permiten la unión a los ligamentos anterior y posterior de esta articulación.

El Capitulum es una eminencia redondeada que forma la parte lateral del húmero distal. La cabeza del radio se articula con el capítulo.

La tróclea es la porción medial en forma de carrete del húmero distal y se articula con el cúbito.


==== Epicóndilos ====

Los epicóndilos se continúan por arriba con las crestas supracondíleas.

El epicóndilo lateral es una pequeña eminencia tuberculada, ligeramente curvada hacia adelante y que se une al ligamento colateral radial de la articulación del codo y a un tendón común al origen del supinador y algunos de los músculos extensores.

El epicóndilo medial, más grande y prominente que el lateral, se dirige un poco hacia atrás; se une al ligamento colateral cubital de la articulación del codo, al pronador redondo ya un tendón común de origen de algunos de los músculos flexores del antebrazo; el nervio cubital corre en un surco en la parte posterior de este epicóndilo.

La cresta supracondílea medial forma el borde medial agudo del húmero distal que continúa superiormente desde el epicóndilo medial.

La cresta supracondílea lateral forma el borde lateral afilado del húmero distal que continúa superiormente desde el epicóndilo lateral.


==== Fronteras ====

La porción medial de la superficie articular se denomina tróclea y presenta una profunda depresión entre dos bordes bien marcados; es convexo desde delante hacia atrás, cóncavo de lado a lado y ocupa las partes anterior, inferior y posterior de la extremidad.

El borde lateral lo separa del surco que articula con el margen de la cabeza del radio.

El borde medial es más grueso, de mayor longitud y, en consecuencia, más prominente que el lateral.

La porción ranurada de la superficie articular encaja con precisión dentro de la muesca semilunar del cúbito; es más ancho y más profundo en la cara posterior que en la anterior del hueso, y está inclinado oblicuamente hacia abajo y adelante hacia el lado medial.


=== Articulaciones ===

En el hombro, la cabeza del húmero se articula con la fosa glenoidea de la escápula.

Más distalmente, en el codo, el capítulo del húmero se articula con la cabeza del radio y la tróclea del húmero se articula con la escotadura troclear del cúbito.


=== Nervios ===

El nervio axilar se encuentra en el extremo proximal, contra la cintura escapular.

La dislocación de la articulación glenohumeral del húmero tiene el potencial de lesionar el nervio axilar o la arteria axilar. Los signos y síntomas de esta dislocación incluyen pérdida del contorno normal del hombro y una depresión palpable debajo del acromion.

El nervio radial sigue de cerca al húmero.

En la diáfisis media del húmero, el nervio radial viaja desde la parte posterior a la anterior del hueso en el surco en espiral. Una fractura del húmero en esta región puede provocar una lesión del nervio radial.

El nervio cubital se encuentra en el extremo distal del húmero cerca del codo.

Cuando se golpea, puede causar una sensación de hormigueo distinta y, a veces, una cantidad significativa de dolor.

A veces se le conoce popularmente como "el hueso gracioso", posiblemente debido a esta sensación (un sentimiento "gracioso"), así como al hecho de que el nombre del hueso es un homófono de "humorístico".

Se encuentra posterior al epicóndilo medial y se daña fácilmente en las lesiones del codo.


=== Inserción muscular ===

El deltoides se origina en el tercio lateral de la clavícula, el acromion y la cresta de la espina de la escápula.

Se inserta en la tuberosidad deltoidea del húmero y tiene varias acciones que incluyen abducción, extensión y circunducción del hombro.

El supraespinoso también se origina en la espina de la escápula. Se inserta en el tubérculo mayor del húmero y ayuda en la abducción del hombro.

El pectoral mayor, el redondo mayor y el dorsal ancho se insertan en el surco intertubercular del húmero.

Trabajan para aducir y rotar medial o internamente el húmero.

El infraespinoso y el redondo menor se insertan en el tubérculo mayor y trabajan para rotar lateral o externamente el húmero.

Por el contrario, el músculo subescapular se inserta en el tubérculo menor y funciona para rotar medial o internamente el húmero.

El bíceps braquial, el braquial anterior y el braquiorradial (que se une distalmente) actúan para flexionar el codo.

(Los bíceps no se unen al húmero.) El tríceps braquial y el ancóneo extienden el codo y se unen al lado posterior del húmero.

Los cuatro músculos del supraespinoso, infraespinoso, redondo menor y subescapular forman una faja músculo-ligamentosa llamada manguito rotador.

Este manguito estabiliza la articulación glenohumeral muy móvil pero intrínsecamente inestable.

Los otros músculos se utilizan como contrapesos para las acciones de levantar/tirar y presionar/empujar.


== Otros animales ==

Los fósiles primitivos de anfibios tenían poco o ningún eje que conectara las extremidades superiores e inferiores, lo que hacía que sus extremidades fueran muy cortas.

Sin embargo, en la mayoría de los tetrápodos vivos, el húmero tiene una forma similar a la de los humanos.

En muchos reptiles y algunos mamíferos primitivos, la extremidad inferior incluye un gran foramen, o abertura, que permite el paso de nervios y vasos sanguíneos.
 
 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Húmero
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


== Osificación ==

Durante el desarrollo embrionario, el húmero es una de las primeras estructuras en osificarse, comenzando por el primer centro de osificación en la diáfisis del hueso. La osificación del húmero ocurre de manera predecible en el embrión y el feto y, por lo tanto, se usa como una medida biométrica fetal para determinar la edad gestacional de un feto. Al nacer, el húmero neonatal sólo está osificado en la diáfisis. Las epífisis son cartilaginosas al nacer. La cabeza humeral medial desarrolla un centro de osificación alrededor de los 4 meses de edad y la tuberosidad mayor alrededor de los 10 meses de edad. Estos centros de osificación comienzan a fusionarse a los 3 años de edad. El proceso de osificación se completa a los 13 años de edad, aunque la placa epifisaria (placa de crecimiento) persiste hasta la madurez esquelética, generalmente alrededor de los 17 años de edad.


== Véase también ==
Fractura de húmero


== Referencias ==

Este artículo incorpora texto de dominio público de la página 209 de la 20.ª edición de Grey's Anatomy (1918)


== Enlaces externos ==
"Húmero". Nueva Enciclopedia Internacional. 1905.
Húmero - BlueLink Anatomy, Facultad de Medicina de la Universidad de Michigan


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Húmero

;;;PT;;;



ÚMERO


O úmero (plural: úmeros) é um osso longo no braço que vai do ombro ao cotovelo.

Ele conecta a escápula e os dois ossos do antebraço, o rádio e a ulna, e consiste em três seções.

A extremidade superior do úmero consiste em uma cabeça arredondada, um colo estreito e dois processos curtos (tubérculos, às vezes chamados de tuberosidades).

O corpo é cilíndrico na parte superior e mais prismático na parte inferior. A extremidade inferior consiste em 2 epicôndilos, 2 processos (tróclea e capítulo) e 3 fossas (fossa radial, fossa coronóide e fossa olecraniana).

Além de seu verdadeiro colo anatômico, a constrição abaixo dos tubérculos maior e menor do úmero é chamada de colo cirúrgico devido à sua tendência à fratura, tornando-se muitas vezes o foco dos cirurgiões.


=== Extremidade superior ===

A extremidade superior ou proximal do úmero consiste na grande cabeça arredondada do osso unida ao corpo por uma porção constrita chamada colo e duas eminências, os tubérculos maior e menor.


==== Cabeça ====

A cabeça (caput humeri), é quase hemisférica na forma. Ele é direcionado para cima, medialmente e um pouco para trás, e se articula com a cavidade glenoidal da escápula para formar a articulação glenoumeral (articulação do ombro).

A circunferência de sua superfície articular é levemente constrita e é denominada colo anatômico, em contraste com uma constrição abaixo dos tubérculos chamada colo cirúrgico, que é frequentemente o local da fratura.

Raramente ocorre fratura do colo anatômico.

O diâmetro da cabeça do úmero é geralmente maior nos homens do que nas mulheres.


==== Pescoço anatômico ====

O colo anatômico (collum anatomicum) é direcionado obliquamente, formando um ângulo obtuso com o corpo.

É melhor marcado na metade inferior de sua circunferência; na metade superior é representado por um estreito sulco que separa a cabeça dos tubérculos.

A linha que separa a cabeça do resto da extremidade superior é chamada de pescoço anatômico.

Proporciona fixação à cápsula articular da articulação do ombro e é perfurado por numerosos forames vasculares. Raramente ocorre fratura do colo anatômico.

O colo anatômico do úmero é uma reentrância distal à cabeça do úmero na qual a cápsula articular se insere.


==== Colo cirúrgico ====

O colo cirúrgico é uma área estreita distal aos tubérculos que é um local comum de fratura.

Faz contato com o nervo axilar e a artéria circunflexa posterior do úmero.


==== Tubérculo maior ====

O tubérculo maior (tuberculum majus; tubérculo maior) é uma grande projeção colocada posteriormente que é colocada lateralmente.

O tubérculo maior é onde os músculos supraespinal, infraespinal e redondo menor estão ligados.

A crista do tubérculo maior forma o lábio lateral do sulco bicipital e é o local de inserção do peitoral maior.

O tubérculo maior é lateral ao colo anatômico.

Sua superfície superior é arredondada e marcada por três impressões planas: a mais alta delas dá inserção ao músculo supraespinal; o médio ao músculo infraespinal; o mais baixo, e o corpo do osso por cerca de 2,5 cm. abaixo dele, para o músculo redondo menor.

A superfície lateral do tubérculo maior é convexa, rugosa e contínua com a superfície lateral do corpo.


==== Tubérculo menor ====

O tubérculo menor (tuberculum minus; tubérculo menor) é menor, localizado anterolateralmente à cabeça do úmero.

O tubérculo menor fornece inserção ao músculo subescapular.

Ambos os tubérculos são encontrados na parte proximal da diáfise.

A crista do tubérculo menor forma o lábio medial do sulco bicipital e é o local de inserção dos músculos redondo maior e grande dorsal.

O tubérculo menor é mais proeminente do que o maior: situa-se na frente e é direcionado para medial e para frente.

Acima e na frente apresenta uma impressão para a inserção do tendão do músculo subescapular.


==== Sulco bicipital ====

Os tubérculos são separados uns dos outros por um sulco profundo, o sulco bicipital (sulco intertubercular; sulco bicipital), que aloja o tendão longo do músculo bíceps braquial e transmite um ramo da artéria circunflexa anterior do úmero para a articulação do ombro.

Ele corre obliquamente para baixo e termina perto da junção da parte superior com o terço médio do osso.

No estado fresco sua parte superior é coberta por uma fina camada de cartilagem, revestida por um prolongamento da membrana sinovial da articulação do ombro; sua porção inferior dá inserção ao tendão do músculo grande dorsal.

É profundo e estreito acima, e torna-se raso e um pouco mais largo à medida que desce.

Seus lábios são chamados, respectivamente, as cristas dos tubérculos maior e menor (cumes bicipitais), e formam as partes superiores das bordas anterior e medial do corpo do osso.


=== Eixo ===

O corpo ou diáfise do úmero é triangular a cilíndrico em corte e é comprimido anteroposteriormente. Possui 3 superfícies, a saber:

Superfície ântero-lateral: a área entre a borda lateral do úmero até a linha traçada como uma continuação da crista do tubérculo maior.

A superfície ântero-lateral é direcionada lateralmente para cima, onde é lisa, arredondada e coberta pelo músculo deltoide; anterior e lateral para baixo, onde é ligeiramente côncava de cima para baixo, e dá origem a parte do braquial.

Sobre o meio dessa superfície há uma elevação áspera e retangular, a tuberosidade deltóide para a inserção do músculo deltóide; abaixo dele está o sulco radial, dirigido obliquamente por trás, para frente e para baixo, e transmitindo o nervo radial e a artéria profunda.


Superfície ântero-medial: a área entre a borda medial do úmero até a linha traçada como uma continuação da crista do tubérculo maior.

A superfície ântero-medial, menos extensa que a ântero-lateral, dirige-se medialmente acima, anterior e medialmente abaixo; sua parte superior é estreita e forma o assoalho do sulco intertubercular que dá inserção ao tendão do músculo grande dorsal; sua parte média é levemente rugosa para a fixação de algumas das fibras do tendão de inserção do músculo coracobraquial; sua parte inferior é lisa, côncava de cima para baixo, e dá origem ao músculo braquial.

Superfície posterior: a área entre as bordas medial e lateral.

A face posterior parece um pouco torcida, de modo que sua parte superior é direcionada um pouco medialmente, sua parte inferior para trás e um pouco lateralmente.

Quase toda essa superfície é coberta pelas cabeças lateral e medial do tríceps braquial, o primeiro surgindo acima, o segundo abaixo do sulco radial.

Suas três fronteiras são:

Borda anterior do úmero:
a borda anterior vai da frente do tubérculo maior acima até a fossa coronóide abaixo, separando a face ântero-medial da ântero-lateral.

Sua parte superior é uma crista proeminente, a crista do tubérculo maior; serve para a inserção do tendão do músculo peitoral maior.

Em torno de seu centro, forma o limite anterior da tuberosidade deltóide, na qual o músculo deltóide se insere; abaixo, é liso e arredondado, proporcionando fixação ao músculo braquial.

Borda lateral do úmero:
a borda lateral vai da parte posterior do tubérculo maior até o epicôndilo lateral e separa a face anterolateral da face posterior.

Sua metade superior é arredondada e indistintamente marcada, servindo para a fixação da parte inferior da inserção do músculo redondo menor, e abaixo desta dando origem à cabeça lateral do músculo tríceps braquial; seu centro é atravessado por uma depressão oblíqua larga, mas rasa, o sulco espiral (sulco musculoespiral).

O nervo radial corre no sulco espiral.

Sua parte inferior forma uma margem proeminente, rugosa, um pouco curvada para trás, para frente a crista supracondilar lateral, que apresenta um lábio anterior para a origem do músculo braquiorradial acima, e músculo extensor radial longo do carpo acima, um lábio posterior para o tríceps braquial e uma crista intermediária para a fixação do septo intermuscular lateral.

Borda medial do úmero:
a borda medial estende-se do tubérculo menor até o epicôndilo medial.

Seu terço superior consiste em uma crista proeminente, a crista do tubérculo menor, que dá inserção ao tendão do músculo redondo maior.

Sobre seu centro há uma leve impressão para a inserção do músculo coracobraquial, e logo abaixo está a entrada do canal nutriente, direcionado para baixo; às vezes há um segundo canal nutriente no início do sulco radial.

O terço inferior desta borda é elevado em uma leve crista, a crista supracondilar medial, que se tornou muito proeminente abaixo; apresenta lábio anterior para as origens do músculo braquial e pronador redondo, lábio posterior para a cabeça medial do músculo tríceps braquial e uma crista intermediária para a fixação do septo intermuscular medial.

A tuberosidade deltoide é uma superfície rugosa na face lateral da diáfise do úmero e atua como local de inserção do músculo deltoideo.

A parte póstero-superior da diáfise apresenta uma crista, iniciando-se logo abaixo do colo cirúrgico do úmero e estendendo-se até a ponta superior da tuberosidade deltoide. Este é o local onde a cabeça lateral do tríceps braquial está conectada.

O sulco radial, também conhecido como sulco espiral, é encontrado na superfície posterior da diáfise e é um sulco oblíquo raso através do qual o nervo radial passa junto com os vasos profundos.

Esta está localizada póstero-inferiormente à tuberosidade deltoide. O limite inferior do sulco espiral é contínuo distalmente com a borda lateral da diáfise.

O forame nutriente do úmero está localizado na superfície anteromedial do úmero. As artérias nutrientes entram no úmero através deste forame.


=== Úmero distal ===

A extremidade distal ou inferior do úmero é achatada de frente para trás e levemente curvada para frente; termina abaixo em uma ampla superfície articular, que é dividida em duas partes por uma ligeira crista.

Projetando-se em ambos os lados estão os epicôndilos lateral e medial.


==== Superfície articular ====

A superfície articular estende-se um pouco abaixo dos epicôndilos e é ligeiramente curvada para a frente; sua extremidade medial ocupa um nível mais baixo que a lateral.

A porção lateral desta superfície é constituída por uma eminência lisa e arredondada, denominada capítulo do úmero; articula-se com a depressão em forma de taça na cabeça do rádio e limita-se à parte anterior e inferior do osso.


=== Fossas ===

Acima da parte anterior da tróclea há uma pequena depressão, a fossa coronóide, que recebe o processo coronóide da ulna durante a flexão do antebraço.

Acima da parte posterior da tróclea há uma profunda depressão triangular, a fossa do olécrano, na qual o ápice do olécrano é recebido na extensão do antebraço.

A fossa coronóide é a parte oca medial na superfície anterior do úmero distal.

A fossa coronóide é menor que a fossa olecraniana e recebe o processo coronóide da ulna durante a flexão máxima do cotovelo.

Acima da parte anterior do capítulo há uma leve depressão, a fossa radial, que recebe a borda anterior da cabeça do rádio, quando o antebraço é flexionado.

Essas fossas são separadas umas das outras por uma lâmina de osso fina e transparente, que às vezes é perfurada por um forame supratroclear; eles são revestidos no estado fresco pela membrana sinovial da articulação do cotovelo, e suas margens proporcionam fixação aos ligamentos anterior e posterior dessa articulação.

O Capítulo é uma eminência arredondada que forma a parte lateral do úmero distal. A cabeça do rádio articula-se com o capítulo.

A tróclea é a porção medial em forma de carretel do úmero distal e articula-se com a ulna.


==== Epicôndilos ====

Os epicôndilos são contínuos acima com as cristas supracondilares.

O epicôndilo lateral é uma pequena eminência tuberculosa, ligeiramente curvada para a frente, que dá fixação ao ligamento colateral radial da articulação do cotovelo e a um tendão comum à origem do supinador e alguns dos músculos extensores.

O epicôndilo medial, maior e mais proeminente que o lateral, é direcionado um pouco para trás; dá fixação ao ligamento colateral ulnar da articulação do cotovelo, ao pronador redondo e a um tendão comum de origem de alguns músculos flexores do antebraço; o nervo ulnar corre em um sulco na parte de trás deste epicôndilo.

A crista supracondilar medial forma a borda medial aguda do úmero distal continuando superiormente a partir do epicôndilo medial.

A crista supracondilar lateral forma a borda lateral aguda do úmero distal continuando superiormente a partir do epicôndilo lateral.


==== Fronteiras ====

A porção medial da superfície articular é denominada tróclea e apresenta uma depressão profunda entre duas bordas bem marcadas; é convexo de antes para trás, côncavo de um lado para o outro e ocupa as partes anterior, inferior e posterior da extremidade.

A borda lateral o separa do sulco que se articula com a margem da cabeça do rádio.

A borda medial é mais espessa, de maior comprimento e, consequentemente, mais proeminente que a lateral.

A porção sulcada da superfície articular se encaixa com precisão na incisura semilunar da ulna; é mais largo e profundo na face posterior do que na face anterior do osso, e inclina-se obliquamente para baixo e para frente em direção ao lado medial.


=== Articulações ===

No ombro, a cabeça do úmero articula-se com a fossa glenóide da escápula.

Mais distalmente, no cotovelo, o capítulo do úmero articula-se com a cabeça do rádio, e a tróclea do úmero articula-se com a incisura troclear da ulna.


=== Nervos ===

O nervo axilar está localizado na extremidade proximal, contra a cintura escapular.

A luxação da articulação glenoumeral do úmero tem o potencial de lesar o nervo axilar ou a artéria axilar. Os sinais e sintomas desta luxação incluem uma perda do contorno normal do ombro e uma depressão palpável sob o acrômio.

O nervo radial segue o úmero de perto.

Na diáfise média do úmero, o nervo radial viaja da face posterior para a anterior do osso no sulco espiral. Uma fratura do úmero nesta região pode resultar em lesão do nervo radial.

O nervo ulnar situa-se na extremidade distal do úmero, próximo ao cotovelo.

Quando atingido, pode causar uma sensação distinta de formigamento e, às vezes, uma quantidade significativa de dor.

Às vezes é popularmente referido como 'o osso engraçado', possivelmente devido a essa sensação (um sentimento "engraçado"), bem como ao fato de o nome do osso ser um homófono de 'humorístico'.

Situa-se posterior ao epicôndilo medial e é facilmente danificado em lesões de cotovelo.


=== Fixação muscular ===

O deltoide origina-se no terço lateral da clavícula, acrômio e na crista da espinha da escápula.

É inserido na tuberosidade deltoide do úmero e tem várias ações, incluindo abdução, extensão e circundução do ombro.

O supraespinhoso também se origina na espinha da escápula. Insere-se no tubérculo maior do úmero e auxilia na abdução do ombro.

O peitoral maior, redondo maior e grande dorsal se inserem no sulco intertubercular do úmero.

Eles trabalham para aduzir e medialmente, ou internamente, girar o úmero.

O infraespinal e o redondo menor se inserem no tubérculo maior e trabalham para girar lateralmente ou externamente o úmero.

Em contraste, o músculo subescapular se insere no tubérculo menor e trabalha para rodar medialmente ou internamente o úmero.

O bíceps braquial, braquial e braquiorradial (que se insere distalmente) agem para flexionar o cotovelo.

(O bíceps não se fixa ao úmero.) O tríceps braquial e o ancôneo estendem o cotovelo e se fixam na parte posterior do úmero.

Os quatro músculos do supraespinal, infraespinal, redondo menor e subescapular formam uma cintura musculoligamentar chamada manguito rotador.

Este manguito estabiliza a articulação glenoumeral muito móvel, mas inerentemente instável.

Os outros músculos são usados ​​como contrapesos para as ações de levantar/puxar e pressionar/empurrar.


== Outros animais ==

Fósseis primitivos de anfíbios tinham pouco ou nenhum eixo conectando as extremidades superiores e inferiores, tornando seus membros muito curtos.

Na maioria dos tetrápodes vivos, no entanto, o úmero tem uma forma semelhante à dos humanos.

Em muitos répteis e alguns mamíferos primitivos, a extremidade inferior inclui um grande forame, ou abertura, que permite a passagem de nervos e vasos sanguíneos.
 
 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Humerus
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


== Ossificação ==

Durante o desenvolvimento embrionário, o úmero é uma das primeiras estruturas a ossificar, começando com o primeiro centro de ossificação na diáfise do osso. A ossificação do úmero ocorre previsivelmente no embrião e no feto e, portanto, é usada como medida biométrica fetal ao determinar a idade gestacional de um feto. Ao nascimento, o úmero neonatal está apenas ossificado na diáfise. As epífises são cartilaginosas ao nascimento. A cabeça umeral medial desenvolve um centro de ossificação por volta dos 4 meses de idade e a tuberosidade maior por volta dos 10 meses de idade. Esses centros de ossificação começam a se fundir aos 3 anos de idade. O processo de ossificação está completo aos 13 anos de idade, embora a placa epifisária (placa de crescimento) persista até a maturidade esquelética, geralmente por volta dos 17 anos de idade.


== Veja também ==
Fratura do úmero


== Referências ==

Este artigo incorpora o texto de domínio público da página 209 da 20ª edição de Gray's Anatomy (1918)


== Links externos ==
"Úmero". Nova Enciclopédia Internacional. 1905.
Úmero - BlueLink Anatomy, Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de Michigan


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Humerus

;;;FR;;;



HUMÉRUS


L'humérus (pluriel : humeri) est un os long du bras qui va de l'épaule au coude.

Il relie l'omoplate et les deux os de l'avant-bras, le radius et le cubitus, et se compose de trois sections.

L'extrémité supérieure humérale se compose d'une tête arrondie, d'un col étroit et de deux processus courts (tubercules, parfois appelés tubérosités).

Le corps est cylindrique dans sa partie supérieure, et plus prismatique en dessous. Le membre inférieur comprend 2 épicondyles, 2 processus (trochlée et capitule) et 3 fosses (fosse radiale, fosse coronoïde et fosse olécrânienne).

En plus de son véritable col anatomique, la constriction sous les grands et petits tubercules de l'humérus est appelée son col chirurgical en raison de sa tendance à se fracturer, devenant ainsi souvent le centre d'intérêt des chirurgiens.


=== Membre supérieur ===

L'extrémité supérieure ou proximale de l'humérus est constituée de la grande tête arrondie de l'os reliée au corps par une partie resserrée appelée col et de deux éminences, les tubercules plus grands et plus petits.


==== Tête ====

La tête (caput humeri) est de forme presque hémisphérique. Il est dirigé vers le haut, vers le milieu et un peu vers l'arrière, et s'articule avec la cavité glénoïde de l'omoplate pour former l'articulation glénohumérale (articulation de l'épaule).

La circonférence de sa surface articulaire est légèrement resserrée et est appelée col anatomique, par opposition à une constriction sous les tubercules appelée col chirurgical qui est fréquemment le siège d'une fracture.

La fracture du cou anatomique se produit rarement.

Le diamètre de la tête humérale est généralement plus grand chez l'homme que chez la femme.


==== Col anatomique ====

Le cou anatomique (collum anatomicum) est dirigé obliquement, formant un angle obtus avec le corps.

Il est mieux marqué dans la moitié inférieure de sa circonférence ; dans la moitié supérieure, il est représenté par une rainure étroite séparant la tête des tubercules.

La ligne séparant la tête du reste de l'extrémité supérieure s'appelle le cou anatomique.

Il offre une fixation à la capsule articulaire de l'articulation de l'épaule et est perforé par de nombreux foramina vasculaires. La fracture du cou anatomique se produit rarement.

Le col anatomique de l'humérus est une indentation distale de la tête de l'humérus sur laquelle se fixe la capsule articulaire.


==== Cou chirurgical ====

Le col chirurgical est une zone étroite distale des tubercules qui est un site de fracture courant.

Il entre en contact avec le nerf axillaire et l'artère circonflexe humérale postérieure.


==== Tubercule majeur ====

Le tubercule majeur (tuberculum majus; grosse tubérosité) est une grande saillie placée en arrière qui est placée latéralement.

Le tubercule majeur est l'endroit où les muscles supraspinatus, infraspinatus et teres minor sont attachés.

La crête du tubercule majeur forme la lèvre latérale du sillon bicipital et est le site d'insertion du grand pectoral.

Le tubercule majeur est juste latéral au col anatomique.

Sa face supérieure est arrondie et marquée par trois empreintes plates : la plus haute d'entre elles donne l'insertion au muscle sus-épineux ; le milieu du muscle sous-épineux ; le plus bas, et le corps de l'os sur environ 2,5 cm. en dessous, au muscle petit rond.

La surface latérale du tubercule majeur est convexe, rugueuse et continue avec la surface latérale du corps.


==== Petit tubercule ====

Le petit tubercule (tuberculum minus; petit tubercule) est plus petit, placé antérolatéralement à la tête de l'humérus.

Le petit tubercule assure l'insertion du muscle sous-scapulaire.

Ces deux tubercules se trouvent dans la partie proximale de l'arbre.

La crête du petit tubercule forme la lèvre médiale du sillon bicipital et est le site d'insertion des muscles teres major et latissimus dorsi.

La petite tubérosité, est plus proéminente que la grande : elle est située en avant, et est dirigée vers l'intérieur et vers l'avant.

Au-dessus et en avant, il présente une empreinte pour l'insertion du tendon du muscle sous-scapulaire.


==== Sillon bicipital ====

Les tubercules sont séparés les uns des autres par un sillon profond, le sillon bicipital (sillon intertuberculaire ; sillon bicipital), qui loge le long tendon du muscle biceps brachial et transmet une branche de l'artère circonflexe humérale antérieure à l'articulation de l'épaule.

Il s'étend obliquement vers le bas et se termine près de la jonction de la partie supérieure avec le tiers médian de l'os.

A l'état frais, sa partie supérieure est recouverte d'une fine couche de cartilage, tapissée par un prolongement de la membrane synoviale de l'articulation de l'épaule ; sa partie inférieure donne insertion au tendon du muscle latissimus dorsi.

Il est profond et étroit au-dessus, et devient peu profond et un peu plus large à mesure qu'il descend.

Ses lèvres sont appelées, respectivement, les crêtes des grands et petits tubercules (crêtes bicipitales) et forment les parties supérieures des bords antérieur et médial du corps de l'os.


=== Arbre ===

Le corps ou la tige de l'humérus est triangulaire à cylindrique en coupe et est comprimé antéropostérieurement. Il comporte 3 surfaces, à savoir :

Face antérolatérale : zone située entre le bord latéral de l'humérus et la ligne tracée dans le prolongement de la crête du tubercule majeur.

La surface antéro-latérale est dirigée latéralement vers le haut, où elle est lisse, arrondie et recouverte par le muscle deltoïde ; vers l'avant et latéralement en dessous, où il est légèrement concave de haut en bas, et donne origine à une partie du brachial.

Vers le milieu de cette surface se trouve une élévation rectangulaire rugueuse, la tubérosité deltoïde pour l'insertion du muscle deltoïde ; au-dessous se trouve le sillon radial, dirigé obliquement par derrière, en avant et en bas, et transmettant le nerf radial et l'artère profonde.


Surface antéro-médiale : zone comprise entre le bord médial de l'humérus et la ligne tracée dans le prolongement de la crête du tubercule majeur.

La face antéro-médiale, moins étendue que la face antéro-latérale, est dirigée vers le haut, vers l'avant et vers le bas ; sa partie supérieure est étroite et forme le plancher du sillon intertuberculaire qui donne l'insertion au tendon du muscle grand dorsal ; sa partie médiane est légèrement rugueuse pour l'attache de certaines des fibres du tendon d'insertion du muscle coracobrachial ; sa partie inférieure est lisse, concave de haut en bas et donne naissance au muscle brachial.

Face postérieure : la zone située entre les bords médial et latéral.

La face postérieure apparaît quelque peu tordue, de sorte que sa partie supérieure est dirigée un peu vers l'intérieur, sa partie inférieure vers l'arrière et un peu latéralement.

La quasi-totalité de cette surface est recouverte par les chefs latéral et médial du triceps brachial, le premier apparaissant au-dessus, le second au-dessous du sillon radial.

Ses trois frontières sont :

Bord antérieur de l'humérus :
le bord antérieur va de l'avant du tubercule majeur au-dessus à la fosse coronoïde en dessous, séparant la surface antéro-médiale de la surface antéro-latérale.

Sa partie supérieure est une crête proéminente, la crête du tubercule majeur ; il sert à l'insertion du tendon du muscle grand pectoral.

Autour de son centre, il forme la limite antérieure de la tubérosité deltoïde, sur laquelle s'attache le muscle deltoïde ; en dessous, il est lisse et arrondi, permettant la fixation au muscle brachial.

Bord latéral de l'humérus :
le bord latéral va de la partie arrière du tubercule majeur à l'épicondyle latéral et sépare l'antérolatéral de la face postérieure.

Sa moitié supérieure est arrondie et indistinctement marquée, servant à l'attache de la partie inférieure de l'insertion du muscle petit rond, et en dessous donnant naissance au chef latéral du muscle triceps brachial ; son centre est traversé par une dépression oblique large mais peu profonde, le sillon spiralé (sillon musculospiral).

Le nerf radial passe dans le sillon spiralé.

Sa partie inférieure forme une marge proéminente et rugueuse, un peu incurvée de l'arrière, vers l'avant la crête supracondylienne latérale, qui présente une lèvre antérieure pour l'origine du muscle brachioradial au-dessus, et le muscle extensor carpi radialis longus au-dessus, une lèvre postérieure pour le triceps muscle brachial et une crête intermédiaire pour la fixation du septum intermusculaire latéral.

Bord médial de l'humérus :
le bord médial s'étend du petit tubercule à l'épicondyle médial.

Son tiers supérieur est constitué d'une crête proéminente, la crête du petit tubercule, qui donne insertion au tendon du muscle teres major.

Autour de son centre se trouve une légère impression pour l'insertion du muscle coracobrachial, et juste en dessous se trouve l'entrée du canal nutritif, dirigée vers le bas ; parfois il y a un deuxième canal nutritif au début du sillon radial.

Le tiers inférieur de ce bord est relevé en une légère crête, la crête supracondylienne médiale, devenue très proéminente en dessous ; il présente une lèvre antérieure pour les origines du muscle brachial et du muscle rond pronateur, une lèvre postérieure pour le chef médial du muscle triceps brachial et une crête intermédiaire pour la fixation du septum intermusculaire médial.

La tubérosité deltoïde est une surface rugueuse sur la surface latérale de la tige de l'humérus et sert de site d'insertion du muscle deltoïde.

La partie postérieure ou supérieure de l'arbre a une crête, commençant juste en dessous du col chirurgical de l'humérus et s'étendant jusqu'à la pointe supérieure de la tubérosité deltoïde. C'est là que le chef latéral du triceps brachial est attaché.

Le sulcus radial, également connu sous le nom de rainure en spirale, se trouve sur la surface postérieure de la tige et est une rainure oblique peu profonde à travers laquelle le nerf radial passe avec des vaisseaux profonds.

Celui-ci est situé en postéro-inférieur à la tubérosité deltoïdienne. La limite inférieure de la rainure en spirale est continue distalement avec le bord latéral de la diaphyse.

Le foramen nutritif de l'humérus est situé dans la surface antéro-médiale de l'humérus. Les artères nourricières pénètrent dans l'humérus par ce foramen.


=== Humérus distal ===

L'extrémité distale ou inférieure de l'humérus est aplatie d'avant en arrière et légèrement courbée vers l'avant ; il se termine en bas par une large surface articulaire, qui est divisée en deux parties par une légère crête.

Les épicondyles latéral et médial se projettent de chaque côté.


==== Surface articulaire ====

La surface articulaire s'étend un peu plus bas que les épicondyles et est légèrement courbée vers l'avant ; son extrémité médiale occupe un niveau inférieur au latéral.

La partie latérale de cette surface consiste en une éminence lisse et arrondie, nommée capitule de l'humérus ; il s'articule avec la dépression en forme de coupe sur la tête du radius et se limite à la partie antérieure et inférieure de l'os.


=== Fosse ===

Au-dessus de la partie antérieure de la trochlée se trouve une petite dépression, la fosse coronoïde, qui reçoit le processus coronoïde du cubitus lors de la flexion de l'avant-bras.

Au-dessus de la partie postérieure de la trochlée se trouve une profonde dépression triangulaire, la fosse olécrânienne, dans laquelle le sommet de l'olécrâne se loge dans le prolongement de l'avant-bras.

La fosse coronoïde est la partie creuse médiale de la face antérieure de l'humérus distal.

La fosse coronoïde est plus petite que la fosse olécrânienne et reçoit le processus coronoïde de l'ulna lors de la flexion maximale du coude.

Au-dessus de la partie antérieure du capitule se trouve une légère dépression, la fosse radiale, qui reçoit le bord antérieur de la tête du radius, lorsque l'avant-bras est fléchi.

Ces fosses sont séparées l'une de l'autre par une lame osseuse mince et transparente, qui est parfois perforée par un foramen supratrochléaire ; ils sont tapissés à l'état frais par la membrane synoviale de l'articulation du coude, et leurs marges permettent l'attache aux ligaments antérieur et postérieur de cette articulation.

Le Capitulum est une éminence arrondie formant la partie latérale de l'humérus distal. La tête du radius s'articule avec le capitule.

La trochlée est la partie médiane en forme de bobine de l'humérus distal et s'articule avec l'ulna.


==== Épicondyles ====

Les épicondyles sont continus au-dessus avec les crêtes supracondyliennes.

L'épicondyle latéral est une petite éminence tuberculée, recourbée un peu en avant, et s'attachant au ligament collatéral radial de l'articulation du coude, et à un tendon commun à l'origine du supinateur et à certains des muscles extenseurs.

L'épicondyle médial, plus gros et plus proéminent que le latéral, est dirigé un peu en arrière ; il donne attache au ligament collatéral ulnaire de l'articulation du coude, au rond pronateur et à un tendon commun d'origine de certains des muscles fléchisseurs de l'avant-bras; le nerf cubital court dans une rainure à l'arrière de cet épicondyle.

La crête supracondylienne médiale forme le bord médian pointu de l'humérus distal continuant vers le haut à partir de l'épicondyle médian.

La crête supracondylienne latérale forme le bord latéral pointu de l'humérus distal se prolongeant vers le haut à partir de l'épicondyle latéral.


==== Bordures ====

La partie médiale de la surface articulaire porte le nom de trochlée et présente une profonde dépression entre deux bords bien marqués ; il est convexe d'avant en arrière, concave d'un côté à l'autre, et occupe les parties antérieure, inférieure et postérieure de l'extrémité.

Le bord latéral le sépare du sillon qui s'articule avec le bord de la tête du radius.

Le bord médial est plus épais, plus long et par conséquent plus proéminent que le bord latéral.

La partie rainurée de la surface articulaire s'insère avec précision dans l'encoche semi-lunaire de l'ulna ; il est plus large et plus profond sur la face postérieure que sur la face antérieure de l'os, et est incliné obliquement vers le bas et vers l'avant vers le côté médial.


=== Articulations ===

Au niveau de l'épaule, la tête de l'humérus s'articule avec la fosse glénoïde de l'omoplate.

Plus distalement, au niveau du coude, le capitule de l'humérus s'articule avec la tête du radius, et la trochlée de l'humérus s'articule avec l'échancrure trochléenne de l'ulna.


=== Nerfs ===

Le nerf axillaire est situé à l'extrémité proximale, contre la ceinture scapulaire.

La luxation de l'articulation glénohumérale de l'humérus peut blesser le nerf axillaire ou l'artère axillaire. Les signes et symptômes de cette luxation comprennent une perte du contour normal de l'épaule et une dépression palpable sous l'acromion.

Le nerf radial suit de près l'humérus.

Au milieu de l'humérus, le nerf radial se déplace de la face postérieure à la face antérieure de l'os dans la rainure en spirale. Une fracture de l'humérus dans cette région peut entraîner une lésion du nerf radial.

Le nerf cubital se situe à l'extrémité distale de l'humérus près du coude.

Lorsqu'il est frappé, il peut provoquer une sensation de picotement distincte et parfois une douleur importante.

Il est parfois communément appelé «l'os drôle», peut-être en raison de cette sensation (un sentiment «amusant»), ainsi que du fait que le nom de l'os est un homophone de «humoristique».

Il se situe en arrière de l'épicondyle médial et est facilement endommagé lors de blessures au coude.


=== Attachement musculaire ===

Le deltoïde prend naissance sur le tiers latéral de la clavicule, l'acromion et la crête de la colonne vertébrale de l'omoplate.

Il est inséré sur la tubérosité deltoïde de l'humérus et a plusieurs actions dont l'abduction, l'extension et la circumduction de l'épaule.

Le sus-épineux prend également sa source sur la colonne vertébrale de l'omoplate. Il s'insère sur le tubercule majeur de l'humérus et aide à l'abduction de l'épaule.

Le grand pectoral, le grand rond et le grand dorsal s'insèrent dans le sillon intertuberculaire de l'humérus.

Ils travaillent pour adduire et médialement, ou en interne, faire pivoter l'humérus.

L'infraspinatus et le teres minor s'insèrent sur le tubercule majeur et travaillent pour faire pivoter latéralement ou extérieurement l'humérus.

En revanche, le muscle sous-scapulaire s'insère sur le petit tubercule et travaille pour faire tourner l'humérus médialement ou en interne.

Le biceps brachial, le brachialis et le brachioradialis (qui s'attache distalement) agissent pour fléchir le coude.

(Le biceps ne s'attache pas à l'humérus.) Le triceps brachial et l'anconé prolongent le coude et s'attachent à la face postérieure de l'humérus.

Les quatre muscles supraspinatus, infraspinatus, teres minor et subscapularis forment une ceinture musculo-ligamentaire appelée coiffe des rotateurs.

Cette manchette stabilise l'articulation gléno-humérale très mobile mais intrinsèquement instable.

Les autres muscles sont utilisés comme contrepoids pour les actions de soulever/tirer et de presser/pousser.


== Autres animaux ==

Les fossiles primitifs d'amphibiens avaient peu ou pas de tige reliant les membres supérieurs et inférieurs, ce qui rendait leurs membres très courts.

Chez la plupart des tétrapodes vivants, cependant, l'humérus a une forme similaire à celle des humains.

Chez de nombreux reptiles et certains mammifères primitifs, l'extrémité inférieure comprend un grand foramen, ou ouverture, qui permet le passage des nerfs et des vaisseaux sanguins.
 
 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Humerus
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


== Ossification ==

Au cours du développement embryonnaire, l'humérus est l'une des premières structures à s'ossifier, en commençant par le premier centre d'ossification dans la diaphyse de l'os. L'ossification de l'humérus se produit de manière prévisible chez l'embryon et le fœtus, et est donc utilisée comme mesure biométrique fœtale lors de la détermination de l'âge gestationnel d'un fœtus. A la naissance, l'humérus néonatal n'est ossifié que dans la diaphyse. Les épiphyses sont cartilagineuses à la naissance. La tête humérale médiale développe un centre d'ossification vers l'âge de 4 mois et la grosse tubérosité vers l'âge de 10 mois. Ces centres d'ossification commencent à fusionner à 3 ans. Le processus d'ossification est terminé à 13 ans, bien que la plaque épiphysaire (plaque de croissance) persiste jusqu'à la maturité squelettique, généralement vers 17 ans.


== Voir aussi ==
Fracture de l'humérus


== Références ==

Cet article incorpore du texte dans le domaine public de la page 209 de la 20e édition de Gray's Anatomy (1918)


== Liens externes ==
"Humérus" . Nouvelle Encyclopédie Internationale. 1905.
Humérus - BlueLink Anatomy, faculté de médecine de l'Université du Michigan


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Humerus
