

KNEE


In humans and other primates, the knee joins the thigh with the leg and consists of two joints: one between the femur and tibia (tibiofemoral joint), and one between the femur and patella (patellofemoral joint). 

It is the largest joint in the human body. 

The knee is a modified hinge joint, which permits flexion and extension as well as slight internal and external rotation. 

The knee is vulnerable to injury and to the development of osteoarthritis.
It is often termed a compound joint having tibiofemoral and patellofemoral components. (The fibular collateral ligament is often considered with tibiofemoral components.)


== Structure ==


The knee is a modified hinge joint, a type of synovial joint, which is composed of three functional compartments: the patellofemoral articulation, consisting of the patella, or "kneecap", and the patellar groove on the front of the femur through which it slides; and the medial and lateral tibiofemoral articulations linking the femur, or thigh bone, with the tibia, the main bone of the lower leg. 

The joint is bathed in synovial fluid which is contained inside the synovial membrane called the joint capsule. 

The posterolateral corner of the knee is an area that has recently been the subject of renewed scrutiny and research.The knee is the largest joint and one of the most important joints in the body. 

It plays an essential role in movement related to carrying the body weight in horizontal (running and walking) and vertical (jumping) directions.At birth, the kneecap is just formed from cartilage, and this will ossify (change to bone) between the ages of three and five years. 

Because it is the largest sesamoid bone in the human body, the ossification process takes significantly longer.


=== Articular bodies ===

The main articular bodies of the femur are its lateral and medial condyles. 

These diverge slightly distally and posteriorly, with the lateral condyle being wider in front than at the back while the medial condyle is of more constant width. : 206  The radius of the condyles' curvature in the sagittal plane becomes smaller toward the back. 

This diminishing radius produces a series of involute midpoints (i.e. located on a spiral). 

The resulting series of transverse axes permit the sliding and rolling motion in the flexing knee while ensuring the collateral ligaments are sufficiently lax to permit the rotation associated with the curvature of the medial condyle about a vertical axis.: 194–95 The pair of tibial condyles are separated by the intercondylar eminence: 206  composed of a lateral and a medial tubercle.: 202 The patella also serves an articular body, and its posterior surface is referred to as the trochlea of the knee. 

It is inserted into the thin anterior wall of the joint capsule.: 206  On its posterior surface is a lateral and a medial articular surface,: 194  both of which communicate with the patellar surface which unites the two femoral condyles on the anterior side of the bone's distal end.: 192 


=== Articular capsule ===


The articular capsule has a synovial and a fibrous membrane separated by fatty deposits. 

Anteriorly, the synovial membrane is attached on the margin of the cartilage both on the femur and the tibia, but on the femur, it communicates with the suprapatellar bursa or recess and extends the joint space proximally.: 210  The suprapatellar bursa is prevented from being pinched during extension by the articularis genus muscle. 

Behind, the synovial membrane is attached to the margins of the two femoral condyles which produces two extensions (semimembranosus bursa under medial head of gastronemius and popliteal bursa under lateral head of gastronemius) similar to the suprapatellar bursa. 

Between these two extensions, the synovial membrane passes in front of the two cruciate ligaments at the center of the joint, thus forming a pocket direct inward.: 210 Synovium lining the capsule and its bursae. 

The synovium also lines infrapatellar fat pad, the fat pad that lies below the ligamentum patellae. 

Synovium projecting into the fat pad as two foldings.


=== Bursae ===


Numerous bursae surround the knee joint. 

The largest communicative bursa is the suprapatellar bursa described above. 

Four considerably smaller bursae are located on the back of the knee. 

Two non-communicative bursae are located in front of the patella and below the patellar tendon, and others are sometimes present. : 210 


=== Cartilage ===

Cartilage is a thin, elastic tissue that protects the bone and makes certain that the joint surfaces can slide easily over each other. 

Cartilage ensures supple knee movement. 

There are two types of joint cartilage in the knees: fibrous cartilage (the meniscus) and hyaline cartilage. 

Fibrous cartilage has tensile strength and can resist pressure. 

Hyaline cartilage covers the surface along which the joints move. 

Collagen fibres within the articular cartilage have been described by Benninghoff as arising from the subchondral bone in a radial manner, building so called Gothic arches. 

On the surface of the cartilage these fibres appear in a tangential orientation and increase the abrasion resistance. 

There are no blood vessels inside of the hyaline cartilage, the alimentation is performed per diffusion. 

Synovial fluid and the subchondral bone marrow serve both as nutrition sources for the hyaline cartilage. 

Lack of at least one source induces a degeneration. 

Cartilage will wear over the years. 

Cartilage has a very limited capacity for self-restoration. 

The newly formed tissue will generally consist of a large part of fibrous cartilage of lesser quality than the original hyaline cartilage. 

As a result, new cracks and tears will form in the cartilage over time.


=== Menisci ===


The articular disks of the knee-joint are called menisci because they only partly divide the joint space.: 26  These two disks, the medial meniscus and the lateral meniscus, consist of connective tissue with extensive collagen fibers containing cartilage-like cells. 

Strong fibers run along the menisci from one attachment to the other, while weaker radial fibers are interlaced with the former. 

The menisci are flattened at the center of the knee joint, fused with the synovial membrane laterally, and can move over the tibial surface. : 208 
The upper and lower surfaces of the menisci are free. 

Each meniscus have anterior and posterior horns that meet in the intercondylar area of the tibia.Medial meniscus is bigger, less curved, and thinner. 

Its posterior horn is thicker (14mm) than the anterior horn (6mm).The lateral meniscus is smaller, more curved (nearly circular), and has more uniform thickness than medial meniscus (10mm). 

The lateral meniscus is less attached to the joint capsule, because its posterolateral surface is grooved by the popliteus tendon, separating the meniscus from the capsule. 

The popliteus tendon is not attached to the lateral meniscus.


=== Ligaments ===


The ligaments surrounding the knee joint offer stability by limiting movements and, together with the menisci and several bursae, protect the articular capsule.


==== Intracapsular ====
The knee is stabilized by a pair of cruciate ligaments. 

These ligaments are both extrasynovial, intracapsular ligaments. 

The anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) stretches from the lateral condyle of femur to the anterior intercondylar area. 

The ACL is critically important because it prevents the tibia from being pushed too far anterior relative to the femur. 

It is often torn during twisting or bending of the knee. 

The posterior cruciate ligament (PCL) stretches from medial condyle of femur to the posterior intercondylar area. 

This ligament prevents posterior displacement of the tibia relative to the femur. 

Injury to this ligament is uncommon but can occur as a direct result of forced trauma to the ligament.The transverse ligament stretches from the lateral meniscus to the medial meniscus. 

It passes in front of the menisci. 

It is divided into several strips in 10% of cases.: 208  The two menisci are attached to each other anteriorly by the ligament. 

The posterior (of Wrisberg) and anterior meniscofemoral ligaments (of Humphrey) stretch from the posterior horn of the lateral meniscus to the medial femoral condyle. 

They pass anterior and posterior to the posterior cruciate ligament respectively.: 208  The meniscotibial ligaments (or "coronary") stretches from inferior edges of the menisci to the periphery of the tibial plateaus.


==== Extracapsular ====
The patellar ligament connects the patella to the tuberosity of the tibia. 

It is also occasionally called the patellar tendon because there is no definite separation between the quadriceps tendon (which surrounds the patella) and the area connecting the patella to the tibia. 

This very strong ligament helps give the patella its mechanical leverage and also functions as a cap for the condyles of the femur. 

Laterally and medially to the patellar ligament the lateral and medial retinacula connect fibers from the vasti lateralis and medialis muscles to the tibia. 

Some fibers from the iliotibial tract radiate into the lateral retinaculum and the medial retinaculum receives some transverse fibers arising on the medial femoral epicondyle.: 206 The medial collateral ligament (MCL a.k.a. "tibial") stretches from the medial epicondyle of the femur to the medial tibial condyle. 

It is composed of three groups of fibers, one stretching between the two bones, and two fused with the medial meniscus. 

The MCL is partly covered by the pes anserinus and the tendon of the semimembranosus passes under it.: 206  It protects the medial side of the knee from being bent open by a stress applied to the lateral side of the knee (a valgus force).: 206 The lateral collateral ligament (LCL a.k.a. "fibular") stretches from the lateral epicondyle of the femur to the head of fibula. 

It is separate from both the joint capsule and the lateral meniscus.: 206  It protects the lateral side from an inside bending force (a varus force). 

The anterolateral ligament (ALL) is situated in front of the LCL.Lastly, there are two ligaments on the dorsal side of the knee. 

The oblique popliteal ligament is a radiation of the tendon of the semimembranosus on the medial side, from where it is direct laterally and proximally. 

The arcuate popliteal ligament originates on the apex of the head of the fibula to stretch proximally, crosses the tendon of the popliteus muscle, and passes into the capsule.: 206 


== Muscles ==

The muscles responsible for the movement of the knee joint belong to either the anterior, medial or posterior compartment of the thigh. 

The extensors generally belong to the anterior compartment and the flexors to the posterior. 

The two exceptions to this is gracilis, a flexor, which belongs to the medial compartment and sartorius, a flexor, in the anterior compartment.


=== Extensors ===



=== Flexors ===

Posterior compartment

Medial compartment:


=== Blood supply ===


The femoral artery and the popliteal artery help form the arterial network or plexus, surrounding the knee joint. 

There are six main branches: two superior genicular arteries, two inferior genicular arteries, the descending genicular artery and the recurrent branch of anterior tibial artery.
The medial genicular arteries penetrate the knee joint.


== Function ==

The knee permits flexion and extension about a virtual transverse axis, as well as a slight medial and lateral rotation about the axis of the lower leg in the flexed position. 

The knee joint is called "mobile" because the femur and lateral meniscus move: 399  over the tibia during rotation, while the femur rolls and glides over both menisci during extension-flexion.: 212–213 The center of the transverse axis of the extension/flexion movements is located where both collateral ligaments and both cruciate ligaments intersect. 

This center moves upward and backward during flexion, while the distance between the center and the articular surfaces of the femur changes dynamically with the decreasing curvature of the femoral condyles. 

The total range of motion is dependent on several parameters such as soft-tissue restraints, active insufficiency, and hamstring tightness.: 398 


=== Extended position ===

With the knee extended, both the lateral and medial collateral ligaments, as well as the anterior part of the anterior cruciate ligament, are taut. 

During extension, the femoral condyles glide and roll into a position which causes the complete unfolding of the tibial collateral ligament. 

During the last 10° of extension, an obligatory terminal rotation is triggered in which the knee is rotated medially 5°. 

The final rotation is produced by a lateral rotation of the tibia in the non-weight-bearing leg, and by a medial rotation of the femur in the weight-bearing leg. 

This terminal rotation is made possible by the shape of the medial femoral condyle, assisted by contraction of the popliteus muscle and the iliotibial tract and is caused by the stretching of the anterior cruciate ligament. 

Both cruciate ligaments are slightly unwinded and both lateral ligaments become taut.: 212 


=== Flexed position ===

In the flexed position, the collateral ligaments are relaxed while the cruciate ligaments are taut. 

Rotation is controlled by the twisted cruciate ligaments; the two ligaments get twisted around each other during medial rotation of the tibia—which reduces the amount of rotation possible—while they become unwound during lateral rotation of the tibia. 

Because of the oblique position of the cruciate ligaments, at least a part of one of them is always tense and these ligaments control the joint as the collateral ligaments are relaxed. 

Furthermore, the dorsal fibers of the tibial collateral ligament become tensed during extreme medial rotation and the ligament also reduces the lateral rotation to 45–60°.: 212 


== Clinical significance ==


Knee pain is caused by trauma, misalignment, and degeneration as well as by conditions like arthritis. 

The most common knee disorder is generally known as patellofemoral syndrome. 

The majority of minor cases of knee pain can be treated at home with rest and ice but more serious injuries do require surgical care.
One form of patellofemoral syndrome involves a tissue-related problem that creates pressure and irritation in the knee between the patella and the trochlea (patellar compression syndrome), which causes pain. 

The second major class of knee disorder involves a tear, slippage, or dislocation that impairs the structural ability of the knee to balance the leg (patellofemoral instability syndrome). 

Patellofemoral instability syndrome may cause either pain, a sense of poor balance, or both.Prepatellar bursitis also known as housemaid's knee is painful inflammation of the prepatellar bursa (a frontal knee bursa) often brought about by occupational activity such as roofing.
Age also contributes to disorders of the knee. 

Particularly in older people, knee pain frequently arises due to osteoarthritis. 

In addition, weakening of tissues around the knee may contribute to the problem. 

Patellofemoral instability may relate to hip abnormalities or to tightness of surrounding ligaments.Cartilage lesions can be caused by:

Accidents (fractures)
Injuries
The removal of a meniscus
Anterior cruciate ligament injury
Posterior cruciate ligament injury
Posterolateral corner injury
Medial knee injuries
Considerable strain on the knee.Any kind of work during which the knees undergo heavy stress may also be detrimental to cartilage. 

This is especially the case in professions in which people frequently have to walk, lift, or squat. 

Other causes of pain may be excessive on, and wear off, the knees, in combination with such things as muscle weakness and overweight.
Common complaints:

A painful, blocked, locked or swollen knee.
Sufferers sometimes feel as if their knees are about to give way, or may feel uncertain about their movement.


=== Overall fitness and knee injury ===

Physical fitness is related integrally to the development of knee problems. 

The same activity such as climbing stairs may cause pain from patellofemoral compression for someone who is physically unfit, but not for someone else (or even for that person at a different time). 

Obesity is another major contributor to knee pain. 

For instance, a 30-year-old woman who weighed 120 lb at age 18 years, before her three pregnancies, and now weighs 285 lb, had added 660 lb of force across her patellofemoral joint with each step.


=== Common injuries due to physical activity ===


In sports that place great pressure on the knees, especially with twisting forces, it is common to tear one or more ligaments or cartilages. 

Some of the most common knee injuries are those to the medial side: medial knee injuries.


=== Anterior cruciate ligament injury ===


The anterior cruciate ligament is the most commonly injured ligament of the knee. 

The injury is common during sports. 

Twisting of the knee is a common cause of over-stretching or tearing the ACL. 

When the ACL is injured a popping sound may be heard, and the leg may suddenly give out. 

Besides swelling and pain, walking may be painful and the knee will feel unstable. 

Minor tears of the anterior cruciate ligament may heal over time, but a torn ACL requires surgery. 

After surgery, recovery is prolonged and low impact exercises are recommended to strengthen the joint.


=== Torn meniscus injury ===

The menisci act as shock absorbers and separate the two ends of bone in the knee joint. 

There are two menisci in the knee, the medial (inner) and the lateral (outer). 

When there is torn cartilage, it means that the meniscus has been injured. 

Meniscus tears occur during sports often when the knee is twisted. 

Menisci injury may be innocuous and one may be able to walk after a tear, but soon swelling and pain set in. 

Sometimes the knee will lock while bending. 

Pain often occurs when one squats. 

Small meniscus tears are treated conservatively but most large tears require surgery.


=== Fractures ===


Knee fractures are rare but do occur, especially as a result of a road accident. 

Knee fractures include a patella fracture, and a type of avulsion fracture called a Segond fracture. 

There is usually immediate pain and swelling, and a difficulty or inability to stand on the leg. 

The muscles go into spasm and even the slightest movements are painful. 

X-rays can easily confirm the injury and surgery will depend on the degree of displacement and type of fracture.


=== Ruptured tendon ===

Tendons usually attach muscle to bone. 

In the knee the quadriceps and patellar tendon can sometimes tear. 

The injuries to these tendons occur when there is forceful contraction of the knee. 

If the tendon is completely torn, bending or extending the leg is impossible. 

A completely torn tendon requires surgery but a partially torn tendon can be treated with leg immobilization followed by physical therapy.


=== Overuse ===

Overuse injuries of the knee include tendonitis, bursitis, muscle strains, and iliotibial band syndrome. 

These injuries often develop slowly over weeks or months. 

Activities that induce pain usually delay healing. 

Rest, ice and compression do help in most cases. 

Once the swelling has diminished, heat packs can increase blood supply and promote healing. 

Most overuse injuries subside with time but can flare up if the activities are quickly resumed. 

Individuals may reduce the chances of overuse injuries by warming up prior to exercise, by limiting high impact activities and keep their weight under control.


=== Varus or valgus deformity ===


There are two disorders relating to an abnormal angle in the coronal plane at the level of the knee:

Genu valgum is a valgus deformity in which the tibia is turned outward in relation to the femur, resulting in a knock-kneed appearance.
Genu varum is a varus deformity in which the tibia is turned inward in relation to the femur, resulting in a bowlegged deformity.The degree of varus or valgus deformity can be quantified by the hip-knee-ankle angle, which is an angle between the femoral mechanical axis and the center of the ankle joint. 

It is normally between 1.0° and 1.5° of varus in adults. 

Normal ranges are different in children.


=== Surgical interventions ===

Before the advent of arthroscopy and arthroscopic surgery, patients having surgery for a torn ACL required at least nine months of rehabilitation, having initially spent several weeks in a full-length plaster cast. 

With current techniques, such patients may be walking without crutches in two weeks, and playing some sports in a few months.
In addition to developing new surgical procedures, ongoing research is looking into underlying problems which may increase the likelihood of an athlete suffering a severe knee injury. 

These findings may lead to effective preventive measures, especially in female athletes, who have been shown to be especially vulnerable to ACL tears from relatively minor trauma.
Articular cartilage repair treatment:

Arthroscopic debridement of the knee (arthroscopic lavage)
Mosaïc-plasty
Microfracture (Ice-picking)
Autologous chondrocyte implantation
Osteochondral Autograft and Allografts
PLC Reconstruction


== Imaging ==



=== MRI ===

Both anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) and posterior cruciate ligaments (PCL) are hypointense on both T1 and T2 weighted images of MRI. 

However, some high signal striations are often seen at the distal part of the ACL, making ACL higher intensity than PCL on MRI scans.

		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		


=== X-ray ===


		
		


=== Illustrations ===


		
		
		
		


== Other animals ==

In humans, the term "knee" refers to the joints between the femur, tibia, and patella, in the leg.
In quadrupeds such as dogs, horses, and mice, the homologous joints between the femur, tibia, and patella, in the hind leg, are known as the stifle joint. 

Also in quadrupeds, particularly horses, ungulates, and elephants, the layman's term "knee" also commonly refers to the forward-facing joint in the foreleg, the carpus, which is homologous to the human wrist.
In birds, the "knee" refers to the joints between the femur and tibiotarsus, and also the patella (when present). 

The layman's term "knee" may also refer to the (lower and often more visible due to not being covered by feathers) joint between the tibiotarsus and tarsometatarsus, which is homologous to the human ankle.
In insects and other animals, the term knee widely refers to any hinge joint.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Knee
;;;ES;;;



RODILLA


En humanos y otros primates, la rodilla une el muslo con la pierna y consta de dos articulaciones: una entre el fémur y la tibia (articulación femorotibial) y otra entre el fémur y la rótula (articulación femororrotuliana).

Es la articulación más grande del cuerpo humano.

La rodilla es una articulación de bisagra modificada, que permite la flexión y la extensión, así como una ligera rotación interna y externa.

La rodilla es vulnerable a lesiones y al desarrollo de osteoartritis.
A menudo se denomina articulación compuesta que tiene componentes tibiofemorales y patelofemorales. (El ligamento colateral fibular a menudo se considera con componentes tibiofemorales).


== Estructura ==


La rodilla es una articulación de bisagra modificada, un tipo de articulación sinovial, que se compone de tres compartimentos funcionales: la articulación femororrotuliana, que consta de la rótula o "rótula", y el surco rotuliano en la parte frontal del fémur a través del cual se desliza. ; y las articulaciones tibiofemorales medial y lateral que unen el fémur, o hueso del muslo, con la tibia, el hueso principal de la parte inferior de la pierna.

La articulación está bañada en líquido sinovial que está contenido dentro de la membrana sinovial llamada cápsula articular.

La esquina posterolateral de la rodilla es un área que recientemente ha sido objeto de renovado escrutinio e investigación. La rodilla es la articulación más grande y una de las más importantes del cuerpo.

Desempeña un papel esencial en el movimiento relacionado con el transporte del peso corporal en dirección horizontal (correr y caminar) y vertical (saltar). Al nacer, la rótula se forma a partir de cartílago, y este se osificará (cambiará a hueso) entre las edades. de tres y cinco años.

Debido a que es el hueso sesamoideo más grande del cuerpo humano, el proceso de osificación lleva mucho más tiempo.


=== Cuerpos articulares ===

Los principales cuerpos articulares del fémur son sus cóndilos lateral y medial.

Estos divergen ligeramente distal y posteriormente, siendo el cóndilo lateral más ancho por delante que por detrás, mientras que el cóndilo medial tiene una anchura más constante. : 206 El radio de curvatura de los cóndilos en el plano sagital se hace más pequeño hacia atrás.

Este radio decreciente produce una serie de puntos medios de involuta (es decir, ubicados en una espiral).

La serie resultante de ejes transversales permite el movimiento de deslizamiento y rotación en la rodilla en flexión, al mismo tiempo que asegura que los ligamentos colaterales estén lo suficientemente laxos para permitir la rotación asociada con la curvatura del cóndilo medial alrededor de un eje vertical.: 194–95 El par de cóndilos tibiales están separados por la eminencia intercondílea: 206 compuesta por un tubérculo lateral y uno medial.: 202 La rótula también sirve a un cuerpo articular, y su superficie posterior se denomina tróclea de la rodilla.

Se inserta en la delgada pared anterior de la cápsula articular.: 206 en su superficie posterior hay una superficie articular lateral y medial: 194 ambas se comunican con la superficie patelar que une los dos cóndilos femorales en el lado anterior de la extremo distal del hueso.: 192 


=== Cápsula articular ===


La cápsula articular tiene una sinovial y una membrana fibrosa separadas por depósitos grasos.

Anteriormente, la membrana sinovial se une al margen del cartílago tanto en el fémur como en la tibia, pero en el fémur se comunica con la bolsa o receso suprapatelar y extiende el espacio articular proximalmente.: 210 Se impide que la bolsa suprapatelar sea pellizcado durante la extensión por el músculo del género articularis.

Detrás, la membrana sinovial se une a los márgenes de los dos cóndilos femorales, lo que produce dos extensiones (bolsa semimembranosa debajo de la cabeza medial del gastronemio y bolsa poplítea debajo de la cabeza lateral del gastronemio) similar a la bolsa suprapatelar.

Entre estas dos extensiones, la membrana sinovial pasa por delante de los dos ligamentos cruzados en el centro de la articulación, formando así una bolsa directamente hacia adentro.: 210 Sinovial que recubre la cápsula y sus bolsas.

El sinovio también recubre la almohadilla de grasa infrapatelar, la almohadilla de grasa que se encuentra debajo del ligamento rotuliano.

La membrana sinovial se proyecta hacia la almohadilla grasa como dos pliegues.


=== bolsas ===


Numerosas bursas rodean la articulación de la rodilla.

La bolsa comunicativa más grande es la bolsa suprapatelar descrita anteriormente.

Cuatro bursas considerablemente más pequeñas se encuentran en la parte posterior de la rodilla.

Dos bursas no comunicativas se encuentran por delante de la rótula y por debajo del tendón rotuliano, y en ocasiones hay otras presentes. : 210 


=== Cartílago ===

El cartílago es un tejido delgado y elástico que protege el hueso y asegura que las superficies articulares puedan deslizarse fácilmente una sobre la otra.

El cartílago asegura un movimiento flexible de la rodilla.

Hay dos tipos de cartílago articular en las rodillas: cartílago fibroso (el menisco) y cartílago hialino.

El cartílago fibroso tiene resistencia a la tracción y puede resistir la presión.

El cartílago hialino cubre la superficie a lo largo de la cual se mueven las articulaciones.

Benninghoff ha descrito que las fibras de colágeno dentro del cartílago articular surgen del hueso subcondral de manera radial, formando los llamados arcos góticos.

En la superficie del cartílago estas fibras aparecen en una orientación tangencial y aumentan la resistencia a la abrasión.

No existen vasos sanguíneos en el interior del cartílago hialino, la alimentación se realiza por difusión.

El líquido sinovial y la médula ósea subcondral sirven como fuentes de nutrición para el cartílago hialino.

La falta de al menos una fuente induce una degeneración.

El cartílago se desgastará con los años.

El cartílago tiene una capacidad muy limitada de autorregeneración.

El tejido recién formado generalmente consistirá en una gran parte de cartílago fibroso de menor calidad que el cartílago hialino original.

Como resultado, con el tiempo se formarán nuevas grietas y desgarros en el cartílago.


=== Meniscos ===


Los discos articulares de la articulación de la rodilla se denominan meniscos porque sólo dividen parcialmente el espacio articular.: 26 Estos dos discos, el menisco medial y el menisco lateral, consisten en tejido conectivo con extensas fibras de colágeno que contienen células similares al cartílago.

Las fibras fuertes corren a lo largo de los meniscos de una inserción a la otra, mientras que las fibras radiales más débiles se entrelazan con las primeras.

Los meniscos se aplanan en el centro de la articulación de la rodilla, se fusionan lateralmente con la membrana sinovial y pueden moverse sobre la superficie tibial. : 208 
Las superficies superior e inferior de los meniscos están libres.

Cada menisco tiene cuernos anterior y posterior que se unen en el área intercondílea de la tibia. El menisco medial es más grande, menos curvo y más delgado.

Su asta posterior es más gruesa (14 mm) que la anterior (6 mm). El menisco lateral es más pequeño, más curvo (casi circular) y tiene un grosor más uniforme que el menisco medial (10 mm).

El menisco lateral está menos adherido a la cápsula articular, porque su superficie posterolateral está acanalada por el tendón poplíteo, separando el menisco de la cápsula.

El tendón poplíteo no está unido al menisco lateral.


=== Ligamentos ===


Los ligamentos que rodean la articulación de la rodilla ofrecen estabilidad al limitar los movimientos y, junto con los meniscos y varias bursas, protegen la cápsula articular.


==== Intracapsular ====
La rodilla está estabilizada por un par de ligamentos cruzados.

Estos ligamentos son ligamentos extrasinoviales e intracapsulares.

El ligamento cruzado anterior (LCA) se extiende desde el cóndilo lateral del fémur hasta el área intercondílea anterior.

El LCA es de vital importancia porque evita que la tibia se empuje demasiado hacia delante en relación con el fémur.

A menudo se desgarra al torcer o doblar la rodilla.

El ligamento cruzado posterior (LCP) se extiende desde el cóndilo medial del fémur hasta el área intercondílea posterior.

Este ligamento evita el desplazamiento posterior de la tibia con respecto al fémur.

La lesión de este ligamento es poco común, pero puede ocurrir como resultado directo de un traumatismo forzado en el ligamento. El ligamento transverso se extiende desde el menisco lateral hasta el menisco medial.

Pasa por delante de los meniscos.

Se divide en varias tiras en el 10% de los casos.: 208 Los dos meniscos están unidos entre sí anteriormente por el ligamento.

Los ligamentos meniscofemoral posterior (de Wrisberg) y anterior (de Humphrey) se extienden desde el asta posterior del menisco lateral hasta el cóndilo femoral medial.

Pasan anterior y posterior al ligamento cruzado posterior respectivamente.: 208 Los ligamentos meniscotibiales (o "coronarios") se extienden desde los bordes inferiores de los meniscos hasta la periferia de las mesetas tibiales.


==== Extracapsular ====
El ligamento rotuliano conecta la rótula con la tuberosidad de la tibia.

Ocasionalmente también se le llama tendón rotuliano porque no existe una separación definida entre el tendón del cuádriceps (que rodea la rótula) y el área que conecta la rótula con la tibia.

Este ligamento muy fuerte ayuda a dar a la rótula su palanca mecánica y también funciona como una tapa para los cóndilos del fémur.

Lateral y medialmente al ligamento rotuliano, los retináculos lateral y medial conectan las fibras de los músculos vasti lateralis y medialis a la tibia.

Algunas fibras del tracto iliotibial se irradian hacia el retináculo lateral y el retináculo medial recibe algunas fibras transversales que surgen en el epicóndilo femoral medial.: 206 El ligamento colateral medial (LCM, también conocido como "tibial") se extiende desde el epicóndilo medial del fémur hasta el cóndilo tibial.

Se compone de tres grupos de fibras, una que se extiende entre los dos huesos y dos fusionadas con el menisco medial.

El MCL está parcialmente cubierto por el pie anserinus y el tendón del semimembranoso pasa por debajo.: 206 Protege el lado medial de la rodilla para que no se doble por la tensión aplicada al lado lateral de la rodilla (una fuerza en valgo). : 206 El ligamento colateral lateral (LCL, también conocido como "fibular") se extiende desde el epicóndilo lateral del fémur hasta la cabeza del peroné.

Está separado tanto de la cápsula articular como del menisco lateral.: 206 Protege el lado lateral de una fuerza de flexión interna (una fuerza en varo).

El ligamento anterolateral (LLA) está situado por delante del LCL. Por último, hay dos ligamentos en el lado dorsal de la rodilla.

El ligamento poplíteo oblicuo es una radiación del tendón del semimembranoso en el lado medial, desde donde se dirige lateral y proximalmente.

El ligamento poplíteo arqueado se origina en el vértice de la cabeza del peroné para estirarse proximalmente, cruza el tendón del músculo poplíteo y pasa a la cápsula.: 206 


== Músculos ==

Los músculos responsables del movimiento de la articulación de la rodilla pertenecen al compartimento anterior, medial o posterior del muslo.

Los extensores pertenecen generalmente al compartimento anterior y los flexores al posterior.

Las dos excepciones a esto son gracilis, un flexor, que pertenece al compartimiento medial y sartorius, un flexor, en el compartimiento anterior.


=== Extensores ===



=== Flexores ===

compartimento posterior

Compartimento medial:


=== Suministro de sangre ===


La arteria femoral y la arteria poplítea ayudan a formar la red arterial o plexo que rodea la articulación de la rodilla.

Hay seis ramas principales: dos arterias geniculares superiores, dos arterias geniculares inferiores, la arteria genicular descendente y la rama recurrente de la arteria tibial anterior.
Las arterias geniculares mediales penetran en la articulación de la rodilla.


== Función ==

La rodilla permite la flexión y extensión alrededor de un eje transverso virtual, así como una ligera rotación medial y lateral alrededor del eje de la parte inferior de la pierna en la posición flexionada.

La articulación de la rodilla se denomina "móvil" porque el fémur y el menisco lateral se mueven: 399 sobre la tibia durante la rotación, mientras que el fémur rueda y se desliza sobre ambos meniscos durante la extensión-flexión.: 212–213 El centro del eje transversal de la extensión Los movimientos de flexión se localizan donde ambos ligamentos colaterales y ambos ligamentos cruzados se cruzan.

Este centro se mueve hacia arriba y hacia atrás durante la flexión, mientras que la distancia entre el centro y las superficies articulares del fémur cambia dinámicamente con la curvatura decreciente de los cóndilos femorales.

El rango total de movimiento depende de varios parámetros, como las restricciones de los tejidos blandos, la insuficiencia activa y la rigidez de los isquiotibiales.: 398 


=== Posición extendida ===

Con la rodilla extendida, los ligamentos colaterales lateral y medial, así como la parte anterior del ligamento cruzado anterior, están tensos.

Durante la extensión, los cóndilos femorales se deslizan y giran hasta una posición que provoca el despliegue completo del ligamento colateral tibial.

Durante los últimos 10° de extensión, se desencadena una rotación terminal obligatoria en la que la rodilla se rota medialmente 5°.

La rotación final se produce por una rotación lateral de la tibia en la pierna que no soporta el peso y por una rotación medial del fémur en la pierna que soporta el peso.

Esta rotación terminal es posible gracias a la forma del cóndilo femoral medial, asistida por la contracción del músculo poplíteo y el tracto iliotibial y es causada por el estiramiento del ligamento cruzado anterior.

Ambos ligamentos cruzados están ligeramente desenrollados y ambos ligamentos laterales se tensan.: 212 


=== Posición flexionada ===

En la posición flexionada, los ligamentos colaterales están relajados mientras que los ligamentos cruzados están tensos.

La rotación está controlada por los ligamentos cruzados torcidos; los dos ligamentos se tuercen entre sí durante la rotación medial de la tibia, lo que reduce la cantidad de rotación posible, mientras que se desenrollan durante la rotación lateral de la tibia.

Debido a la posición oblicua de los ligamentos cruzados, al menos una parte de ellos siempre está tensa y estos ligamentos controlan la articulación mientras los ligamentos colaterales están relajados.

Además, las fibras dorsales del ligamento colateral tibial se tensan durante la rotación medial extrema y el ligamento también reduce la rotación lateral a 45–60°.: 212 


== Importancia clínica ==


El dolor de rodilla es causado por traumatismos, desalineación y degeneración, así como por afecciones como la artritis.

El trastorno de rodilla más común se conoce generalmente como síndrome femororrotuliano.

La mayoría de los casos menores de dolor de rodilla se pueden tratar en casa con reposo y hielo, pero las lesiones más graves requieren atención quirúrgica.
Una forma de síndrome femororrotuliano implica un problema relacionado con el tejido que crea presión e irritación en la rodilla entre la rótula y la tróclea (síndrome de compresión patelar), lo que provoca dolor.

La segunda clase importante de trastorno de la rodilla implica un desgarro, deslizamiento o dislocación que afecta la capacidad estructural de la rodilla para equilibrar la pierna (síndrome de inestabilidad femororrotuliana).

El síndrome de inestabilidad femororrotuliana puede causar dolor, falta de equilibrio o ambos. La bursitis prerrotuliana, también conocida como rodilla de la criada, es una inflamación dolorosa de la bursa prerrotuliana (una bursa frontal de la rodilla) a menudo provocada por una actividad laboral como la construcción de techos.
La edad también contribuye a los trastornos de la rodilla.

Particularmente en las personas mayores, el dolor de rodilla surge con frecuencia debido a la osteoartritis.

Además, el debilitamiento de los tejidos alrededor de la rodilla puede contribuir al problema.

La inestabilidad femororrotuliana puede estar relacionada con anomalías de la cadera o con la tensión de los ligamentos circundantes. Las lesiones del cartílago pueden ser causadas por:

Accidentes (fracturas)
Lesiones
La extirpación de un menisco
Lesión del ligamento cruzado anterior
Lesión del ligamento cruzado posterior
Lesión de la esquina posterolateral
Lesiones mediales de rodilla
Esfuerzo considerable en la rodilla. Cualquier tipo de trabajo en el que las rodillas sufran una gran tensión también puede ser perjudicial para el cartílago.

Este es especialmente el caso en profesiones en las que las personas tienen que caminar, levantar objetos o ponerse en cuclillas con frecuencia.

Otras causas de dolor pueden ser excesivas y desaparecer en las rodillas, en combinación con debilidad muscular y sobrepeso.
Quejas comunes:

Una rodilla dolorosa, bloqueada, trabada o hinchada.
Las víctimas a veces sienten como si sus rodillas estuvieran a punto de ceder, o pueden sentirse inseguros acerca de su movimiento.


=== Estado físico general y lesión de rodilla ===

La aptitud física está relacionada integralmente con el desarrollo de problemas de rodilla.

La misma actividad, como subir escaleras, puede causar dolor por compresión femororrotuliana a alguien que no está físicamente en forma, pero no a otra persona (o incluso a esa persona en un momento diferente).

La obesidad es otro factor importante que contribuye al dolor de rodilla.

Por ejemplo, una mujer de 30 años que pesaba 120 lb a los 18 años, antes de sus tres embarazos, y ahora pesa 285 lb, había agregado 660 lb de fuerza a través de su articulación femororrotuliana con cada paso.


=== Lesiones comunes por actividad física ===


En los deportes que ejercen una gran presión sobre las rodillas, especialmente con fuerzas de torsión, es común desgarrar uno o más ligamentos o cartílagos.

Algunas de las lesiones de rodilla más comunes son las del lado medial: lesiones de rodilla medial.


=== Lesión del ligamento cruzado anterior ===


El ligamento cruzado anterior es el ligamento más comúnmente lesionado de la rodilla.

La lesión es común durante los deportes.

Torcer la rodilla es una causa común de estiramiento excesivo o desgarro del LCA.

Cuando se lesiona el LCA, se puede escuchar un chasquido y la pierna puede ceder repentinamente.

Además de la hinchazón y el dolor, caminar puede ser doloroso y la rodilla se sentirá inestable.

Los desgarros menores del ligamento cruzado anterior pueden sanar con el tiempo, pero un LCA desgarrado requiere cirugía.

Después de la cirugía, la recuperación es prolongada y se recomiendan ejercicios de bajo impacto para fortalecer la articulación.


=== Lesión de menisco roto ===

Los meniscos actúan como amortiguadores y separan los dos extremos del hueso en la articulación de la rodilla.

Hay dos meniscos en la rodilla, el medial (interior) y el lateral (exterior).

Cuando hay cartílago desgarrado, significa que el menisco se ha lesionado.

Los desgarros de menisco ocurren durante los deportes, a menudo cuando se tuerce la rodilla.

La lesión de los meniscos puede ser inocua y es posible que uno pueda caminar después de un desgarro, pero pronto se presenta la hinchazón y el dolor.

A veces, la rodilla se bloquea al doblarse.

El dolor a menudo ocurre cuando uno se pone en cuclillas.

Los desgarros de menisco pequeños se tratan de forma conservadora, pero la mayoría de los desgarros grandes requieren cirugía.


=== Fracturas ===


Las fracturas de rodilla son raras pero ocurren, especialmente como resultado de un accidente de tráfico.

Las fracturas de rodilla incluyen una fractura de rótula y un tipo de fractura por avulsión llamada fractura de Segond.

Por lo general, hay dolor e hinchazón inmediatos, y dificultad o incapacidad para pararse sobre la pierna.

Los músculos sufren espasmos e incluso los movimientos más leves son dolorosos.

Las radiografías pueden confirmar fácilmente la lesión y la cirugía dependerá del grado de desplazamiento y el tipo de fractura.


=== Tendón roto ===

Los tendones generalmente unen el músculo al hueso.

En la rodilla, el cuádriceps y el tendón rotuliano a veces pueden desgarrarse.

Las lesiones de estos tendones ocurren cuando hay una contracción forzada de la rodilla.

Si el tendón está completamente desgarrado, es imposible doblar o extender la pierna.

Un tendón completamente desgarrado requiere cirugía, pero un tendón parcialmente desgarrado se puede tratar con inmovilización de la pierna seguida de fisioterapia.


=== Uso excesivo ===

Las lesiones por uso excesivo de la rodilla incluyen tendinitis, bursitis, distensiones musculares y síndrome de la banda iliotibial.

Estas lesiones a menudo se desarrollan lentamente durante semanas o meses.

Las actividades que inducen dolor generalmente retrasan la curación.

El descanso, el hielo y la compresión ayudan en la mayoría de los casos.

Una vez que la hinchazón ha disminuido, las compresas de calor pueden aumentar el suministro de sangre y promover la curación.

La mayoría de las lesiones por uso excesivo desaparecen con el tiempo, pero pueden reaparecer si las actividades se reanudan rápidamente.

Las personas pueden reducir las posibilidades de lesiones por uso excesivo calentando antes del ejercicio, limitando las actividades de alto impacto y manteniendo su peso bajo control.


=== Deformidad en varo o valgo ===


Hay dos trastornos relacionados con un ángulo anormal en el plano coronal a nivel de la rodilla:

El genu valgum es una deformidad en valgo en la que la tibia se gira hacia afuera en relación con el fémur, lo que da como resultado una apariencia de rodillas valgas.
Genu varum es una deformidad en varo en la que la tibia se gira hacia adentro en relación con el fémur, lo que resulta en una deformidad de piernas arqueadas. El grado de deformidad en varo o valgo puede cuantificarse por el ángulo cadera-rodilla-tobillo, que es un ángulo entre eje mecánico femoral y el centro de la articulación del tobillo.

Normalmente está entre 1,0° y 1,5° de varo en adultos.

Los rangos normales son diferentes en los niños.


=== Intervenciones quirúrgicas ===

Antes del advenimiento de la artroscopia y la cirugía artroscópica, los pacientes que se sometían a cirugía por un LCA desgarrado requerían al menos nueve meses de rehabilitación, habiendo pasado inicialmente varias semanas con un yeso de cuerpo entero.

Con las técnicas actuales, estos pacientes pueden caminar sin muletas en dos semanas y practicar algún deporte en unos pocos meses.
Además de desarrollar nuevos procedimientos quirúrgicos, la investigación en curso está investigando los problemas subyacentes que pueden aumentar la probabilidad de que un atleta sufra una lesión grave en la rodilla.

Estos hallazgos pueden dar lugar a medidas preventivas eficaces, especialmente en las atletas, que han demostrado ser especialmente vulnerables a los desgarros del LCA por traumatismos relativamente menores.
Tratamiento de reparación del cartílago articular:

Desbridamiento artroscópico de la rodilla (lavado artroscópico)
Mosaico-plastia
Microfractura (recogida de hielo)
Implantación de condrocitos autólogos
Autoinjertos y aloinjertos osteocondrales
Reconstrucción de PLC


== Imágenes ==



=== resonancia magnética ===

Tanto el ligamento cruzado anterior (LCA) como los ligamentos cruzados posteriores (LCP) son hipointensos en las imágenes de resonancia magnética ponderadas en T1 y T2.

Sin embargo, a menudo se observan algunas estrías de alta señal en la parte distal del LCA, lo que hace que el LCA sea de mayor intensidad que el LCP en las imágenes de resonancia magnética.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


=== Rayos X ===


 
 


=== Ilustraciones ===


 
 
 
 


== Otros animales ==

En humanos, el término "rodilla" se refiere a las articulaciones entre el fémur, la tibia y la rótula, en la pierna.
En cuadrúpedos como perros, caballos y ratones, las articulaciones homólogas entre el fémur, la tibia y la rótula, en la pata trasera, se conocen como articulación de la rodilla.

También en cuadrúpedos, particularmente caballos, ungulados y elefantes, el término "rodilla" del profano también se refiere comúnmente a la articulación que mira hacia adelante en la pata delantera, el carpo, que es homóloga a la muñeca humana.
En las aves, la "rodilla" se refiere a las articulaciones entre el fémur y el tibiotarso, y también a la rótula (cuando está presente).

El término "rodilla" del profano también puede referirse a la articulación (más baja y, a menudo, más visible debido a que no está cubierta por plumas) entre el tibiotarso y el tarsometatarso, que es homóloga al tobillo humano.
En insectos y otros animales, el término rodilla se refiere ampliamente a cualquier articulación en bisagra.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rodilla

;;;PT;;;



JOELHO


Em humanos e outros primatas, o joelho une a coxa com a perna e consiste em duas articulações: uma entre o fêmur e a tíbia (articulação tibiofemoral) e outra entre o fêmur e a patela (articulação femoropatelar).

É a maior articulação do corpo humano.

O joelho é uma articulação em dobradiça modificada, que permite flexão e extensão, bem como leve rotação interna e externa.

O joelho é vulnerável a lesões e ao desenvolvimento de osteoartrite.
É muitas vezes denominado uma articulação composta com componentes tibiofemoral e patelofemoral. (O ligamento colateral fibular é frequentemente considerado com componentes tibiofemorais.)


== Estrutura ==


O joelho é uma articulação em dobradiça modificada, um tipo de articulação sinovial, que é composta por três compartimentos funcionais: a articulação patelofemoral, constituída pela patela, ou "rótula", e o sulco patelar na parte anterior do fêmur por onde desliza ; e as articulações tibiofemorais medial e lateral que ligam o fêmur, ou osso da coxa, com a tíbia, o principal osso da perna.

A articulação é banhada em líquido sinovial que está contido dentro da membrana sinovial chamada cápsula articular.

O canto póstero-lateral do joelho é uma área que recentemente foi objeto de escrutínio e pesquisa renovados. O joelho é a maior articulação e uma das articulações mais importantes do corpo.

Desempenha um papel essencial no movimento relacionado ao transporte do peso corporal nas direções horizontal (corrida e caminhada) e vertical (salto). de três e cinco anos.

Por ser o maior osso sesamoide do corpo humano, o processo de ossificação leva muito mais tempo.


=== Corpos articulares ===

Os principais corpos articulares do fêmur são seus côndilos lateral e medial.

Estes divergem ligeiramente distal e posteriormente, com o côndilo lateral sendo mais largo na frente do que atrás, enquanto o côndilo medial é de largura mais constante. : 206 O raio da curvatura dos côndilos no plano sagital torna-se menor em direção às costas.

Este raio decrescente produz uma série de pontos médios involutos (isto é, localizados em uma espiral).

A série resultante de eixos transversais permite o movimento de deslizamento e rolamento no joelho em flexão, garantindo que os ligamentos colaterais estejam suficientemente frouxos para permitir a rotação associada à curvatura do côndilo medial em torno de um eixo vertical.: 194-95 O par de côndilos tibiais são separados pela eminência intercondilar: 206 composta por um tubérculo lateral e um medial.: 202 A patela também serve a um corpo articular, e sua superfície posterior é chamada de tróclea do joelho.

Está inserido na fina parede anterior da cápsula articular.: 206 Em sua superfície posterior há uma superfície articular lateral e uma medial,: 194 ambas se comunicam com a superfície patelar que une os dois côndilos femorais no lado anterior do extremidade distal do osso.: 192 


=== Cápsula articular ===


A cápsula articular possui uma membrana sinovial e uma membrana fibrosa separadas por depósitos de gordura.

Anteriormente, a membrana sinovial é fixada na margem da cartilagem tanto no fêmur quanto na tíbia, mas no fêmur ela se comunica com a bolsa ou recesso suprapatelar e estende o espaço articular proximalmente.: 210 A bolsa suprapatelar é impedida de ser pinçada durante a extensão pelo músculo articularis.

Atrás, a membrana sinovial é fixada às margens dos dois côndilos femorais que produz duas extensões (bursa semimembranosa sob a cabeça medial do gastronêmio e bursa poplítea sob a cabeça lateral do gastronêmio) semelhantes à bolsa suprapatelar.

Entre essas duas extensões, a membrana sinovial passa na frente dos dois ligamentos cruzados no centro da articulação, formando assim uma bolsa diretamente para dentro.: 210 Sinóvia que reveste a cápsula e suas bursas.

A sinóvia também reveste o coxim de gordura infrapatelar, o coxim de gordura que fica abaixo do ligamento patelar.

Sinóvia projetando-se na almofada de gordura como duas dobras.


=== Bolsas ===


Numerosas bursas circundam a articulação do joelho.

A maior bolsa comunicativa é a bolsa suprapatelar descrita acima.

Quatro bursas consideravelmente menores estão localizadas na parte de trás do joelho.

Duas bursas não comunicativas estão localizadas na frente da patela e abaixo do tendão patelar, e outras às vezes estão presentes. : 210 


=== Cartilagem ===

A cartilagem é um tecido fino e elástico que protege o osso e garante que as superfícies articulares possam deslizar facilmente umas sobre as outras.

A cartilagem garante um movimento flexível do joelho.

Existem dois tipos de cartilagem articular nos joelhos: cartilagem fibrosa (menisco) e cartilagem hialina.

A cartilagem fibrosa tem resistência à tração e pode resistir à pressão.

A cartilagem hialina cobre a superfície ao longo da qual as articulações se movem.

As fibras de colágeno dentro da cartilagem articular foram descritas por Benninghoff como originando-se do osso subcondral de maneira radial, formando os chamados arcos góticos.

Na superfície da cartilagem essas fibras aparecem em orientação tangencial e aumentam a resistência à abrasão.

Não há vasos sanguíneos dentro da cartilagem hialina, a alimentação é feita por difusão.

O líquido sinovial e a medula óssea subcondral servem como fontes de nutrição para a cartilagem hialina.

A falta de pelo menos uma fonte induz uma degeneração.

A cartilagem vai se desgastar ao longo dos anos.

A cartilagem tem uma capacidade muito limitada de auto-restauração.

O tecido recém-formado geralmente consiste em uma grande parte de cartilagem fibrosa de menor qualidade do que a cartilagem hialina original.

Como resultado, novas rachaduras e rasgos se formarão na cartilagem ao longo do tempo.


=== Meniscos ===


Os discos articulares da articulação do joelho são chamados de meniscos porque dividem apenas parcialmente o espaço articular.: 26 Esses dois discos, o menisco medial e o menisco lateral, consistem em tecido conjuntivo com extensas fibras colágenas contendo células semelhantes a cartilagem.

Fibras fortes correm ao longo dos meniscos de uma fixação para a outra, enquanto fibras radiais mais fracas são entrelaçadas com as primeiras.

Os meniscos são achatados no centro da articulação do joelho, fundidos com a membrana sinovial lateralmente e podem se mover sobre a superfície tibial. : 208 
As superfícies superior e inferior dos meniscos são livres.

Cada menisco tem cornos anterior e posterior que se encontram na área intercondilar da tíbia. O menisco medial é maior, menos curvo e mais fino.

Seu corno posterior é mais espesso (14mm) que o anterior (6mm). O menisco lateral é menor, mais curvo (quase circular) e tem espessura mais uniforme que o menisco medial (10mm).

O menisco lateral é menos aderido à cápsula articular, pois sua superfície posterolateral é sulcada pelo tendão poplíteo, separando o menisco da cápsula.

O tendão poplíteo não está preso ao menisco lateral.


=== Ligamentos ===


Os ligamentos que envolvem a articulação do joelho oferecem estabilidade limitando os movimentos e, juntamente com os meniscos e várias bursas, protegem a cápsula articular.


==== Intracapsular ====
O joelho é estabilizado por um par de ligamentos cruzados.

Esses ligamentos são ambos ligamentos extrassinoviais e intracapsulares.

O ligamento cruzado anterior (LCA) se estende do côndilo lateral do fêmur até a área intercondilar anterior.

O LCA é extremamente importante porque evita que a tíbia seja empurrada muito para frente em relação ao fêmur.

Muitas vezes é rasgado durante a torção ou flexão do joelho.

O ligamento cruzado posterior (LCP) se estende do côndilo medial do fêmur até a área intercondilar posterior.

Este ligamento impede o deslocamento posterior da tíbia em relação ao fêmur.

A lesão desse ligamento é incomum, mas pode ocorrer como resultado direto de um trauma forçado no ligamento. O ligamento transverso se estende do menisco lateral ao menisco medial.

Passa na frente dos meniscos.

É dividido em várias tiras em 10% dos casos.: 208 Os dois meniscos são fixados um ao outro anteriormente pelo ligamento.

Os ligamentos meniscofemoral posterior (de Wrisberg) e anterior (de Humphrey) estendem-se do corno posterior do menisco lateral até o côndilo femoral medial.

Eles passam anterior e posterior ao ligamento cruzado posterior, respectivamente.: 208 Os ligamentos meniscotibiais (ou "coronários") se estendem das bordas inferiores dos meniscos até a periferia dos platôs tibiais.


==== Extracapsular ====
O ligamento patelar conecta a patela à tuberosidade da tíbia.

Também é ocasionalmente chamado de tendão patelar porque não há separação definida entre o tendão do quadríceps (que envolve a patela) e a área que conecta a patela à tíbia.

Este ligamento muito forte ajuda a dar à patela sua alavancagem mecânica e também funciona como uma tampa para os côndilos do fêmur.

Lateralmente e medialmente ao ligamento patelar, os retináculos lateral e medial conectam as fibras dos músculos vasto lateral e medial à tíbia.

Algumas fibras do trato iliotibial irradiam para o retináculo lateral e o retináculo medial recebe algumas fibras transversais que surgem no epicôndilo medial do fêmur. côndilo tibial.

É composto por três grupos de fibras, um que se estende entre os dois ossos e dois fundidos com o menisco medial.

O LCM é parcialmente coberto pela pata de ganso e o tendão do semimembranoso passa por baixo dele: 206 Ele protege o lado medial do joelho de ser dobrado e aberto por um estresse aplicado ao lado lateral do joelho (uma força em valgo). : 206 O ligamento colateral lateral (LCL também conhecido como "fibular") se estende do epicôndilo lateral do fêmur até a cabeça da fíbula.

É separado tanto da cápsula articular quanto do menisco lateral.: 206 Protege o lado lateral de uma força de flexão interna (uma força em varo).

O ligamento anterolateral (ALL) está situado na frente do LCL. Por último, existem dois ligamentos no lado dorsal do joelho.

O ligamento poplíteo oblíquo é uma radiação do tendão do semimembranoso no lado medial, de onde é direto lateralmente e proximalmente.

O ligamento poplíteo arqueado origina-se no ápice da cabeça da fíbula para se esticar proximalmente, cruza o tendão do músculo poplíteo e passa para a cápsula.: 206 


== Músculos ==

Os músculos responsáveis ​​pelo movimento da articulação do joelho pertencem ao compartimento anterior, medial ou posterior da coxa.

Os extensores geralmente pertencem ao compartimento anterior e os flexores ao posterior.

As duas exceções são o grácil, um flexor, que pertence ao compartimento medial e o sartório, um flexor, no compartimento anterior.


=== Extensores ===



=== Flexores ===

Compartimento posterior

Compartimento médio:


=== Suprimento sanguíneo ===


A artéria femoral e a artéria poplítea ajudam a formar a rede ou plexo arterial que envolve a articulação do joelho.

Existem seis ramos principais: duas artérias geniculares superiores, duas artérias geniculares inferiores, a artéria genicular descendente e o ramo recorrente da artéria tibial anterior.
As artérias geniculares mediais penetram na articulação do joelho.


== Função ==

O joelho permite flexão e extensão em torno de um eixo transversal virtual, bem como uma ligeira rotação medial e lateral em torno do eixo da perna na posição flexionada.

A articulação do joelho é chamada de "móvel" porque o fêmur e o menisco lateral se movem: 399 sobre a tíbia durante a rotação, enquanto o fêmur rola e desliza sobre ambos os meniscos durante a extensão-flexão.: 212–213 O centro do eixo transversal da extensão /movimentos de flexão está localizado onde ambos os ligamentos colaterais e ambos os ligamentos cruzados se cruzam.

Este centro move-se para cima e para trás durante a flexão, enquanto a distância entre o centro e as superfícies articulares do fêmur muda dinamicamente com a diminuição da curvatura dos côndilos femorais.

A amplitude total de movimento depende de vários parâmetros, como restrições de tecidos moles, insuficiência ativa e rigidez dos isquiotibiais.: 398 


=== Posição estendida ===

Com o joelho estendido, os ligamentos colaterais lateral e medial, bem como a parte anterior do ligamento cruzado anterior, ficam tensos.

Durante a extensão, os côndilos femorais deslizam e rolam em uma posição que causa o desdobramento completo do ligamento colateral tibial.

Durante os últimos 10° de extensão, uma rotação terminal obrigatória é acionada na qual o joelho é girado medialmente 5°.

A rotação final é produzida por uma rotação lateral da tíbia na perna sem carga e por uma rotação medial do fêmur na perna com carga.

Essa rotação terminal é possibilitada pela forma do côndilo femoral medial, auxiliada pela contração do músculo poplíteo e do trato iliotibial e é causada pelo estiramento do ligamento cruzado anterior.

Ambos os ligamentos cruzados são ligeiramente desenrolados e ambos os ligamentos laterais ficam tensos.: 212 


=== Posição flexionada ===

Na posição flexionada, os ligamentos colaterais estão relaxados enquanto os ligamentos cruzados estão tensos.

A rotação é controlada pelos ligamentos cruzados torcidos; os dois ligamentos se torcem um ao redor do outro durante a rotação medial da tíbia - o que reduz a quantidade de rotação possível - enquanto eles se desenrolam durante a rotação lateral da tíbia.

Devido à posição oblíqua dos ligamentos cruzados, pelo menos uma parte de um deles está sempre tensa e esses ligamentos controlam a articulação à medida que os ligamentos colaterais estão relaxados.

Além disso, as fibras dorsais do ligamento colateral tibial ficam tensas durante a rotação medial extrema e o ligamento também reduz a rotação lateral para 45-60°.: 212 


== Significado clínico ==


A dor no joelho é causada por trauma, desalinhamento e degeneração, bem como por condições como artrite.

O distúrbio do joelho mais comum é geralmente conhecido como síndrome femoropatelar.

A maioria dos casos menores de dor no joelho pode ser tratada em casa com repouso e gelo, mas lesões mais graves requerem cuidados cirúrgicos.
Uma forma de síndrome femoropatelar envolve um problema relacionado ao tecido que cria pressão e irritação no joelho entre a patela e a tróclea (síndrome de compressão patelar), o que causa dor.

A segunda classe principal de distúrbios do joelho envolve uma ruptura, deslizamento ou luxação que prejudica a capacidade estrutural do joelho de equilibrar a perna (síndrome da instabilidade patelofemoral).

A síndrome da instabilidade femoropatelar pode causar dor, sensação de desequilíbrio ou ambos. A bursite pré-patelar, também conhecida como joelho de empregada, é uma inflamação dolorosa da bolsa pré-patelar (uma bolsa frontal do joelho), geralmente causada por atividades ocupacionais, como telhados.
A idade também contribui para distúrbios do joelho.

Particularmente em pessoas idosas, a dor no joelho surge frequentemente devido à osteoartrite.

Além disso, o enfraquecimento dos tecidos ao redor do joelho pode contribuir para o problema.

A instabilidade femoropatelar pode estar relacionada a anormalidades do quadril ou ao aperto dos ligamentos circundantes. As lesões da cartilagem podem ser causadas por:

Acidentes (fraturas)
Lesões
A remoção de um menisco
Lesão do ligamento cruzado anterior
Lesão do ligamento cruzado posterior
Lesão do canto posterolateral
Lesões do joelho medial
Tensão considerável sobre o joelho. Qualquer tipo de trabalho durante o qual os joelhos sofrem forte estresse também pode ser prejudicial para a cartilagem.

Este é especialmente o caso em profissões em que as pessoas frequentemente têm que andar, levantar ou agachar.

Outras causas de dor podem ser excessivas e desgastadas nos joelhos, em combinação com fraqueza muscular e excesso de peso.
Reclamações comuns:

Um joelho doloroso, bloqueado, travado ou inchado.
Os pacientes às vezes sentem como se seus joelhos estivessem prestes a ceder, ou podem se sentir incertos sobre seu movimento.


=== Aptidão geral e lesão no joelho ===

A aptidão física está relacionada integralmente ao desenvolvimento de problemas no joelho.

A mesma atividade, como subir escadas, pode causar dor por compressão femoropatelar para alguém fisicamente inapto, mas não para outra pessoa (ou mesmo para essa pessoa em um momento diferente).

A obesidade é outro grande contribuinte para a dor no joelho.

Por exemplo, uma mulher de 30 anos que pesava 120 libras aos 18 anos, antes de suas três gestações, e agora pesa 285 libras, adicionou 660 libras de força em sua articulação femoropatelar a cada passo.


=== Lesões comuns devido à atividade física ===


Em esportes que exercem grande pressão sobre os joelhos, principalmente com forças de torção, é comum romper um ou mais ligamentos ou cartilagens.

Algumas das lesões mais comuns do joelho são as do lado medial: lesões do joelho medial.


=== Lesão do ligamento cruzado anterior ===


O ligamento cruzado anterior é o ligamento mais comumente lesado do joelho.

A lesão é comum durante esportes.

A torção do joelho é uma causa comum de alongamento excessivo ou ruptura do LCA.

Quando o LCA está ferido, um som de estalo pode ser ouvido e a perna pode ceder de repente.

Além do inchaço e da dor, caminhar pode ser doloroso e o joelho parecerá instável.

Lesões menores do ligamento cruzado anterior podem cicatrizar com o tempo, mas uma ruptura do LCA requer cirurgia.

Após a cirurgia, a recuperação é prolongada e exercícios de baixo impacto são recomendados para fortalecer a articulação.


=== Lesão do menisco rasgado ===

Os meniscos atuam como amortecedores e separam as duas extremidades do osso na articulação do joelho.

Existem dois meniscos no joelho, o medial (interno) e o lateral (externo).

Quando há cartilagem rasgada, isso significa que o menisco foi ferido.

As rupturas do menisco ocorrem durante os esportes, muitas vezes quando o joelho é torcido.

A lesão do menisco pode ser inócua e pode-se andar após uma ruptura, mas logo o inchaço e a dor se instalam.

Às vezes, o joelho trava ao dobrar.

A dor geralmente ocorre quando se agacha.

As pequenas rupturas do menisco são tratadas de forma conservadora, mas a maioria das grandes rupturas requer cirurgia.


=== Fraturas ===


As fraturas do joelho são raras, mas ocorrem, especialmente como resultado de um acidente de trânsito.

As fraturas do joelho incluem uma fratura da patela e um tipo de fratura por avulsão chamada fratura de Segond.

Geralmente, há dor e inchaço imediatos e dificuldade ou incapacidade de ficar em pé na perna.

Os músculos entram em espasmo e até os movimentos mais leves são dolorosos.

As radiografias podem confirmar facilmente a lesão e a cirurgia dependerá do grau de deslocamento e do tipo de fratura.


=== Tendão rompido ===

Os tendões geralmente unem o músculo ao osso.

No joelho, o tendão do quadríceps e da patela às vezes pode romper.

As lesões nesses tendões ocorrem quando há contração forçada do joelho.

Se o tendão estiver completamente rompido, é impossível dobrar ou estender a perna.

Um tendão completamente rompido requer cirurgia, mas um tendão parcialmente rompido pode ser tratado com imobilização da perna seguida de fisioterapia.


=== Uso excessivo ===

Lesões por uso excessivo do joelho incluem tendinite, bursite, distensões musculares e síndrome da banda iliotibial.

Essas lesões geralmente se desenvolvem lentamente ao longo de semanas ou meses.

Atividades que induzem a dor geralmente atrasam a cicatrização.

Descanso, gelo e compressão ajudam na maioria dos casos.

Uma vez que o inchaço tenha diminuído, os pacotes de calor podem aumentar o suprimento de sangue e promover a cura.

A maioria das lesões por uso excessivo diminui com o tempo, mas pode aumentar se as atividades forem retomadas rapidamente.

Os indivíduos podem reduzir as chances de lesões por uso excessivo aquecendo-se antes do exercício, limitando atividades de alto impacto e mantendo seu peso sob controle.


=== Deformidade em varo ou valgo ===


Existem dois distúrbios relacionados a um ângulo anormal no plano coronal ao nível do joelho:

Genu valgum é uma deformidade em valgo em que a tíbia é voltada para fora em relação ao fêmur, resultando em uma aparência de joelho em torção.
Genu varum é uma deformidade em varo em que a tíbia está voltada para dentro em relação ao fêmur, resultando em uma deformidade de pernas arqueadas. eixo mecânico femoral e o centro da articulação do tornozelo.

É normalmente entre 1,0° e 1,5° de varo em adultos.

Os intervalos normais são diferentes em crianças.


=== Intervenções cirúrgicas ===

Antes do advento da artroscopia e da cirurgia artroscópica, os pacientes submetidos à cirurgia para uma ruptura do LCA precisavam de pelo menos nove meses de reabilitação, tendo inicialmente passado várias semanas com gesso completo.

Com as técnicas atuais, esses pacientes podem andar sem muletas em duas semanas e praticar alguns esportes em alguns meses.
Além de desenvolver novos procedimentos cirúrgicos, pesquisas em andamento estão analisando problemas subjacentes que podem aumentar a probabilidade de um atleta sofrer uma lesão grave no joelho.

Esses achados podem levar a medidas preventivas eficazes, especialmente em atletas do sexo feminino, que demonstraram ser especialmente vulneráveis ​​a lesões do LCA por trauma relativamente menor.
Tratamento de reparação da cartilagem articular:

Desbridamento artroscópico do joelho (lavagem artroscópica)
Mosaico-plastia
Microfratura (Colocação de Gelo)
Implante autólogo de condrócitos
Autoenxerto Osteocondral e Aloenxertos
Reconstrução de CLP


== Imagens ==



=== ressonância magnética ===

Tanto o ligamento cruzado anterior (LCA) quanto o ligamento cruzado posterior (LCP) são hipointensos nas imagens ponderadas em T1 e T2 da RM.

No entanto, algumas estrias de alto sinal são frequentemente vistas na parte distal do LCA, tornando o LCA mais intenso do que o LCP em exames de ressonância magnética.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


=== Raio X ===


 
 


=== Ilustrações ===


 
 
 
 


== Outros animais ==

Em humanos, o termo "joelho" refere-se às articulações entre o fêmur, a tíbia e a patela, na perna.
Em quadrúpedes, como cães, cavalos e camundongos, as articulações homólogas entre o fêmur, a tíbia e a patela, na perna traseira, são conhecidas como articulação do joelho.

Também em quadrúpedes, particularmente cavalos, ungulados e elefantes, o termo do leigo "joelho" também comumente se refere à articulação voltada para a frente na perna dianteira, o carpo, que é homólogo ao pulso humano.
Nas aves, o “joelho” refere-se às articulações entre o fêmur e o tibiotarso, e também a patela (quando presente).

O termo do leigo "joelho" também pode se referir à articulação (mais baixa e muitas vezes mais visível por não ser coberta por penas) entre o tibiotarso e o tarsometatarso, que é homóloga ao tornozelo humano.
Em insetos e outros animais, o termo joelho refere-se amplamente a qualquer articulação em dobradiça.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Knee

;;;FR;;;



GENOU


Chez l'homme et les autres primates, le genou relie la cuisse à la jambe et se compose de deux articulations : une entre le fémur et le tibia (articulation tibio-fémorale) et une entre le fémur et la rotule (articulation fémoro-patellaire).

C'est la plus grosse articulation du corps humain.

Le genou est une articulation à charnière modifiée, qui permet la flexion et l'extension ainsi qu'une légère rotation interne et externe.

Le genou est vulnérable aux blessures et au développement de l'arthrose.
On l'appelle souvent une articulation composée ayant des composants tibio-fémoral et fémoro-patellaire. (Le ligament collatéral fibulaire est souvent considéré avec des composants tibiofémoraux.)


== Structure ==


Le genou est une articulation à charnière modifiée, un type d'articulation synoviale, qui se compose de trois compartiments fonctionnels : l'articulation fémoro-patellaire, constituée de la rotule, ou « rotule », et la rainure rotulienne à l'avant du fémur à travers laquelle elle glisse ; et les articulations tibio-fémorales médiales et latérales reliant le fémur, ou os de la cuisse, au tibia, l'os principal de la partie inférieure de la jambe.

L'articulation baigne dans le liquide synovial qui est contenu à l'intérieur de la membrane synoviale appelée capsule articulaire.

Le coin postéro-latéral du genou est une zone qui a récemment fait l'objet d'examens et de recherches renouvelés. Le genou est la plus grande articulation et l'une des articulations les plus importantes du corps.

Il joue un rôle essentiel dans les mouvements liés au transport du poids du corps dans les directions horizontales (course et marche) et verticales (sauts). de trois et cinq ans.

Comme il s'agit du plus gros os sésamoïde du corps humain, le processus d'ossification prend beaucoup plus de temps.


=== Corps articulaires ===

Les principaux corps articulaires du fémur sont ses condyles latéraux et médiaux.

Ceux-ci divergent légèrement distalement et postérieurement, le condyle latéral étant plus large à l'avant qu'à l'arrière tandis que le condyle médial est de largeur plus constante. : 206 Le rayon de courbure des condyles dans le plan sagittal diminue vers l'arrière.

Ce rayon décroissant produit une série de points médians de développante (c'est-à-dire situés sur une spirale).

La série d'axes transversaux qui en résulte permet le mouvement de glissement et de roulement dans le genou fléchi tout en garantissant que les ligaments collatéraux sont suffisamment relâchés pour permettre la rotation associée à la courbure du condyle médial autour d'un axe vertical. : 194–95 La paire de condyles tibiaux sont séparés par l'éminence intercondylienne : 206 composée d'un tubercule latéral et médial.

Il est inséré dans la fine paroi antérieure de la capsule articulaire. : 206 sur sa face postérieure se trouve une surface articulaire latérale et médiale, : 194 qui communiquent toutes deux avec la surface rotulienne qui unit les deux condyles fémoraux sur la face antérieure de la extrémité distale de l'os : 192 


=== Capsule articulaire ===


La capsule articulaire a une synoviale et une membrane fibreuse séparées par des dépôts graisseux.

Antérieurement, la membrane synoviale est attachée sur la marge du cartilage à la fois sur le fémur et le tibia, mais sur le fémur, elle communique avec la bourse ou l'évidement suprapatellaire et prolonge l'espace articulaire de manière proximale. : 210 La bourse suprapatellaire est empêchée d'être pincé lors de l'extension par le muscle du genre articularis.

En arrière, la membrane synoviale est attachée aux marges des deux condyles fémoraux qui produit deux extensions (bourse semi-membraneuse sous le chef médial du gastronémien et bourse poplitée sous le chef latéral du gastronémien) similaires à la bourse suprapatellaire.

Entre ces deux extensions, la membrane synoviale passe devant les deux ligaments croisés au centre de l'articulation, formant ainsi une poche directe vers l'intérieur. : 210 Synovie tapissant la capsule et ses bourses.

La synoviale tapisse également le coussinet adipeux infrapatellaire, le coussinet adipeux qui se trouve sous le ligament rotulien.

Synovie faisant saillie dans le coussinet adipeux en deux plis.


=== Bourse ===


De nombreuses bourses entourent l'articulation du genou.

La plus grande bourse communicative est la bourse suprapatellaire décrite ci-dessus.

Quatre bourses considérablement plus petites sont situées à l'arrière du genou.

Deux bourses non communicantes sont situées en avant de la rotule et en dessous du tendon rotulien, et d'autres sont parfois présentes. : 210 


=== Cartilages ===

Le cartilage est un tissu mince et élastique qui protège l'os et garantit que les surfaces articulaires peuvent glisser facilement les unes sur les autres.

Le cartilage assure un mouvement souple du genou.

Il existe deux types de cartilage articulaire dans les genoux : le cartilage fibreux (le ménisque) et le cartilage hyalin.

Le cartilage fibreux a une résistance à la traction et peut résister à la pression.

Le cartilage hyalin recouvre la surface le long de laquelle les articulations se déplacent.

Les fibres de collagène dans le cartilage articulaire ont été décrites par Benninghoff comme provenant de l'os sous-chondral de manière radiale, construisant ce que l'on appelle des arcs gothiques.

A la surface du cartilage ces fibres apparaissent dans une orientation tangentielle et augmentent la résistance à l'abrasion.

Il n'y a pas de vaisseaux sanguins à l'intérieur du cartilage hyalin, l'alimentation se fait par diffusion.

Le liquide synovial et la moelle osseuse sous-chondrale servent tous deux de sources de nutrition pour le cartilage hyalin.

L'absence d'au moins une source induit une dégénérescence.

Le cartilage s'usera avec les années.

Le cartilage a une capacité très limitée d'auto-restauration.

Le tissu nouvellement formé consistera généralement en une grande partie de cartilage fibreux de moindre qualité que le cartilage hyalin d'origine.

En conséquence, de nouvelles fissures et déchirures se formeront dans le cartilage au fil du temps.


=== Ménisques ===


Les disques articulaires de l'articulation du genou sont appelés ménisques car ils ne divisent que partiellement l'espace articulaire : 26 Ces deux disques, le ménisque médial et le ménisque latéral, sont constitués de tissu conjonctif avec de nombreuses fibres de collagène contenant des cellules ressemblant à du cartilage.

Des fibres fortes courent le long des ménisques d'une attache à l'autre, tandis que des fibres radiales plus faibles sont entrelacées avec les premières.

Les ménisques sont aplatis au centre de l'articulation du genou, fusionnés avec la membrane synoviale latéralement et peuvent se déplacer sur la surface tibiale. : 208 
Les faces supérieure et inférieure des ménisques sont libres.

Chaque ménisque a des cornes antérieure et postérieure qui se rejoignent dans la zone intercondylienne du tibia. Le ménisque médial est plus grand, moins incurvé et plus fin.

Sa corne postérieure est plus épaisse (14 mm) que la corne antérieure (6 mm). Le ménisque latéral est plus petit, plus courbé (presque circulaire) et a une épaisseur plus uniforme que le ménisque médial (10 mm).

Le ménisque latéral est moins attaché à la capsule articulaire, car sa surface postérolatérale est sillonnée par le tendon poplité, séparant le ménisque de la capsule.

Le tendon poplité n'est pas attaché au ménisque latéral.


=== Ligaments ===


Les ligaments entourant l'articulation du genou offrent une stabilité en limitant les mouvements et, avec les ménisques et plusieurs bourses, protègent la capsule articulaire.


==== Intracapsulaire ====
Le genou est stabilisé par une paire de ligaments croisés.

Ces ligaments sont à la fois des ligaments extrasynoviaux et intracapsulaires.

Le ligament croisé antérieur (LCA) s'étend du condyle latéral du fémur à la zone intercondylienne antérieure.

Le LCA est extrêmement important car il empêche le tibia d'être poussé trop loin vers l'avant par rapport au fémur.

Il est souvent déchiré lors de la torsion ou de la flexion du genou.

Le ligament croisé postérieur (PCL) s'étend du condyle médial du fémur à la zone intercondylienne postérieure.

Ce ligament empêche le déplacement postérieur du tibia par rapport au fémur.

Les blessures à ce ligament sont rares mais peuvent survenir à la suite d'un traumatisme forcé du ligament. Le ligament transverse s'étend du ménisque latéral au ménisque médial.

Il passe devant les ménisques.

Il est divisé en plusieurs bandelettes dans 10 % des cas. : 208 Les deux ménisques sont attachés l'un à l'autre en avant par le ligament.

Les ligaments ménisco-fémoral postérieur (de Wrisberg) et antérieur (de Humphrey) s'étendent de la corne postérieure du ménisque latéral au condyle fémoral médial.

Ils passent respectivement en avant et en arrière du ligament croisé postérieur. : 208 Les ligaments méniscotibiaux (ou "coronaires") s'étendent des bords inférieurs des ménisques à la périphérie des plateaux tibiaux.


==== Extracapsulaire ====
Le ligament rotulien relie la rotule à la tubérosité du tibia.

Il est aussi parfois appelé tendon rotulien car il n'y a pas de séparation définie entre le tendon du quadriceps (qui entoure la rotule) et la zone reliant la rotule au tibia.

Ce ligament très solide aide à donner à la rotule son effet de levier mécanique et fonctionne également comme un capuchon pour les condyles du fémur.

Latéralement et médialement au ligament rotulien, les rétinacules latéral et médial relient les fibres des muscles vaste latéral et médial au tibia.

Certaines fibres du tractus iliotibial rayonnent dans le rétinaculum latéral et le rétinaculum médial reçoit des fibres transversales apparaissant sur l'épicondyle fémoral médial. : 206 Le ligament collatéral médial (MCL aka "tibial") s'étend de l'épicondyle médial du fémur à la condyle tibial.

Il est composé de trois groupes de fibres, une s'étendant entre les deux os et deux fusionnées avec le ménisque médial.

Le MCL est partiellement recouvert par le pied anserinus et le tendon du demi-membraneux passe en dessous. : 206 Il protège la face médiale du genou d'une flexion ouverte par une contrainte appliquée sur la face latérale du genou (une force de valgus). : 206 Le ligament collatéral latéral (LCL alias "fibulaire") s'étend de l'épicondyle latéral du fémur à la tête du péroné.

Il est séparé à la fois de la capsule articulaire et du ménisque latéral. : 206 Il protège le côté latéral d'une force de flexion interne (force de varus).

Le ligament antérolatéral (LAL) est situé devant le LCL. Enfin, il existe deux ligaments sur la face dorsale du genou.

Le ligament poplité oblique est un rayonnement du tendon du semi-membraneux du côté médial, d'où il est direct latéralement et proximalement.

Le ligament poplité arqué prend naissance à l'apex de la tête du péroné pour s'étirer de manière proximale, traverse le tendon du muscle poplité et passe dans la capsule. : 206 


== Muscles ==

Les muscles responsables du mouvement de l'articulation du genou appartiennent au compartiment antérieur, médial ou postérieur de la cuisse.

Les extenseurs appartiennent généralement à la loge antérieure et les fléchisseurs à la loge postérieure.

Les deux exceptions à cela sont gracilis, un fléchisseur, qui appartient au compartiment médial et sartorius, un fléchisseur, dans le compartiment antérieur.


=== Extenseurs ===



=== Fléchisseurs ===

Compartiment postérieur

Compartiment médial :


=== Approvisionnement en sang ===


L'artère fémorale et l'artère poplitée contribuent à former le réseau artériel ou plexus entourant l'articulation du genou.

Il y a six branches principales : deux artères géniculaires supérieures, deux artères géniculaires inférieures, l'artère géniculaire descendante et la branche récurrente de l'artère tibiale antérieure.
Les artères géniculaires médiales pénètrent dans l'articulation du genou.


== Fonction ==

Le genou permet une flexion et une extension autour d'un axe transversal virtuel, ainsi qu'une légère rotation médiale et latérale autour de l'axe du bas de jambe en position fléchie.

L'articulation du genou est dite "mobile" car le fémur et le ménisque latéral se déplacent : 399 sur le tibia pendant la rotation, tandis que le fémur roule et glisse sur les deux ménisques pendant l'extension-flexion. : 212–213 Le centre de l'axe transversal de l'extension /mouvements de flexion est situé là où les deux ligaments collatéraux et les deux ligaments croisés se croisent.

Ce centre se déplace vers le haut et vers l'arrière pendant la flexion, tandis que la distance entre le centre et les surfaces articulaires du fémur change dynamiquement avec la courbure décroissante des condyles fémoraux.

L'amplitude totale des mouvements dépend de plusieurs paramètres tels que les contraintes des tissus mous, l'insuffisance active et l'étanchéité des ischio-jambiers. : 398 


=== Position allongée ===

Avec le genou en extension, les ligaments collatéraux latéral et médial, ainsi que la partie antérieure du ligament croisé antérieur, sont tendus.

Lors de l'extension, les condyles fémoraux glissent et roulent dans une position qui provoque le déploiement complet du ligament collatéral tibial.

Au cours des 10 derniers degrés d'extension, une rotation terminale obligatoire est déclenchée dans laquelle le genou est tourné médialement de 5°.

La rotation finale est produite par une rotation latérale du tibia dans la jambe non portante, et par une rotation médiale du fémur dans la jambe portante.

Cette rotation terminale est rendue possible par la forme du condyle fémoral médial, assistée par la contraction du muscle poplité et du tractus ilio-tibial et est provoquée par l'étirement du ligament croisé antérieur.

Les deux ligaments croisés sont légèrement déroulés et les deux ligaments latéraux se tendent. : 212 


=== Position fléchie ===

En position fléchie, les ligaments collatéraux sont détendus tandis que les ligaments croisés sont tendus.

La rotation est contrôlée par les ligaments croisés tordus ; les deux ligaments se tordent l'un autour de l'autre lors de la rotation médiale du tibia - ce qui réduit la quantité de rotation possible - tandis qu'ils se déroulent lors de la rotation latérale du tibia.

En raison de la position oblique des ligaments croisés, au moins une partie de l'un d'entre eux est toujours tendue et ces ligaments contrôlent l'articulation tandis que les ligaments collatéraux sont relâchés.

De plus, les fibres dorsales du ligament collatéral tibial se tendent lors d'une rotation médiale extrême et le ligament réduit également la rotation latérale à 45–60°. : 212 


== Signification clinique ==


La douleur au genou est causée par un traumatisme, un désalignement et une dégénérescence ainsi que par des conditions telles que l'arthrite.

Le trouble du genou le plus courant est généralement connu sous le nom de syndrome fémoro-patellaire.

La majorité des cas mineurs de douleur au genou peuvent être traités à domicile avec du repos et de la glace, mais les blessures plus graves nécessitent des soins chirurgicaux.
Une forme de syndrome fémoro-patellaire implique un problème lié aux tissus qui crée une pression et une irritation dans le genou entre la rotule et la trochlée (syndrome de compression patellaire), ce qui provoque des douleurs.

La deuxième grande classe de troubles du genou implique une déchirure, un glissement ou une luxation qui altère la capacité structurelle du genou à équilibrer la jambe (syndrome d'instabilité fémoro-patellaire).

Le syndrome d'instabilité fémoro-patellaire peut provoquer soit de la douleur, soit une sensation de mauvais équilibre, soit les deux. La bursite prépatellaire, également connue sous le nom de genou de la femme de ménage, est une inflammation douloureuse de la bourse prépatellaire (une bourse frontale du genou) souvent provoquée par une activité professionnelle telle que la toiture.
L'âge contribue également aux troubles du genou.

Particulièrement chez les personnes âgées, la douleur au genou est souvent due à l'arthrose.

De plus, l'affaiblissement des tissus autour du genou peut contribuer au problème.

L'instabilité fémoropatellaire peut être liée à des anomalies de la hanche ou à une tension des ligaments environnants. Les lésions cartilagineuses peuvent être causées par :

Accident (fracture)
Blessures
L'ablation d'un ménisque
Lésion du ligament croisé antérieur
Lésion du ligament croisé postérieur
Blessure du coin postéro-latéral
Blessures médiales du genou
Sollicitation considérable du genou. Tout type de travail au cours duquel les genoux sont fortement sollicités peut également être préjudiciable au cartilage.

C'est particulièrement le cas dans les professions où les gens doivent fréquemment marcher, soulever ou s'accroupir.

D'autres causes de douleur peuvent être excessives et s'user au niveau des genoux, en combinaison avec des facteurs tels que la faiblesse musculaire et le surpoids.
Plaintes courantes :

Un genou douloureux, bloqué, verrouillé ou enflé.
Les personnes atteintes ont parfois l'impression que leurs genoux sont sur le point de céder ou peuvent se sentir incertaines quant à leur mouvement.


=== Condition physique générale et blessure au genou ===

La condition physique est liée intégralement au développement des problèmes de genou.

La même activité, comme monter des escaliers, peut causer de la douleur due à la compression fémoro-patellaire pour une personne physiquement inapte, mais pas pour quelqu'un d'autre (ou même pour cette personne à un moment différent).

L'obésité est un autre contributeur majeur à la douleur au genou.

Par exemple, une femme de 30 ans qui pesait 120 livres à l'âge de 18 ans, avant ses trois grossesses, et qui pèse maintenant 285 livres, avait ajouté 660 livres de force sur son articulation fémoro-patellaire à chaque pas.


=== Blessures courantes dues à l'activité physique ===


Dans les sports qui exercent une forte pression sur les genoux, notamment avec des forces de torsion, il est courant de déchirer un ou plusieurs ligaments ou cartilages.

Certaines des blessures au genou les plus courantes sont celles du côté médial : les blessures médiales au genou.


=== Lésion du ligament croisé antérieur ===


Le ligament croisé antérieur est le ligament du genou le plus souvent lésé.

La blessure est fréquente pendant le sport.

La torsion du genou est une cause fréquente d'étirement excessif ou de déchirure du LCA.

Lorsque le LCA est blessé, un claquement peut se faire entendre et la jambe peut soudainement céder.

Outre l'enflure et la douleur, la marche peut être douloureuse et le genou peut sembler instable.

Les déchirures mineures du ligament croisé antérieur peuvent guérir avec le temps, mais une déchirure du LCA nécessite une intervention chirurgicale.

Après la chirurgie, la récupération est prolongée et des exercices à faible impact sont recommandés pour renforcer l'articulation.


=== Blessure au ménisque déchiré ===

Les ménisques agissent comme des amortisseurs et séparent les deux extrémités de l'os dans l'articulation du genou.

Il y a deux ménisques dans le genou, le médial (intérieur) et le latéral (extérieur).

Lorsqu'il y a du cartilage déchiré, cela signifie que le ménisque a été blessé.

Les déchirures du ménisque surviennent souvent pendant les sports lorsque le genou est tordu.

Une blessure au ménisque peut être inoffensive et on peut être capable de marcher après une déchirure, mais bientôt un gonflement et une douleur s'installent.

Parfois, le genou se bloque en se pliant.

La douleur survient souvent lorsque l'on s'accroupit.

Les petites déchirures du ménisque sont traitées de manière conservatrice, mais la plupart des grosses déchirures nécessitent une intervention chirurgicale.


=== Fractures ===


Les fractures du genou sont rares mais surviennent, notamment à la suite d'un accident de la route.

Les fractures du genou comprennent une fracture de la rotule et un type de fracture par avulsion appelée fracture de Segond.

Il y a généralement une douleur et un gonflement immédiats, et une difficulté ou une incapacité à se tenir debout sur la jambe.

Les muscles ont des spasmes et même les moindres mouvements sont douloureux.

Les radiographies peuvent facilement confirmer la blessure et la chirurgie dépendra du degré de déplacement et du type de fracture.


=== Tendon rompu ===

Les tendons attachent généralement le muscle à l'os.

Au genou, le quadriceps et le tendon rotulien peuvent parfois se déchirer.

Les blessures à ces tendons se produisent lorsqu'il y a une forte contraction du genou.

Si le tendon est complètement déchiré, il est impossible de plier ou d'étendre la jambe.

Un tendon complètement déchiré nécessite une intervention chirurgicale, mais un tendon partiellement déchiré peut être traité par une immobilisation de la jambe suivie d'une thérapie physique.


=== Surutilisation ===

Les blessures dues au surmenage du genou comprennent les tendinites, les bursites, les foulures musculaires et le syndrome de la bande iliotibiale.

Ces blessures se développent souvent lentement au fil des semaines ou des mois.

Les activités qui induisent de la douleur retardent généralement la guérison.

Le repos, la glace et la compression aident dans la plupart des cas.

Une fois que le gonflement a diminué, les compresses chauffantes peuvent augmenter l'apport sanguin et favoriser la guérison.

La plupart des blessures dues au surmenage disparaissent avec le temps, mais peuvent éclater si les activités reprennent rapidement.

Les individus peuvent réduire les risques de blessures dues au surmenage en s'échauffant avant l'exercice, en limitant les activités à fort impact et en gardant leur poids sous contrôle.


=== Déformation varus ou valgus ===


Il existe deux troubles liés à un angle anormal dans le plan coronal au niveau du genou :

Le genu valgum est une déformation en valgus dans laquelle le tibia est tourné vers l'extérieur par rapport au fémur, ce qui donne un aspect cagneux.
Le genu varum est une déformation en varus dans laquelle le tibia est tourné vers l'intérieur par rapport au fémur, ce qui entraîne une déformation en jambes arquées. Le degré de déformation en varus ou en valgus peut être quantifié par l'angle hanche-genou-cheville, qui est un angle entre le l'axe mécanique fémoral et le centre de l'articulation de la cheville.

Il est normalement compris entre 1,0° et 1,5° de varus chez l'adulte.

Les plages normales sont différentes chez les enfants.


=== Interventions chirurgicales ===

Avant l'avènement de l'arthroscopie et de la chirurgie arthroscopique, les patients opérés pour une rupture du LCA nécessitaient au moins neuf mois de rééducation, après avoir initialement passé plusieurs semaines dans un plâtre de pleine longueur.

Avec les techniques actuelles, ces patients peuvent marcher sans béquilles en deux semaines et faire du sport en quelques mois.
En plus de développer de nouvelles procédures chirurgicales, la recherche en cours se penche sur les problèmes sous-jacents qui peuvent augmenter la probabilité qu'un athlète souffre d'une grave blessure au genou.

Ces résultats peuvent conduire à des mesures préventives efficaces, en particulier chez les athlètes féminines, qui se sont révélées particulièrement vulnérables aux déchirures du LCA dues à un traumatisme relativement mineur.
Traitement de réparation du cartilage articulaire :

Débridement arthroscopique du genou (lavage arthroscopique)
Mosaic-plastie
Microfracture (Icepicking)
Implantation de chondrocytes autologues
Autogreffes et allogreffes ostéochondrales
Reconstruction de l'automate


== Imagerie ==



=== IRM ===

Le ligament croisé antérieur (LCA) et les ligaments croisés postérieurs (PCL) sont hypointenses sur les images pondérées en T1 et T2 de l'IRM.

Cependant, certaines stries à signal élevé sont souvent observées dans la partie distale du LCA, ce qui rend le LCA plus intense que le PCL sur les IRM.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


=== Radiographie ===


 
 


=== Illustrations ===


 
 
 
 


== Autres animaux ==

Chez l'homme, le terme «genou» fait référence aux articulations entre le fémur, le tibia et la rotule, dans la jambe.
Chez les quadrupèdes tels que les chiens, les chevaux et les souris, les articulations homologues entre le fémur, le tibia et la rotule, dans la patte arrière, sont appelées articulation du grasset.

Toujours chez les quadrupèdes, en particulier les chevaux, les ongulés et les éléphants, le terme profane «genou» fait également référence à l'articulation orientée vers l'avant de la patte antérieure, le carpe, qui est homologue au poignet humain.
Chez les oiseaux, le «genou» fait référence aux articulations entre le fémur et le tibiotarse, ainsi qu'à la rotule (lorsqu'elle est présente).

Le terme profane «genou» peut également faire référence à l'articulation (inférieure et souvent plus visible car non recouverte de plumes) entre le tibiotarse et le tarsométatarse, qui est homologue à la cheville humaine.
Chez les insectes et autres animaux, le terme genou fait largement référence à toute articulation articulée.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Genou
