

MENTAL DISORDER


A mental disorder, also called a mental illness or psychiatric disorder, is a behavioral or mental pattern that causes significant distress or impairment of personal functioning. 

Such features may be persistent, relapsing and remitting, or occur as single episodes. 

Many disorders have been described, with signs and symptoms that vary widely between specific disorders. 

Such disorders may be diagnosed by a mental health professional, usually a clinical psychologist or psychiatrist.
The causes of mental disorders are often unclear. 

Theories may incorporate findings from a range of fields. 

Mental disorders are usually defined by a combination of how a person behaves, feels, perceives, or thinks. 

This may be associated with particular regions or functions of the brain, often in a social context. 

A mental disorder is one aspect of mental health. 

Cultural and religious beliefs, as well as social norms, should be taken into account when making a diagnosis.Services are based in psychiatric hospitals or in the community, and assessments are carried out by mental health professionals such as psychiatrists, psychologists, psychiatric nurses and clinical social workers, using various methods such as psychometric tests but often relying on observation and questioning. 

Treatments are provided by various mental health professionals. 

Psychotherapy and psychiatric medication are two major treatment options. 

Other treatments include lifestyle changes, social interventions, peer support, and self-help. 

In a minority of cases, there might be involuntary detention or treatment. 

Prevention programs have been shown to reduce depression.In 2019, common mental disorders around the globe include depression, which affects about 264 million, bipolar disorder, which affects about 45 million, dementia, which affects about 50 million, and schizophrenia and other psychoses, which affects about 20 million people. 

Neurodevelopmental disorders include intellectual disability and autism spectrum disorders which usually arise in infancy or childhood. 

Stigma and discrimination can add to the suffering and disability associated with mental disorders, leading to various social movements attempting to increase understanding and challenge social exclusion.


== Definition ==


The definition and classification of mental disorders are key issues for researchers as well as service providers and those who may be diagnosed. 

For a mental state to classify as a disorder, it generally needs to cause dysfunction. 

Most international clinical documents use the term mental "disorder", while "illness" is also common. 

It has been noted that using the term "mental" (i.e., of the mind) is not necessarily meant to imply separateness from the brain or body.
According to DSM-IV, a mental disorder is a psychological syndrome or pattern which is associated with distress (e.g. via a painful symptom), disability (impairment in one or more important areas of functioning), increased risk of death, or causes a significant loss of autonomy; however it excludes normal responses such as grief from loss of a loved one and also excludes deviant behavior for political, religious, or societal reasons not arising from a dysfunction in the individual.DSM-IV predicates the definition with caveats, stating that, as in the case with many medical terms, mental disorder "lacks a consistent operational definition that covers all situations", noting that different levels of abstraction can be used for medical definitions, including pathology, symptomology, deviance from a normal range, or etiology, and that the same is true for mental disorders so that sometimes one type of definition is appropriate, and sometimes another, depending on the situation.In 2013, the American Psychiatric Association (APA) redefined mental disorders in the DSM-5 as "a syndrome characterized by clinically significant disturbance in an individual's cognition, emotion regulation, or behavior that reflects a dysfunction in the psychological, biological, or developmental processes underlying mental functioning." The final draft of ICD-11 contains a very similar definition.The terms "mental breakdown" or "nervous breakdown" may be used by the general population to mean a mental disorder. 

The terms "nervous breakdown" and "mental breakdown" have not been formally defined through a medical diagnostic system such as the DSM-5 or ICD-10, and are nearly absent from scientific literature regarding mental illness. 

Although "nervous breakdown" is not rigorously defined, surveys of laypersons suggest that the term refers to a specific acute time-limited reactive disorder, involving symptoms such as anxiety or depression, usually precipitated by external stressors. 

Many health experts today refer to a nervous breakdown as a mental health crisis.


=== Nervous illness ===

Additionally to the concept of mental disorder, some people have argued for a return to the old-fashioned concept of nervous illness. 

In How Everyone Became Depressed: The Rise and Fall of the Nervous Breakdown (2013), Edward Shorter, a professor of psychiatry and the history of medicine, says:

About half of them are depressed. 

Or at least that is the diagnosis that they got when they were put on antidepressants. ... 

They go to work but they are unhappy and uncomfortable; they are somewhat anxious; they are tired; they have various physical pains—and they tend to obsess about the whole business. 

There is a term for what they have, and it is a good old-fashioned term that has gone out of use. 

They have nerves or a nervous illness. 

It is an illness not just of mind or brain, but a disorder of the entire body. ... 

We have a package here of five symptoms—mild depression, some anxiety, fatigue, somatic pains, and obsessive thinking. ... 

We have had nervous illness for centuries. 

When you are too nervous to function ... it is a nervous breakdown. 

But that term has vanished from medicine, although not from the way we speak.... 

The nervous patients of yesteryear are the depressives of today. 

That is the bad news.... 

There is a deeper illness that drives depression and the symptoms of mood. 

We can call this deeper illness something else, or invent a neologism, but we need to get the discussion off depression and onto this deeper disorder in the brain and body. 

That is the point.
In eliminating the nervous breakdown, psychiatry has come close to having its own nervous breakdown.
Nerves stand at the core of common mental illness, no matter how much we try to forget them.
"Nervous breakdown" is a pseudo-medical term to describe a wealth of stress-related feelings and they are often made worse by the belief that there is a real phenomenon called "nervous breakdown". 


== Classifications ==


There are currently two widely established systems that classify mental disorders:

ICD-10 Chapter V: Mental and behavioural disorders, since 1949 part of the International Classification of Diseases produced by the WHO,
the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5) produced by the APA since 1952.Both of these list categories of disorder and provide standardized criteria for diagnosis. 

They have deliberately converged their codes in recent revisions so that the manuals are often broadly comparable, although significant differences remain. 

Other classification schemes may be used in non-western cultures, for example, the Chinese Classification of Mental Disorders, and other manuals may be used by those of alternative theoretical persuasions, such as the Psychodynamic Diagnostic Manual. 

In general, mental disorders are classified separately from neurological disorders, learning disabilities or intellectual disability.
Unlike the DSM and ICD, some approaches are not based on identifying distinct categories of disorder using dichotomous symptom profiles intended to separate the abnormal from the normal. 

There is significant scientific debate about the relative merits of categorical versus such non-categorical (or hybrid) schemes, also known as continuum or dimensional models. 

A spectrum approach may incorporate elements of both.
In the scientific and academic literature on the definition or classification of mental disorder, one extreme argues that it is entirely a matter of value judgements (including of what is normal) while another proposes that it is or could be entirely objective and scientific (including by reference to statistical norms). 

Common hybrid views argue that the concept of mental disorder is objective even if only a "fuzzy prototype" that can never be precisely defined, or conversely that the concept always involves a mixture of scientific facts and subjective value judgments. 

Although the diagnostic categories are referred to as 'disorders', they are presented as medical diseases, but are not validated in the same way as most medical diagnoses. 

Some neurologists argue that classification will only be reliable and valid when based on neurobiological features rather than clinical interview, while others suggest that the differing ideological and practical perspectives need to be better integrated.The DSM and ICD approach remains under attack both because of the implied causality model and because some researchers believe it better to aim at underlying brain differences which can precede symptoms by many years.


=== Dimensional models ===

The high degree of comorbidity between disorders in categorical models such as the DSM and ICD have led some to propose dimensional models. 

Studying comorbidity between disorders have demonstrated two latent (unobserved) factors or dimensions in the structure of mental disorders that are thought to possibly reflect etiological processes. 

These two dimensions reflect a distinction between internalizing disorders, such as mood or anxiety symptoms, and externalizing disorders such as behavioral or substance use symptoms. 

A single general factor of psychopathology, similar to the g factor for intelligence, has been empirically supported. 

The p factor model supports the internalizing-externalizing distinction, but also supports the formation of a third dimension of thought disorders such as schizophrenia. 

Biological evidence also supports the validity of the internalizing-externalizing structure of mental disorders, with twin and adoption studies supporting heritable factors for externalizing and internalizing disorders. 

A leading dimensional model is the Hierarchical Taxonomy of Psychopathology.


=== Disorders ===


There are many different categories of mental disorder, and many different facets of human behavior and personality that can become disordered.


==== Anxiety disorder ====
Anxiety disorder: Anxiety or fear that interferes with normal functioning may be classified as an anxiety disorder. 

Commonly recognized categories include specific phobias, generalized anxiety disorder, social anxiety disorder, panic disorder, agoraphobia, obsessive-compulsive disorder and post-traumatic stress disorder.


==== Mood disorder ====
Mood disorder: Other affective (emotion/mood) processes can also become disordered. 

Mood disorder involving unusually intense and sustained sadness, melancholia, or despair is known as major depression (also known as unipolar or clinical depression). 

Milder, but still prolonged depression, can be diagnosed as dysthymia. 

Bipolar disorder (also known as manic depression) involves abnormally "high" or pressured mood states, known as mania or hypomania, alternating with normal or depressed moods. 

The extent to which unipolar and bipolar mood phenomena represent distinct categories of disorder, or mix and merge along a dimension or spectrum of mood, is subject to some scientific debate.


==== Psychotic disorder ====
Psychotic disorder: Patterns of belief, language use and perception of reality can become dysregulated (e.g., delusions, thought disorder, hallucinations). 

Psychotic disorders in this domain include schizophrenia, and delusional disorder. 

Schizoaffective disorder is a category used for individuals showing aspects of both schizophrenia and affective disorders. 

Schizotypy is a category used for individuals showing some of the characteristics associated with schizophrenia, but without meeting cutoff criteria.


==== Personality disorder ====
Personality disorder: Personality—the fundamental characteristics of a person that influence thoughts and behaviors across situations and time—may be considered disordered if judged to be abnormally rigid and maladaptive. 

Although treated separately by some, the commonly used categorical schemes include them as mental disorders, albeit on a separate axis II in the case of the DSM-IV. 

A number of different personality disorders are listed, including those sometimes classed as eccentric, such as paranoid, schizoid and schizotypal personality disorders; types that have described as dramatic or emotional, such as antisocial, borderline, histrionic or narcissistic personality disorders; and those sometimes classed as fear-related, such as anxious-avoidant, dependent, or obsessive-compulsive personality disorders. 

Personality disorders, in general, are defined as emerging in childhood, or at least by adolescence or early adulthood. 

The ICD also has a category for enduring personality change after a catastrophic experience or psychiatric illness. 

If an inability to sufficiently adjust to life circumstances begins within three months of a particular event or situation, and ends within six months after the stressor stops or is eliminated, it may instead be classed as an adjustment disorder. 

There is an emerging consensus that personality disorders, similar to personality traits in general, incorporate a mixture of acute dysfunctional behaviors that may resolve in short periods, and maladaptive temperamental traits that are more enduring. 

Furthermore, there are also non-categorical schemes that rate all individuals via a profile of different dimensions of personality without a symptom-based cutoff from normal personality variation, for example through schemes based on dimensional models.


==== Eating disorder ====
Eating disorders involve disproportionate concern in matters of food and weight. 

Categories of disorder in this area include anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa, exercise bulimia or binge eating disorder.


==== Sleep disorder ====
Sleep disorders are associated with disruption to normal sleep patterns. 

A common sleep disorder is insomnia, which is described as difficulty falling and/or staying asleep.


==== Sexuality related ====
Sexual disorders include dyspareunia and various kinds of paraphilia (sexual arousal to objects, situations, or individuals that are considered abnormal or harmful to the person or others).


==== Other ====
Impulse control disorder: People who are abnormally unable to resist certain urges or impulses that could be harmful to themselves or others, may be classified as having an impulse control disorder, and disorders such as kleptomania (stealing) or pyromania (fire-setting). 

Various behavioral addictions, such as gambling addiction, may be classed as a disorder. 

Obsessive-compulsive disorder can sometimes involve an inability to resist certain acts but is classed separately as being primarily an anxiety disorder.
Substance use disorder: This disorder refers to the use of drugs (legal or illegal, including alcohol) that persists despite significant problems or harm related to its use. 

Substance dependence and substance abuse fall under this umbrella category in the DSM. 

Substance use disorder may be due to a pattern of compulsive and repetitive use of a drug that results in tolerance to its effects and withdrawal symptoms when use is reduced or stopped.
Dissociative disorder: People who suffer severe disturbances of their self-identity, memory, and general awareness of themselves and their surroundings may be classified as having these types of disorders, including depersonalization disorder or dissociative identity disorder (which was previously referred to as multiple personality disorder or "split personality").
Cognitive disorder: These affect cognitive abilities, including learning and memory. 

This category includes delirium and mild and major neurocognitive disorder (previously termed dementia).
Developmental disorder: These disorders initially occur in childhood. 

Some examples include autism spectrum disorder, oppositional defiant disorder and conduct disorder, and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), which may continue into adulthood. 

Conduct disorder, if continuing into adulthood, may be diagnosed as antisocial personality disorder (dissocial personality disorder in the ICD). 

Popular labels such as psychopath (or sociopath) do not appear in the DSM or ICD but are linked by some to these diagnoses.
Somatoform disorders may be diagnosed when there are problems that appear to originate in the body that are thought to be manifestations of a mental disorder. 

This includes somatization disorder and conversion disorder. 

There are also disorders of how a person perceives their body, such as body dysmorphic disorder. 

Neurasthenia is an old diagnosis involving somatic complaints as well as fatigue and low spirits/depression, which is officially recognized by the ICD-10 but no longer by the DSM-IV.Factitious disorders are diagnosed where symptoms are thought to be reported for personal gain. 

Symptoms are often deliberately produced or feigned, and may relate to either symptoms in the individual or in someone close to them, particularly people they care for.
There are attempts to introduce a category of relational disorder, where the diagnosis is of a relationship rather than on any one individual in that relationship. 

The relationship may be between children and their parents, between couples, or others. 

There already exists, under the category of psychosis, a diagnosis of shared psychotic disorder where two or more individuals share a particular delusion because of their close relationship with each other.
There are a number of uncommon psychiatric syndromes, which are often named after the person who first described them, such as Capgras syndrome, De Clerambault syndrome, Othello syndrome, Ganser syndrome, Cotard delusion, and Ekbom syndrome, and additional disorders such as the Couvade syndrome and Geschwind syndrome.


== Signs and symptoms ==



=== Course ===

The onset of psychiatric disorders usually occurs from childhood to early adulthood. 

Impulse-control disorders and a few anxiety disorders tend to appear in childhood. 

Some other anxiety disorders, substance disorders, and mood disorders emerge later in the mid-teens. 

Symptoms of schizophrenia typically manifest from late adolescence to early twenties.The likely course and outcome of mental disorders vary and are dependent on numerous factors related to the disorder itself, the individual as a whole, and the social environment. 

Some disorders may last a brief period of time, while others may be long-term in nature.
All disorders can have a varied course. 

Long-term international studies of schizophrenia have found that over a half of individuals recover in terms of symptoms, and around a fifth to a third in terms of symptoms and functioning, with many requiring no medication. 

While some have serious difficulties and support needs for many years, "late" recovery is still plausible. 

The World Health Organization concluded that the long-term studies' findings converged with others in "relieving patients, carers and clinicians of the chronicity paradigm which dominated thinking throughout much of the 20th century."A follow-up study by Tohen and coworkers revealed that around half of people initially diagnosed with bipolar disorder achieve symptomatic recovery (no longer meeting criteria for the diagnosis) within six weeks, and nearly all achieve it within two years, with nearly half regaining their prior occupational and residential status in that period. 

Less than half go on to experience a new episode of mania or major depression within the next two years.


=== Disability ===

Some disorders may be very limited in their functional effects, while others may involve substantial disability and support needs. 

The degree of ability or disability may vary over time and across different life domains. 

Furthermore, continued disability has been linked to institutionalization, discrimination and social exclusion as well as to the inherent effects of disorders. 

Alternatively, functioning may be affected by the stress of having to hide a condition in work or school, etc., by adverse effects of medications or other substances, or by mismatches between illness-related variations and demands for regularity.It is also the case that, while often being characterized in purely negative terms, some mental traits or states labeled as disorders can also involve above-average creativity, non-conformity, goal-striving, meticulousness, or empathy. 

In addition, the public perception of the level of disability associated with mental disorders can change.Nevertheless, internationally, people report equal or greater disability from commonly occurring mental conditions than from commonly occurring physical conditions, particularly in their social roles and personal relationships. 

The proportion with access to professional help for mental disorders is far lower, however, even among those assessed as having a severely disabling condition. 

Disability in this context may or may not involve such things as:

Basic activities of daily living. 

Including looking after the self (health care, grooming, dressing, shopping, cooking etc.) or looking after accommodation (chores, DIY tasks, etc.)
Interpersonal relationships. 

Including communication skills, ability to form relationships and sustain them, ability to leave the home or mix in crowds or particular settings
Occupational functioning. 

Ability to acquire an employment and hold it, cognitive and social skills required for the job, dealing with workplace culture, or studying as a student.In terms of total disability-adjusted life years (DALYs), which is an estimate of how many years of life are lost due to premature death or to being in a state of poor health and disability, mental disorders rank amongst the most disabling conditions. 

Unipolar (also known as Major) depressive disorder is the third leading cause of disability worldwide, of any condition mental or physical, accounting for 65.5 million years lost. 

The first systematic description of global disability arising in youth, in 2011, found that among 10- to 24-year-olds nearly half of all disability (current and as estimated to continue) was due to mental and neurological conditions, including substance use disorders and conditions involving self-harm. 

Second to this were accidental injuries (mainly traffic collisions) accounting for 12 percent of disability, followed by communicable diseases at 10 percent. 

The disorders associated with most disabilities in high-income countries were unipolar major depression (20%) and alcohol use disorder (11%). 

In the eastern Mediterranean region, it was unipolar major depression (12%) and schizophrenia (7%), and in Africa it was unipolar major depression (7%) and bipolar disorder (5%).Suicide, which is often attributed to some underlying mental disorder, is a leading cause of death among teenagers and adults under 35. 

There are an estimated 10 to 20 million non-fatal attempted suicides every year worldwide.


== Risk factors ==


The predominant view as of 2018 is that genetic, psychological, and environmental factors all contribute to the development or progression of mental disorders. 

Different risk factors may be present at different ages, with risk occurring as early as during prenatal period.


=== Genetics ===


A number of psychiatric disorders are linked to a family history (including depression, narcissistic personality disorder and anxiety). 

Twin studies have also revealed a very high heritability for many mental disorders (especially autism and schizophrenia). 

Although researchers have been looking for decades for clear linkages between genetics and mental disorders, that work has not yielded specific genetic biomarkers yet that might lead to better diagnosis and better treatments.Statistical research looking at eleven disorders found widespread assortative mating between people with mental illness. 

That means that individuals with one of these disorders were two to three times more likely than the general population to have a partner with a mental disorder. 

Sometimes people seemed to have preferred partners with the same mental illness. 

Thus, people with schizophrenia or ADHD are seven times more likely to have affected partners with the same disorder. 

This is even more pronounced for people with Autism spectrum disorders who are 10 times more likely to have a spouse with the same disorder.


=== Environment ===


During the prenatal stage, factors like unwanted pregnancy, lack of adaptation to pregnancy or substance use during pregnancy increases the risk of developing a mental disorder. 

Maternal stress and birth complications including prematurity and infections have also been implicated in increasing susceptibility for mental illness. 

Infants neglected or not provided optimal nutrition have a higher risk of developing cognitive impairment.Social influences have also been found to be important, including abuse, neglect, bullying, social stress, traumatic events, and other negative or overwhelming life experiences. 

Aspects of the wider community have also been implicated, including employment problems, socioeconomic inequality, lack of social cohesion, problems linked to migration, and features of particular societies and cultures. 

The specific risks and pathways to particular disorders are less clear, however.
Nutrition also plays a role in mental disorders.In schizophrenia and psychosis, risk factors include migration and discrimination, childhood trauma, bereavement or separation in families, recreational use of drugs, and urbanicity.In anxiety, risk factors may include parenting factors including parental rejection, lack of parental warmth, high hostility, harsh discipline, high maternal negative affect, anxious childrearing, modelling of dysfunctional and drug-abusing behaviour, and child abuse (emotional, physical and sexual). 

Adults with imbalance work to life are at higher risk for developing anxiety.For bipolar disorder, stress (such as childhood adversity) is not a specific cause, but does place genetically and biologically vulnerable individuals at risk for a more severe course of illness.


=== Drug use ===

Mental disorders are associated with drug use including: cannabis, alcohol and caffeine, use of which appears to promote anxiety. 

For psychosis and schizophrenia, usage of a number of drugs has been associated with development of the disorder, including cannabis, cocaine, and amphetamines. 

There has been debate regarding the relationship between usage of cannabis and bipolar disorder. 

Cannabis has also been associated with depression. 

Adolescents are at increased risk for tobacco, alcohol and drug use; Peer pressure is the main reason why adolescents start using substances. 

At this age, the use of substances could be detrimental to the development of the brain and place them at higher risk of developing a mental disorder.


=== Chronic disease ===

People living with chronic conditions like HIV and diabetes are at higher risk of developing a mental disorder. 

People living with diabetes experience significant stress from biological impact of the disease, which places them at risk for developing anxiety and depression. 

Diabetic patients also have to deal with emotional stress trying to manage the disease. 

Conditions like heart disease, stroke, respiratory conditions, cancer, and arthritis increase the risk of developing a mental disorder when compared to the general population.


=== Personality traits ===

Risk factors for mental illness include a propensity for high neuroticism or "emotional instability". 

In anxiety, risk factors may include temperament and attitudes (e.g. pessimism).


=== Causal models ===

Mental disorders can arise from multiple sources, and in many cases there is no single accepted or consistent cause currently established. 

An eclectic or pluralistic mix of models may be used to explain particular disorders. 

The primary paradigm of contemporary mainstream Western psychiatry is said to be the biopsychosocial model which incorporates biological, psychological and social factors, although this may not always be applied in practice.
Biological psychiatry follows a biomedical model where many mental disorders are conceptualized as disorders of brain circuits likely caused by developmental processes shaped by a complex interplay of genetics and experience. 

A common assumption is that disorders may have resulted from genetic and developmental vulnerabilities, exposed by stress in life (for example in a diathesis–stress model), although there are various views on what causes differences between individuals. 

Some types of mental disorders may be viewed as primarily neurodevelopmental disorders.
Evolutionary psychology may be used as an overall explanatory theory, while attachment theory is another kind of evolutionary-psychological approach sometimes applied in the context of mental disorders. 

Psychoanalytic theories have continued to evolve alongside and cognitive-behavioral and systemic-family approaches. 

A distinction is sometimes made between a "medical model" or a "social model" of disorder and disability.


== Diagnosis ==

Psychiatrists seek to provide a medical diagnosis of individuals by an assessment of symptoms, signs and impairment associated with particular types of mental disorder. 

Other mental health professionals, such as clinical psychologists, may or may not apply the same diagnostic categories to their clinical formulation of a client's difficulties and circumstances. 

The majority of mental health problems are, at least initially, assessed and treated by family physicians (in the UK general practitioners) during consultations, who may refer a patient on for more specialist diagnosis in acute or chronic cases.
Routine diagnostic practice in mental health services typically involves an interview known as a mental status examination, where evaluations are made of appearance and behavior, self-reported symptoms, mental health history, and current life circumstances. 

The views of other professionals, relatives, or other third parties may be taken into account. 

A physical examination to check for ill health or the effects of medications or other drugs may be conducted. 

Psychological testing is sometimes used via paper-and-pen or computerized questionnaires, which may include algorithms based on ticking off standardized diagnostic criteria, and in rare specialist cases neuroimaging tests may be requested, but such methods are more commonly found in research studies than routine clinical practice.Time and budgetary constraints often limit practicing psychiatrists from conducting more thorough diagnostic evaluations. 

It has been found that most clinicians evaluate patients using an unstructured, open-ended approach, with limited training in evidence-based assessment methods, and that inaccurate diagnosis may be common in routine practice. 

In addition, comorbidity is very common in psychiatric diagnosis, where the same person meets the criteria for more than one disorder. 

On the other hand, a person may have several different difficulties only some of which meet the criteria for being diagnosed. 

There may be specific problems with accurate diagnosis in developing countries.
More structured approaches are being increasingly used to measure levels of mental illness.

HoNOS is the most widely used measure in English mental health services, being used by at least 61 trusts. 

In HoNOS a score of 0–4 is given for each of 12 factors, based on functional living capacity. 

Research has been supportive of HoNOS, although some questions have been asked about whether it provides adequate coverage of the range and complexity of mental illness problems, and whether the fact that often only 3 of the 12 scales vary over time gives enough subtlety to accurately measure outcomes of treatment.


=== Criticism ===

Since the 1980s, Paula Caplan has been concerned about the subjectivity of psychiatric diagnosis, and people being arbitrarily "slapped with a psychiatric label." Caplan says because psychiatric diagnosis is unregulated, doctors are not required to spend much time interviewing patients or to seek a second opinion. 

The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders can lead a psychiatrist to focus on narrow checklists of symptoms, with little consideration of what is actually causing the person's problems. 

So, according to Caplan, getting a psychiatric diagnosis and label often stands in the way of recovery.In 2013, psychiatrist Allen Frances wrote a paper entitled "The New Crisis of Confidence in Psychiatric Diagnosis", which said that "psychiatric diagnosis... still relies exclusively on fallible subjective judgments rather than objective biological tests." Frances was also concerned about "unpredictable overdiagnosis." For many years, marginalized psychiatrists (such as Peter Breggin, Thomas Szasz) and outside critics (such as Stuart A. 

Kirk) have "been accusing psychiatry of engaging in the systematic medicalization of normality." More recently these concerns have come from insiders who have worked for and promoted the American Psychiatric Association (e.g., Robert Spitzer, Allen Frances). 

A 2002 editorial in the British Medical Journal warned of inappropriate medicalization leading to disease mongering, where the boundaries of the definition of illnesses are expanded to include personal problems as medical problems or risks of diseases are emphasized to broaden the market for medications.Gary Greenberg, a psychoanalyst, in his book "the Book of Woe", argues that mental illness is really about suffering and how the DSM creates diagnostic labels to categorize people's suffering. 

Indeed, the psychiatrist Thomas Szasz, in his book "the Medicalization of Everyday Life", also argues that what is psychiatric illness, is not always biological in nature (i.e. social problems, poverty, etc.), and may even be a part of the human condition.


== Prevention ==


The 2004 WHO report "Prevention of Mental Disorders" stated that "Prevention of these disorders is obviously one of the most effective ways to reduce the [disease] burden."
The 2011 European Psychiatric Association (EPA) guidance on prevention of mental disorders states "There is considerable evidence that various psychiatric conditions can be prevented through the implementation of effective evidence-based interventions."
A 2011 UK Department of Health report on the economic case for mental health promotion and mental illness prevention found that "many interventions are outstandingly good value for money, low in cost and often become self-financing over time, saving public expenditure".
In 2016, the National Institute of Mental Health re-affirmed prevention as a research priority area.Parenting may affect the child's mental health, and evidence suggests that helping parents to be more effective with their children can address mental health needs.Universal prevention (aimed at a population that has no increased risk for developing a mental disorder, such as school programs or mass media campaigns) need very high numbers of people to show effect (sometimes known as the "power" problem). 

Approaches to overcome this are (1) focus on high-incidence groups (e.g. by targeting groups with high risk factors), (2) use multiple interventions to achieve greater, and thus more statistically valid, effects, (3) use cumulative meta-analyses of many trials, and (4) run very large trials.


== Management ==


Treatment and support for mental disorders are provided in psychiatric hospitals, clinics or a range of community mental health services. 

In some countries services are increasingly based on a recovery approach, intended to support individual's personal journey to gain the kind of life they want.
There is a range of different types of treatment and what is most suitable depends on the disorder and the individual. 

Many things have been found to help at least some people, and a placebo effect may play a role in any intervention or medication. 

In a minority of cases, individuals may be treated against their will, which can cause particular difficulties depending on how it is carried out and perceived. 

Compulsory treatment while in the community versus non-compulsory treatment does not appear to make much of a difference except by maybe decreasing victimization.


=== Lifestyle ===

Lifestyle strategies, including dietary changes, exercise and quitting smoking may be of benefit.


=== Therapy ===

There is also a wide range of psychotherapists (including family therapy), counselors, and public health professionals. 

In addition, there are peer support roles where personal experience of similar issues is the primary source of expertise.A major option for many mental disorders is psychotherapy. 

There are several main types. 

Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) is widely used and is based on modifying the patterns of thought and behavior associated with a particular disorder. 

Other psychotherapies include dialectic behavioral therapy (DBT) and interpersonal psychotherapy (IPT). 

Psychoanalysis, addressing underlying psychic conflicts and defenses, has been a dominant school of psychotherapy and is still in use. 

Systemic therapy or family therapy is sometimes used, addressing a network of significant others as well as an individual.
Some psychotherapies are based on a humanistic approach. 

There are many specific therapies used for particular disorders, which may be offshoots or hybrids of the above types. 

Mental health professionals often employ an eclectic or integrative approach. 

Much may depend on the therapeutic relationship, and there may be problems with trust, confidentiality and engagement.


=== Medication ===

A major option for many mental disorders is psychiatric medication and there are several main groups. 

Antidepressants are used for the treatment of clinical depression, as well as often for anxiety and a range of other disorders. 

Anxiolytics (including sedatives) are used for anxiety disorders and related problems such as insomnia. 

Mood stabilizers are used primarily in bipolar disorder. 

Antipsychotics are used for psychotic disorders, notably for positive symptoms in schizophrenia, and also increasingly for a range of other disorders. 

Stimulants are commonly used, notably for ADHD.Despite the different conventional names of the drug groups, there may be considerable overlap in the disorders for which they are actually indicated, and there may also be off-label use of medications. 

There can be problems with adverse effects of medication and adherence to them, and there is also criticism of pharmaceutical marketing and professional conflicts of interest. 

However, these medications in combination with non-pharmacological methods, such as cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) are seen to be most effective in treating mental disorders.


=== Other ===

Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) is sometimes used in severe cases when other interventions for severe intractable depression have failed. 

ECT is usually indicated for treatment resistant depression, severe vegetative symptoms, psychotic depression, intense suicidal ideation, depression during pregnancy, and catatonia. 

Psychosurgery is considered experimental but is advocated by some neurologists in certain rare cases.Counseling (professional) and co-counseling (between peers) may be used. 

Psychoeducation programs may provide people with the information to understand and manage their problems. 

Creative therapies are sometimes used, including music therapy, art therapy or drama therapy. 

Lifestyle adjustments and supportive measures are often used, including peer support, self-help groups for mental health and supported housing or supported employment (including social firms). 

Some advocate dietary supplements.Reasonable accommodations (adjustments and supports) might be put in place to help an individual cope and succeed in environments despite potential disability related to mental health problems. 

This could include an emotional support animal or specifically trained psychiatric service dog. 

As of 2019 cannabis is specifically not recommended as a treatment.


== Epidemiology ==


Mental disorders are common. 

Worldwide, more than one in three people in most countries report sufficient criteria for at least one at some point in their life. 

In the United States, 46% qualify for a mental illness at some point. 

An ongoing survey indicates that anxiety disorders are the most common in all but one country, followed by mood disorders in all but two countries, while substance disorders and impulse-control disorders were consistently less prevalent. 

Rates varied by region.A review of anxiety disorder surveys in different countries found average lifetime prevalence estimates of 16.6%, with women having higher rates on average. 

A review of mood disorder surveys in different countries found lifetime rates of 6.7% for major depressive disorder (higher in some studies, and in women) and 0.8% for Bipolar I disorder.In the United States the frequency of disorder is: anxiety disorder (28.8%), mood disorder (20.8%), impulse-control disorder (24.8%) or substance use disorder (14.6%).A 2004 cross-Europe study found that approximately one in four people reported meeting criteria at some point in their life for at least one of the DSM-IV disorders assessed, which included mood disorders (13.9%), anxiety disorders (13.6%), or alcohol disorder (5.2%). 

Approximately one in ten met the criteria within a 12-month period. 

Women and younger people of either gender showed more cases of the disorder. 

A 2005 review of surveys in 16 European countries found that 27% of adult Europeans are affected by at least one mental disorder in a 12-month period.An international review of studies on the prevalence of schizophrenia found an average (median) figure of 0.4% for lifetime prevalence; it was consistently lower in poorer countries.Studies of the prevalence of personality disorders (PDs) have been fewer and smaller-scale, but one broad Norwegian survey found a five-year prevalence of almost 1 in 7 (13.4%). 

Rates for specific disorders ranged from 0.8% to 2.8%, differing across countries, and by gender, educational level and other factors. 

A US survey that incidentally screened for personality disorder found a rate of 14.79%.Approximately 7% of a preschool pediatric sample were given a psychiatric diagnosis in one clinical study, and approximately 10% of 1- and 2-year-olds receiving developmental screening have been assessed as having significant emotional/behavioral problems based on parent and pediatrician reports.While rates of psychological disorders are often the same for men and women, women tend to have a higher rate of depression. 

Each year 73 million women are affected by major depression, and suicide is ranked 7th as the cause of death for women between the ages of 20–59. 

Depressive disorders account for close to 41.9% of the disability from neuropsychiatric disorders among women compared to 29.3% among men.


== History ==



=== Ancient civilizations ===

Ancient civilizations described and treated a number of mental disorders. 

Mental illnesses were well known in ancient Mesopotamia, where diseases and mental disorders were believed to be caused by specific deities. 

Because hands symbolized control over a person, mental illnesses were known as "hands" of certain deities. 

One psychological illness was known as Qāt Ištar, meaning "Hand of Ishtar". 

Others were known as "Hand of Shamash", "Hand of the Ghost", and "Hand of the God". 

Descriptions of these illnesses, however, are so vague that it is usually impossible to determine which illnesses they correspond to in modern terminology. 

Mesopotamian doctors kept detailed record of their patients' hallucinations and assigned spiritual meanings to them. 

The royal family of Elam was notorious for its members frequently suffering from insanity. 

The Greeks coined terms for melancholy, hysteria and phobia and developed the humorism theory. 

Mental disorders were described, and treatments developed, in Persia, Arabia and in the medieval Islamic world.


=== Europe ===



==== Middle Ages ====
Conceptions of madness in the Middle Ages in Christian Europe were a mixture of the divine, diabolical, magical and humoral, and transcendental. 

In the early modern period, some people with mental disorders may have been victims of the witch-hunts. 

While not every witch and sorcerer accused were mentally ill, all mentally ill were considered to be witches or sorcerers. 

Many terms for mental disorders that found their way into everyday use first became popular in the 16th and 17th centuries.


==== Eighteenth century ====

By the end of the 17th century and into the Enlightenment, madness was increasingly seen as an organic physical phenomenon with no connection to the soul or moral responsibility. 

Asylum care was often harsh and treated people like wild animals, but towards the end of the 18th century a moral treatment movement gradually developed. 

Clear descriptions of some syndromes may be rare before the 19th century.


==== Nineteenth century ====
Industrialization and population growth led to a massive expansion of the number and size of insane asylums in every Western country in the 19th century. 

Numerous different classification schemes and diagnostic terms were developed by different authorities, and the term psychiatry was coined (1808), though medical superintendents were still known as alienists.


==== Twentieth century ====

The turn of the 20th century saw the development of psychoanalysis, which would later come to the fore, along with Kraepelin's classification scheme. 

Asylum "inmates" were increasingly referred to as "patients", and asylums were renamed as hospitals.


=== Europe and the United States ===


Early in the 20th century in the United States, a mental hygiene movement developed, aiming to prevent mental disorders. 

Clinical psychology and social work developed as professions. 

World War I saw a massive increase of conditions that came to be termed "shell shock".
World War II saw the development in the U.S. of a new psychiatric manual for categorizing mental disorders, which along with existing systems for collecting census and hospital statistics led to the first Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders. 

The International Classification of Diseases (ICD) also developed a section on mental disorders. 

The term stress, having emerged from endocrinology work in the 1930s, was increasingly applied to mental disorders.
Electroconvulsive therapy, insulin shock therapy, lobotomies and the neuroleptic chlorpromazine came to be used by mid-century. 

In the 1960s there were many challenges to the concept of mental illness itself. 

These challenges came from psychiatrists like Thomas Szasz who argued that mental illness was a myth used to disguise moral conflicts; from sociologists such as Erving Goffman who said that mental illness was merely another example of how society labels and controls non-conformists; from behavioral psychologists who challenged psychiatry's fundamental reliance on unobservable phenomena; and from gay rights activists who criticised the APA's listing of homosexuality as a mental disorder. 

A study published in Science by Rosenhan received much publicity and was viewed as an attack on the efficacy of psychiatric diagnosis.Deinstitutionalization gradually occurred in the West, with isolated psychiatric hospitals being closed down in favor of community mental health services. 

A consumer/survivor movement gained momentum. 

Other kinds of psychiatric medication gradually came into use, such as "psychic energizers" (later antidepressants) and lithium. 

Benzodiazepines gained widespread use in the 1970s for anxiety and depression, until dependency problems curtailed their popularity.
Advances in neuroscience, genetics, and psychology led to new research agendas. 

Cognitive behavioral therapy and other psychotherapies developed. 

The DSM and then ICD adopted new criteria-based classifications, and the number of "official" diagnoses saw a large expansion. 

Through the 1990s, new SSRI-type antidepressants became some of the most widely prescribed drugs in the world, as later did antipsychotics. 

Also during the 1990s, a recovery approach developed.


== Society and culture ==


Different societies or cultures, even different individuals in a subculture, can disagree as to what constitutes optimal versus pathological biological and psychological functioning. 

Research has demonstrated that cultures vary in the relative importance placed on, for example, happiness, autonomy, or social relationships for pleasure. 

Likewise, the fact that a behavior pattern is valued, accepted, encouraged, or even statistically normative in a culture does not necessarily mean that it is conducive to optimal psychological functioning.
People in all cultures find some behaviors bizarre or even incomprehensible. 

But just what they feel is bizarre or incomprehensible is ambiguous and subjective. 

These differences in determination can become highly contentious. 

The process by which conditions and difficulties come to be defined and treated as medical conditions and problems, and thus come under the authority of doctors and other health professionals, is known as medicalization or pathologization.


=== Religion ===


Religious, spiritual, or transpersonal experiences and beliefs meet many criteria of delusional or psychotic disorders. 

A belief or experience can sometimes be shown to produce distress or disability—the ordinary standard for judging mental disorders. 

There is a link between religion and schizophrenia, a complex mental disorder characterized by a difficulty in recognizing reality, regulating emotional responses, and thinking in a clear and logical manner. 

Those with schizophrenia commonly report some type of religious delusion, and religion itself may be a trigger for schizophrenia.


=== Movements ===


Controversy has often surrounded psychiatry, and the term anti-psychiatry was coined by the psychiatrist David Cooper in 1967. 

The anti-psychiatry message is that psychiatric treatments are ultimately more damaging than helpful to patients, and psychiatry's history involves what may now be seen as dangerous treatments. 

Electroconvulsive therapy was one of these, which was used widely between the 1930s and 1960s. 

Lobotomy was another practice that was ultimately seen as too invasive and brutal. 

Diazepam and other sedatives were sometimes over-prescribed, which led to an epidemic of dependence. 

There was also concern about the large increase in prescribing psychiatric drugs for children. 

Some charismatic psychiatrists came to personify the movement against psychiatry. 

The most influential of these was R.D. 

Laing who wrote a series of best-selling books, including The Divided Self. 

Thomas Szasz wrote The Myth of Mental Illness. 

Some ex-patient groups have become militantly anti-psychiatric, often referring to themselves as survivors. 

Giorgio Antonucci has questioned the basis of psychiatry through his work on the dismantling of two psychiatric hospitals (in the city of Imola), carried out from 1973 to 1996.
The consumer/survivor movement (also known as user/survivor movement) is made up of individuals (and organizations representing them) who are clients of mental health services or who consider themselves survivors of psychiatric interventions. 

Activists campaign for improved mental health services and for more involvement and empowerment within mental health services, policies and wider society. 

Patient advocacy organizations have expanded with increasing deinstitutionalization in developed countries, working to challenge the stereotypes, stigma and exclusion associated with psychiatric conditions. 

There is also a carers rights movement of people who help and support people with mental health conditions, who may be relatives, and who often work in difficult and time-consuming circumstances with little acknowledgement and without pay. 

An anti-psychiatry movement fundamentally challenges mainstream psychiatric theory and practice, including in some cases asserting that psychiatric concepts and diagnoses of 'mental illness' are neither real nor useful.Alternatively, a movement for global mental health has emerged, defined as 'the area of study, research and practice that places a priority on improving mental health and achieving equity in mental health for all people worldwide'.


=== Cultural bias ===


Current diagnostic guidelines, namely the DSM and to some extent the ICD, have been criticized as having a fundamentally Euro-American outlook. 

Opponents argue that even when diagnostic criteria are used across different cultures, it does not mean that the underlying constructs have validity within those cultures, as even reliable application can prove only consistency, not legitimacy. 

Advocating a more culturally sensitive approach, critics such as Carl Bell and Marcello Maviglia contend that the cultural and ethnic diversity of individuals is often discounted by researchers and service providers.Cross-cultural psychiatrist Arthur Kleinman contends that the Western bias is ironically illustrated in the introduction of cultural factors to the DSM-IV. 

Disorders or concepts from non-Western or non-mainstream cultures are described as "culture-bound", whereas standard psychiatric diagnoses are given no cultural qualification whatsoever, revealing to Kleinman an underlying assumption that Western cultural phenomena are universal. 

Kleinman's negative view towards the culture-bound syndrome is largely shared by other cross-cultural critics. 

Common responses included both disappointment over the large number of documented non-Western mental disorders still left out and frustration that even those included are often misinterpreted or misrepresented.Many mainstream psychiatrists are dissatisfied with the new culture-bound diagnoses, although for partly different reasons. 

Robert Spitzer, a lead architect of the DSM-III, has argued that adding cultural formulations was an attempt to appease cultural critics, and has stated that they lack any scientific rationale or support. 

Spitzer also posits that the new culture-bound diagnoses are rarely used, maintaining that the standard diagnoses apply regardless of the culture involved. 

In general, mainstream psychiatric opinion remains that if a diagnostic category is valid, cross-cultural factors are either irrelevant or are significant only to specific symptom presentations.Clinical conceptions of mental illness also overlap with personal and cultural values in the domain of morality, so much so that it is sometimes argued that separating the two is impossible without fundamentally redefining the essence of being a particular person in a society. 

In clinical psychiatry, persistent distress and disability indicate an internal disorder requiring treatment; but in another context, that same distress and disability can be seen as an indicator of emotional struggle and the need to address social and structural problems. 

This dichotomy has led some academics and clinicians to advocate a postmodernist conceptualization of mental distress and well-being.Such approaches, along with cross-cultural and "heretical" psychologies centered on alternative cultural and ethnic and race-based identities and experiences, stand in contrast to the mainstream psychiatric community's alleged avoidance of any explicit involvement with either morality or culture. 

In many countries there are attempts to challenge perceived prejudice against minority groups, including alleged institutional racism within psychiatric services. 

There are also ongoing attempts to improve professional cross cultural sensitivity.


=== Laws and policies ===


Three-quarters of countries around the world have mental health legislation. 

Compulsory admission to mental health facilities (also known as involuntary commitment) is a controversial topic. 

It can impinge on personal liberty and the right to choose, and carry the risk of abuse for political, social, and other reasons; yet it can potentially prevent harm to self and others, and assist some people in attaining their right to healthcare when they may be unable to decide in their own interests. 

Because of this it is a concern of medical ethics.
All human rights oriented mental health laws require proof of the presence of a mental disorder as defined by internationally accepted standards, but the type and severity of disorder that counts can vary in different jurisdictions. 

The two most often used grounds for involuntary admission are said to be serious likelihood of immediate or imminent danger to self or others, and the need for treatment. 

Applications for someone to be involuntarily admitted usually come from a mental health practitioner, a family member, a close relative, or a guardian. 

Human-rights-oriented laws usually stipulate that independent medical practitioners or other accredited mental health practitioners must examine the patient separately and that there should be regular, time-bound review by an independent review body. 

The individual should also have personal access to independent advocacy.
For involuntary treatment to be administered (by force if necessary), it should be shown that an individual lacks the mental capacity for informed consent (i.e. to understand treatment information and its implications, and therefore be able to make an informed choice to either accept or refuse). 

Legal challenges in some areas have resulted in supreme court decisions that a person does not have to agree with a psychiatrist's characterization of the issues as constituting an "illness", nor agree with a psychiatrist's conviction in medication, but only recognize the issues and the information about treatment options.Proxy consent (also known as surrogate or substituted decision-making) may be transferred to a personal representative, a family member, or a legally appointed guardian. 

Moreover, patients may be able to make, when they are considered well, an advance directive stipulating how they wish to be treated should they be deemed to lack mental capacity in the future. 

The right to supported decision-making, where a person is helped to understand and choose treatment options before they can be declared to lack capacity, may also be included in the legislation. 

There should at the very least be shared decision-making as far as possible. 

Involuntary treatment laws are increasingly extended to those living in the community, for example outpatient commitment laws (known by different names) are used in New Zealand, Australia, the United Kingdom, and most of the United States.
The World Health Organization reports that in many instances national mental health legislation takes away the rights of persons with mental disorders rather than protecting rights, and is often outdated. 

In 1991, the United Nations adopted the Principles for the Protection of Persons with Mental Illness and the Improvement of Mental Health Care, which established minimum human rights standards of practice in the mental health field. 

In 2006, the UN formally agreed the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities to protect and enhance the rights and opportunities of disabled people, including those with psychosocial disabilities.The term insanity, sometimes used colloquially as a synonym for mental illness, is often used technically as a legal term. 

The insanity defense may be used in a legal trial (known as the mental disorder defence in some countries).


=== Perception and discrimination ===



==== Stigma ====
The social stigma associated with mental disorders is a widespread problem. 

The US Surgeon General stated in 1999 that: "Powerful and pervasive, stigma prevents people from acknowledging their own mental health problems, much less disclosing them to others." In the United States, racial and ethnic minorities are more likely to experience mental health disorders often due to low socioeconomic status, and discrimination. 

In Taiwan, those with mental disorders are subject to general public's misperception that the root causes of the mental disorders are "over-thinking", "having a lot of time and nothing better to do", "stagnant", "not serious in life", "not paying enough attention to the real life affairs", "mentally weak", "refusing to be resilient", "turning back to perfectionistic strivings", "not bravery" and so forth.Employment discrimination is reported to play a significant part in the high rate of unemployment among those with a diagnosis of mental illness. 

An Australian study found that having a mental illness is a bigger barrier to employment than a physical disability. 

The mentally ill are stigmatized in Chinese society and can not legally marry.Efforts are being undertaken worldwide to eliminate the stigma of mental illness, although the methods and outcomes used have sometimes been criticized.


==== Media and general public ====

Media coverage of mental illness comprises predominantly negative and pejorative depictions, for example, of incompetence, violence or criminality, with far less coverage of positive issues such as accomplishments or human rights issues. 

Such negative depictions, including in children's cartoons, are thought to contribute to stigma and negative attitudes in the public and in those with mental health problems themselves, although more sensitive or serious cinematic portrayals have increased in prevalence.In the United States, the Carter Center has created fellowships for journalists in South Africa, the U.S., and Romania, to enable reporters to research and write stories on mental health topics. 

Former US First Lady Rosalynn Carter began the fellowships not only to train reporters in how to sensitively and accurately discuss mental health and mental illness, but also to increase the number of stories on these topics in the news media. 

There is also a World Mental Health Day, which in the US and Canada falls within a Mental Illness Awareness Week.
The general public have been found to hold a strong stereotype of dangerousness and desire for social distance from individuals described as mentally ill. 

A US national survey found that a higher percentage of people rate individuals described as displaying the characteristics of a mental disorder as "likely to do something violent to others", compared to the percentage of people who are rating individuals described as being troubled.Recent depictions in media have included leading characters successfully living with and managing a mental illness, including in bipolar disorder in Homeland (2011) and posttraumatic stress disorder in Iron Man 3 (2013).


==== Violence ====
Despite public or media opinion, national studies have indicated that severe mental illness does not independently predict future violent behavior, on average, and is not a leading cause of violence in society. 

There is a statistical association with various factors that do relate to violence (in anyone), such as substance use and various personal, social, and economic factors. 

A 2015 review found that in the United States, about 4% of violence is attributable to people diagnosed with mental illness, and a 2014 study found that 7.5% of crimes committed by mentally ill people were directly related to the symptoms of their mental illness. 

The majority of people with serious mental illness are never violent.In fact, findings consistently indicate that it is many times more likely that people diagnosed with a serious mental illness living in the community will be the victims rather than the perpetrators of violence. 

In a study of individuals diagnosed with "severe mental illness" living in a US inner-city area, a quarter were found to have been victims of at least one violent crime over the course of a year, a proportion eleven times higher than the inner-city average, and higher in every category of crime including violent assaults and theft. 

People with a diagnosis may find it more difficult to secure prosecutions, however, due in part to prejudice and being seen as less credible.However, there are some specific diagnoses, such as childhood conduct disorder or adult antisocial personality disorder or psychopathy, which are defined by, or are inherently associated with, conduct problems and violence. 

There are conflicting findings about the extent to which certain specific symptoms, notably some kinds of psychosis (hallucinations or delusions) that can occur in disorders such as schizophrenia, delusional disorder or mood disorder, are linked to an increased risk of serious violence on average. 

The mediating factors of violent acts, however, are most consistently found to be mainly socio-demographic and socio-economic factors such as being young, male, of lower socioeconomic status and, in particular, substance use (including alcohol use) to which some people may be particularly vulnerable.High-profile cases have led to fears that serious crimes, such as homicide, have increased due to deinstitutionalization, but the evidence does not support this conclusion. 

Violence that does occur in relation to mental disorder (against the mentally ill or by the mentally ill) typically occurs in the context of complex social interactions, often in a family setting rather than between strangers. 

It is also an issue in health care settings and the wider community.


== Mental health ==


The recognition and understanding of mental health conditions have changed over time and across cultures and there are still variations in definition, assessment, and classification, although standard guideline criteria are widely used. 

In many cases, there appears to be a continuum between mental health and mental illness, making diagnosis complex.: 39  According to the World Health Organization (WHO), over a third of people in most countries report problems at some time in their life which meet the criteria for diagnosis of one or more of the common types of mental disorder. 

Corey M Keyes has created a two continua model of mental illness and health which holds that both are related, but distinct dimensions: one continuum indicates the presence or absence of mental health, the other the presence or absence of mental illness. 

For example, people with optimal mental health can also have a mental illness, and people who have no mental illness can also have poor mental health.


== Other animals ==


Psychopathology in non-human primates has been studied since the mid-20th century. 

Over 20 behavioral patterns in captive chimpanzees have been documented as (statistically) abnormal for frequency, severity or oddness—some of which have also been observed in the wild. 

Captive great apes show gross behavioral abnormalities such as stereotypy of movements, self-mutilation, disturbed emotional reactions (mainly fear or aggression) towards companions, lack of species-typical communications, and generalized learned helplessness. 

In some cases such behaviors are hypothesized to be equivalent to symptoms associated with psychiatric disorders in humans such as depression, anxiety disorders, eating disorders and post-traumatic stress disorder. 

Concepts of antisocial, borderline and schizoid personality disorders have also been applied to non-human great apes.The risk of anthropomorphism is often raised concerning such comparisons, and assessment of non-human animals cannot incorporate evidence from linguistic communication. 

However, available evidence may range from nonverbal behaviors—including physiological responses and homologous facial displays and acoustic utterances—to neurochemical studies. 

It is pointed out that human psychiatric classification is often based on statistical description and judgment of behaviors (especially when speech or language is impaired) and that the use of verbal self-report is itself problematic and unreliable.Psychopathology has generally been traced, at least in captivity, to adverse rearing conditions such as early separation of infants from mothers; early sensory deprivation; and extended periods of social isolation. 

Studies have also indicated individual variation in temperament, such as sociability or impulsiveness. 

Particular causes of problems in captivity have included integration of strangers into existing groups and a lack of individual space, in which context some pathological behaviors have also been seen as coping mechanisms. 

Remedial interventions have included careful individually tailored re-socialization programs, behavior therapy, environment enrichment, and on rare occasions psychiatric drugs. 

Socialization has been found to work 90% of the time in disturbed chimpanzees, although restoration of functional sexuality and caregiving is often not achieved.Laboratory researchers sometimes try to develop animal models of human mental disorders, including by inducing or treating symptoms in animals through genetic, neurological, chemical or behavioral manipulation, but this has been criticized on empirical grounds and opposed on animal rights grounds.


== Notes ==



== Further reading ==




https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mental_disorder
;;;ES;;;



TRASTORNO MENTAL


Un trastorno mental, también llamado enfermedad mental o trastorno psiquiátrico, es un patrón conductual o mental que causa angustia significativa o deterioro del funcionamiento personal.

Tales características pueden ser persistentes, recurrentes y remitentes, o presentarse como episodios únicos.

Se han descrito muchos trastornos, con signos y síntomas que varían ampliamente entre trastornos específicos.

Dichos trastornos pueden ser diagnosticados por un profesional de la salud mental, generalmente un psicólogo clínico o un psiquiatra.
Las causas de los trastornos mentales a menudo no están claras.

Las teorías pueden incorporar hallazgos de una variedad de campos.

Los trastornos mentales generalmente se definen por una combinación de cómo una persona se comporta, siente, percibe o piensa.

Esto puede estar asociado con regiones o funciones particulares del cerebro, a menudo en un contexto social.

Un trastorno mental es un aspecto de la salud mental.

Las creencias culturales y religiosas, así como las normas sociales, deben tenerse en cuenta al realizar un diagnóstico. Los servicios se basan en hospitales psiquiátricos o en la comunidad, y las evaluaciones las llevan a cabo profesionales de la salud mental como psiquiatras, psicólogos, enfermeras psiquiátricas y trabajadores sociales clínicos, que utilizan varios métodos, como pruebas psicométricas, pero a menudo se basan en la observación y el cuestionamiento.

Los tratamientos son proporcionados por varios profesionales de la salud mental.

La psicoterapia y la medicación psiquiátrica son dos opciones principales de tratamiento.

Otros tratamientos incluyen cambios en el estilo de vida, intervenciones sociales, apoyo de pares y autoayuda.

En una minoría de casos, puede haber detención o tratamiento involuntarios.

Se ha demostrado que los programas de prevención reducen la depresión. En 2019, los trastornos mentales comunes en todo el mundo incluyen depresión, que afecta a unos 264 millones, trastorno bipolar, que afecta a unos 45 millones, demencia, que afecta a unos 50 millones, y esquizofrenia y otras psicosis. que afecta a unos 20 millones de personas.

Los trastornos del neurodesarrollo incluyen la discapacidad intelectual y los trastornos del espectro autista que generalmente surgen en la infancia o la niñez.

El estigma y la discriminación pueden sumarse al sufrimiento y la discapacidad asociados con los trastornos mentales, lo que lleva a que varios movimientos sociales intenten aumentar la comprensión y desafiar la exclusión social.


== Definición ==


La definición y clasificación de los trastornos mentales son cuestiones clave para los investigadores, así como para los proveedores de servicios y para quienes pueden ser diagnosticados.

Para que un estado mental se clasifique como un trastorno, generalmente debe causar una disfunción.

La mayoría de los documentos clínicos internacionales utilizan el término "trastorno" mental, mientras que "enfermedad" también es común.

Se ha observado que el uso del término "mental" (es decir, de la mente) no implica necesariamente una separación del cerebro o del cuerpo.
Según el DSM-IV, un trastorno mental es un síndrome o patrón psicológico que se asocia con angustia (p. ej., a través de un síntoma doloroso), discapacidad (deterioro en una o más áreas importantes del funcionamiento), mayor riesgo de muerte o causa un trastorno significativo. pérdida de autonomía; sin embargo, excluye las respuestas normales como el duelo por la pérdida de un ser querido y también excluye el comportamiento desviado por razones políticas, religiosas o sociales que no surjan de una disfunción en el individuo. El DSM-IV predica la definición con advertencias, afirmando que, como en En el caso de muchos términos médicos, el trastorno mental "carece de una definición operativa consistente que abarque todas las situaciones", señalando que se pueden usar diferentes niveles de abstracción para las definiciones médicas, incluida la patología, la sintomatología, la desviación de un rango normal o la etiología, y que lo mismo ocurre con los trastornos mentales por lo que a veces conviene un tipo de definición, y a veces otro, dependiendo de la situación. En 2013, la Asociación Americana de Psiquiatría (APA) redefinió los trastornos mentales en el DSM-5 como “un síndrome caracterizado por una alteración clínicamente significativa en la cognición, la regulación emocional o el comportamiento de un individuo que refleja una disfunción en los procesos psicológicos, biológicos o de desarrollo que subyacen al funcionamiento mental". El borrador final de la CIE-11 contiene una definición muy similar. La población en general puede utilizar los términos "crisis mental" o "crisis nerviosa" para referirse a un trastorno mental. La Asociación Estadounidense de Psiquiatría (APA) redefinió los trastornos mentales en el DSM-5 como "un síndrome caracterizado por una alteración clínicamente significativa en la cognición, la regulación emocional o el comportamiento de un individuo que refleja una disfunción en los procesos psicológicos, biológicos o de desarrollo que subyacen al funcionamiento mental". ." El borrador final de la CIE-11 contiene una definición muy similar. La población en general puede utilizar los términos "crisis mental" o "crisis nerviosa" para referirse a un trastorno mental. La Asociación Estadounidense de Psiquiatría (APA) redefinió los trastornos mentales en el DSM-5 como "un síndrome caracterizado por una alteración clínicamente significativa en la cognición, la regulación emocional o el comportamiento de un individuo que refleja una disfunción en los procesos psicológicos, biológicos o de desarrollo que subyacen al funcionamiento mental". ." El borrador final de la CIE-11 contiene una definición muy similar. La población en general puede utilizar los términos "crisis mental" o "crisis nerviosa" para referirse a un trastorno mental.

Los términos "crisis nerviosa" y "crisis mental" no se han definido formalmente a través de un sistema de diagnóstico médico como el DSM-5 o el ICD-10, y casi no aparecen en la literatura científica sobre enfermedades mentales.

Aunque el "ataque de nervios" no se define con rigor, las encuestas de legos sugieren que el término se refiere a un trastorno reactivo agudo específico de tiempo limitado, que involucra síntomas como ansiedad o depresión, generalmente precipitados por factores estresantes externos.

Muchos expertos en salud hoy en día se refieren a un ataque de nervios como una crisis de salud mental.


=== Enfermedad nerviosa ===

Además del concepto de trastorno mental, algunas personas han abogado por volver al concepto antiguo de enfermedad nerviosa.

En How Everyone Became Depressed: The Rise and Fall of the Nervous Breakdown (2013), Edward Shorter, profesor de psiquiatría e historia de la medicina, dice:

Aproximadamente la mitad de ellos están deprimidos.

O al menos ese es el diagnóstico que recibieron cuando les recetaron antidepresivos. ...

Van a trabajar pero se sienten infelices e incómodos; están algo ansiosos; ellos están cansados; tienen varios dolores físicos y tienden a obsesionarse con todo el asunto.

Hay un término para lo que tienen, y es un buen término pasado de moda que ya no se usa.

Tienen nervios o una enfermedad nerviosa.

Es una enfermedad no solo de la mente o el cerebro, sino un trastorno de todo el cuerpo. ...

Aquí tenemos un paquete de cinco síntomas: depresión leve, algo de ansiedad, fatiga, dolores somáticos y pensamientos obsesivos. ...

Hemos tenido enfermedades nerviosas durante siglos.

Cuando estás demasiado nervioso para funcionar... es un ataque de nervios.

Pero ese término ha desaparecido de la medicina, aunque no de nuestra forma de hablar...

Los pacientes nerviosos de antaño son los depresivos de hoy.

Esa es la mala noticia....

Hay una enfermedad más profunda que impulsa la depresión y los síntomas del estado de ánimo.

Podemos llamar a esta enfermedad más profunda de otra manera, o inventar un neologismo, pero necesitamos desviar la discusión de la depresión hacia este trastorno más profundo en el cerebro y el cuerpo.

Ese es el punto.
Al eliminar el ataque de nervios, la psiquiatría se ha acercado a tener su propio ataque de nervios.
Los nervios se encuentran en el centro de las enfermedades mentales comunes, sin importar cuánto intentemos olvidarlos.
"Colapso de nervios" es un término pseudomédico para describir una gran cantidad de sentimientos relacionados con el estrés y, a menudo, empeoran con la creencia de que existe un fenómeno real llamado "colapso de nervios".


== Clasificaciones ==


Actualmente existen dos sistemas ampliamente establecidos que clasifican los trastornos mentales:

CIE-10 Capítulo V: Trastornos mentales y del comportamiento, desde 1949 parte de la Clasificación Internacional de Enfermedades producida por la OMS,
el Manual Diagnóstico y Estadístico de los Trastornos Mentales (DSM-5) elaborado por la APA desde 1952. Ambos enumeran categorías de trastornos y proporcionan criterios estandarizados para el diagnóstico.

Han hecho converger deliberadamente sus códigos en revisiones recientes para que los manuales a menudo sean ampliamente comparables, aunque persisten diferencias significativas.

Se pueden usar otros esquemas de clasificación en culturas no occidentales, por ejemplo, la Clasificación china de trastornos mentales, y otros manuales pueden ser usados ​​por personas de convicciones teóricas alternativas, como el Manual de diagnóstico psicodinámico.

En general, los trastornos mentales se clasifican por separado de los trastornos neurológicos, las dificultades de aprendizaje o la discapacidad intelectual.
A diferencia del DSM y la CIE, algunos enfoques no se basan en la identificación de distintas categorías de trastornos utilizando perfiles de síntomas dicotómicos destinados a separar lo anormal de lo normal.

Existe un importante debate científico sobre los méritos relativos de los esquemas categóricos frente a los no categóricos (o híbridos), también conocidos como modelos continuos o dimensionales.

Un enfoque de espectro puede incorporar elementos de ambos.
En la literatura científica y académica sobre la definición o clasificación de los trastornos mentales, un extremo sostiene que es enteramente una cuestión de juicios de valor (incluyendo lo que es normal), mientras que otro propone que es o podría ser enteramente objetivo y científico (incluso por referencia a normas estadísticas).

Los puntos de vista híbridos comunes argumentan que el concepto de trastorno mental es objetivo, aunque solo sea un "prototipo borroso" que nunca se puede definir con precisión, o por el contrario, que el concepto siempre implica una mezcla de hechos científicos y juicios de valor subjetivos.

Aunque las categorías de diagnóstico se denominan "trastornos", se presentan como enfermedades médicas, pero no se validan de la misma manera que la mayoría de los diagnósticos médicos.

Algunos neurólogos argumentan que la clasificación solo será confiable y válida cuando se base en características neurobiológicas en lugar de una entrevista clínica, mientras que otros sugieren que las diferentes perspectivas ideológicas y prácticas deben integrarse mejor. modelo de causalidad y porque algunos investigadores creen que es mejor apuntar a las diferencias cerebrales subyacentes que pueden preceder a los síntomas por muchos años.


=== Modelos dimensionales ===

El alto grado de comorbilidad entre trastornos en modelos categóricos como el DSM y el ICD ha llevado a algunos a proponer modelos dimensionales.

El estudio de la comorbilidad entre trastornos ha demostrado dos factores o dimensiones latentes (no observados) en la estructura de los trastornos mentales que se cree que posiblemente reflejan procesos etiológicos.

Estas dos dimensiones reflejan una distinción entre los trastornos de internalización, como los síntomas del estado de ánimo o de ansiedad, y los trastornos de externalización, como los síntomas del comportamiento o el consumo de sustancias.

Se ha sustentado empíricamente un único factor general de psicopatología, similar al factor g de la inteligencia.

El modelo del factor p respalda la distinción de internalización-externalización, pero también respalda la formación de una tercera dimensión de los trastornos del pensamiento, como la esquizofrenia.

La evidencia biológica también respalda la validez de la estructura de internalización y externalización de los trastornos mentales, con estudios de gemelos y de adopción que respaldan los factores hereditarios de los trastornos de externalización e internalización.

Un modelo dimensional líder es la taxonomía jerárquica de la psicopatología.


=== Trastornos ===


Hay muchas categorías diferentes de trastornos mentales y muchas facetas diferentes del comportamiento humano y la personalidad que pueden volverse desordenadas.


==== Trastorno de ansiedad ====
Trastorno de ansiedad: la ansiedad o el miedo que interfiere con el funcionamiento normal se puede clasificar como un trastorno de ansiedad.

Las categorías comúnmente reconocidas incluyen fobias específicas, trastorno de ansiedad generalizada, trastorno de ansiedad social, trastorno de pánico, agorafobia, trastorno obsesivo-compulsivo y trastorno de estrés postraumático.


==== Trastorno del estado de ánimo ====
Trastorno del estado de ánimo: Otros procesos afectivos (emoción/estado de ánimo) también pueden alterarse.

El trastorno del estado de ánimo que involucra tristeza, melancolía o desesperación inusualmente intensa y sostenida se conoce como depresión mayor (también conocida como depresión unipolar o clínica).

Una depresión más leve, pero aún prolongada, puede diagnosticarse como distimia.

El trastorno bipolar (también conocido como depresión maníaca) implica estados de ánimo anormalmente "altos" o presionados, conocidos como manía o hipomanía, que se alternan con estados de ánimo normales o deprimidos.

La medida en que los fenómenos del estado de ánimo unipolar y bipolar representan distintas categorías de trastorno, o se mezclan y fusionan a lo largo de una dimensión o espectro del estado de ánimo, está sujeta a cierto debate científico.


==== Trastorno psicótico ====
Trastorno psicótico: los patrones de creencias, el uso del lenguaje y la percepción de la realidad pueden desregularse (p. ej., delirios, trastornos del pensamiento, alucinaciones).

Los trastornos psicóticos en este dominio incluyen la esquizofrenia y el trastorno delirante.

El trastorno esquizoafectivo es una categoría utilizada para personas que muestran aspectos tanto de la esquizofrenia como de los trastornos afectivos.

La esquizotipia es una categoría utilizada para personas que muestran algunas de las características asociadas con la esquizofrenia, pero sin cumplir con los criterios de corte.


==== Trastorno de personalidad ====
Trastorno de personalidad: la personalidad, las características fundamentales de una persona que influyen en los pensamientos y comportamientos a través de las situaciones y el tiempo, puede considerarse desordenada si se considera anormalmente rígida e inadaptada.

Aunque algunos los tratan por separado, los esquemas categóricos de uso común los incluyen como trastornos mentales, aunque en un eje II separado en el caso del DSM-IV.

Se enumeran varios trastornos de personalidad diferentes, incluidos los que a veces se clasifican como excéntricos, como los trastornos de personalidad paranoide, esquizoide y esquizotípico; tipos que se han descrito como dramáticos o emocionales, como los trastornos de personalidad antisocial, borderline, histriónico o narcisista; y los que a veces se clasifican como relacionados con el miedo, como los trastornos de personalidad ansioso-evitativo, dependiente u obsesivo-compulsivo.

Los trastornos de personalidad, en general, se definen como emergentes en la infancia, o al menos en la adolescencia o en la adultez temprana.

El ICD también tiene una categoría para cambios duraderos de personalidad después de una experiencia catastrófica o enfermedad psiquiátrica.

Si una incapacidad para adaptarse suficientemente a las circunstancias de la vida comienza dentro de los tres meses posteriores a un evento o situación en particular y termina dentro de los seis meses posteriores a la desaparición o eliminación del factor estresante, puede clasificarse como un trastorno de adaptación.

Existe un consenso emergente de que los trastornos de personalidad, similares a los rasgos de personalidad en general, incorporan una mezcla de comportamientos disfuncionales agudos que pueden resolverse en períodos cortos y rasgos temperamentales desadaptativos que son más duraderos.

Además, también hay esquemas no categóricos que califican a todos los individuos a través de un perfil de diferentes dimensiones de la personalidad sin un límite basado en síntomas de la variación normal de la personalidad, por ejemplo, a través de esquemas basados ​​en modelos dimensionales.


==== Trastorno alimentario ====
Los trastornos alimentarios implican una preocupación desproporcionada en cuestiones de alimentación y peso.

Las categorías de trastornos en esta área incluyen anorexia nerviosa, bulimia nerviosa, bulimia por ejercicio o trastorno por atracón.


==== Trastorno del sueño ====
Los trastornos del sueño están asociados con la interrupción de los patrones normales de sueño.

Un trastorno del sueño común es el insomnio, que se describe como la dificultad para conciliar el sueño y/o permanecer dormido.


==== Relacionado con la sexualidad ====
Los trastornos sexuales incluyen dispareunia y varios tipos de parafilia (excitación sexual ante objetos, situaciones o individuos que se consideran anormales o dañinos para la persona o para los demás).


==== Otro ====
Trastorno del control de los impulsos: las personas que son anormalmente incapaces de resistir ciertos impulsos o impulsos que podrían ser perjudiciales para ellos mismos o para los demás, pueden clasificarse con un trastorno del control de los impulsos y trastornos como la cleptomanía (robar) o la piromanía (prender fuego).

Varias adicciones conductuales, como la adicción al juego, pueden clasificarse como un trastorno.

El trastorno obsesivo-compulsivo a veces puede implicar una incapacidad para resistir ciertos actos, pero se clasifica por separado como un trastorno de ansiedad principalmente.
Trastorno por uso de sustancias: este trastorno se refiere al uso de drogas (legales o ilegales, incluido el alcohol) que persiste a pesar de los problemas o daños significativos relacionados con su uso.

La dependencia de sustancias y el abuso de sustancias caen dentro de esta categoría general en el DSM.

El trastorno por uso de sustancias puede deberse a un patrón de uso compulsivo y repetitivo de una droga que resulta en tolerancia a sus efectos y síntomas de abstinencia cuando se reduce o suspende el uso.
Trastorno disociativo: las personas que sufren trastornos graves de su propia identidad, memoria y conciencia general de sí mismos y de su entorno pueden clasificarse como portadores de este tipo de trastornos, incluido el trastorno de despersonalización o el trastorno de identidad disociativo (que antes se denominaba personalidad múltiple). trastorno o "doble personalidad").
Trastorno cognitivo: estos afectan las capacidades cognitivas, incluido el aprendizaje y la memoria.

Esta categoría incluye el delirio y el trastorno neurocognitivo leve y mayor (anteriormente denominado demencia).
Trastorno del desarrollo: estos trastornos se presentan inicialmente en la infancia.

Algunos ejemplos incluyen el trastorno del espectro autista, el trastorno de oposición desafiante y el trastorno de conducta, y el trastorno por déficit de atención con hiperactividad (TDAH), que pueden continuar hasta la edad adulta.

El trastorno de conducta, si continúa hasta la edad adulta, puede diagnosticarse como trastorno de personalidad antisocial (trastorno de personalidad disocial en el ICD).

Las etiquetas populares como psicópata (o sociópata) no aparecen en el DSM o ICD, pero algunos las vinculan con estos diagnósticos.
Los trastornos somatomorfos se pueden diagnosticar cuando existen problemas que parecen originarse en el cuerpo y que se cree que son manifestaciones de un trastorno mental.

Esto incluye el trastorno de somatización y el trastorno de conversión.

También existen trastornos de cómo una persona percibe su cuerpo, como el trastorno dismórfico corporal.

La neurastenia es un diagnóstico antiguo que implica quejas somáticas, así como fatiga y desánimo/depresión, que está oficialmente reconocido por la CIE-10 pero ya no por el DSM-IV. Los trastornos facticios se diagnostican cuando se piensa que los síntomas se informan para beneficio personal. .

Los síntomas a menudo se producen o fingen deliberadamente, y pueden relacionarse con síntomas en el individuo o en alguien cercano a él, en particular a las personas a las que cuida.
Hay intentos de introducir una categoría de trastorno relacional, donde el diagnóstico es de una relación en lugar de cualquier individuo en esa relación.

La relación puede ser entre hijos y sus padres, entre parejas u otras.

Ya existe, bajo la categoría de psicosis, un diagnóstico de trastorno psicótico compartido donde dos o más individuos comparten un delirio particular debido a su estrecha relación entre ellos.
Hay una serie de síndromes psiquiátricos poco comunes, que a menudo reciben el nombre de la persona que los describió por primera vez, como el síndrome de Capgras, el síndrome de De Clerambault, el síndrome de Othello, el síndrome de Ganser, el delirio de Cotard y el síndrome de Ekbom, y trastornos adicionales como el síndrome de Couvade. síndrome y síndrome de Geschwind.


== Signos y síntomas ==



=== Curso ===

El inicio de los trastornos psiquiátricos suele ocurrir desde la infancia hasta la edad adulta temprana.

Los trastornos del control de los impulsos y algunos trastornos de ansiedad tienden a aparecer en la infancia.

Algunos otros trastornos de ansiedad, trastornos por sustancias y trastornos del estado de ánimo surgen más tarde, a mediados de la adolescencia.

Los síntomas de la esquizofrenia suelen manifestarse desde el final de la adolescencia hasta los veinte años. El curso probable y el resultado de los trastornos mentales varían y dependen de numerosos factores relacionados con el trastorno en sí, el individuo en su conjunto y el entorno social.

Algunos trastornos pueden durar un breve período de tiempo, mientras que otros pueden ser de naturaleza a largo plazo.
Todos los trastornos pueden tener un curso variado.

Los estudios internacionales a largo plazo sobre la esquizofrenia han encontrado que más de la mitad de las personas se recuperan en términos de síntomas, y alrededor de un quinto a un tercio en términos de síntomas y funcionamiento, y muchos no requieren medicación.

Si bien algunos tienen serias dificultades y necesidades de apoyo durante muchos años, la recuperación "tardía" sigue siendo plausible.

La Organización Mundial de la Salud concluyó que los hallazgos de los estudios a largo plazo convergieron con otros en "aliviar a los pacientes, cuidadores y médicos del paradigma de la cronicidad que dominó el pensamiento durante gran parte del siglo XX". Un estudio de seguimiento realizado por Tohen y colaboradores reveló que alrededor de la mitad de las personas inicialmente diagnosticadas con trastorno bipolar logran la recuperación sintomática (ya no cumplen con los criterios para el diagnóstico) dentro de las seis semanas, y casi todas la logran dentro de los dos años, con casi la mitad recuperando su estado ocupacional y residencial anterior en ese período.

Menos de la mitad pasa a experimentar un nuevo episodio de manía o depresión mayor en los próximos dos años.


=== Discapacidad ===

Algunos trastornos pueden tener efectos funcionales muy limitados, mientras que otros pueden implicar una discapacidad sustancial y necesidades de apoyo.

El grado de capacidad o discapacidad puede variar con el tiempo y entre diferentes dominios de la vida.

Además, la discapacidad continua se ha relacionado con la institucionalización, la discriminación y la exclusión social, así como con los efectos inherentes de los trastornos.

Alternativamente, el funcionamiento puede verse afectado por el estrés de tener que ocultar una condición en el trabajo o la escuela, etc., por los efectos adversos de medicamentos u otras sustancias, o por desajustes entre las variaciones relacionadas con la enfermedad y las demandas de regularidad. También es el caso que, si bien a menudo se caracterizan en términos puramente negativos, algunos rasgos o estados mentales etiquetados como trastornos también pueden implicar una creatividad superior a la media, la inconformidad, la búsqueda de objetivos, la meticulosidad o la empatía.

Además, la percepción pública del nivel de discapacidad asociado con los trastornos mentales puede cambiar. Sin embargo, internacionalmente, las personas reportan una discapacidad igual o mayor por condiciones mentales comunes que por condiciones físicas comunes, particularmente en sus roles sociales y relaciones personales.

Sin embargo, la proporción con acceso a ayuda profesional para los trastornos mentales es mucho más baja, incluso entre aquellos evaluados con una condición de discapacidad grave.

La discapacidad en este contexto puede o no involucrar cosas tales como:

Actividades básicas de la vida diaria.

Incluyendo el cuidado de uno mismo (cuidado de la salud, arreglarse, vestirse, ir de compras, cocinar, etc.) o el cuidado del alojamiento (quehaceres, tareas de bricolaje, etc.)
Relaciones interpersonales.

Incluyendo habilidades de comunicación, capacidad para formar relaciones y mantenerlas, capacidad para salir de casa o mezclarse con multitudes o entornos particulares
Funcionamiento ocupacional.

Capacidad para adquirir un empleo y mantenerlo, habilidades cognitivas y sociales requeridas para el trabajo, lidiar con la cultura del lugar de trabajo o estudiar como estudiante. En términos de años de vida ajustados por discapacidad (DALY), que es una estimación de cuántos años de vida se pierden por muerte prematura o por estar en malas condiciones de salud y discapacidad, los trastornos mentales figuran entre las condiciones más incapacitantes.

El trastorno depresivo unipolar (también conocido como mayor) es la tercera causa de discapacidad en todo el mundo, de cualquier condición mental o física, y representa 65,5 millones de años perdidos.

La primera descripción sistemática de la discapacidad global que surge en la juventud, en 2011, encontró que entre los jóvenes de 10 a 24 años, casi la mitad de todas las discapacidades (actuales y que se estima que continuarán) se debían a condiciones mentales y neurológicas, incluidos los trastornos por uso de sustancias. y condiciones que implican autolesiones.

En segundo lugar, se encuentran las lesiones accidentales (principalmente colisiones de tránsito) que representan el 12 por ciento de la discapacidad, seguidas por las enfermedades transmisibles con el 10 por ciento.

Los trastornos asociados con la mayoría de las discapacidades en los países de ingresos altos fueron la depresión mayor unipolar (20 %) y el trastorno por consumo de alcohol (11 %).

En la región del Mediterráneo oriental, fue la depresión mayor unipolar (12 %) y la esquizofrenia (7 %), y en África fue la depresión mayor unipolar (7 %) y el trastorno bipolar (5 %). trastorno mental subyacente, es una de las principales causas de muerte entre los adolescentes y adultos menores de 35 años.

Se estima que cada año se producen entre 10 y 20 millones de intentos de suicidio no mortales en todo el mundo.


== Factores de riesgo ==


La opinión predominante a partir de 2018 es que los factores genéticos, psicológicos y ambientales contribuyen al desarrollo o progresión de los trastornos mentales.

Los diferentes factores de riesgo pueden estar presentes a diferentes edades, y el riesgo se presenta ya durante el período prenatal.


=== Genética ===


Varios trastornos psiquiátricos están relacionados con antecedentes familiares (incluida la depresión, el trastorno narcisista de la personalidad y la ansiedad).

Los estudios de gemelos también han revelado una heredabilidad muy alta para muchos trastornos mentales (especialmente el autismo y la esquizofrenia).

Aunque los investigadores han estado buscando durante décadas vínculos claros entre la genética y los trastornos mentales, ese trabajo aún no ha producido biomarcadores genéticos específicos que puedan conducir a un mejor diagnóstico y mejores tratamientos. La investigación estadística que analizó once trastornos encontró emparejamiento selectivo generalizado entre personas con enfermedades mentales .

Eso significa que las personas con uno de estos trastornos tenían entre dos y tres veces más probabilidades que la población general de tener una pareja con un trastorno mental.

A veces, las personas parecían tener parejas preferidas con la misma enfermedad mental.

Así, las personas con esquizofrenia o TDAH tienen siete veces más probabilidades de tener parejas afectadas con el mismo trastorno.

Esto es aún más pronunciado para las personas con trastornos del espectro autista que tienen 10 veces más probabilidades de tener un cónyuge con el mismo trastorno.


=== Medio ambiente ===


Durante la etapa prenatal, factores como el embarazo no deseado, la falta de adaptación al embarazo o el consumo de sustancias durante el embarazo aumentan el riesgo de desarrollar un trastorno mental.

El estrés materno y las complicaciones del parto, incluidos la prematuridad y las infecciones, también se han relacionado con el aumento de la susceptibilidad a las enfermedades mentales.

Los bebés descuidados o que no reciben una nutrición óptima tienen un mayor riesgo de desarrollar deterioro cognitivo. También se ha descubierto que las influencias sociales son importantes, incluidos el abuso, la negligencia, la intimidación, el estrés social, los eventos traumáticos y otras experiencias de vida negativas o abrumadoras.

También se han implicado aspectos de la comunidad en general, incluidos los problemas de empleo, la desigualdad socioeconómica, la falta de cohesión social, los problemas relacionados con la migración y las características de sociedades y culturas particulares.

Sin embargo, los riesgos específicos y las vías hacia trastornos particulares son menos claros.
La nutrición también juega un papel en los trastornos mentales. En la esquizofrenia y la psicosis, los factores de riesgo incluyen la migración y la discriminación, el trauma infantil, el duelo o la separación en las familias, el uso recreativo de drogas y la urbanidad. En la ansiedad, los factores de riesgo pueden incluir factores de crianza, incluido el rechazo de los padres. , falta de calidez de los padres, alta hostilidad, disciplina severa, alto afecto negativo materno, crianza ansiosa, modelado de comportamiento disfuncional y de abuso de drogas, y abuso infantil (emocional, físico y sexual).

Los adultos con un desequilibrio entre el trabajo y la vida tienen un mayor riesgo de desarrollar ansiedad. Para el trastorno bipolar, el estrés (como la adversidad infantil) no es una causa específica, pero pone a las personas genética y biológicamente vulnerables en riesgo de sufrir un curso más grave de la enfermedad.


=== Consumo de drogas ===

Los trastornos mentales están asociados con el consumo de drogas, que incluyen: cannabis, alcohol y cafeína, cuyo uso parece promover la ansiedad.

Para la psicosis y la esquizofrenia, el uso de varias drogas se ha asociado con el desarrollo del trastorno, incluidos el cannabis, la cocaína y las anfetaminas.

Ha habido debate sobre la relación entre el consumo de cannabis y el trastorno bipolar.

El cannabis también se ha asociado con la depresión.

Los adolescentes corren un mayor riesgo de consumo de tabaco, alcohol y drogas; La presión de grupo es la razón principal por la que los adolescentes comienzan a consumir sustancias.

A esta edad, el uso de sustancias podría ser perjudicial para el desarrollo del cerebro y colocarlos en mayor riesgo de desarrollar un trastorno mental.


=== Enfermedad crónica ===

Las personas que viven con enfermedades crónicas como el VIH y la diabetes corren un mayor riesgo de desarrollar un trastorno mental.

Las personas que viven con diabetes experimentan un estrés significativo por el impacto biológico de la enfermedad, lo que las pone en riesgo de desarrollar ansiedad y depresión.

Los pacientes diabéticos también tienen que lidiar con el estrés emocional al tratar de controlar la enfermedad.

Condiciones como enfermedades cardíacas, accidentes cerebrovasculares, afecciones respiratorias, cáncer y artritis aumentan el riesgo de desarrollar un trastorno mental en comparación con la población general.


=== Rasgos de personalidad ===

Los factores de riesgo para la enfermedad mental incluyen una propensión a un alto neuroticismo o "inestabilidad emocional".

En la ansiedad, los factores de riesgo pueden incluir temperamento y actitudes (p. ej., pesimismo).


=== Modelos causales ===

Los trastornos mentales pueden surgir de múltiples fuentes y, en muchos casos, no existe una causa única aceptada o consistente actualmente establecida.

Se puede utilizar una mezcla ecléctica o pluralista de modelos para explicar trastornos particulares.

Se dice que el paradigma principal de la psiquiatría occidental dominante contemporánea es el modelo biopsicosocial que incorpora factores biológicos, psicológicos y sociales, aunque es posible que esto no siempre se aplique en la práctica.
La psiquiatría biológica sigue un modelo biomédico en el que muchos trastornos mentales se conceptualizan como trastornos de los circuitos cerebrales probablemente causados ​​por procesos de desarrollo moldeados por una interacción compleja de genética y experiencia.

Una suposición común es que los trastornos pueden ser el resultado de vulnerabilidades genéticas y de desarrollo, expuestas por el estrés en la vida (por ejemplo, en un modelo de diátesis-estrés), aunque existen varios puntos de vista sobre las causas de las diferencias entre los individuos.

Algunos tipos de trastornos mentales pueden verse principalmente como trastornos del neurodesarrollo.
La psicología evolutiva puede usarse como una teoría explicativa general, mientras que la teoría del apego es otro tipo de enfoque psicológico-evolutivo que a veces se aplica en el contexto de los trastornos mentales.

Las teorías psicoanalíticas han seguido evolucionando junto con los enfoques cognitivo-conductual y sistémico-familiar.

A veces se hace una distinción entre un "modelo médico" o un "modelo social" de trastorno y discapacidad.


== Diagnóstico ==

Los psiquiatras buscan proporcionar un diagnóstico médico de las personas mediante una evaluación de los síntomas, signos y deficiencias asociadas con determinados tipos de trastornos mentales.

Otros profesionales de la salud mental, como los psicólogos clínicos, pueden o no aplicar las mismas categorías de diagnóstico a su formulación clínica de las dificultades y circunstancias de un cliente.

La mayoría de los problemas de salud mental son, al menos inicialmente, evaluados y tratados por médicos de familia (médicos generales en el Reino Unido) durante las consultas, quienes pueden derivar a un paciente para un diagnóstico más especializado en casos agudos o crónicos.
La práctica de diagnóstico de rutina en los servicios de salud mental generalmente implica una entrevista conocida como examen del estado mental, donde se realizan evaluaciones de la apariencia y el comportamiento, los síntomas autoinformados, el historial de salud mental y las circunstancias de la vida actual.

Se pueden tener en cuenta las opiniones de otros profesionales, familiares u otros terceros.

Se puede realizar un examen físico para comprobar si hay problemas de salud o los efectos de medicamentos u otras drogas.

Las pruebas psicológicas a veces se usan a través de papel y bolígrafo o cuestionarios computarizados, que pueden incluir algoritmos basados ​​en marcar criterios de diagnóstico estandarizados, y en casos raros de especialistas, se pueden solicitar pruebas de neuroimagen, pero tales métodos se encuentran más comúnmente en estudios de investigación que rutinarios. práctica clínica. Las limitaciones de tiempo y presupuesto a menudo limitan a los psiquiatras en ejercicio para realizar evaluaciones diagnósticas más exhaustivas.

Se ha encontrado que la mayoría de los médicos evalúan a los pacientes utilizando un enfoque abierto y no estructurado, con capacitación limitada en métodos de evaluación basados ​​en la evidencia, y que los diagnósticos inexactos pueden ser comunes en la práctica habitual.

Además, la comorbilidad es muy común en el diagnóstico psiquiátrico, donde una misma persona cumple los criterios de más de un trastorno.

Por otro lado, una persona puede tener varias dificultades diferentes, solo algunas de las cuales cumplen los criterios para ser diagnosticadas.

Puede haber problemas específicos con un diagnóstico preciso en los países en desarrollo.
Cada vez se utilizan más enfoques estructurados para medir los niveles de enfermedad mental.

HoNOS es la medida más utilizada en los servicios de salud mental ingleses, siendo utilizada por al menos 61 fideicomisos.

En HoNOS se otorga una puntuación de 0 a 4 para cada uno de los 12 factores, según la capacidad de vida funcional.

La investigación ha apoyado a HoNOS, aunque se han formulado algunas preguntas sobre si proporciona una cobertura adecuada del rango y la complejidad de los problemas de enfermedades mentales, y si el hecho de que a menudo solo 3 de las 12 escalas varíen con el tiempo brinda suficiente sutileza para medir con precisión. resultados del tratamiento.


=== Críticas ===

Desde la década de 1980, Paula Caplan se ha preocupado por la subjetividad de los diagnósticos psiquiátricos y por el hecho de que las personas sean arbitrariamente "abofeteadas con una etiqueta psiquiátrica". Caplan dice que debido a que el diagnóstico psiquiátrico no está regulado, los médicos no están obligados a pasar mucho tiempo entrevistando a los pacientes o buscando una segunda opinión.

El Manual Diagnóstico y Estadístico de los Trastornos Mentales puede llevar a un psiquiatra a concentrarse en listas estrechas de verificación de síntomas, con poca consideración de lo que realmente está causando los problemas de la persona.

Por lo tanto, según Caplan, obtener un diagnóstico y una etiqueta psiquiátrica a menudo se interpone en el camino de la recuperación. En 2013, el psiquiatra Allen Frances escribió un artículo titulado "La nueva crisis de confianza en el diagnóstico psiquiátrico", que decía que "el diagnóstico psiquiátrico... todavía se basa exclusivamente en juicios subjetivos falibles en lugar de pruebas biológicas objetivas". Frances también estaba preocupada por el "sobrediagnóstico impredecible". Durante muchos años, psiquiatras marginados (como Peter Breggin, Thomas Szasz) y críticos externos (como Stuart A.

Kirk) han "estado acusando a la psiquiatría de involucrarse en la medicalización sistemática de la normalidad". Más recientemente, estas preocupaciones provienen de personas internas que trabajaron para la Asociación Estadounidense de Psiquiatría y la promovieron (p. ej., Robert Spitzer, Allen Frances).

Un editorial de 2002 en el British Medical Journal advirtió sobre la medicalización inapropiada que conduce a la promoción de enfermedades, donde los límites de la definición de enfermedades se amplían para incluir problemas personales a medida que se enfatizan los problemas médicos o los riesgos de enfermedades para ampliar el mercado de medicamentos. Gary Greenberg, un psicoanalista, en su libro "The Book of Woe", argumenta que la enfermedad mental en realidad tiene que ver con el sufrimiento y cómo el DSM crea etiquetas de diagnóstico para categorizar el sufrimiento de las personas.

De hecho, el psiquiatra Thomas Szasz, en su libro "La medicalización de la vida cotidiana", también argumenta que lo que es una enfermedad psiquiátrica, no siempre es de naturaleza biológica (es decir, problemas sociales, pobreza, etc.), e incluso puede ser parte de la condición humana.


== Prevención ==


El informe de la OMS de 2004 "Prevención de los trastornos mentales" afirmó que "la prevención de estos trastornos es obviamente una de las formas más efectivas de reducir la carga [de la enfermedad]".
La guía de la Asociación Europea de Psiquiatría (EPA) de 2011 sobre la prevención de los trastornos mentales establece que "existe evidencia considerable de que varias afecciones psiquiátricas se pueden prevenir mediante la implementación de intervenciones efectivas basadas en evidencia".
Un informe del Departamento de Salud del Reino Unido de 2011 sobre el caso económico de la promoción de la salud mental y la prevención de enfermedades mentales encontró que "muchas intervenciones tienen una excelente relación calidad-precio, son de bajo costo y, a menudo, se autofinancian con el tiempo, ahorrando gastos públicos".
En 2016, el Instituto Nacional de Salud Mental reafirmó la prevención como un área prioritaria de investigación. La crianza de los hijos puede afectar la salud mental del niño, y la evidencia sugiere que ayudar a los padres a ser más efectivos con sus hijos puede abordar las necesidades de salud mental. en una población que no tiene un mayor riesgo de desarrollar un trastorno mental, como programas escolares o campañas en los medios de comunicación) necesitan un número muy alto de personas para mostrar el efecto (a veces conocido como el problema del "poder").

Los enfoques para superar esto son (1) centrarse en grupos de alta incidencia (por ejemplo, dirigiéndose a grupos con factores de alto riesgo), (2) usar múltiples intervenciones para lograr efectos mayores y, por lo tanto, más válidos estadísticamente, (3) usar meta- análisis de muchos ensayos, y (4) ejecutar ensayos muy grandes.


== Gestión ==


El tratamiento y el apoyo para los trastornos mentales se brindan en hospitales psiquiátricos, clínicas o una variedad de servicios comunitarios de salud mental.

En algunos países, los servicios se basan cada vez más en un enfoque de recuperación, destinado a apoyar el viaje personal de las personas para obtener el tipo de vida que desean.
Existe una gama de diferentes tipos de tratamiento y cuál es el más adecuado depende del trastorno y del individuo.

Se ha descubierto que muchas cosas ayudan al menos a algunas personas, y un efecto placebo puede desempeñar un papel en cualquier intervención o medicamento.

En una minoría de casos, las personas pueden ser tratadas en contra de su voluntad, lo que puede causar dificultades particulares según cómo se lleve a cabo y se perciba.

El tratamiento obligatorio en la comunidad frente al tratamiento no obligatorio no parece marcar una gran diferencia, excepto tal vez por la disminución de la victimización.


=== Estilo de vida ===

Las estrategias de estilo de vida, incluidos los cambios en la dieta, el ejercicio y dejar de fumar, pueden ser beneficiosas.


=== Terapia ===

También hay una amplia gama de psicoterapeutas (incluida la terapia familiar), consejeros y profesionales de la salud pública.

Además, existen roles de apoyo entre pares donde la experiencia personal de problemas similares es la principal fuente de experiencia. Una opción importante para muchos trastornos mentales es la psicoterapia.

Hay varios tipos principales.

La terapia cognitiva conductual (TCC) es muy utilizada y se basa en modificar los patrones de pensamiento y conducta asociados a un determinado trastorno.

Otras psicoterapias incluyen la terapia conductual dialéctica (DBT) y la psicoterapia interpersonal (IPT).

El psicoanálisis, que aborda los conflictos psíquicos y las defensas subyacentes, ha sido una escuela dominante de psicoterapia y todavía se usa.

A veces se utiliza la terapia sistémica o la terapia familiar, que se dirige a una red de personas significativas, así como a un individuo.
Algunas psicoterapias se basan en un enfoque humanista.

Hay muchas terapias específicas que se usan para trastornos particulares, que pueden ser derivados o híbridos de los tipos anteriores.

Los profesionales de la salud mental a menudo emplean un enfoque ecléctico o integrador.

Mucho puede depender de la relación terapéutica y puede haber problemas con la confianza, la confidencialidad y el compromiso.


=== Medicamentos ===

Una opción importante para muchos trastornos mentales es la medicación psiquiátrica y existen varios grupos principales.

Los antidepresivos se utilizan para el tratamiento de la depresión clínica, así como para la ansiedad y una variedad de otros trastornos.

Los ansiolíticos (incluidos los sedantes) se utilizan para los trastornos de ansiedad y problemas relacionados, como el insomnio.

Los estabilizadores del estado de ánimo se utilizan principalmente en el trastorno bipolar.

Los antipsicóticos se utilizan para los trastornos psicóticos, en particular para los síntomas positivos de la esquizofrenia, y también cada vez más para una variedad de otros trastornos.

Los estimulantes se usan comúnmente, especialmente para el TDAH. A pesar de los diferentes nombres convencionales de los grupos de medicamentos, puede haber una superposición considerable en los trastornos para los que realmente están indicados, y también puede haber un uso no indicado en la etiqueta de los medicamentos.

Puede haber problemas con los efectos adversos de los medicamentos y la adherencia a los mismos, y también hay críticas al marketing farmacéutico y los conflictos de intereses profesionales.

Sin embargo, se considera que estos medicamentos en combinación con métodos no farmacológicos, como la terapia cognitivo-conductual (TCC), son más efectivos en el tratamiento de los trastornos mentales.


=== Otro ===

La terapia electroconvulsiva (TEC) a veces se usa en casos graves cuando han fracasado otras intervenciones para la depresión grave intratable.

La TEC generalmente está indicada para la depresión resistente al tratamiento, los síntomas vegetativos graves, la depresión psicótica, la ideación suicida intensa, la depresión durante el embarazo y la catatonía.

La psicocirugía se considera experimental, pero algunos neurólogos la recomiendan en ciertos casos raros. Se puede utilizar el asesoramiento (profesional) y el asesoramiento conjunto (entre pares).

Los programas de psicoeducación pueden brindar a las personas la información para comprender y manejar sus problemas.

A veces se utilizan terapias creativas, como musicoterapia, arteterapia o dramaterapia.

A menudo se utilizan ajustes en el estilo de vida y medidas de apoyo, incluido el apoyo entre pares, grupos de autoayuda para la salud mental y vivienda asistida o empleo asistido (incluidas las empresas sociales).

Algunos abogan por los suplementos dietéticos. Se pueden implementar adaptaciones razonables (ajustes y apoyos) para ayudar a una persona a sobrellevar y tener éxito en entornos a pesar de la posible discapacidad relacionada con problemas de salud mental.

Esto podría incluir un animal de apoyo emocional o un perro de servicio psiquiátrico específicamente entrenado.

A partir de 2019, el cannabis no se recomienda específicamente como tratamiento.


== Epidemiología ==


Los trastornos mentales son comunes.

En todo el mundo, más de una de cada tres personas en la mayoría de los países reportan criterios suficientes para al menos uno en algún momento de su vida.

En los Estados Unidos, el 46% califica para una enfermedad mental en algún momento.

Una encuesta en curso indica que los trastornos de ansiedad son los más comunes en todos los países excepto en uno, seguidos por los trastornos del estado de ánimo en todos los países excepto en dos, mientras que los trastornos por consumo de sustancias y los trastornos del control de los impulsos fueron consistentemente menos prevalentes.

Las tasas variaron según la región. Una revisión de las encuestas sobre trastornos de ansiedad en diferentes países encontró estimaciones de prevalencia promedio durante la vida del 16,6 %, y las mujeres tenían tasas más altas en promedio.

Una revisión de las encuestas sobre trastornos del estado de ánimo en diferentes países encontró tasas de por vida del 6,7 % para el trastorno depresivo mayor (mayor en algunos estudios y en mujeres) y del 0,8 % para el trastorno bipolar I. En los Estados Unidos, la frecuencia del trastorno es: trastorno de ansiedad ( 28,8 %), trastorno del estado de ánimo (20,8 %), trastorno del control de los impulsos (24,8 %) o trastorno por consumo de sustancias (14,6 %). para al menos uno de los trastornos del DSM-IV evaluados, que incluían trastornos del estado de ánimo (13,9 %), trastornos de ansiedad (13,6 %) o trastorno por alcoholismo (5,2 %).

Aproximadamente uno de cada diez cumplió con los criterios en un período de 12 meses.

Las mujeres y las personas más jóvenes de ambos sexos mostraron más casos del trastorno.

Una revisión de 2005 de encuestas en 16 países europeos encontró que el 27% de los adultos europeos se ven afectados por al menos un trastorno mental en un período de 12 meses. Una revisión internacional de estudios sobre la prevalencia de la esquizofrenia encontró una cifra promedio (mediana) de 0,4 % de prevalencia a lo largo de la vida; fue consistentemente menor en los países más pobres. Los estudios sobre la prevalencia de los trastornos de la personalidad (TP) han sido menos y de menor escala, pero una amplia encuesta noruega encontró una prevalencia de cinco años de casi 1 en 7 (13,4%).

Las tasas de trastornos específicos oscilaron entre el 0,8 % y el 2,8 %, y difirieron entre países y según el género, el nivel educativo y otros factores.

Una encuesta de EE. UU. que incidentalmente evaluó el trastorno de la personalidad encontró una tasa del 14,79 %. Aproximadamente el 7 % de una muestra pediátrica preescolar recibió un diagnóstico psiquiátrico en un estudio clínico, y aproximadamente el 10 % de los niños de 1 y 2 años recibieron una evaluación del desarrollo han sido evaluados con problemas emocionales/conductuales significativos según los informes de los padres y el pediatra. Si bien las tasas de trastornos psicológicos suelen ser las mismas para hombres y mujeres, las mujeres tienden a tener una tasa más alta de depresión.

Cada año, 73 millones de mujeres se ven afectadas por la depresión mayor, y el suicidio ocupa el séptimo lugar como causa de muerte entre las mujeres de 20 a 59 años.

Los trastornos depresivos representan cerca del 41,9% de la discapacidad por trastornos neuropsiquiátricos entre las mujeres frente al 29,3% entre los hombres.


== Historia ==



=== Civilizaciones antiguas ===

Las civilizaciones antiguas describieron y trataron una serie de trastornos mentales.

Las enfermedades mentales eran bien conocidas en la antigua Mesopotamia, donde se creía que las enfermedades y los trastornos mentales eran causados ​​por deidades específicas.

Debido a que las manos simbolizaban el control sobre una persona, las enfermedades mentales se conocían como "manos" de ciertas deidades.

Una enfermedad psicológica se conocía como Qāt Ištar, que significa "Mano de Ishtar".

Otros eran conocidos como "Mano de Shamash", "Mano del fantasma" y "Mano de Dios".

Sin embargo, las descripciones de estas enfermedades son tan vagas que normalmente es imposible determinar a qué enfermedades corresponden en la terminología moderna.

Los médicos mesopotámicos mantuvieron un registro detallado de las alucinaciones de sus pacientes y les asignaron significados espirituales.

La familia real de Elam era notoria porque sus miembros sufrían frecuentemente de locura.

Los griegos acuñaron términos para melancolía, histeria y fobia y desarrollaron la teoría del humorismo.

Los trastornos mentales se describieron y se desarrollaron tratamientos en Persia, Arabia y en el mundo islámico medieval.


=== Europa ===



==== Edad Media ====
Las concepciones de la locura en la Edad Media en la Europa cristiana eran una mezcla de lo divino, lo diabólico, lo mágico y lo humorístico, y lo trascendental.

En el período moderno temprano, algunas personas con trastornos mentales pueden haber sido víctimas de la caza de brujas.

Si bien no todos los acusados ​​de brujería y hechicería eran enfermos mentales, todos los enfermos mentales eran considerados brujos o hechiceros.

Muchos términos para los trastornos mentales que se abrieron camino en el uso cotidiano se hicieron populares por primera vez en los siglos XVI y XVII.


==== Siglo XVIII ====

A finales del siglo XVII y en la Ilustración, la locura se veía cada vez más como un fenómeno físico orgánico sin conexión con el alma ni responsabilidad moral.

El cuidado de asilo a menudo era duro y trataba a las personas como animales salvajes, pero hacia fines del siglo XVIII se desarrolló gradualmente un movimiento de tratamiento moral.

Las descripciones claras de algunos síndromes pueden ser raras antes del siglo XIX.


==== Siglo XIX ====
La industrialización y el crecimiento de la población llevaron a una expansión masiva del número y tamaño de los manicomios en todos los países occidentales en el siglo XIX.

Diferentes autoridades desarrollaron numerosos esquemas de clasificación y términos de diagnóstico diferentes, y se acuñó el término psiquiatría (1808), aunque los superintendentes médicos todavía eran conocidos como alienistas.


==== Siglo XX ====

El cambio de siglo vio el desarrollo del psicoanálisis, que luego pasaría a primer plano, junto con el esquema de clasificación de Kraepelin.

Los "reclusos" de asilo se denominaron cada vez más "pacientes", y los asilos pasaron a llamarse hospitales.


=== Europa y Estados Unidos ===


A principios del siglo XX en los Estados Unidos, se desarrolló un movimiento de higiene mental con el objetivo de prevenir los trastornos mentales.

La psicología clínica y el trabajo social se desarrollaron como profesiones.

La Primera Guerra Mundial vio un aumento masivo de condiciones que llegaron a denominarse "choque de guerra".
La Segunda Guerra Mundial vio el desarrollo en los EE. UU. de un nuevo manual psiquiátrico para categorizar los trastornos mentales, que junto con los sistemas existentes para recopilar censos y estadísticas hospitalarias dio lugar al primer Manual diagnóstico y estadístico de los trastornos mentales.

La Clasificación Internacional de Enfermedades (ICD) también desarrolló una sección sobre trastornos mentales.

El término estrés, que surgió del trabajo de endocrinología en la década de 1930, se aplicó cada vez más a los trastornos mentales.
La terapia electroconvulsiva, la terapia de choque con insulina, las lobotomías y el neuroléptico clorpromacina comenzaron a utilizarse a mediados de siglo.

En la década de 1960 hubo muchos desafíos al concepto mismo de enfermedad mental.

Estos desafíos provinieron de psiquiatras como Thomas Szasz, quien argumentó que la enfermedad mental era un mito utilizado para disfrazar conflictos morales; de sociólogos como Erving Goffman, quien dijo que la enfermedad mental era simplemente otro ejemplo de cómo la sociedad etiqueta y controla a los inconformistas; de psicólogos del comportamiento que desafiaron la confianza fundamental de la psiquiatría en fenómenos no observables; y de activistas por los derechos de los homosexuales que criticaron la inclusión de la homosexualidad en la lista de la APA como un trastorno mental.

Un estudio publicado en Science por Rosenhan recibió mucha publicidad y fue visto como un ataque a la eficacia del diagnóstico psiquiátrico. La desinstitucionalización ocurrió gradualmente en Occidente, con el cierre de hospitales psiquiátricos aislados a favor de los servicios comunitarios de salud mental.

Un movimiento de consumidores/supervivientes cobró impulso.

Poco a poco se empezaron a utilizar otros tipos de medicación psiquiátrica, como los "energizantes psíquicos" (posteriormente antidepresivos) y el litio.

Las benzodiazepinas ganaron un uso generalizado en la década de 1970 para la ansiedad y la depresión, hasta que los problemas de dependencia redujeron su popularidad.
Los avances en neurociencia, genética y psicología llevaron a nuevas agendas de investigación.

Se desarrolló la terapia cognitiva conductual y otras psicoterapias.

El DSM y luego la CIE adoptaron nuevas clasificaciones basadas en criterios, y el número de diagnósticos "oficiales" experimentó una gran expansión.

A lo largo de la década de 1990, los nuevos antidepresivos de tipo ISRS se convirtieron en algunos de los medicamentos más recetados en el mundo, al igual que más tarde los antipsicóticos.

También durante la década de 1990, se desarrolló un enfoque de recuperación.


== Sociedad y cultura ==


Diferentes sociedades o culturas, incluso diferentes individuos en una subcultura, pueden estar en desacuerdo sobre lo que constituye un funcionamiento biológico y psicológico óptimo versus patológico.

La investigación ha demostrado que las culturas varían en la importancia relativa que se le da, por ejemplo, a la felicidad, la autonomía o las relaciones sociales por placer.

Del mismo modo, el hecho de que un patrón de comportamiento sea valorado, aceptado, alentado o incluso estadísticamente normativo en una cultura no significa necesariamente que conduzca a un funcionamiento psicológico óptimo.
Las personas de todas las culturas encuentran algunos comportamientos extraños o incluso incomprensibles.

Pero lo que sienten que es extraño o incomprensible es ambiguo y subjetivo.

Estas diferencias en la determinación pueden volverse muy polémicas.

El proceso por el cual las condiciones y dificultades llegan a ser definidas y tratadas como condiciones y problemas médicos y, por lo tanto, quedan bajo la autoridad de los médicos y otros profesionales de la salud, se conoce como medicalización o patologización.


=== Religión ===


Las experiencias y creencias religiosas, espirituales o transpersonales cumplen muchos criterios de trastornos delirantes o psicóticos.

A veces se puede demostrar que una creencia o experiencia produce angustia o discapacidad, el estándar ordinario para juzgar los trastornos mentales.

Existe un vínculo entre la religión y la esquizofrenia, un trastorno mental complejo caracterizado por una dificultad para reconocer la realidad, regular las respuestas emocionales y pensar de manera clara y lógica.

Las personas con esquizofrenia comúnmente reportan algún tipo de delirio religioso, y la religión en sí misma puede ser un desencadenante de la esquizofrenia.


=== Movimientos ===


La controversia a menudo ha rodeado a la psiquiatría, y el término antipsiquiatría fue acuñado por el psiquiatra David Cooper en 1967.

El mensaje contra la psiquiatría es que los tratamientos psiquiátricos son, en última instancia, más dañinos que útiles para los pacientes, y la historia de la psiquiatría involucra lo que ahora pueden verse como tratamientos peligrosos.

La terapia electroconvulsiva fue una de ellas, que se usó ampliamente entre las décadas de 1930 y 1960.

La lobotomía fue otra práctica que finalmente se consideró demasiado invasiva y brutal.

A veces se recetaban en exceso diazepam y otros sedantes, lo que conducía a una epidemia de dependencia.

También hubo preocupación por el gran aumento en la prescripción de medicamentos psiquiátricos para niños.

Algunos psiquiatras carismáticos llegaron a personificar el movimiento contra la psiquiatría.

El más influyente de ellos fue RD

Laing, quien escribió una serie de libros superventas, incluido The Divided Self.

Thomas Szasz escribió El mito de la enfermedad mental.

Algunos grupos de ex pacientes se han vuelto militantemente antipsiquiátricos, y a menudo se refieren a sí mismos como sobrevivientes.

Giorgio Antonucci ha cuestionado las bases de la psiquiatría a través de su trabajo sobre el desmantelamiento de dos hospitales psiquiátricos (en la ciudad de Imola), llevado a cabo entre 1973 y 1996.
El movimiento de consumidores/sobrevivientes (también conocido como movimiento de usuarios/sobrevivientes) está formado por individuos (y organizaciones que los representan) que son clientes de servicios de salud mental o que se consideran sobrevivientes de intervenciones psiquiátricas.

Los activistas hacen campaña por mejores servicios de salud mental y por una mayor participación y empoderamiento dentro de los servicios de salud mental, las políticas y la sociedad en general.

Las organizaciones de defensa de los pacientes se han expandido con el aumento de la desinstitucionalización en los países desarrollados, trabajando para desafiar los estereotipos, el estigma y la exclusión asociados con las condiciones psiquiátricas.

También existe un movimiento por los derechos de los cuidadores de personas que ayudan y apoyan a personas con problemas de salud mental, que pueden ser familiares y que a menudo trabajan en circunstancias difíciles y que consumen mucho tiempo con poco reconocimiento y sin remuneración.

Un movimiento anti-psiquiatría desafía fundamentalmente la teoría y la práctica psiquiátricas dominantes, y en algunos casos afirma que los conceptos y diagnósticos psiquiátricos de "enfermedad mental" no son reales ni útiles. Alternativamente, ha surgido un movimiento por la salud mental global, definido como "el área de estudio, investigación y práctica que prioriza la mejora de la salud mental y el logro de la equidad en la salud mental para todas las personas en todo el mundo'.


=== Sesgo cultural ===


Las directrices diagnósticas actuales, a saber, el DSM y, en cierta medida, la CIE, han sido criticadas por tener una perspectiva fundamentalmente euroamericana.

Los opositores argumentan que incluso cuando los criterios de diagnóstico se utilizan en diferentes culturas, no significa que las construcciones subyacentes tengan validez dentro de esas culturas, ya que incluso la aplicación confiable puede demostrar solo consistencia, no legitimidad.

Defendiendo un enfoque más culturalmente sensible, críticos como Carl Bell y Marcello Maviglia sostienen que los investigadores y proveedores de servicios a menudo descartan la diversidad cultural y étnica de los individuos. El psiquiatra transcultural Arthur Kleinman sostiene que el sesgo occidental se ilustra irónicamente en la introducción. de factores culturales al DSM-IV.

Los trastornos o conceptos de culturas no occidentales o no dominantes se describen como "ligados a la cultura", mientras que los diagnósticos psiquiátricos estándar no reciben ninguna calificación cultural, lo que revela a Kleinman una suposición subyacente de que los fenómenos culturales occidentales son universales.

La visión negativa de Kleinman sobre el síndrome ligado a la cultura es compartida en gran medida por otros críticos transculturales.

Las respuestas comunes incluyeron tanto la decepción por la gran cantidad de trastornos mentales no occidentales documentados que aún se excluyen como la frustración de que incluso los incluidos a menudo se malinterpretan o se tergiversan.

Robert Spitzer, uno de los principales arquitectos del DSM-III, ha argumentado que agregar formulaciones culturales fue un intento de apaciguar a los críticos culturales y ha declarado que carecen de fundamento o apoyo científico.

Spitzer también postula que los nuevos diagnósticos ligados a la cultura rara vez se usan, manteniendo que los diagnósticos estándar se aplican independientemente de la cultura involucrada.

En general, la opinión psiquiátrica dominante sigue siendo que si una categoría diagnóstica es válida, los factores transculturales son irrelevantes o son significativos solo para presentaciones de síntomas específicos. Las concepciones clínicas de la enfermedad mental también se superponen con los valores personales y culturales en el dominio de la moralidad, tanto es así que a veces se argumenta que separarlos es imposible sin redefinir fundamentalmente la esencia de ser una persona particular en una sociedad.

En psiquiatría clínica, la angustia y la discapacidad persistentes indican un trastorno interno que requiere tratamiento; pero en otro contexto, esa misma angustia y discapacidad pueden verse como un indicador de lucha emocional y la necesidad de abordar problemas sociales y estructurales.

Esta dicotomía ha llevado a algunos académicos y médicos a abogar por una conceptualización posmodernista de la angustia mental y el bienestar. Tales enfoques, junto con psicologías transculturales y "heréticas" centradas en identidades y experiencias culturales y étnicas y raciales alternativas, se destacan en contrasta con la supuesta evitación de cualquier compromiso explícito con la moralidad o la cultura por parte de la comunidad psiquiátrica dominante.

En muchos países hay intentos de cuestionar los prejuicios percibidos contra los grupos minoritarios, incluido el presunto racismo institucional dentro de los servicios psiquiátricos.

También hay intentos en curso para mejorar la sensibilidad intercultural profesional.


=== Leyes y políticas ===


Tres cuartas partes de los países del mundo cuentan con legislación sobre salud mental.

El ingreso obligatorio en centros de salud mental (también conocido como internamiento involuntario) es un tema controvertido.

Puede vulnerar la libertad personal y el derecho a elegir, y comportar el riesgo de abuso por motivos políticos, sociales y de otro tipo; sin embargo, puede potencialmente prevenir daños a sí mismos y a otros, y ayudar a algunas personas a lograr su derecho a la atención médica cuando no pueden decidir por sus propios intereses.

Por ello es una preocupación de la ética médica.
Todas las leyes de salud mental orientadas a los derechos humanos exigen pruebas de la presencia de un trastorno mental tal como lo definen los estándares internacionalmente aceptados, pero el tipo y la gravedad del trastorno que cuenta pueden variar en diferentes jurisdicciones.

Se dice que los dos motivos más utilizados para el ingreso involuntario son la probabilidad grave de peligro inmediato o inminente para uno mismo o para otros, y la necesidad de tratamiento.

Las solicitudes para que alguien sea admitido involuntariamente generalmente provienen de un médico de salud mental, un miembro de la familia, un pariente cercano o un tutor.

Las leyes orientadas a los derechos humanos generalmente estipulan que los médicos independientes u otros profesionales de la salud mental acreditados deben examinar al paciente por separado y que debe haber una revisión periódica y con plazos determinados por parte de un organismo de revisión independiente.

El individuo también debe tener acceso personal a la defensa independiente.
Para que se administre un tratamiento involuntario (por la fuerza si es necesario), se debe demostrar que una persona carece de la capacidad mental para el consentimiento informado (es decir, para comprender la información del tratamiento y sus implicaciones y, por lo tanto, ser capaz de tomar una decisión informada entre aceptar o rechazar).

Los desafíos legales en algunas áreas han resultado en decisiones de la corte suprema de que una persona no tiene que estar de acuerdo con la caracterización de un psiquiatra de los problemas que constituyen una "enfermedad", ni estar de acuerdo con la condena de un psiquiatra en la medicación, sino solo reconocer los problemas y la información. acerca de las opciones de tratamiento. El consentimiento del apoderado (también conocido como toma de decisiones sustituta o sustituta) se puede transferir a un representante personal, un miembro de la familia o un tutor designado legalmente.

Además, los pacientes pueden hacer, cuando se les considera bien, una directiva anticipada que estipula cómo desean ser tratados en caso de que se considere que carecen de capacidad mental en el futuro.

El derecho a la toma de decisiones asistida, donde se ayuda a una persona a comprender y elegir las opciones de tratamiento antes de que se pueda declarar que carece de capacidad, también puede incluirse en la legislación.

Como mínimo, debería haber una toma de decisiones compartida en la medida de lo posible.

Las leyes de tratamiento involuntario se extienden cada vez más a quienes viven en la comunidad; por ejemplo, las leyes de internamiento de pacientes ambulatorios (conocidas con diferentes nombres) se utilizan en Nueva Zelanda, Australia, el Reino Unido y la mayor parte de los Estados Unidos.
La Organización Mundial de la Salud informa que, en muchos casos, la legislación nacional sobre salud mental elimina los derechos de las personas con trastornos mentales en lugar de protegerlos y, a menudo, está desactualizada.

En 1991, las Naciones Unidas adoptaron los Principios para la protección de las personas con enfermedades mentales y la mejora de la atención de la salud mental, que establecieron normas mínimas de práctica en materia de derechos humanos en el campo de la salud mental.

En 2006, la ONU acordó formalmente la Convención sobre los Derechos de las Personas con Discapacidad para proteger y mejorar los derechos y oportunidades de las personas discapacitadas, incluidas aquellas con discapacidades psicosociales. utilizado técnicamente como un término legal.

La defensa por locura se puede utilizar en un juicio legal (conocida como defensa por trastorno mental en algunos países).


=== Percepción y discriminación ===



==== Estigma ====
El estigma social asociado con los trastornos mentales es un problema generalizado.

El Cirujano General de EE. UU. declaró en 1999 que: "El estigma poderoso y generalizado impide que las personas reconozcan sus propios problemas de salud mental, y mucho menos revelarlos a los demás". En los Estados Unidos, las minorías raciales y étnicas tienen más probabilidades de experimentar trastornos de salud mental, a menudo debido al bajo nivel socioeconómico y la discriminación.

En Taiwán, las personas con trastornos mentales están sujetas a la percepción errónea del público en general de que las causas fundamentales de los trastornos mentales son "pensar demasiado", "tener mucho tiempo y nada mejor que hacer", "estancarse", "no ser serio en la vida". ", "no prestar suficiente atención a los asuntos de la vida real", "débil mentalmente", "negarse a ser resistente", "regresar a los esfuerzos perfeccionistas", "falta de valentía", etc. Se informa que la discriminación laboral juega un papel importante parte en la alta tasa de desempleo entre aquellos con un diagnóstico de enfermedad mental.

Un estudio australiano encontró que tener una enfermedad mental es una barrera más grande para el empleo que una discapacidad física.

Los enfermos mentales son estigmatizados en la sociedad china y no pueden casarse legalmente. Se están realizando esfuerzos en todo el mundo para eliminar el estigma de la enfermedad mental, aunque a veces se han criticado los métodos y los resultados utilizados.


==== Medios y publico en general ====

La cobertura mediática de las enfermedades mentales comprende representaciones predominantemente negativas y peyorativas, por ejemplo, de incompetencia, violencia o criminalidad, con una cobertura mucho menor de cuestiones positivas como logros o problemas de derechos humanos.

Se cree que tales representaciones negativas, incluso en dibujos animados para niños, contribuyen al estigma y las actitudes negativas en el público y en las personas con problemas de salud mental, aunque las representaciones cinematográficas más sensibles o serias han aumentado en prevalencia. En los Estados Unidos, el Centro Carter ha creado becas para periodistas en Sudáfrica, EE. UU. y Rumania, para permitirles investigar y escribir historias sobre temas de salud mental.

La exprimera dama de los EE. UU., Rosalynn Carter, comenzó las becas no solo para capacitar a los reporteros sobre cómo hablar con sensibilidad y precisión sobre la salud mental y las enfermedades mentales, sino también para aumentar la cantidad de historias sobre estos temas en los medios de comunicación.

También hay un Día Mundial de la Salud Mental, que en los EE. UU. y Canadá se enmarca dentro de la Semana de Concientización sobre las Enfermedades Mentales.
Se ha descubierto que el público en general tiene un fuerte estereotipo de peligrosidad y deseo de distanciamiento social de las personas descritas como enfermas mentales.

Una encuesta nacional de EE. UU. encontró que un porcentaje más alto de personas califica a las personas que muestran las características de un trastorno mental como "probables de hacer algo violento con los demás", en comparación con el porcentaje de personas que califican a las personas descritas como problemáticas. Representaciones recientes en los medios han incluido personajes principales que viven con éxito y manejan una enfermedad mental, incluido el trastorno bipolar en Homeland (2011) y el trastorno de estrés postraumático en Iron Man 3 (2013).


==== Violencia ====
A pesar de la opinión pública o de los medios, los estudios nacionales han indicado que la enfermedad mental grave no predice de forma independiente el comportamiento violento futuro, en promedio, y no es una de las principales causas de violencia en la sociedad.

Existe una asociación estadística con varios factores que sí se relacionan con la violencia (en cualquier persona), como el consumo de sustancias y diversos factores personales, sociales y económicos.

Una revisión de 2015 encontró que en los Estados Unidos, alrededor del 4 % de la violencia es atribuible a personas diagnosticadas con enfermedades mentales, y un estudio de 2014 encontró que el 7,5 % de los delitos cometidos por personas con enfermedades mentales estaban directamente relacionados con los síntomas de su enfermedad mental.

La mayoría de las personas con enfermedades mentales graves nunca son violentas. De hecho, los hallazgos indican consistentemente que es mucho más probable que las personas diagnosticadas con una enfermedad mental grave que viven en la comunidad sean víctimas en lugar de perpetradores de la violencia.

En un estudio de personas diagnosticadas con "enfermedad mental grave" que vivían en un área del centro de la ciudad de EE. UU., se descubrió que una cuarta parte había sido víctima de al menos un delito violento en el transcurso de un año, una proporción once veces mayor que la del interior. -promedio de la ciudad, y superior en todas las categorías de delitos, incluidos asaltos violentos y robos.

Sin embargo, a las personas con un diagnóstico puede resultarles más difícil obtener un enjuiciamiento, debido en parte a los prejuicios y a que se les considera menos creíbles. Sin embargo, existen algunos diagnósticos específicos, como el trastorno de conducta infantil o el trastorno de personalidad antisocial en adultos o la psicopatía, que son definidos por, o están inherentemente asociados con, problemas de conducta y violencia.

Hay hallazgos contradictorios sobre el grado en que ciertos síntomas específicos, en particular algunos tipos de psicosis (alucinaciones o delirios) que pueden ocurrir en trastornos como la esquizofrenia, el trastorno delirante o el trastorno del estado de ánimo, están relacionados con un mayor riesgo de violencia grave en promedio.

Sin embargo, los factores mediadores de los actos violentos, sin embargo, se encuentran de manera más consistente principalmente en factores sociodemográficos y socioeconómicos, como ser joven, hombre, de nivel socioeconómico más bajo y, en particular, el uso de sustancias (incluido el consumo de alcohol) al que algunos las personas pueden ser particularmente vulnerables. Los casos de alto perfil han llevado a temer que los delitos graves, como el homicidio, hayan aumentado debido a la desinstitucionalización, pero la evidencia no respalda esta conclusión.

La violencia que ocurre en relación con el trastorno mental (contra los enfermos mentales o por parte de los enfermos mentales) generalmente ocurre en el contexto de interacciones sociales complejas, a menudo en un entorno familiar en lugar de entre extraños.

También es un problema en los entornos de atención de la salud y en la comunidad en general.


== Salud mental ==


El reconocimiento y la comprensión de las condiciones de salud mental han cambiado con el tiempo y entre culturas y todavía hay variaciones en la definición, evaluación y clasificación, aunque los criterios de las guías estándar se usan ampliamente.

En muchos casos, parece haber un continuo entre la salud mental y la enfermedad mental, lo que hace que el diagnóstico sea complejo.: 39 Según la Organización Mundial de la Salud (OMS), más de un tercio de las personas en la mayoría de los países reportan problemas en algún momento de su vida que cumplen los criterios para el diagnóstico de uno o más de los tipos comunes de trastorno mental.

Corey M Keyes ha creado un modelo de dos continuos de enfermedad mental y salud que sostiene que ambos están relacionados, pero tienen dimensiones distintas: un continuo indica la presencia o ausencia de salud mental, el otro la presencia o ausencia de enfermedad mental.

Por ejemplo, las personas con una salud mental óptima también pueden tener una enfermedad mental, y las personas que no tienen una enfermedad mental también pueden tener una salud mental deficiente.


== Otros animales ==


La psicopatología en primates no humanos se ha estudiado desde mediados del siglo XX.

Se han documentado más de 20 patrones de comportamiento en chimpancés cautivos como (estadísticamente) anormales en frecuencia, gravedad o rareza, algunos de los cuales también se han observado en la naturaleza.

Los grandes simios en cautiverio muestran graves anomalías de comportamiento, como estereotipia de movimientos, automutilación, reacciones emocionales perturbadas (principalmente miedo o agresión) hacia los compañeros, falta de comunicación típica de la especie e indefensión aprendida generalizada.

En algunos casos, se supone que dichos comportamientos son equivalentes a los síntomas asociados con trastornos psiquiátricos en humanos, como depresión, trastornos de ansiedad, trastornos alimentarios y trastorno de estrés postraumático.

Los conceptos de trastornos de la personalidad antisocial, límite y esquizoide también se han aplicado a los grandes simios no humanos. El riesgo de antropomorfismo suele surgir con respecto a tales comparaciones, y la evaluación de los animales no humanos no puede incorporar evidencia de la comunicación lingüística.

Sin embargo, la evidencia disponible puede variar desde comportamientos no verbales, incluidas respuestas fisiológicas y expresiones faciales homólogas y expresiones acústicas, hasta estudios neuroquímicos.

Se señala que la clasificación psiquiátrica humana a menudo se basa en la descripción estadística y el juicio de los comportamientos (especialmente cuando el habla o el lenguaje están deteriorados) y que el uso del autoinforme verbal es en sí mismo problemático y poco confiable. La psicopatología generalmente se ha rastreado, al menos en cautiverio, a condiciones de crianza adversas tales como la separación temprana de los bebés de las madres; privación sensorial temprana; y períodos prolongados de aislamiento social.

Los estudios también han indicado variaciones individuales en el temperamento, como la sociabilidad o la impulsividad.

Las causas particulares de los problemas en cautiverio han incluido la integración de extraños en grupos existentes y la falta de espacio individual, en cuyo contexto algunos comportamientos patológicos también se han visto como mecanismos de afrontamiento.

Las intervenciones correctivas han incluido cuidadosos programas de resocialización personalizados, terapia conductual, enriquecimiento ambiental y, en raras ocasiones, medicamentos psiquiátricos.

Se ha descubierto que la socialización funciona el 90 % del tiempo en chimpancés perturbados, aunque a menudo no se logra la restauración de la sexualidad funcional y el cuidado. , manipulación neurológica, química o conductual, pero esto ha sido criticado por motivos empíricos y opuesto por motivos de derechos de los animales.


== Notas ==



== Lectura adicional ==




https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mental_disorder

;;;PT;;;



DISTÚRBIO MENTAL


Um transtorno mental, também chamado de doença mental ou transtorno psiquiátrico, é um padrão comportamental ou mental que causa sofrimento significativo ou prejuízo no funcionamento pessoal.

Tais características podem ser persistentes, recorrentes e remitentes, ou ocorrer como episódios únicos.

Muitos distúrbios foram descritos, com sinais e sintomas que variam amplamente entre distúrbios específicos.

Tais distúrbios podem ser diagnosticados por um profissional de saúde mental, geralmente um psicólogo clínico ou psiquiatra.
As causas dos transtornos mentais geralmente não são claras.

As teorias podem incorporar descobertas de vários campos.

Os transtornos mentais são geralmente definidos por uma combinação de como uma pessoa se comporta, sente, percebe ou pensa.

Isso pode estar associado a regiões ou funções específicas do cérebro, muitas vezes em um contexto social.

Um transtorno mental é um aspecto da saúde mental.

Crenças culturais e religiosas, bem como normas sociais, devem ser levadas em consideração ao fazer um diagnóstico. Os serviços são baseados em hospitais psiquiátricos ou na comunidade, e as avaliações são realizadas por profissionais de saúde mental, como psiquiatras, psicólogos, enfermeiros psiquiátricos e assistentes sociais clínicos, usando vários métodos, como testes psicométricos, mas muitas vezes contando com observação e questionamento.

Os tratamentos são fornecidos por vários profissionais de saúde mental.

Psicoterapia e medicação psiquiátrica são duas principais opções de tratamento.

Outros tratamentos incluem mudanças no estilo de vida, intervenções sociais, apoio de colegas e auto-ajuda.

Em uma minoria de casos, pode haver detenção ou tratamento involuntário.

Em 2019, os transtornos mentais comuns em todo o mundo incluem depressão, que afeta cerca de 264 milhões, transtorno bipolar, que afeta cerca de 45 milhões, demência, que afeta cerca de 50 milhões, e esquizofrenia e outras psicoses, que afeta cerca de 20 milhões de pessoas.

Os distúrbios do neurodesenvolvimento incluem deficiência intelectual e distúrbios do espectro do autismo que geralmente surgem na infância.

O estigma e a discriminação podem aumentar o sofrimento e a deficiência associados aos transtornos mentais, levando vários movimentos sociais a tentar aumentar a compreensão e desafiar a exclusão social.


== Definição ==


A definição e classificação dos transtornos mentais são questões-chave para pesquisadores, prestadores de serviços e aqueles que podem ser diagnosticados.

Para que um estado mental seja classificado como um transtorno, ele geralmente precisa causar disfunção.

A maioria dos documentos clínicos internacionais usa o termo “transtorno” mental, enquanto “doença” também é comum.

Observou-se que o uso do termo "mental" (isto é, da mente) não significa necessariamente uma separação do cérebro ou do corpo.
De acordo com o DSM-IV, um transtorno mental é uma síndrome ou padrão psicológico que está associado a sofrimento (por exemplo, por meio de um sintoma doloroso), incapacidade (prejuízo em uma ou mais áreas importantes do funcionamento), aumento do risco de morte ou causa perda de autonomia; no entanto, exclui respostas normais, como luto pela perda de um ente querido e também exclui comportamento desviante por motivos políticos, religiosos ou sociais que não sejam decorrentes de uma disfunção no indivíduo. O DSM-IV predica a definição com ressalvas, afirmando que, como em No caso de muitos termos médicos, transtorno mental "falta de uma definição operacional consistente que cubra todas as situações", observando que diferentes níveis de abstração podem ser usados ​​para definições médicas, incluindo patologia, sintomatologia, desvio de uma faixa normal ou etiologia, e que o mesmo vale para os transtornos mentais, de modo que ora um tipo de definição é adequado, ora outro, dependendo da situação. caracterizada por perturbação clinicamente significativa na cognição, regulação emocional ou comportamento de um indivíduo que reflete uma disfunção nos processos psicológicos, biológicos ou de desenvolvimento subjacentes ao funcionamento mental”. A versão final da CID-11 contém uma definição muito semelhante. Os termos "colapso mental" ou "colapso nervoso" podem ser usados ​​pela população em geral para significar um transtorno mental. A American Psychiatric Association (APA) redefiniu os transtornos mentais no DSM-5 como "uma síndrome caracterizada por distúrbios clinicamente significativos na cognição, regulação emocional ou comportamento de um indivíduo que reflete uma disfunção nos processos psicológicos, biológicos ou de desenvolvimento subjacentes ao funcionamento mental ." A versão final da CID-11 contém uma definição muito semelhante. Os termos "colapso mental" ou "colapso nervoso" podem ser usados ​​pela população em geral para significar um transtorno mental. A American Psychiatric Association (APA) redefiniu os transtornos mentais no DSM-5 como "uma síndrome caracterizada por distúrbios clinicamente significativos na cognição, regulação emocional ou comportamento de um indivíduo que reflete uma disfunção nos processos psicológicos, biológicos ou de desenvolvimento subjacentes ao funcionamento mental ." A versão final da CID-11 contém uma definição muito semelhante. Os termos "colapso mental" ou "colapso nervoso" podem ser usados ​​pela população em geral para significar um transtorno mental.

Os termos "colapso nervoso" e "colapso mental" não foram formalmente definidos por meio de um sistema de diagnóstico médico, como o DSM-5 ou CID-10, e estão quase ausentes da literatura científica sobre doenças mentais.

Embora "colapso nervoso" não seja rigorosamente definido, pesquisas com leigos sugerem que o termo se refere a um transtorno reativo agudo específico de tempo limitado, envolvendo sintomas como ansiedade ou depressão, geralmente precipitados por estressores externos.

Muitos especialistas em saúde hoje se referem a um colapso nervoso como uma crise de saúde mental.


=== Doença nervosa ===

Além do conceito de transtorno mental, algumas pessoas defendem um retorno ao conceito antiquado de doença nervosa.

Em How Everyone Became Depressed: The Rise and Fall of the Nervous Breakdown (2013), Edward Shorter, professor de psiquiatria e história da medicina, diz:

Cerca de metade deles estão deprimidos.

Ou pelo menos esse é o diagnóstico que eles receberam quando tomaram antidepressivos. ...

Eles vão trabalhar, mas estão infelizes e desconfortáveis; eles estão um pouco ansiosos; eles estão cansados; eles têm várias dores físicas — e tendem a ficar obcecados com todo o negócio.

Há um termo para o que eles têm, e é um bom termo antiquado que está fora de uso.

Eles têm nervos ou uma doença nervosa.

É uma doença não apenas da mente ou do cérebro, mas um distúrbio de todo o corpo. ...

Temos aqui um pacote de cinco sintomas – depressão leve, alguma ansiedade, fadiga, dores somáticas e pensamento obsessivo. ...

Temos doenças nervosas há séculos.

Quando você está nervoso demais para funcionar... é um colapso nervoso.

Mas esse termo desapareceu da medicina, embora não da forma como falamos....

Os pacientes nervosos do passado são os depressivos de hoje.

Essa é a má notícia....

Há uma doença mais profunda que impulsiona a depressão e os sintomas de humor.

Podemos chamar essa doença mais profunda de outra coisa, ou inventar um neologismo, mas precisamos tirar a discussão da depressão para essa desordem mais profunda no cérebro e no corpo.

Esse é o ponto.
Ao eliminar o colapso nervoso, a psiquiatria chegou perto de ter seu próprio colapso nervoso.
Os nervos estão no centro das doenças mentais comuns, não importa o quanto tentemos esquecê-los.
"colapso nervoso" é um termo pseudo-médico para descrever uma variedade de sentimentos relacionados ao estresse e muitas vezes são agravados pela crença de que existe um fenômeno real chamado "colapso nervoso".


== Classificações ==


Atualmente, existem dois sistemas amplamente estabelecidos que classificam os transtornos mentais:

CID-10 Capítulo V: Transtornos mentais e comportamentais, desde 1949 parte da Classificação Internacional de Doenças produzida pela OMS,
o Manual Diagnóstico e Estatístico de Transtornos Mentais (DSM-5) produzido pela APA desde 1952. Ambos listam categorias de transtorno e fornecem critérios padronizados para diagnóstico.

Eles convergiram deliberadamente seus códigos em revisões recentes, de modo que os manuais geralmente são amplamente comparáveis, embora diferenças significativas permaneçam.

Outros esquemas de classificação podem ser usados ​​em culturas não ocidentais, por exemplo, a Classificação Chinesa de Transtornos Mentais, e outros manuais podem ser usados ​​por pessoas de convicções teóricas alternativas, como o Manual de Diagnóstico Psicodinâmico.

Em geral, os transtornos mentais são classificados separadamente dos transtornos neurológicos, dificuldades de aprendizagem ou deficiência intelectual.
Ao contrário do DSM e do CID, algumas abordagens não se baseiam na identificação de categorias distintas de transtorno usando perfis de sintomas dicotômicos destinados a separar o anormal do normal.

Há um debate científico significativo sobre os méritos relativos de esquemas categóricos versus tais esquemas não categóricos (ou híbridos), também conhecidos como modelos contínuos ou dimensionais.

Uma abordagem de espectro pode incorporar elementos de ambos.
Na literatura científica e acadêmica sobre a definição ou classificação de transtorno mental, um extremo argumenta que é inteiramente uma questão de julgamentos de valor (incluindo o que é normal), enquanto outro propõe que é ou poderia ser inteiramente objetivo e científico (inclusive por referência a normas estatísticas).

Visões híbridas comuns argumentam que o conceito de transtorno mental é objetivo, mesmo que seja apenas um "protótipo difuso" que nunca pode ser definido com precisão, ou, inversamente, que o conceito sempre envolve uma mistura de fatos científicos e julgamentos de valor subjetivos.

Embora as categorias diagnósticas sejam chamadas de 'distúrbios', elas são apresentadas como doenças médicas, mas não são validadas da mesma forma que a maioria dos diagnósticos médicos.

Alguns neurologistas argumentam que a classificação só será confiável e válida quando baseada em características neurobiológicas em vez de entrevista clínica, enquanto outros sugerem que as diferentes perspectivas ideológicas e práticas precisam ser melhor integradas. modelo de causalidade e porque alguns pesquisadores acreditam que é melhor visar as diferenças cerebrais subjacentes que podem preceder os sintomas em muitos anos.


=== Modelos dimensionais ===

O alto grau de comorbidade entre transtornos em modelos categóricos como o DSM e o CID levou alguns a propor modelos dimensionais.

O estudo da comorbidade entre transtornos demonstrou dois fatores ou dimensões latentes (não observados) na estrutura dos transtornos mentais que possivelmente refletem processos etiológicos.

Essas duas dimensões refletem uma distinção entre transtornos internalizantes, como sintomas de humor ou ansiedade, e transtornos externalizantes, como sintomas comportamentais ou de uso de substâncias.

Um único fator geral de psicopatologia, semelhante ao fator g para inteligência, foi empiricamente apoiado.

O modelo do fator p apóia a distinção internalização-externalização, mas também apóia a formação de uma terceira dimensão de transtornos do pensamento, como a esquizofrenia.

Evidências biológicas também apóiam a validade da estrutura internalizante-externalizante dos transtornos mentais, com estudos de gêmeos e de adoção apoiando fatores hereditários para transtornos externalizantes e internalizantes.

Um modelo dimensional líder é a Taxonomia Hierárquica da Psicopatologia.


=== Distúrbios ===


Existem muitas categorias diferentes de transtorno mental e muitas facetas diferentes do comportamento e da personalidade humana que podem se tornar desordenadas.


==== Transtorno de ansiedade ====
Transtorno de ansiedade: Ansiedade ou medo que interfere no funcionamento normal pode ser classificado como um transtorno de ansiedade.

As categorias comumente reconhecidas incluem fobias específicas, transtorno de ansiedade generalizada, transtorno de ansiedade social, transtorno do pânico, agorafobia, transtorno obsessivo-compulsivo e transtorno de estresse pós-traumático.


==== Transtorno do humor ====
Transtorno do humor: Outros processos afetivos (emoção/humor) também podem se tornar desordenados.

O transtorno de humor que envolve tristeza, melancolia ou desespero extraordinariamente intenso e sustentado é conhecido como depressão maior (também conhecida como depressão unipolar ou clínica).

Depressão mais leve, mas ainda prolongada, pode ser diagnosticada como distimia.

O transtorno bipolar (também conhecido como depressão maníaca) envolve estados de humor anormalmente "altos" ou pressionados, conhecidos como mania ou hipomania, alternando com humor normal ou deprimido.

A extensão em que os fenômenos de humor unipolar e bipolar representam categorias distintas de transtorno, ou se misturam e se fundem ao longo de uma dimensão ou espectro de humor, está sujeita a algum debate científico.


==== Transtorno psicótico ====
Transtorno psicótico: Padrões de crença, uso da linguagem e percepção da realidade podem se tornar desregulados (por exemplo, delírios, transtorno do pensamento, alucinações).

Os transtornos psicóticos neste domínio incluem esquizofrenia e transtorno delirante.

O transtorno esquizoafetivo é uma categoria usada para indivíduos que apresentam aspectos tanto da esquizofrenia quanto dos transtornos afetivos.

A esquizotipia é uma categoria usada para indivíduos que apresentam algumas das características associadas à esquizofrenia, mas sem atender aos critérios de corte.


==== Transtorno de personalidade ====
Transtorno de personalidade: A personalidade – as características fundamentais de uma pessoa que influenciam pensamentos e comportamentos em todas as situações e no tempo – pode ser considerada desordenada se considerada anormalmente rígida e mal-adaptativa.

Embora tratados separadamente por alguns, os esquemas categóricos comumente utilizados os incluem como transtornos mentais, embora em um eixo II separado no caso do DSM-IV.

Vários transtornos de personalidade diferentes são listados, incluindo aqueles às vezes classificados como excêntricos, como transtornos de personalidade paranóide, esquizóide e esquizotípico; tipos descritos como dramáticos ou emocionais, como transtornos de personalidade antissocial, borderline, histriônico ou narcisista; e aqueles às vezes classificados como relacionados ao medo, como transtornos de personalidade ansioso-esquiva, dependente ou obsessivo-compulsivo.

Os transtornos de personalidade, em geral, são definidos como emergentes na infância, ou pelo menos na adolescência ou início da idade adulta.

A CID também tem uma categoria para mudanças duradouras de personalidade após uma experiência catastrófica ou doença psiquiátrica.

Se uma incapacidade de se ajustar suficientemente às circunstâncias da vida começa dentro de três meses de um determinado evento ou situação e termina dentro de seis meses após o estressor parar ou ser eliminado, pode ser classificado como um transtorno de adaptação.

Há um consenso emergente de que os transtornos de personalidade, semelhantes aos traços de personalidade em geral, incorporam uma mistura de comportamentos disfuncionais agudos que podem se resolver em curtos períodos e traços temperamentais desadaptativos que são mais duradouros.

Além disso, também existem esquemas não categóricos que classificam todos os indivíduos por meio de um perfil de diferentes dimensões da personalidade sem um corte baseado em sintomas da variação normal da personalidade, por exemplo, por meio de esquemas baseados em modelos dimensionais.


==== Distúrbio alimentar ====
Os transtornos alimentares envolvem preocupação desproporcional em questões de alimentação e peso.

As categorias de transtorno nesta área incluem anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa, bulimia por exercício ou transtorno de compulsão alimentar periódica.


==== Distúrbio do sono ====
Os distúrbios do sono estão associados à interrupção dos padrões normais de sono.

Um distúrbio do sono comum é a insônia, que é descrita como dificuldade em adormecer e/ou permanecer dormindo.


==== Relacionado à sexualidade ====
Os distúrbios sexuais incluem dispareunia e vários tipos de parafilia (excitação sexual por objetos, situações ou indivíduos considerados anormais ou prejudiciais à pessoa ou a outros).


==== Outro ====
Transtorno do controle de impulsos: As pessoas que são anormalmente incapazes de resistir a certos impulsos ou impulsos que podem ser prejudiciais a si mesmos ou a outros, podem ser classificadas como tendo um transtorno de controle de impulsos e distúrbios como cleptomania (roubar) ou piromania (incendiar).

Vários vícios comportamentais, como o vício em jogos de azar, podem ser classificados como um distúrbio.

O transtorno obsessivo-compulsivo às vezes pode envolver uma incapacidade de resistir a certos atos, mas é classificado separadamente como sendo principalmente um transtorno de ansiedade.
Transtorno por uso de substâncias: Este transtorno refere-se ao uso de drogas (legais ou ilegais, incluindo álcool) que persiste apesar de problemas significativos ou danos relacionados ao seu uso.

Dependência de substâncias e abuso de substâncias se enquadram nesta categoria guarda-chuva no DSM.

O transtorno por uso de substâncias pode ser devido a um padrão de uso compulsivo e repetitivo de uma droga que resulta em tolerância aos seus efeitos e sintomas de abstinência quando o uso é reduzido ou interrompido.
Transtorno dissociativo: As pessoas que sofrem distúrbios graves de sua auto-identidade, memória e consciência geral de si mesmos e de seus arredores podem ser classificadas como tendo esses tipos de transtornos, incluindo transtorno de despersonalização ou transtorno dissociativo de identidade (que anteriormente era chamado de personalidade múltipla). transtorno ou "personalidade dividida").
Transtorno cognitivo: afetam as habilidades cognitivas, incluindo aprendizado e memória.

Esta categoria inclui delirium e transtorno neurocognitivo leve e maior (anteriormente denominado demência).
Transtorno do desenvolvimento: Esses transtornos ocorrem inicialmente na infância.

Alguns exemplos incluem transtorno do espectro do autismo, transtorno desafiador de oposição e transtorno de conduta e transtorno de déficit de atenção e hiperatividade (TDAH), que pode continuar na idade adulta.

O transtorno de conduta, se continuar na idade adulta, pode ser diagnosticado como transtorno de personalidade antissocial (transtorno de personalidade dissocial no CID).

Rótulos populares como psicopata (ou sociopata) não aparecem no DSM ou na CID, mas são vinculados por alguns a esses diagnósticos.
Os transtornos somatoformes podem ser diagnosticados quando há problemas que parecem se originar no corpo e que são considerados manifestações de um transtorno mental.

Isso inclui transtorno de somatização e transtorno de conversão.

Existem também distúrbios de como uma pessoa percebe seu corpo, como o transtorno dismórfico corporal.

A neurastenia é um diagnóstico antigo envolvendo queixas somáticas, bem como fadiga e desânimo/depressão, que é oficialmente reconhecido pela CID-10, mas não mais pelo DSM-IV. Transtornos factícios são diagnosticados quando os sintomas são relatados para ganho pessoal .

Os sintomas geralmente são produzidos ou fingidos deliberadamente e podem estar relacionados a sintomas no indivíduo ou em alguém próximo a eles, principalmente pessoas de quem cuidam.
Há tentativas de introduzir uma categoria de transtorno relacional, onde o diagnóstico é de um relacionamento e não de qualquer indivíduo nesse relacionamento.

A relação pode ser entre filhos e seus pais, entre casais ou outros.

Já existe, sob a categoria de psicose, um diagnóstico de transtorno psicótico compartilhado em que dois ou mais indivíduos compartilham um delírio particular por causa de seu relacionamento próximo um com o outro.
Há uma série de síndromes psiquiátricas incomuns, que geralmente são nomeadas após a pessoa que as descreveu pela primeira vez, como síndrome de Capgras, síndrome de De Clerambault, síndrome de Othello, síndrome de Ganser, delírio de Cotard e síndrome de Ekbom, e distúrbios adicionais, como a síndrome de Couvade. síndrome e síndrome de Geschwind.


== Sinais e sintomas ==



=== Curso ===

O início dos transtornos psiquiátricos geralmente ocorre desde a infância até o início da idade adulta.

Os transtornos de controle de impulsos e alguns transtornos de ansiedade tendem a aparecer na infância.

Alguns outros transtornos de ansiedade, transtornos de substâncias e transtornos de humor surgem mais tarde no meio da adolescência.

Os sintomas da esquizofrenia geralmente se manifestam do final da adolescência até o início dos vinte anos. O curso provável e o resultado dos transtornos mentais variam e dependem de vários fatores relacionados ao próprio transtorno, ao indivíduo como um todo e ao ambiente social.

Alguns distúrbios podem durar um breve período de tempo, enquanto outros podem ser de natureza a longo prazo.
Todos os distúrbios podem ter um curso variado.

Estudos internacionais de longo prazo sobre esquizofrenia descobriram que mais da metade dos indivíduos se recupera em termos de sintomas e cerca de um quinto a um terço em termos de sintomas e funcionamento, com muitos não necessitando de medicação.

Embora alguns tenham sérias dificuldades e necessidades de suporte por muitos anos, a recuperação "tardia" ainda é plausível.

A Organização Mundial da Saúde concluiu que os resultados dos estudos de longo prazo convergiram com outros em "aliviar pacientes, cuidadores e médicos do paradigma de cronicidade que dominou o pensamento durante grande parte do século 20". cerca de metade das pessoas inicialmente diagnosticadas com transtorno bipolar alcançam recuperação sintomática (não preenchendo mais os critérios para o diagnóstico) em seis semanas, e quase todas a alcançam em dois anos, com quase metade recuperando seu status ocupacional e residencial anterior nesse período.

Menos da metade passa a experimentar um novo episódio de mania ou depressão maior nos próximos dois anos.


=== Deficiência ===

Alguns distúrbios podem ser muito limitados em seus efeitos funcionais, enquanto outros podem envolver deficiências substanciais e necessidades de suporte.

O grau de habilidade ou deficiência pode variar ao longo do tempo e em diferentes domínios da vida.

Além disso, a deficiência continuada tem sido associada à institucionalização, discriminação e exclusão social, bem como aos efeitos inerentes dos transtornos.

Alternativamente, o funcionamento pode ser afetado pelo estresse de ter que esconder uma condição no trabalho ou na escola, etc., por efeitos adversos de medicamentos ou outras substâncias, ou por descompassos entre variações relacionadas à doença e exigências de regularidade. que, embora muitas vezes sejam caracterizados em termos puramente negativos, alguns traços ou estados mentais rotulados como transtornos também podem envolver criatividade acima da média, não conformidade, busca de objetivos, meticulosidade ou empatia.

Além disso, a percepção pública do nível de deficiência associado a transtornos mentais pode mudar. No entanto, internacionalmente, as pessoas relatam incapacidade igual ou maior devido a condições mentais comuns do que a condições físicas comuns, particularmente em seus papéis sociais e relacionamentos pessoais.

A proporção com acesso a ajuda profissional para transtornos mentais é muito menor, no entanto, mesmo entre aqueles avaliados como portadores de uma condição gravemente incapacitante.

A deficiência neste contexto pode ou não envolver coisas como:

Atividades básicas da vida diária.

Incluindo cuidar de si mesmo (cuidados de saúde, higiene, vestir, fazer compras, cozinhar etc.)
Relações interpessoais.

Incluindo habilidades de comunicação, capacidade de formar relacionamentos e sustentá-los, capacidade de sair de casa ou misturar-se a multidões ou ambientes específicos
Funcionamento ocupacional.

Capacidade de adquirir um emprego e mantê-lo, habilidades cognitivas e sociais necessárias para o trabalho, lidar com a cultura do local de trabalho ou estudar como estudante. de vida são perdidos devido à morte prematura ou ao estado de saúde precário e deficiência, os transtornos mentais estão entre as condições mais incapacitantes.

O transtorno depressivo unipolar (também conhecido como Major) é a terceira principal causa de incapacidade em todo o mundo, de qualquer condição mental ou física, respondendo por 65,5 milhões de anos perdidos.

A primeira descrição sistemática de deficiência global surgida na juventude, em 2011, descobriu que entre os 10 e 24 anos de idade, quase metade de todas as deficiências (atuais e estimadas em continuidade) se deviam a condições mentais e neurológicas, incluindo transtornos por uso de substâncias e condições que envolvem automutilação.

Em segundo lugar estavam as lesões acidentais (principalmente colisões de trânsito) representando 12% das incapacidades, seguidas por doenças transmissíveis em 10%.

Os transtornos associados à maioria das deficiências em países de alta renda foram depressão maior unipolar (20%) e transtorno por uso de álcool (11%).

Na região do Mediterrâneo oriental, foi depressão maior unipolar (12%) e esquizofrenia (7%), e na África foi depressão maior unipolar (7%) e transtorno bipolar (5%). transtorno mental subjacente, é uma das principais causas de morte entre adolescentes e adultos com menos de 35 anos.

Há uma estimativa de 10 a 20 milhões de tentativas de suicídio não fatais a cada ano em todo o mundo.


== Fatores de risco ==


A visão predominante a partir de 2018 é que fatores genéticos, psicológicos e ambientais contribuem para o desenvolvimento ou progressão de transtornos mentais.

Diferentes fatores de risco podem estar presentes em diferentes idades, com risco ocorrendo já no período pré-natal.


=== Genética ===


Vários transtornos psiquiátricos estão ligados a um histórico familiar (incluindo depressão, transtorno de personalidade narcisista e ansiedade).

Estudos com gêmeos também revelaram uma hereditariedade muito alta para muitos transtornos mentais (especialmente autismo e esquizofrenia).

Embora os pesquisadores tenham procurado por décadas por ligações claras entre genética e transtornos mentais, esse trabalho ainda não produziu biomarcadores genéticos específicos que possam levar a melhores diagnósticos e melhores tratamentos. .

Isso significa que indivíduos com um desses transtornos eram duas a três vezes mais propensos do que a população geral a ter um parceiro com transtorno mental.

Às vezes, as pessoas pareciam ter parceiros preferidos com a mesma doença mental.

Assim, pessoas com esquizofrenia ou TDAH são sete vezes mais propensas a ter parceiros afetados com o mesmo transtorno.

Isso é ainda mais pronunciado para pessoas com transtornos do espectro do autismo que são 10 vezes mais propensas a ter um cônjuge com o mesmo transtorno.


=== Ambiente ===


Durante a fase pré-natal, fatores como gravidez indesejada, falta de adaptação à gravidez ou uso de substâncias durante a gravidez aumentam o risco de desenvolver um transtorno mental.

O estresse materno e as complicações do parto, incluindo prematuridade e infecções, também têm sido implicados no aumento da suscetibilidade à doença mental.

Bebês negligenciados ou sem nutrição adequada têm um risco maior de desenvolver comprometimento cognitivo. As influências sociais também foram consideradas importantes, incluindo abuso, negligência, bullying, estresse social, eventos traumáticos e outras experiências de vida negativas ou avassaladoras.

Aspectos da comunidade em geral também foram implicados, incluindo problemas de emprego, desigualdade socioeconômica, falta de coesão social, problemas ligados à migração e características de sociedades e culturas específicas.

Os riscos e caminhos específicos para distúrbios específicos são menos claros, no entanto.
A nutrição também desempenha um papel nos transtornos mentais. Na esquizofrenia e na psicose, os fatores de risco incluem migração e discriminação, trauma na infância, luto ou separação em famílias, uso recreativo de drogas e urbanidade. , falta de calor dos pais, alta hostilidade, disciplina severa, alto afeto negativo materno, criação ansiosa dos filhos, modelagem de comportamento disfuncional e de abuso de drogas e abuso infantil (emocional, físico e sexual).

Adultos com desequilíbrio do trabalho para a vida correm maior risco de desenvolver ansiedade. Para o transtorno bipolar, o estresse (como adversidade na infância) não é uma causa específica, mas coloca indivíduos geneticamente e biologicamente vulneráveis ​​em risco de um curso mais grave da doença.


=== Uso de drogas ===

Os transtornos mentais estão associados ao uso de drogas, incluindo: cannabis, álcool e cafeína, cujo uso parece promover ansiedade.

Para psicose e esquizofrenia, o uso de várias drogas tem sido associado ao desenvolvimento do transtorno, incluindo cannabis, cocaína e anfetaminas.

Tem havido um debate sobre a relação entre o uso de cannabis e transtorno bipolar.

A cannabis também tem sido associada à depressão.

Os adolescentes estão em risco aumentado para o uso de tabaco, álcool e drogas; A pressão dos pares é a principal razão pela qual os adolescentes começam a usar substâncias.

Nessa idade, o uso de substâncias pode ser prejudicial ao desenvolvimento do cérebro e colocá-los em maior risco de desenvolver um transtorno mental.


=== Doença crônica ===

Pessoas que vivem com condições crônicas como HIV e diabetes correm maior risco de desenvolver um transtorno mental.

As pessoas que vivem com diabetes experimentam estresse significativo pelo impacto biológico da doença, o que as coloca em risco de desenvolver ansiedade e depressão.

Os pacientes diabéticos também têm que lidar com o estresse emocional tentando controlar a doença.

Condições como doenças cardíacas, derrame, doenças respiratórias, câncer e artrite aumentam o risco de desenvolver um transtorno mental quando comparado à população em geral.


=== Traços de personalidade ===

Os fatores de risco para doença mental incluem uma propensão para alto neuroticismo ou "instabilidade emocional".

Na ansiedade, os fatores de risco podem incluir temperamento e atitudes (por exemplo, pessimismo).


=== Modelos causais ===

Os transtornos mentais podem surgir de múltiplas fontes e, em muitos casos, não há uma única causa aceita ou consistente atualmente estabelecida.

Uma mistura eclética ou pluralista de modelos pode ser usada para explicar distúrbios particulares.

Diz-se que o paradigma primário da psiquiatria ocidental contemporânea é o modelo biopsicossocial que incorpora fatores biológicos, psicológicos e sociais, embora isso nem sempre possa ser aplicado na prática.
A psiquiatria biológica segue um modelo biomédico onde muitos transtornos mentais são conceituados como distúrbios de circuitos cerebrais provavelmente causados ​​por processos de desenvolvimento moldados por uma complexa interação de genética e experiência.

Uma suposição comum é que os transtornos podem ter resultado de vulnerabilidades genéticas e de desenvolvimento, expostas pelo estresse na vida (por exemplo, em um modelo de diátese-estresse), embora existam várias visões sobre o que causa diferenças entre os indivíduos.

Alguns tipos de transtornos mentais podem ser vistos principalmente como transtornos do neurodesenvolvimento.
A psicologia evolutiva pode ser usada como uma teoria explicativa geral, enquanto a teoria do apego é outro tipo de abordagem evolutiva-psicológica às vezes aplicada no contexto de transtornos mentais.

As teorias psicanalíticas continuaram a evoluir ao lado das abordagens cognitivo-comportamentais e sistêmicas da família.

Às vezes, é feita uma distinção entre um "modelo médico" ou um "modelo social" de transtorno e deficiência.


== Diagnóstico ==

Os psiquiatras procuram fornecer um diagnóstico médico de indivíduos por meio de uma avaliação dos sintomas, sinais e deficiências associados a tipos específicos de transtorno mental.

Outros profissionais de saúde mental, como psicólogos clínicos, podem ou não aplicar as mesmas categorias diagnósticas à sua formulação clínica das dificuldades e circunstâncias de um cliente.

A maioria dos problemas de saúde mental são, pelo menos inicialmente, avaliados e tratados por médicos de família (no Reino Unido clínicos gerais) durante as consultas, que podem encaminhar um paciente para um diagnóstico mais especializado em casos agudos ou crônicos.
A prática diagnóstica de rotina em serviços de saúde mental geralmente envolve uma entrevista conhecida como exame do estado mental, onde são feitas avaliações de aparência e comportamento, sintomas autorrelatados, histórico de saúde mental e circunstâncias atuais da vida.

As opiniões de outros profissionais, parentes ou outros terceiros podem ser levadas em consideração.

Um exame físico para verificar se há problemas de saúde ou os efeitos de medicamentos ou outras drogas podem ser realizados.

Às vezes, os testes psicológicos são usados ​​por meio de papel e caneta ou questionários computadorizados, que podem incluir algoritmos baseados em critérios diagnósticos padronizados e, em raros casos especializados, testes de neuroimagem podem ser solicitados, mas esses métodos são mais comumente encontrados em estudos de pesquisa do que em rotina. prática clínica. Tempo e restrições orçamentárias muitas vezes limitam a prática de psiquiatras de realizar avaliações diagnósticas mais completas.

Verificou-se que a maioria dos médicos avalia os pacientes usando uma abordagem não estruturada e aberta, com treinamento limitado em métodos de avaliação baseados em evidências, e que o diagnóstico impreciso pode ser comum na prática de rotina.

Além disso, a comorbidade é muito comum no diagnóstico psiquiátrico, onde a mesma pessoa preenche os critérios para mais de um transtorno.

Por outro lado, uma pessoa pode ter várias dificuldades diferentes, das quais apenas algumas atendem aos critérios para serem diagnosticadas.

Pode haver problemas específicos com diagnóstico preciso em países em desenvolvimento.
Abordagens mais estruturadas estão sendo cada vez mais usadas para medir os níveis de doença mental.

HoNOS é a medida mais utilizada nos serviços de saúde mental ingleses, sendo utilizada por pelo menos 61 trusts.

No HoNOS, uma pontuação de 0 a 4 é dada para cada um dos 12 fatores, com base na capacidade de vida funcional.

A pesquisa tem apoiado o HoNOS, embora algumas perguntas tenham sido feitas sobre se ele fornece uma cobertura adequada da variedade e complexidade dos problemas de doença mental e se o fato de que muitas vezes apenas 3 das 12 escalas variam ao longo do tempo fornece sutileza suficiente para medir com precisão resultados do tratamento.


=== Críticas ===

Desde a década de 1980, Paula Caplan se preocupa com a subjetividade do diagnóstico psiquiátrico, e as pessoas sendo arbitrariamente "tapeadas com um rótulo psiquiátrico". Caplan diz que, como o diagnóstico psiquiátrico não é regulamentado, os médicos não precisam gastar muito tempo entrevistando pacientes ou buscando uma segunda opinião.

O Manual Diagnóstico e Estatístico de Transtornos Mentais pode levar um psiquiatra a se concentrar em listas restritas de sintomas, com pouca consideração sobre o que realmente está causando os problemas da pessoa.

Então, de acordo com Caplan, obter um diagnóstico psiquiátrico e um rótulo muitas vezes atrapalha a recuperação. ainda depende exclusivamente de julgamentos subjetivos falíveis, em vez de testes biológicos objetivos". Frances também estava preocupada com o "sobrediagnóstico imprevisível". Por muitos anos, psiquiatras marginalizados (como Peter Breggin, Thomas Szasz) e críticos externos (como Stuart A.

Kirk) "acusam a psiquiatria de se engajar na medicalização sistemática da normalidade". Mais recentemente, essas preocupações vieram de pessoas de dentro que trabalharam e promoveram a Associação Psiquiátrica Americana (por exemplo, Robert Spitzer, Allen Frances).

Um editorial de 2002 no British Medical Journal alertou para a medicalização inadequada que leva à comercialização de doenças, onde os limites da definição de doenças são expandidos para incluir problemas pessoais como problemas médicos ou riscos de doenças são enfatizados para ampliar o mercado de medicamentos. Gary Greenberg, um psicanalista, em seu livro "The Book of Woe", argumenta que a doença mental é realmente sobre sofrimento e como o DSM cria rótulos diagnósticos para categorizar o sofrimento das pessoas.

De fato, o psiquiatra Thomas Szasz, em seu livro "The Medicalization of Everyday Life", também argumenta que o que é doença psiquiátrica, nem sempre é de natureza biológica (isto é, problemas sociais, pobreza, etc.), e pode até fazer parte de uma A condição humana.


== Prevenção ==


O relatório da OMS de 2004 "Prevenção de Transtornos Mentais" afirmou que "a prevenção desses transtornos é obviamente uma das maneiras mais eficazes de reduzir a carga [da doença]".
A orientação da Associação Psiquiátrica Europeia (EPA) de 2011 sobre prevenção de transtornos mentais afirma que "há evidências consideráveis ​​de que várias condições psiquiátricas podem ser prevenidas por meio da implementação de intervenções eficazes baseadas em evidências".
Um relatório de 2011 do Departamento de Saúde do Reino Unido sobre o caso econômico para a promoção da saúde mental e prevenção de doenças mentais descobriu que "muitas intervenções têm uma excelente relação custo-benefício, baixo custo e muitas vezes se autofinanciam ao longo do tempo, economizando gastos públicos".
Em 2016, o Instituto Nacional de Saúde Mental reafirmou a prevenção como uma área prioritária de pesquisa.A paternidade pode afetar a saúde mental da criança, e as evidências sugerem que ajudar os pais a serem mais eficazes com seus filhos pode atender às necessidades de saúde mental.Prevenção universal (destinada a em uma população que não tem risco aumentado de desenvolver um transtorno mental, como programas escolares ou campanhas de mídia de massa) precisam de um número muito alto de pessoas para mostrar o efeito (às vezes conhecido como o problema do "poder").

As abordagens para superar isso são (1) focar em grupos de alta incidência (por exemplo, visando grupos com fatores de alto risco), (2) usar várias intervenções para obter efeitos maiores e, portanto, estatisticamente mais válidos, (3) usar meta- análises de muitos ensaios, e (4) executar ensaios muito grandes.


== Gestão ==


Tratamento e apoio para transtornos mentais são fornecidos em hospitais psiquiátricos, clínicas ou uma série de serviços comunitários de saúde mental.

Em alguns países, os serviços estão cada vez mais baseados em uma abordagem de recuperação, destinada a apoiar a jornada pessoal do indivíduo para ganhar o tipo de vida que deseja.
Existe uma gama de diferentes tipos de tratamento e o que é mais adequado depende do distúrbio e do indivíduo.

Muitas coisas foram encontradas para ajudar pelo menos algumas pessoas, e um efeito placebo pode desempenhar um papel em qualquer intervenção ou medicação.

Em uma minoria de casos, os indivíduos podem ser tratados contra sua vontade, o que pode causar dificuldades particulares dependendo de como é realizado e percebido.

O tratamento obrigatório na comunidade versus o tratamento não obrigatório não parece fazer muita diferença, exceto talvez diminuindo a vitimização.


=== Estilo de vida ===

Estratégias de estilo de vida, incluindo mudanças na dieta, exercícios e parar de fumar podem ser benéficas.


=== Terapia ===

Há também uma ampla gama de psicoterapeutas (incluindo terapia familiar), conselheiros e profissionais de saúde pública.

Além disso, existem papéis de apoio de pares onde a experiência pessoal de questões semelhantes é a principal fonte de conhecimento. Uma opção importante para muitos transtornos mentais é a psicoterapia.

Existem vários tipos principais.

A terapia cognitivo-comportamental (TCC) é amplamente utilizada e baseia-se na modificação dos padrões de pensamento e comportamento associados a um determinado transtorno.

Outras psicoterapias incluem terapia comportamental dialética (DBT) e psicoterapia interpessoal (IPT).

A psicanálise, abordando conflitos e defesas psíquicas subjacentes, tem sido uma escola dominante de psicoterapia e ainda está em uso.

A terapia sistêmica ou terapia familiar às vezes é usada, abordando uma rede de outros significativos, bem como um indivíduo.
Algumas psicoterapias são baseadas em uma abordagem humanista.

Existem muitas terapias específicas usadas para distúrbios particulares, que podem ser ramificações ou híbridas dos tipos acima.

Os profissionais de saúde mental geralmente empregam uma abordagem eclética ou integrativa.

Muito pode depender do relacionamento terapêutico, e pode haver problemas de confiança, confidencialidade e engajamento.


=== Medicação ===

Uma opção importante para muitos transtornos mentais é a medicação psiquiátrica e existem vários grupos principais.

Os antidepressivos são usados ​​para o tratamento da depressão clínica, bem como muitas vezes para a ansiedade e uma série de outros distúrbios.

Ansiolíticos (incluindo sedativos) são usados ​​para transtornos de ansiedade e problemas relacionados, como insônia.

Os estabilizadores de humor são usados ​​principalmente no transtorno bipolar.

Os antipsicóticos são usados ​​para transtornos psicóticos, principalmente para sintomas positivos na esquizofrenia, e também cada vez mais para uma série de outros transtornos.

Estimulantes são comumente usados, notadamente para TDAH. Apesar dos diferentes nomes convencionais dos grupos de drogas, pode haver sobreposição considerável nos distúrbios para os quais eles são realmente indicados, e também pode haver uso off-label de medicamentos.

Pode haver problemas com efeitos adversos de medicamentos e adesão aos mesmos, além de críticas ao marketing farmacêutico e conflitos de interesse profissional.

No entanto, esses medicamentos em combinação com métodos não farmacológicos, como a terapia cognitivo-comportamental (TCC), são considerados mais eficazes no tratamento de transtornos mentais.


=== Outro ===

A terapia eletroconvulsiva (ECT) às vezes é usada em casos graves quando outras intervenções para depressão intratável grave falharam.

A ECT é geralmente indicada para depressão resistente ao tratamento, sintomas vegetativos graves, depressão psicótica, ideação suicida intensa, depressão durante a gravidez e catatonia.

A psicocirurgia é considerada experimental, mas é defendida por alguns neurologistas em alguns casos raros. Pode-se usar aconselhamento (profissional) e co-aconselhamento (entre pares).

Os programas de psicoeducação podem fornecer às pessoas informações para entender e gerenciar seus problemas.

Terapias criativas às vezes são usadas, incluindo musicoterapia, arteterapia ou terapia dramática.

Ajustes de estilo de vida e medidas de apoio são frequentemente usados, incluindo apoio de colegas, grupos de auto-ajuda para saúde mental e moradia apoiada ou emprego apoiado (incluindo empresas sociais).

Alguns defendem suplementos dietéticos. Adaptações razoáveis ​​(ajustes e suportes) podem ser postas em prática para ajudar um indivíduo a lidar e ter sucesso em ambientes apesar da potencial deficiência relacionada a problemas de saúde mental.

Isso pode incluir um animal de apoio emocional ou um cão de serviço psiquiátrico especificamente treinado.

A partir de 2019, a cannabis não é especificamente recomendada como tratamento.


== Epidemiologia ==


Os transtornos mentais são comuns.

Em todo o mundo, mais de uma em cada três pessoas na maioria dos países relatam critérios suficientes para pelo menos uma em algum momento de sua vida.

Nos Estados Unidos, 46% se qualificam para uma doença mental em algum momento.

Uma pesquisa em andamento indica que os transtornos de ansiedade são os mais comuns em todos os países, exceto em um, seguidos pelos transtornos de humor em todos, exceto em dois países, enquanto os transtornos de substâncias e os transtornos de controle de impulsos foram consistentemente menos prevalentes.

As taxas variaram de acordo com a região. Uma revisão de pesquisas sobre transtornos de ansiedade em diferentes países encontrou estimativas de prevalência média ao longo da vida de 16,6%, com as mulheres apresentando taxas mais altas em média.

Uma revisão de pesquisas sobre transtornos de humor em diferentes países encontrou taxas ao longo da vida de 6,7% para transtorno depressivo maior (maior em alguns estudos e em mulheres) e 0,8% para transtorno bipolar I. Nos Estados Unidos, a frequência do transtorno é: transtorno de ansiedade ( 28,8%), transtorno de humor (20,8%), transtorno de controle de impulsos (24,8%) ou transtorno por uso de substâncias (14,6%). para pelo menos um dos transtornos do DSM-IV avaliados, que incluíam transtornos do humor (13,9%), transtornos de ansiedade (13,6%) ou transtorno do álcool (5,2%).

Aproximadamente um em cada dez preencheu os critérios dentro de um período de 12 meses.

Mulheres e pessoas mais jovens de ambos os sexos apresentaram mais casos do transtorno.

Uma revisão de 2005 de pesquisas em 16 países europeus descobriu que 27% dos europeus adultos são afetados por pelo menos um transtorno mental em um período de 12 meses. % para prevalência ao longo da vida; foi consistentemente menor nos países mais pobres. Os estudos sobre a prevalência de transtornos de personalidade (TPs) foram menores e em menor escala, mas uma ampla pesquisa norueguesa encontrou uma prevalência de cinco anos de quase 1 em 7 (13,4%).

As taxas para distúrbios específicos variaram de 0,8% a 2,8%, diferindo entre os países e por sexo, nível educacional e outros fatores.

Uma pesquisa nos EUA que detectou incidentalmente transtorno de personalidade encontrou uma taxa de 14,79%. Aproximadamente 7% de uma amostra pediátrica pré-escolar recebeu um diagnóstico psiquiátrico em um estudo clínico e aproximadamente 10% de crianças de 1 e 2 anos receberam triagem de desenvolvimento foram avaliados como tendo problemas emocionais/comportamentais significativos com base em relatórios de pais e pediatras. Embora as taxas de distúrbios psicológicos sejam frequentemente as mesmas para homens e mulheres, as mulheres tendem a ter uma taxa mais alta de depressão.

A cada ano, 73 milhões de mulheres são afetadas pela depressão maior, e o suicídio ocupa a 7ª posição como causa de morte para mulheres entre 20 e 59 anos.

Os transtornos depressivos são responsáveis ​​por cerca de 41,9% das incapacidades por transtornos neuropsiquiátricos entre as mulheres, em comparação com 29,3% entre os homens.


== História ==



=== Civilizações antigas ===

As civilizações antigas descreveram e trataram uma série de transtornos mentais.

As doenças mentais eram bem conhecidas na antiga Mesopotâmia, onde se acreditava que doenças e distúrbios mentais eram causados ​​por divindades específicas.

Como as mãos simbolizavam o controle sobre uma pessoa, as doenças mentais eram conhecidas como "mãos" de certas divindades.

Uma doença psicológica era conhecida como Qāt Ištar, que significa "Mão de Ishtar".

Outros eram conhecidos como "Mão de Shamash", "Mão do Fantasma" e "Mão do Deus".

As descrições dessas doenças, no entanto, são tão vagas que geralmente é impossível determinar a quais doenças elas correspondem na terminologia moderna.

Os médicos mesopotâmicos mantinham registros detalhados das alucinações de seus pacientes e atribuíam significados espirituais a eles.

A família real de Elam era notória por seus membros frequentemente sofrerem de insanidade.

Os gregos cunharam termos para melancolia, histeria e fobia e desenvolveram a teoria do humorismo.

Distúrbios mentais foram descritos e tratamentos desenvolvidos na Pérsia, Arábia e no mundo islâmico medieval.


=== Europa ===



==== Idade Média ====
As concepções de loucura na Idade Média na Europa cristã eram uma mistura do divino, diabólico, mágico e humoral e transcendental.

No início do período moderno, algumas pessoas com transtornos mentais podem ter sido vítimas da caça às bruxas.

Embora nem todas as bruxas e feiticeiros acusados ​​fossem mentalmente doentes, todos os mentalmente doentes eram considerados bruxas ou feiticeiros.

Muitos termos para transtornos mentais que chegaram ao uso diário tornaram-se populares nos séculos XVI e XVII.


==== Século XVIII ====

No final do século XVII e no Iluminismo, a loucura era cada vez mais vista como um fenômeno físico orgânico sem conexão com a alma ou responsabilidade moral.

Os cuidados de asilo eram muitas vezes severos e tratavam as pessoas como animais selvagens, mas no final do século XVIII um movimento de tratamento moral se desenvolveu gradualmente.

Descrições claras de algumas síndromes podem ser raras antes do século XIX.


==== Século XIX ====
A industrialização e o crescimento populacional levaram a uma expansão maciça do número e tamanho dos manicômios em todos os países ocidentais no século XIX.

Numerosos esquemas de classificação e termos diagnósticos diferentes foram desenvolvidos por diferentes autoridades, e o termo psiquiatria foi cunhado (1808), embora os superintendentes médicos ainda fossem conhecidos como alienistas.


==== Século XX ====

A virada do século 20 viu o desenvolvimento da psicanálise, que mais tarde viria à tona, juntamente com o esquema de classificação de Kraepelin.

Asilo "detentos" foram cada vez mais referidos como "pacientes", e asilos foram renomeados como hospitais.


=== Europa e Estados Unidos ===


No início do século 20, nos Estados Unidos, desenvolveu-se um movimento de higiene mental, com o objetivo de prevenir transtornos mentais.

Psicologia clínica e serviço social desenvolvidos como profissões.

A Primeira Guerra Mundial viu um aumento maciço de condições que vieram a ser chamadas de "choque de concha".
A Segunda Guerra Mundial viu o desenvolvimento nos EUA de um novo manual psiquiátrico para categorizar os transtornos mentais, que, juntamente com os sistemas existentes de coleta de censos e estatísticas hospitalares, levou ao primeiro Manual Diagnóstico e Estatístico de Transtornos Mentais.

A Classificação Internacional de Doenças (CID) também desenvolveu uma seção sobre transtornos mentais.

O termo estresse, tendo surgido do trabalho da endocrinologia na década de 1930, foi cada vez mais aplicado aos transtornos mentais.
A eletroconvulsoterapia, a terapia de choque insulínico, as lobotomias e o neuroléptico clorpromazina passaram a ser utilizados em meados do século.

Na década de 1960 houve muitos desafios ao próprio conceito de doença mental.

Esses desafios vieram de psiquiatras como Thomas Szasz, que argumentava que a doença mental era um mito usado para disfarçar conflitos morais; de sociólogos como Erving Goffman, que disse que a doença mental era apenas mais um exemplo de como a sociedade rotula e controla os não-conformistas; de psicólogos comportamentais que desafiaram a confiança fundamental da psiquiatria em fenômenos inobserváveis; e de ativistas dos direitos dos homossexuais que criticaram a lista da APA da homossexualidade como um transtorno mental.

Um estudo publicado na Science por Rosenhan recebeu muita publicidade e foi visto como um ataque à eficácia do diagnóstico psiquiátrico. A desinstitucionalização ocorreu gradualmente no Ocidente, com o fechamento de hospitais psiquiátricos isolados em favor de serviços comunitários de saúde mental.

Um movimento de consumidores/sobreviventes ganhou força.

Outros tipos de medicamentos psiquiátricos gradualmente começaram a ser usados, como "energizadores psíquicos" (mais tarde antidepressivos) e lítio.

Os benzodiazepínicos ganharam uso generalizado na década de 1970 para ansiedade e depressão, até que problemas de dependência reduziram sua popularidade.
Avanços em neurociência, genética e psicologia levaram a novas agendas de pesquisa.

Terapia cognitivo-comportamental e outras psicoterapias desenvolvidas.

O DSM e depois o CID adotaram novas classificações baseadas em critérios, e o número de diagnósticos "oficiais" teve uma grande expansão.

Durante a década de 1990, os novos antidepressivos do tipo ISRS tornaram-se alguns dos medicamentos mais prescritos no mundo, assim como os antipsicóticos mais tarde.

Também durante a década de 1990, desenvolveu-se uma abordagem de recuperação.


== Sociedade e cultura ==


Diferentes sociedades ou culturas, mesmo diferentes indivíduos em uma subcultura, podem discordar sobre o que constitui funcionamento biológico e psicológico ótimo versus patológico.

A pesquisa demonstrou que as culturas variam na importância relativa atribuída, por exemplo, à felicidade, autonomia ou relações sociais por prazer.

Da mesma forma, o fato de um padrão de comportamento ser valorizado, aceito, encorajado ou mesmo estatisticamente normativo em uma cultura não significa necessariamente que seja conducente ao funcionamento psicológico ideal.
Pessoas de todas as culturas acham alguns comportamentos bizarros ou mesmo incompreensíveis.

Mas apenas o que eles sentem é bizarro ou incompreensível é ambíguo e subjetivo.

Essas diferenças de determinação podem se tornar altamente controversas.

O processo pelo qual as condições e as dificuldades passam a ser definidas e tratadas como condições e problemas médicos e, assim, passam a estar sob a autoridade de médicos e outros profissionais de saúde, é conhecido como medicalização ou patologização.


=== Religião ===


Experiências e crenças religiosas, espirituais ou transpessoais atendem a muitos critérios de transtornos delirantes ou psicóticos.

Às vezes, uma crença ou experiência pode produzir angústia ou incapacidade – o padrão comum para julgar transtornos mentais.

Existe uma ligação entre religião e esquizofrenia, um transtorno mental complexo caracterizado por uma dificuldade em reconhecer a realidade, regular as respostas emocionais e pensar de forma clara e lógica.

Aqueles com esquizofrenia geralmente relatam algum tipo de delírio religioso, e a própria religião pode ser um gatilho para a esquizofrenia.


=== Movimentos ===


A controvérsia muitas vezes cercou a psiquiatria, e o termo antipsiquiatria foi cunhado pelo psiquiatra David Cooper em 1967.

A mensagem antipsiquiátrica é que os tratamentos psiquiátricos são, em última análise, mais prejudiciais do que úteis para os pacientes, e a história da psiquiatria envolve o que agora pode ser visto como tratamentos perigosos.

A eletroconvulsoterapia foi uma delas, amplamente utilizada entre as décadas de 1930 e 1960.

A lobotomia foi outra prática que acabou sendo vista como muito invasiva e brutal.

Às vezes, o diazepam e outros sedativos eram prescritos em excesso, o que levou a uma epidemia de dependência.

Houve também preocupação com o grande aumento na prescrição de medicamentos psiquiátricos para crianças.

Alguns psiquiatras carismáticos passaram a personificar o movimento contra a psiquiatria.

O mais influente deles foi RD

Laing, que escreveu uma série de livros best-sellers, incluindo The Divided Self.

Thomas Szasz escreveu O Mito da Doença Mental.

Alguns grupos de ex-pacientes tornaram-se militantes antipsiquiátricos, muitas vezes referindo-se a si mesmos como sobreviventes.

Giorgio Antonucci questionou as bases da psiquiatria por meio de seu trabalho sobre o desmantelamento de dois hospitais psiquiátricos (na cidade de Imola), realizado de 1973 a 1996.
O movimento do consumidor/sobrevivente (também conhecido como movimento do usuário/sobrevivente) é formado por indivíduos (e organizações que os representam) que são clientes de serviços de saúde mental ou que se consideram sobreviventes de intervenções psiquiátricas.

Os ativistas fazem campanha por melhores serviços de saúde mental e por mais envolvimento e empoderamento dentro dos serviços de saúde mental, políticas e sociedade em geral.

As organizações de defesa do paciente expandiram-se com a crescente desinstitucionalização nos países desenvolvidos, trabalhando para desafiar os estereótipos, estigma e exclusão associados às condições psiquiátricas.

Há também um movimento pelos direitos dos cuidadores de pessoas que ajudam e apoiam pessoas com problemas de saúde mental, que podem ser parentes, e que muitas vezes trabalham em circunstâncias difíceis e demoradas, com pouco reconhecimento e sem remuneração.

Um movimento antipsiquiátrico desafia fundamentalmente a teoria e a prática psiquiátrica convencional, incluindo, em alguns casos, a afirmação de que os conceitos e diagnósticos psiquiátricos de 'doença mental' não são reais nem úteis. de estudo, pesquisa e prática que prioriza a melhoria da saúde mental e a equidade na saúde mental para todas as pessoas em todo o mundo'.


=== Viés cultural ===


As diretrizes diagnósticas atuais, a saber, o DSM e, em certa medida, o ICD, foram criticadas por terem uma perspectiva fundamentalmente euro-americana.

Os opositores argumentam que, mesmo quando os critérios diagnósticos são usados ​​em diferentes culturas, isso não significa que os construtos subjacentes tenham validade nessas culturas, pois mesmo a aplicação confiável pode provar apenas consistência, não legitimidade.

Defendendo uma abordagem culturalmente mais sensível, críticos como Carl Bell e Marcello Maviglia afirmam que a diversidade cultural e étnica dos indivíduos é frequentemente desprezada por pesquisadores e prestadores de serviços. O psiquiatra intercultural Arthur Kleinman afirma que o viés ocidental é ironicamente ilustrado na introdução de fatores culturais para o DSM-IV.

Distúrbios ou conceitos de culturas não ocidentais ou não convencionais são descritos como "limitados à cultura", enquanto os diagnósticos psiquiátricos padrão não recebem qualquer qualificação cultural, revelando a Kleinman uma suposição subjacente de que os fenômenos culturais ocidentais são universais.

A visão negativa de Kleinman em relação à síndrome ligada à cultura é amplamente compartilhada por outros críticos transculturais.

As respostas comuns incluíram tanto desapontamento com o grande número de transtornos mentais não-ocidentais documentados ainda deixados de fora quanto frustração porque mesmo aqueles incluídos são frequentemente mal interpretados ou deturpados. Muitos psiquiatras tradicionais estão insatisfeitos com os novos diagnósticos vinculados à cultura, embora por razões parcialmente diferentes.

Robert Spitzer, um dos principais arquitetos do DSM-III, argumentou que a adição de formulações culturais era uma tentativa de apaziguar os críticos culturais e afirmou que eles carecem de qualquer fundamentação científica ou apoio.

Spitzer também postula que os novos diagnósticos ligados à cultura raramente são usados, sustentando que os diagnósticos padrão se aplicam independentemente da cultura envolvida.

Em geral, a opinião psiquiátrica dominante permanece que, se uma categoria diagnóstica é válida, os fatores transculturais são irrelevantes ou são significativos apenas para apresentações de sintomas específicos. tanto que às vezes se argumenta que separar os dois é impossível sem redefinir fundamentalmente a essência de ser uma pessoa particular em uma sociedade.

Na psiquiatria clínica, angústia e incapacidade persistentes indicam um distúrbio interno que requer tratamento; mas em outro contexto, essa mesma angústia e incapacidade podem ser vistas como um indicador de luta emocional e da necessidade de abordar problemas sociais e estruturais.

Essa dicotomia levou alguns acadêmicos e clínicos a defenderem uma conceituação pós-moderna de sofrimento mental e bem-estar. contraste com a alegada evasão da comunidade psiquiátrica dominante de qualquer envolvimento explícito com moralidade ou cultura.

Em muitos países, há tentativas de desafiar o preconceito percebido contra grupos minoritários, incluindo o suposto racismo institucional dentro dos serviços psiquiátricos.

Há também tentativas contínuas de melhorar a sensibilidade intercultural profissional.


=== Leis e políticas ===


Três quartos dos países ao redor do mundo têm legislação de saúde mental.

A admissão compulsória em estabelecimentos de saúde mental (também conhecida como internação involuntária) é um tema controverso.

Pode colidir com a liberdade pessoal e o direito de escolha e acarretar o risco de abuso por motivos políticos, sociais e outros; no entanto, pode potencialmente prevenir danos a si próprio e aos outros, e ajudar algumas pessoas a alcançar o seu direito à saúde quando elas podem ser incapazes de decidir em seus próprios interesses.

Por isso, é uma preocupação da ética médica.
Todas as leis de saúde mental orientadas para os direitos humanos exigem prova da presença de um transtorno mental conforme definido por padrões internacionalmente aceitos, mas o tipo e a gravidade do transtorno que conta podem variar em diferentes jurisdições.

Os dois motivos mais usados ​​para admissão involuntária são a probabilidade séria de perigo imediato ou iminente para si ou para os outros e a necessidade de tratamento.

Os pedidos de admissão involuntária de alguém geralmente vêm de um profissional de saúde mental, um membro da família, um parente próximo ou um tutor.

As leis voltadas para os direitos humanos geralmente estipulam que médicos independentes ou outros profissionais de saúde mental credenciados devem examinar o paciente separadamente e que deve haver uma revisão regular e com prazo determinado por um órgão de revisão independente.

O indivíduo também deve ter acesso pessoal à advocacia independente.
Para que o tratamento involuntário seja administrado (pela força, se necessário), deve ser demonstrado que um indivíduo não tem a capacidade mental para o consentimento informado (ou seja, para entender as informações do tratamento e suas implicações e, portanto, ser capaz de fazer uma escolha informada para aceitar ou recusar).

Desafios legais em algumas áreas resultaram em decisões da Suprema Corte de que uma pessoa não precisa concordar com a caracterização de um psiquiatra das questões como constituindo uma "doença", nem concordar com a condenação de um psiquiatra em medicação, mas apenas reconhecer as questões e as informações sobre as opções de tratamento. O consentimento por procuração (também conhecido como substituto ou tomada de decisão substituta) pode ser transferido para um representante pessoal, um membro da família ou um tutor legalmente designado.

Além disso, os pacientes podem ser capazes de fazer, quando considerados bem, uma diretriz antecipada estipulando como desejam ser tratados, caso sejam considerados sem capacidade mental no futuro.

O direito à tomada de decisão apoiada, onde uma pessoa é ajudada a entender e escolher opções de tratamento antes que possa ser declarada incapaz, também pode ser incluída na legislação.

Deve haver, no mínimo, uma tomada de decisão compartilhada na medida do possível.

As leis de tratamento involuntário são cada vez mais estendidas para aqueles que vivem na comunidade, por exemplo, leis de internação ambulatorial (conhecidas por nomes diferentes) são usadas na Nova Zelândia, Austrália, Reino Unido e na maior parte dos Estados Unidos.
A Organização Mundial da Saúde relata que, em muitos casos, a legislação nacional de saúde mental retira os direitos das pessoas com transtornos mentais em vez de proteger os direitos, e muitas vezes está desatualizada.

Em 1991, as Nações Unidas adotaram os Princípios para a Proteção das Pessoas com Doença Mental e a Melhoria da Atenção à Saúde Mental, que estabeleceram padrões mínimos de direitos humanos de prática no campo da saúde mental.

Em 2006, a ONU concordou formalmente com a Convenção sobre os Direitos das Pessoas com Deficiência para proteger e melhorar os direitos e oportunidades das pessoas com deficiência, incluindo aquelas com deficiências psicossociais. usado tecnicamente como um termo legal.

A defesa de insanidade pode ser usada em um julgamento legal (conhecido como defesa de transtorno mental em alguns países).


=== Percepção e discriminação ===



==== Estigma ====
O estigma social associado aos transtornos mentais é um problema generalizado.

O Cirurgião Geral dos EUA declarou em 1999 que: "Poderoso e difundido, o estigma impede as pessoas de reconhecerem seus próprios problemas de saúde mental, muito menos de revelá-los a outros". Nos Estados Unidos, as minorias raciais e étnicas são mais propensas a apresentar distúrbios de saúde mental, muitas vezes devido ao baixo status socioeconômico e à discriminação.

Em Taiwan, aqueles com transtornos mentais estão sujeitos à percepção errônea do público em geral de que as causas dos transtornos mentais são "pensar demais", "ter muito tempo e nada melhor para fazer", "estagnar", "não ser sério na vida ", "não prestar atenção suficiente aos assuntos da vida real", "mentalmente fraco", "recusar-se a ser resiliente", "voltar a esforços perfeccionistas", "não bravura" e assim por diante. parte da alta taxa de desemprego entre aqueles com diagnóstico de doença mental.

Um estudo australiano descobriu que ter uma doença mental é uma barreira maior para o emprego do que uma deficiência física.

Os doentes mentais são estigmatizados na sociedade chinesa e não podem se casar legalmente. Esforços estão sendo empreendidos em todo o mundo para eliminar o estigma da doença mental, embora os métodos e resultados usados ​​às vezes tenham sido criticados.


==== Mídia e público em geral ====

A cobertura da mídia sobre doenças mentais compreende representações predominantemente negativas e pejorativas, por exemplo, de incompetência, violência ou criminalidade, com muito menos cobertura de questões positivas, como conquistas ou questões de direitos humanos.

Acredita-se que tais representações negativas, inclusive em desenhos infantis, contribuam para o estigma e atitudes negativas no público e naqueles com problemas de saúde mental, embora representações cinematográficas mais sensíveis ou sérias tenham aumentado em prevalência. Nos Estados Unidos, o Carter Center criou bolsas de estudo para jornalistas na África do Sul, nos EUA e na Romênia, para permitir que os repórteres pesquisem e escrevam histórias sobre tópicos de saúde mental.

A ex-primeira-dama dos EUA Rosalynn Carter iniciou as bolsas não apenas para treinar repórteres em como discutir com sensibilidade e precisão a saúde mental e a doença mental, mas também para aumentar o número de matérias sobre esses tópicos na mídia.

Há também um Dia Mundial da Saúde Mental, que nos EUA e no Canadá se enquadra na Semana de Conscientização sobre Doenças Mentais.
Descobriu-se que o público em geral possui um forte estereótipo de periculosidade e desejo de distanciamento social de indivíduos descritos como doentes mentais.

Uma pesquisa nacional dos EUA descobriu que uma porcentagem maior de pessoas classifica os indivíduos descritos como apresentando as características de um transtorno mental como "prováveis ​​de fazer algo violento com os outros", em comparação com a porcentagem de pessoas que classificam indivíduos descritos como problemáticos. na mídia incluíram personagens principais vivendo e gerenciando com sucesso uma doença mental, incluindo transtorno bipolar em Homeland (2011) e transtorno de estresse pós-traumático em Homem de Ferro 3 (2013).


==== Violência ====
Apesar da opinião pública ou da mídia, estudos nacionais indicaram que a doença mental grave não prevê de forma independente o comportamento violento futuro, em média, e não é uma das principais causas de violência na sociedade.

Existe uma associação estatística com vários fatores que se relacionam com a violência (em qualquer pessoa), como o uso de substâncias e vários fatores pessoais, sociais e econômicos.

Uma revisão de 2015 descobriu que nos Estados Unidos, cerca de 4% da violência é atribuível a pessoas diagnosticadas com doença mental, e um estudo de 2014 descobriu que 7,5% dos crimes cometidos por pessoas com doenças mentais estavam diretamente relacionados aos sintomas de sua doença mental.

A maioria das pessoas com doença mental grave nunca é violenta. Na verdade, os resultados indicam consistentemente que é muito mais provável que as pessoas diagnosticadas com uma doença mental grave que vivem na comunidade sejam as vítimas e não os perpetradores da violência.

Em um estudo de indivíduos diagnosticados com "doença mental grave" vivendo em uma área central dos Estados Unidos, um quarto foi vítima de pelo menos um crime violento ao longo de um ano, uma proporção onze vezes maior do que a população interna. -média da cidade, e mais alta em todas as categorias de crimes, incluindo assaltos violentos e roubos.

No entanto, as pessoas com um diagnóstico podem ter mais dificuldade em obter processos judiciais, em parte devido ao preconceito e por serem vistas como menos credíveis. definidos por, ou estão inerentemente associados a, problemas de conduta e violência.

Existem descobertas conflitantes sobre a extensão em que certos sintomas específicos, notadamente alguns tipos de psicose (alucinações ou delírios) que podem ocorrer em transtornos como esquizofrenia, transtorno delirante ou transtorno de humor, estão ligados a um risco aumentado de violência grave em média.

Os fatores mediadores de atos violentos, no entanto, são mais consistentemente encontrados principalmente fatores sociodemográficos e socioeconômicos, como ser jovem, do sexo masculino, de nível socioeconômico mais baixo e, em particular, o uso de substâncias (incluindo o uso de álcool) para o qual alguns as pessoas podem ser particularmente vulneráveis. Casos de grande repercussão levaram a temores de que crimes graves, como homicídio, tenham aumentado devido à desinstitucionalização, mas as evidências não suportam essa conclusão.

A violência que ocorre em relação ao transtorno mental (contra o doente mental ou pelo doente mental) ocorre tipicamente no contexto de interações sociais complexas, muitas vezes em um ambiente familiar e não entre estranhos.

É também um problema em ambientes de cuidados de saúde e na comunidade em geral.


== Saúde mental ==


O reconhecimento e a compreensão das condições de saúde mental mudaram ao longo do tempo e entre as culturas e ainda existem variações na definição, avaliação e classificação, embora os critérios de diretrizes padrão sejam amplamente utilizados.

Em muitos casos, parece haver um continuum entre saúde mental e doença mental, tornando o diagnóstico complexo.: 39 De acordo com a Organização Mundial da Saúde (OMS), mais de um terço das pessoas na maioria dos países relatam problemas em algum momento da vida que preenchem os critérios para o diagnóstico de um ou mais dos tipos comuns de transtorno mental.

Corey M Keyes criou um modelo de dois contínuos de doença mental e saúde que sustenta que ambos estão relacionados, mas dimensões distintas: um contínuo indica a presença ou ausência de saúde mental, o outro a presença ou ausência de doença mental.

Por exemplo, pessoas com ótima saúde mental também podem ter uma doença mental, e pessoas que não têm doença mental também podem ter uma saúde mental ruim.


== Outros animais ==


A psicopatologia em primatas não humanos tem sido estudada desde meados do século XX.

Mais de 20 padrões comportamentais em chimpanzés em cativeiro foram documentados como (estatisticamente) anormais para frequência, gravidade ou estranheza – alguns dos quais também foram observados na natureza.

Grandes símios em cativeiro apresentam anormalidades comportamentais grosseiras, como estereotipia de movimentos, automutilação, reações emocionais perturbadas (principalmente medo ou agressão) em relação aos companheiros, falta de comunicações típicas da espécie e desamparo aprendido generalizado.

Em alguns casos, supõe-se que tais comportamentos sejam equivalentes a sintomas associados a transtornos psiquiátricos em humanos, como depressão, transtornos de ansiedade, transtornos alimentares e transtorno de estresse pós-traumático.

Conceitos de transtornos de personalidade anti-social, borderline e esquizóide também têm sido aplicados a grandes símios não humanos. O risco de antropomorfismo é frequentemente levantado em relação a tais comparações, e a avaliação de animais não humanos não pode incorporar evidências de comunicação linguística.

No entanto, as evidências disponíveis podem variar de comportamentos não verbais – incluindo respostas fisiológicas e exibições faciais homólogas e enunciados acústicos – a estudos neuroquímicos.

Assinala-se que a classificação psiquiátrica humana é muitas vezes baseada na descrição estatística e julgamento de comportamentos (especialmente quando a fala ou linguagem é prejudicada) e que o uso de auto-relato verbal é problemático e não confiável. em cativeiro, a condições adversas de criação, como separação precoce dos bebês das mães; privação sensorial precoce; e longos períodos de isolamento social.

Estudos também indicaram variação individual no temperamento, como sociabilidade ou impulsividade.

Causas particulares de problemas em cativeiro incluem a integração de estranhos em grupos existentes e a falta de espaço individual, contexto em que alguns comportamentos patológicos também foram vistos como mecanismos de enfrentamento.

As intervenções corretivas incluíram programas cuidadosos de ressocialização individualizados, terapia comportamental, enriquecimento ambiental e, em raras ocasiões, drogas psiquiátricas.

Descobriu-se que a socialização funciona 90% do tempo em chimpanzés perturbados, embora a restauração da sexualidade funcional e dos cuidados muitas vezes não seja alcançada. , manipulação neurológica, química ou comportamental, mas isso tem sido criticado em bases empíricas e contestado por motivos de direitos dos animais.


== Notas ==



== Leitura adicional ==




https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mental_disorder

;;;FR;;;



DÉSORDRE MENTAL


Un trouble mental, également appelé maladie mentale ou trouble psychiatrique, est un schéma comportemental ou mental qui cause une détresse importante ou une altération du fonctionnement personnel.

Ces caractéristiques peuvent être persistantes, récurrentes et rémittentes, ou se produire sous forme d'épisodes uniques.

De nombreux troubles ont été décrits, avec des signes et des symptômes qui varient considérablement entre les troubles spécifiques.

Ces troubles peuvent être diagnostiqués par un professionnel de la santé mentale, généralement un psychologue clinicien ou un psychiatre.
Les causes des troubles mentaux sont souvent peu claires.

Les théories peuvent incorporer des découvertes provenant d'un éventail de domaines.

Les troubles mentaux sont généralement définis par une combinaison de la façon dont une personne se comporte, se sent, perçoit ou pense.

Cela peut être associé à des régions ou à des fonctions particulières du cerveau, souvent dans un contexte social.

Un trouble mental est un aspect de la santé mentale.

Les croyances culturelles et religieuses, ainsi que les normes sociales, doivent être prises en compte lors de l'établissement d'un diagnostic. Les services sont basés dans des hôpitaux psychiatriques ou dans la communauté, et les évaluations sont effectuées par des professionnels de la santé mentale tels que des psychiatres, des psychologues, des infirmières psychiatriques et des les travailleurs sociaux cliniques, utilisant diverses méthodes telles que les tests psychométriques, mais s'appuyant souvent sur l'observation et le questionnement.

Les traitements sont prodigués par divers professionnels de la santé mentale.

La psychothérapie et les médicaments psychiatriques sont deux options de traitement majeures.

D'autres traitements comprennent des changements de mode de vie, des interventions sociales, le soutien par les pairs et l'auto-assistance.

Dans une minorité de cas, il peut y avoir détention ou traitement involontaire.

Il a été démontré que les programmes de prévention réduisent la dépression. qui touche environ 20 millions de personnes.

Les troubles neurodéveloppementaux comprennent la déficience intellectuelle et les troubles du spectre autistique qui surviennent généralement pendant la petite enfance ou l'enfance.

La stigmatisation et la discrimination peuvent s'ajouter à la souffrance et au handicap associés aux troubles mentaux, conduisant à divers mouvements sociaux qui tentent d'améliorer la compréhension et de lutter contre l'exclusion sociale.


== Définition ==


La définition et la classification des troubles mentaux sont des questions clés pour les chercheurs ainsi que pour les prestataires de services et les personnes susceptibles d'être diagnostiquées.

Pour qu'un état mental soit classé comme un trouble, il doit généralement provoquer un dysfonctionnement.

La plupart des documents cliniques internationaux utilisent le terme « trouble » mental, tandis que la « maladie » est également courante.

Il a été noté que l'utilisation du terme "mental" (c'est-à-dire de l'esprit) n'implique pas nécessairement une séparation du cerveau ou du corps.
Selon le DSM-IV, un trouble mental est un syndrome ou un schéma psychologique qui est associé à une détresse (par exemple via un symptôme douloureux), une incapacité (déficience dans un ou plusieurs domaines de fonctionnement importants), un risque accru de décès ou entraîne une perte d'autonomie; cependant, il exclut les réponses normales telles que le chagrin de la perte d'un être cher et exclut également les comportements déviants pour des raisons politiques, religieuses ou sociétales ne résultant pas d'un dysfonctionnement de l'individu. le cas de nombreux termes médicaux, le trouble mental "n'a pas de définition opérationnelle cohérente qui couvre toutes les situations", notant que différents niveaux d'abstraction peuvent être utilisés pour les définitions médicales, y compris la pathologie, la symptomatologie, la déviance par rapport à une plage normale ou l'étiologie, et qu'il en va de même pour les troubles mentaux de sorte que parfois un type de définition est approprié, et parfois un autre, selon la situation. En 2013, l'American Psychiatric Association (APA) a redéfini les troubles mentaux dans le DSM-5 comme "un syndrome caractérisé par une perturbation cliniquement significative de la cognition, de la régulation des émotions ou du comportement d'un individu qui reflète un dysfonctionnement des processus psychologiques, biologiques ou développementaux sous-jacents au fonctionnement mental. La version finale de la CIM-11 contient une définition très similaire. Les termes « dépression mentale » ou « dépression nerveuse » peuvent être utilisés par la population générale pour désigner un trouble mental. l'American Psychiatric Association (APA) a redéfini les troubles mentaux dans le DSM-5 comme "un syndrome caractérisé par une perturbation cliniquement significative de la cognition, de la régulation des émotions ou du comportement d'un individu qui reflète un dysfonctionnement des processus psychologiques, biologiques ou développementaux sous-jacents au fonctionnement mental ." La version finale de la CIM-11 contient une définition très similaire. Les termes « dépression mentale » ou « dépression nerveuse » peuvent être utilisés par la population générale pour désigner un trouble mental. l'American Psychiatric Association (APA) a redéfini les troubles mentaux dans le DSM-5 comme "un syndrome caractérisé par une perturbation cliniquement significative de la cognition, de la régulation des émotions ou du comportement d'un individu qui reflète un dysfonctionnement des processus psychologiques, biologiques ou développementaux sous-jacents au fonctionnement mental ." La version finale de la CIM-11 contient une définition très similaire. Les termes « dépression mentale » ou « dépression nerveuse » peuvent être utilisés par la population générale pour désigner un trouble mental.

Les termes « dépression nerveuse » et « dépression mentale » n'ont pas été formellement définis par un système de diagnostic médical tel que le DSM-5 ou la CIM-10, et sont presque absents de la littérature scientifique concernant la maladie mentale.

Bien que la «dépression nerveuse» ne soit pas rigoureusement définie, des enquêtes auprès de profanes suggèrent que le terme fait référence à un trouble réactif aigu spécifique limité dans le temps, impliquant des symptômes tels que l'anxiété ou la dépression, généralement précipités par des facteurs de stress externes.

De nombreux experts de la santé qualifient aujourd'hui une dépression nerveuse de crise de santé mentale.


=== Maladie nerveuse ===

En plus du concept de trouble mental, certaines personnes ont plaidé pour un retour au concept démodé de maladie nerveuse.

Dans How Everyone Became Depressed: The Rise and Fall of the Nervous Breakdown (2013), Edward Shorter, professeur de psychiatrie et d'histoire de la médecine, déclare :

Environ la moitié d'entre eux sont déprimés.

Ou du moins, c'est le diagnostic qu'ils ont reçu lorsqu'ils ont été mis sous antidépresseurs. ...

Ils vont travailler mais ils sont malheureux et mal à l'aise ; ils sont un peu anxieux ; ils sont fatigués; ils ont diverses douleurs physiques et ils ont tendance à être obsédés par toute l'affaire.

Il y a un terme pour ce qu'ils ont, et c'est un bon vieux terme qui n'est plus utilisé.

Ils ont des nerfs ou une maladie nerveuse.

C'est une maladie non seulement de l'esprit ou du cerveau, mais un trouble du corps tout entier. ...

Nous avons ici un ensemble de cinq symptômes : dépression légère, anxiété, fatigue, douleurs somatiques et pensées obsessionnelles. ...

Nous avons eu des maladies nerveuses pendant des siècles.

Lorsque vous êtes trop nerveux pour fonctionner... c'est une dépression nerveuse.

Mais ce terme a disparu de la médecine, mais pas de notre façon de parler...

Les nerveux d'antan sont les dépressifs d'aujourd'hui.

Voilà les mauvaises nouvelles....

Il existe une maladie plus profonde qui entraîne la dépression et les symptômes de l'humeur.

Nous pouvons appeler cette maladie plus profonde autrement, ou inventer un néologisme, mais nous devons faire passer la discussion de la dépression à ce trouble plus profond du cerveau et du corps.

C'est le but.
En éliminant la dépression nerveuse, la psychiatrie a failli avoir sa propre dépression nerveuse.
Les nerfs sont au cœur de la maladie mentale courante, peu importe à quel point nous essayons de les oublier.
La « dépression nerveuse » est un terme pseudo-médical pour décrire une multitude de sentiments liés au stress et ils sont souvent aggravés par la croyance qu'il existe un véritable phénomène appelé « dépression nerveuse ».


== Classifications ==


Il existe actuellement deux systèmes largement établis qui classifient les troubles mentaux :

CIM-10 Chapitre V : Troubles mentaux et comportementaux, fait depuis 1949 partie de la Classification internationale des maladies produite par l'OMS,
le Manuel diagnostique et statistique des troubles mentaux (DSM-5) produit par l'APA depuis 1952. Ces deux listes énumèrent des catégories de troubles et fournissent des critères normalisés de diagnostic.

Ils ont délibérément fait converger leurs codes dans les révisions récentes afin que les manuels soient souvent globalement comparables, bien que des différences significatives subsistent.

D'autres schémas de classification peuvent être utilisés dans les cultures non occidentales, par exemple, la Classification chinoise des troubles mentaux, et d'autres manuels peuvent être utilisés par ceux d'opinions théoriques alternatives, comme le Manuel de diagnostic psychodynamique.

En général, les troubles mentaux sont classés séparément des troubles neurologiques, des troubles d'apprentissage ou de la déficience intellectuelle.
Contrairement au DSM et à la CIM, certaines approches ne reposent pas sur l'identification de catégories distinctes de troubles à l'aide de profils de symptômes dichotomiques destinés à séparer l'anormal du normal.

Il existe un débat scientifique important sur les mérites relatifs des schémas catégoriques par rapport à ces schémas non catégoriques (ou hybrides), également connus sous le nom de modèles continus ou dimensionnels.

Une approche spectrale peut incorporer des éléments des deux.
Dans la littérature scientifique et académique sur la définition ou la classification des troubles mentaux, un extrême soutient qu'il s'agit entièrement de jugements de valeur (y compris de ce qui est normal) tandis qu'un autre propose qu'il est ou pourrait être entièrement objectif et scientifique (y compris par référence aux normes statistiques).

Les opinions hybrides courantes soutiennent que le concept de trouble mental est objectif même s'il ne s'agit que d'un «prototype flou» qui ne peut jamais être défini avec précision, ou inversement que le concept implique toujours un mélange de faits scientifiques et de jugements de valeur subjectifs.

Bien que les catégories diagnostiques soient appelées « troubles », elles sont présentées comme des maladies médicales, mais ne sont pas validées de la même manière que la plupart des diagnostics médicaux.

Certains neurologues soutiennent que la classification ne sera fiable et valide que lorsqu'elle sera basée sur des caractéristiques neurobiologiques plutôt que sur un entretien clinique, tandis que d'autres suggèrent que les différentes perspectives idéologiques et pratiques doivent être mieux intégrées. modèle de causalité et parce que certains chercheurs pensent qu'il vaut mieux viser les différences cérébrales sous-jacentes qui peuvent précéder les symptômes de plusieurs années.


=== Modèles dimensionnels ===

Le degré élevé de comorbidité entre les troubles dans les modèles catégoriels tels que le DSM et la CIM a conduit certains à proposer des modèles dimensionnels.

L'étude de la comorbidité entre les troubles a mis en évidence deux facteurs ou dimensions latents (non observés) dans la structure des troubles mentaux qui pourraient refléter des processus étiologiques.

Ces deux dimensions reflètent une distinction entre les troubles d'intériorisation, tels que les symptômes d'humeur ou d'anxiété, et les troubles d'extériorisation tels que les symptômes de comportement ou de consommation de substances.

Un seul facteur général de psychopathologie, similaire au facteur g pour l'intelligence, a été empiriquement soutenu.

Le modèle du facteur p soutient la distinction intériorisation-extériorisation, mais soutient également la formation d'une troisième dimension de troubles de la pensée tels que la schizophrénie.

Les preuves biologiques soutiennent également la validité de la structure d'intériorisation-extériorisation des troubles mentaux, avec des études de jumeaux et d'adoption soutenant des facteurs héréditaires pour les troubles d'extériorisation et d'intériorisation.

Un modèle dimensionnel de premier plan est la taxonomie hiérarchique de la psychopathologie.


=== Troubles ===


Il existe de nombreuses catégories différentes de troubles mentaux et de nombreuses facettes différentes du comportement et de la personnalité humaine qui peuvent devenir désordonnées.


==== Trouble anxieux ====
Trouble anxieux : L'anxiété ou la peur qui interfère avec le fonctionnement normal peut être classée comme un trouble anxieux.

Les catégories couramment reconnues comprennent les phobies spécifiques, le trouble anxieux généralisé, le trouble d'anxiété sociale, le trouble panique, l'agoraphobie, le trouble obsessionnel-compulsif et le trouble de stress post-traumatique.


==== Trouble de l'humeur ====
Trouble de l'humeur : d'autres processus affectifs (émotion/humeur) peuvent également devenir désordonnés.

Le trouble de l'humeur impliquant une tristesse, une mélancolie ou un désespoir inhabituellement intense et soutenu est connu sous le nom de dépression majeure (également connue sous le nom de dépression unipolaire ou clinique).

Une dépression plus légère, mais toujours prolongée, peut être diagnostiquée comme une dysthymie.

Le trouble bipolaire (également connu sous le nom de maniaco-dépression) implique des états d'humeur anormalement "élevés" ou sous pression, connus sous le nom de manie ou d'hypomanie, alternant avec des humeurs normales ou dépressives.

La mesure dans laquelle les phénomènes d'humeur unipolaires et bipolaires représentent des catégories distinctes de trouble, ou se mélangent et fusionnent le long d'une dimension ou d'un spectre d'humeur, fait l'objet d'un débat scientifique.


==== Trouble psychotique ====
Trouble psychotique : les modèles de croyance, d'utilisation du langage et de perception de la réalité peuvent devenir dérégulés (p. ex., délires, troubles de la pensée, hallucinations).

Les troubles psychotiques dans ce domaine comprennent la schizophrénie et les troubles délirants.

Le trouble schizo-affectif est une catégorie utilisée pour les personnes présentant à la fois des aspects de schizophrénie et de troubles affectifs.

La schizotypie est une catégorie utilisée pour les personnes présentant certaines des caractéristiques associées à la schizophrénie, mais sans répondre aux critères de coupure.


==== Trouble de la personnalité ====
Trouble de la personnalité : la personnalité - les caractéristiques fondamentales d'une personne qui influencent les pensées et les comportements à travers les situations et le temps - peut être considérée comme désordonnée si elle est jugée anormalement rigide et inadaptée.

Bien que traités séparément par certains, les schémas catégoriels couramment utilisés les incluent en tant que troubles mentaux, quoique sur un axe II séparé dans le cas du DSM-IV.

Un certain nombre de troubles de la personnalité différents sont répertoriés, y compris ceux parfois classés comme excentriques, tels que les troubles de la personnalité paranoïaque, schizoïde et schizotypique; les types qui ont été décrits comme dramatiques ou émotionnels, tels que les troubles de la personnalité antisociale, borderline, histrionique ou narcissique ; et ceux parfois classés comme liés à la peur, tels que les troubles de la personnalité anxieux-évitant, dépendants ou obsessionnels compulsifs.

Les troubles de la personnalité, en général, sont définis comme apparaissant dans l'enfance, ou du moins à l'adolescence ou au début de l'âge adulte.

La CIM a également une catégorie pour le changement de personnalité durable après une expérience catastrophique ou une maladie psychiatrique.

Si une incapacité à s'adapter suffisamment aux circonstances de la vie commence dans les trois mois suivant un événement ou une situation particulière et se termine dans les six mois suivant l'arrêt ou l'élimination du facteur de stress, elle peut plutôt être classée comme un trouble d'adaptation.

Il existe un consensus émergent sur le fait que les troubles de la personnalité, similaires aux traits de personnalité en général, intègrent un mélange de comportements dysfonctionnels aigus qui peuvent se résoudre en de courtes périodes et de traits de tempérament inadaptés qui sont plus durables.

En outre, il existe également des schémas non catégoriques qui évaluent tous les individus via un profil de différentes dimensions de la personnalité sans coupure basée sur les symptômes par rapport à la variation normale de la personnalité, par exemple via des schémas basés sur des modèles dimensionnels.


==== Trouble de l'alimentation ====
Les troubles alimentaires impliquent une préoccupation disproportionnée en matière d'alimentation et de poids.

Les catégories de troubles dans ce domaine comprennent l'anorexie mentale, la boulimie nerveuse, la boulimie d'exercice ou l'hyperphagie boulimique.


==== Trouble du sommeil ====
Les troubles du sommeil sont associés à une perturbation des habitudes de sommeil normales.

Un trouble du sommeil courant est l'insomnie, qui est décrite comme une difficulté à s'endormir et/ou à rester endormi.


==== Lié à la sexualité ====
Les troubles sexuels comprennent la dyspareunie et divers types de paraphilie (excitation sexuelle vis-à-vis d'objets, de situations ou d'individus considérés comme anormaux ou nocifs pour la personne ou pour autrui).


==== Autre ====
Trouble du contrôle des impulsions : les personnes qui sont anormalement incapables de résister à certaines envies ou impulsions qui pourraient être nocives pour elles-mêmes ou pour les autres peuvent être classées comme ayant un trouble du contrôle des impulsions et des troubles tels que la kleptomanie (voler) ou la pyromanie (allumer le feu).

Diverses dépendances comportementales, telles que la dépendance au jeu, peuvent être classées comme un trouble.

Le trouble obsessionnel-compulsif peut parfois impliquer une incapacité à résister à certains actes mais est classé à part comme étant principalement un trouble anxieux.
Trouble lié à l'usage de substances : ce trouble fait référence à la consommation de drogues (légales ou illégales, y compris l'alcool) qui persiste malgré des problèmes ou des dommages importants liés à sa consommation.

La dépendance aux substances et l'abus de substances relèvent de cette catégorie parapluie dans le DSM.

Le trouble lié à l'usage de substances peut être dû à un schéma d'utilisation compulsive et répétitive d'une drogue qui entraîne une tolérance à ses effets et des symptômes de sevrage lorsque l'utilisation est réduite ou arrêtée.
Trouble dissociatif : les personnes qui souffrent de graves troubles de leur identité, de leur mémoire et de leur conscience générale d'elles-mêmes et de leur environnement peuvent être classées comme ayant ces types de troubles, y compris le trouble de dépersonnalisation ou le trouble dissociatif de l'identité (qui était auparavant appelé personnalité multiple). trouble ou « dédoublement de la personnalité »).
Troubles cognitifs : Ceux-ci affectent les capacités cognitives, y compris l'apprentissage et la mémoire.

Cette catégorie comprend le délire et les troubles neurocognitifs légers et majeurs (auparavant appelés démence).
Trouble du développement : ces troubles surviennent initialement dans l'enfance.

Certains exemples incluent le trouble du spectre autistique, le trouble oppositionnel avec provocation et le trouble des conduites, et le trouble déficitaire de l'attention avec hyperactivité (TDAH), qui peut persister à l'âge adulte.

Le trouble des conduites, s'il persiste à l'âge adulte, peut être diagnostiqué comme un trouble de la personnalité antisociale (trouble de la personnalité dissociale dans la CIM).

Les étiquettes populaires telles que psychopathe (ou sociopathe) n'apparaissent pas dans le DSM ou la CIM mais sont liées par certains à ces diagnostics.
Les troubles somatoformes peuvent être diagnostiqués lorsqu'il existe des problèmes qui semblent provenir du corps et que l'on pense être des manifestations d'un trouble mental.

Cela inclut le trouble de somatisation et le trouble de conversion.

Il existe également des troubles de la façon dont une personne perçoit son corps, comme le trouble dysmorphique corporel.

La neurasthénie est un ancien diagnostic impliquant des plaintes somatiques ainsi que de la fatigue et un moral bas / dépression, qui est officiellement reconnu par la CIM-10 mais plus par le DSM-IV. Les troubles factices sont diagnostiqués lorsque les symptômes sont censés être signalés pour un gain personnel .

Les symptômes sont souvent produits ou simulés délibérément et peuvent être liés à des symptômes chez l'individu ou chez un proche, en particulier les personnes dont il s'occupe.
Il y a des tentatives d'introduire une catégorie de trouble relationnel, où le diagnostic porte sur une relation plutôt que sur un individu dans cette relation.

La relation peut être entre les enfants et leurs parents, entre couples ou autres.

Il existe déjà, sous la catégorie de psychose, un diagnostic de trouble psychotique partagé où deux ou plusieurs individus partagent un délire particulier en raison de leur relation étroite les uns avec les autres.
Il existe un certain nombre de syndromes psychiatriques peu courants, qui portent souvent le nom de la personne qui les a décrits pour la première fois, tels que le syndrome de Capgras, le syndrome de De Clerambault, le syndrome d'Othello, le syndrome de Ganser, le délire de Cotard et le syndrome d'Ekbom, ainsi que des troubles supplémentaires tels que la maladie de Couvade. Syndrome et syndrome de Geschwind.


== Signes et symptômes ==



=== Cours ===

L'apparition des troubles psychiatriques survient généralement de l'enfance au début de l'âge adulte.

Les troubles du contrôle des impulsions et quelques troubles anxieux ont tendance à apparaître dans l'enfance.

Certains autres troubles anxieux, troubles liés à la toxicomanie et troubles de l'humeur apparaissent plus tard au milieu de l'adolescence.

Les symptômes de la schizophrénie se manifestent généralement de la fin de l'adolescence au début de la vingtaine. L'évolution et l'issue probables des troubles mentaux varient et dépendent de nombreux facteurs liés au trouble lui-même, à l'individu dans son ensemble et à l'environnement social.

Certains troubles peuvent durer une courte période de temps, tandis que d'autres peuvent être de longue durée.
Tous les troubles peuvent avoir une évolution variée.

Des études internationales à long terme sur la schizophrénie ont montré que plus de la moitié des individus se rétablissent en termes de symptômes, et environ un cinquième à un tiers en termes de symptômes et de fonctionnement, beaucoup ne nécessitant aucun médicament.

Alors que certains ont de sérieuses difficultés et ont besoin d'accompagnement depuis de nombreuses années, une reprise "tardive" reste plausible.

L'Organisation mondiale de la santé a conclu que les résultats des études à long terme convergeaient avec d'autres pour "soulager les patients, les soignants et les cliniciens du paradigme de la chronicité qui a dominé la pensée pendant une grande partie du 20e siècle". Une étude de suivi menée par Tohen et ses collègues a révélé que environ la moitié des personnes initialement diagnostiquées avec un trouble bipolaire obtiennent une récupération symptomatique (ne répondant plus aux critères de diagnostic) dans les six semaines, et presque toutes y parviennent dans les deux ans, près de la moitié retrouvant leur statut professionnel et résidentiel antérieur au cours de cette période.

Moins de la moitié connaissent un nouvel épisode de manie ou de dépression majeure au cours des deux prochaines années.


=== Handicap ===

Certains troubles peuvent être très limités dans leurs effets fonctionnels, tandis que d'autres peuvent impliquer des handicaps importants et des besoins de soutien.

Le degré de capacité ou d'incapacité peut varier dans le temps et dans différents domaines de la vie.

En outre, le maintien du handicap a été lié à l'institutionnalisation, à la discrimination et à l'exclusion sociale ainsi qu'aux effets inhérents des troubles.

Alternativement, le fonctionnement peut être affecté par le stress de devoir cacher une condition au travail ou à l'école, etc., par les effets indésirables des médicaments ou d'autres substances, ou par des décalages entre les variations liées à la maladie et les exigences de régularité. que, tout en étant souvent caractérisés en termes purement négatifs, certains traits ou états mentaux qualifiés de troubles peuvent également impliquer une créativité, une non-conformité, une recherche d'objectifs, une minutie ou une empathie supérieures à la moyenne.

En outre, la perception publique du niveau d'invalidité associé aux troubles mentaux peut changer. Néanmoins, à l'échelle internationale, les personnes signalent une invalidité égale ou supérieure en raison d'affections mentales courantes que d'affections physiques courantes, en particulier dans leurs rôles sociaux et leurs relations personnelles.

Cependant, la proportion ayant accès à une aide professionnelle pour les troubles mentaux est beaucoup plus faible, même parmi les personnes évaluées comme ayant une condition gravement invalidante.

Dans ce contexte, le handicap peut impliquer ou non des éléments tels que :

Activités de base de la vie quotidienne.

Y compris s'occuper de soi (soins de santé, toilette, habillage, courses, cuisine, etc.) ou s'occuper du logement (tâches, tâches de bricolage, etc.)
Les relations interpersonnelles.

Y compris les compétences en communication, la capacité à nouer des relations et à les maintenir, la capacité à quitter la maison ou à se mêler à des foules ou à des contextes particuliers
Fonctionnement professionnel.

Capacité à acquérir un emploi et à l'occuper, compétences cognitives et sociales requises pour l'emploi, gestion de la culture du lieu de travail ou études en tant qu'étudiant. En termes d'années de vie totales ajustées sur l'incapacité (DALY), qui est une estimation du nombre d'années de vie sont perdues en raison d'un décès prématuré ou d'un état de santé précaire et d'un handicap, les troubles mentaux figurent parmi les affections les plus invalidantes.

Le trouble dépressif unipolaire (également connu sous le nom de trouble dépressif majeur) est la troisième cause d'invalidité dans le monde, de toute condition mentale ou physique, représentant 65,5 millions d'années perdues.

La première description systématique de l'incapacité globale survenant chez les jeunes, en 2011, a révélé que chez les 10 à 24 ans, près de la moitié de toutes les incapacités (actuelles et estimées persistantes) étaient dues à des troubles mentaux et neurologiques, y compris des troubles liés à l'utilisation de substances. et les conditions impliquant l'automutilation.

Viennent ensuite les blessures accidentelles (principalement les collisions de la route) représentant 12 % des incapacités, suivies des maladies transmissibles à 10 %.

Les troubles associés à la plupart des incapacités dans les pays à revenu élevé étaient la dépression majeure unipolaire (20 %) et les troubles liés à la consommation d'alcool (11 %).

Dans la région de la Méditerranée orientale, il s'agissait de la dépression majeure unipolaire (12 %) et de la schizophrénie (7 %), et en Afrique, de la dépression majeure unipolaire (7 %) et du trouble bipolaire (5 %). Le suicide, qui est souvent attribué à certains trouble mental sous-jacent, est la principale cause de décès chez les adolescents et les adultes de moins de 35 ans.

Il y a environ 10 à 20 millions de tentatives de suicide non mortelles chaque année dans le monde.


== Facteurs de risque ==


L'opinion prédominante en 2018 est que les facteurs génétiques, psychologiques et environnementaux contribuent tous au développement ou à la progression des troubles mentaux.

Différents facteurs de risque peuvent être présents à différents âges, le risque survenant dès la période prénatale.


=== Génétique ===


Un certain nombre de troubles psychiatriques sont liés à des antécédents familiaux (dont la dépression, le trouble de la personnalité narcissique et l'anxiété).

Des études jumelles ont également révélé une héritabilité très élevée pour de nombreux troubles mentaux (en particulier l'autisme et la schizophrénie).

Bien que les chercheurs aient cherché pendant des décennies des liens clairs entre la génétique et les troubles mentaux, ce travail n'a pas encore fourni de biomarqueurs génétiques spécifiques qui pourraient conduire à un meilleur diagnostic et à de meilleurs traitements. .

Cela signifie que les personnes atteintes de l'un de ces troubles étaient deux à trois fois plus susceptibles que la population générale d'avoir un partenaire atteint d'un trouble mental.

Parfois, les gens semblaient avoir des partenaires préférés avec la même maladie mentale.

Ainsi, les personnes atteintes de schizophrénie ou de TDAH sont sept fois plus susceptibles d'avoir des partenaires atteints du même trouble.

Ceci est encore plus prononcé pour les personnes atteintes de troubles du spectre autistique qui sont 10 fois plus susceptibles d'avoir un conjoint atteint du même trouble.


=== Environnement ===


Pendant la phase prénatale, des facteurs comme une grossesse non désirée, le manque d'adaptation à la grossesse ou la consommation de substances pendant la grossesse augmentent le risque de développer un trouble mental.

Le stress maternel et les complications à la naissance, y compris la prématurité et les infections, ont également été impliqués dans l'augmentation de la susceptibilité aux maladies mentales.

Les nourrissons négligés ou qui ne reçoivent pas une alimentation optimale ont un risque plus élevé de développer des troubles cognitifs. Les influences sociales se sont également révélées importantes, notamment la maltraitance, la négligence, l'intimidation, le stress social, les événements traumatisants et d'autres expériences de vie négatives ou accablantes.

Des aspects de la communauté au sens large ont également été impliqués, notamment les problèmes d'emploi, les inégalités socio-économiques, le manque de cohésion sociale, les problèmes liés à la migration et les caractéristiques de sociétés et de cultures particulières.

Les risques spécifiques et les voies vers des troubles particuliers sont cependant moins clairs.
La nutrition joue également un rôle dans les troubles mentaux. Dans la schizophrénie et la psychose, les facteurs de risque comprennent la migration et la discrimination, les traumatismes de l'enfance, le deuil ou la séparation dans les familles, l'usage récréatif de drogues et l'urbanité. Dans l'anxiété, les facteurs de risque peuvent inclure des facteurs parentaux, notamment le rejet parental. , manque de chaleur parentale, forte hostilité, discipline sévère, affect négatif maternel élevé, éducation anxieuse des enfants, modélisation de comportements dysfonctionnels et toxicomanes et maltraitance des enfants (émotionnelle, physique et sexuelle).

Les adultes présentant un déséquilibre entre le travail et la vie sont plus à risque de développer de l'anxiété. Pour le trouble bipolaire, le stress (comme l'adversité de l'enfance) n'est pas une cause spécifique, mais expose les personnes génétiquement et biologiquement vulnérables à un risque d'évolution plus grave de la maladie.


=== Consommation de drogue ===

Les troubles mentaux sont associés à la consommation de drogues, notamment : le cannabis, l'alcool et la caféine, dont la consommation semble favoriser l'anxiété.

Pour la psychose et la schizophrénie, la consommation d'un certain nombre de drogues a été associée au développement du trouble, notamment le cannabis, la cocaïne et les amphétamines.

Il y a eu un débat sur la relation entre la consommation de cannabis et le trouble bipolaire.

Le cannabis a également été associé à la dépression.

Les adolescents courent un risque accru de consommation de tabac, d'alcool et de drogues; La pression des pairs est la principale raison pour laquelle les adolescents commencent à consommer des substances.

À cet âge, la consommation de substances pourrait être préjudiciable au développement du cerveau et les exposer à un risque plus élevé de développer un trouble mental.


=== Maladie chronique ===

Les personnes vivant avec des maladies chroniques comme le VIH et le diabète courent un risque plus élevé de développer un trouble mental.

Les personnes atteintes de diabète subissent un stress important dû à l'impact biologique de la maladie, ce qui les expose à un risque de développer de l'anxiété et de la dépression.

Les patients diabétiques doivent également faire face à un stress émotionnel en essayant de gérer la maladie.

Des affections telles que les maladies cardiaques, les accidents vasculaires cérébraux, les affections respiratoires, le cancer et l'arthrite augmentent le risque de développer un trouble mental par rapport à la population générale.


=== Traits de personnalité ===

Les facteurs de risque de maladie mentale comprennent une propension au névrosisme élevé ou à «l'instabilité émotionnelle».

Dans l'anxiété, les facteurs de risque peuvent inclure le tempérament et les attitudes (par exemple, le pessimisme).


=== Modèles causaux ===

Les troubles mentaux peuvent provenir de plusieurs sources et, dans de nombreux cas, il n'y a pas de cause unique acceptée ou cohérente actuellement établie.

Un mélange éclectique ou pluraliste de modèles peut être utilisé pour expliquer des troubles particuliers.

On dit que le paradigme principal de la psychiatrie occidentale traditionnelle contemporaine est le modèle biopsychosocial qui intègre des facteurs biologiques, psychologiques et sociaux, bien que cela ne soit pas toujours appliqué dans la pratique.
La psychiatrie biologique suit un modèle biomédical où de nombreux troubles mentaux sont conceptualisés comme des troubles des circuits cérébraux probablement causés par des processus de développement façonnés par une interaction complexe de la génétique et de l'expérience.

Une hypothèse courante est que les troubles peuvent résulter de vulnérabilités génétiques et développementales, exposées par le stress dans la vie (par exemple dans un modèle diathèse-stress), bien qu'il existe différentes opinions sur les causes des différences entre les individus.

Certains types de troubles mentaux peuvent être considérés principalement comme des troubles neurodéveloppementaux.
La psychologie évolutive peut être utilisée comme théorie explicative globale, tandis que la théorie de l'attachement est un autre type d'approche évolutive-psychologique parfois appliquée dans le contexte des troubles mentaux.

Les théories psychanalytiques ont continué à évoluer parallèlement aux approches cognitivo-comportementales et systémiques-familiales.

On distingue parfois un « modèle médical » ou un « modèle social » du trouble et du handicap.


== Diagnostic ==

Les psychiatres cherchent à fournir un diagnostic médical des individus par une évaluation des symptômes, des signes et des troubles associés à des types particuliers de troubles mentaux.

D'autres professionnels de la santé mentale, tels que les psychologues cliniciens, peuvent ou non appliquer les mêmes catégories de diagnostic à leur formulation clinique des difficultés et des circonstances d'un client.

La majorité des problèmes de santé mentale sont, au moins initialement, évalués et traités par des médecins de famille (au Royaume-Uni, des médecins généralistes) lors de consultations, qui peuvent orienter un patient vers un diagnostic plus spécialisé dans les cas aigus ou chroniques.
La pratique diagnostique de routine dans les services de santé mentale implique généralement une entrevue connue sous le nom d'examen de l'état mental, où des évaluations sont faites de l'apparence et du comportement, des symptômes autodéclarés, des antécédents de santé mentale et des circonstances de la vie actuelle.

Les opinions d'autres professionnels, de proches ou d'autres tiers peuvent être prises en compte.

Un examen physique pour vérifier un mauvais état de santé ou les effets de médicaments ou d'autres drogues peut être effectué.

Les tests psychologiques sont parfois utilisés via des questionnaires papier-stylo ou informatisés, qui peuvent inclure des algorithmes basés sur la coche de critères de diagnostic standardisés, et dans de rares cas spécialisés, des tests de neuro-imagerie peuvent être demandés, mais ces méthodes sont plus courantes dans les études de recherche que la routine. pratique clinique. Les contraintes de temps et de budget empêchent souvent les psychiatres en exercice de mener des évaluations diagnostiques plus approfondies.

Il a été constaté que la plupart des cliniciens évaluent les patients en utilisant une approche non structurée et ouverte, avec une formation limitée aux méthodes d'évaluation fondées sur des preuves, et que des diagnostics inexacts peuvent être courants dans la pratique de routine.

De plus, la comorbidité est très courante dans le diagnostic psychiatrique, où la même personne répond aux critères de plus d'un trouble.

D'autre part, une personne peut avoir plusieurs difficultés différentes dont seulement certaines répondent aux critères de diagnostic.

Il peut y avoir des problèmes spécifiques avec un diagnostic précis dans les pays en développement.
Des approches plus structurées sont de plus en plus utilisées pour mesurer les niveaux de maladie mentale.

HoNOS est la mesure la plus largement utilisée dans les services de santé mentale anglais, utilisée par au moins 61 fiducies.

Dans HoNOS, un score de 0 à 4 est attribué pour chacun des 12 facteurs, en fonction de la capacité de vie fonctionnelle.

La recherche a soutenu HoNOS, bien que certaines questions aient été posées quant à savoir s'il fournit une couverture adéquate de l'éventail et de la complexité des problèmes de maladie mentale, et si le fait que souvent seulement 3 des 12 échelles varient dans le temps donne suffisamment de subtilité pour mesurer avec précision résultats du traitement.


=== Critique ===

Depuis les années 1980, Paula Caplan s'inquiète de la subjectivité du diagnostic psychiatrique et des personnes arbitrairement « giflées avec une étiquette psychiatrique ». Caplan dit que parce que le diagnostic psychiatrique n'est pas réglementé, les médecins ne sont pas tenus de passer beaucoup de temps à interroger les patients ou à demander un deuxième avis.

Le Manuel diagnostique et statistique des troubles mentaux peut amener un psychiatre à se concentrer sur des listes de contrôle étroites de symptômes, sans tenir compte de ce qui cause réellement les problèmes de la personne.

Ainsi, selon Caplan, l'obtention d'un diagnostic et d'une étiquette psychiatriques fait souvent obstacle au rétablissement. En 2013, le psychiatre Allen Frances a écrit un article intitulé "La nouvelle crise de confiance dans le diagnostic psychiatrique", qui disait que "le diagnostic psychiatrique... repose toujours exclusivement sur des jugements subjectifs faillibles plutôt que sur des tests biologiques objectifs." Frances était également préoccupée par "un surdiagnostic imprévisible". Pendant de nombreuses années, des psychiatres marginalisés (tels que Peter Breggin, Thomas Szasz) et des critiques extérieurs (tels que Stuart A.

Kirk) ont « accusé la psychiatrie de s'engager dans la médicalisation systématique de la normalité ». Plus récemment, ces préoccupations sont venues d'initiés qui ont travaillé pour et promu l'American Psychiatric Association (par exemple, Robert Spitzer, Allen Frances).

Un éditorial de 2002 du British Medical Journal a mis en garde contre une médicalisation inappropriée conduisant à la vente de maladies, où les limites de la définition des maladies sont élargies pour inclure les problèmes personnels, car les problèmes médicaux ou les risques de maladies sont mis en évidence pour élargir le marché des médicaments. Gary Greenberg, un psychanalyste, dans son livre "The Book of Woe", soutient que la maladie mentale est vraiment une question de souffrance et comment le DSM crée des étiquettes de diagnostic pour catégoriser la souffrance des gens.

En effet, le psychiatre Thomas Szasz, dans son livre « La médicalisation de la vie quotidienne », soutient également que ce qu'est une maladie psychiatrique, n'est pas toujours de nature biologique (c'est-à-dire les problèmes sociaux, la pauvreté, etc.), et peut même faire partie de la condition humaine.


== Prévention ==


Le rapport de l'OMS de 2004 "Prévention des troubles mentaux" a déclaré que "la prévention de ces troubles est évidemment l'un des moyens les plus efficaces pour réduire le fardeau [de la maladie]".
Les directives de l'Association européenne de psychiatrie (EPA) de 2011 sur la prévention des troubles mentaux indiquent qu'« il existe des preuves considérables que diverses affections psychiatriques peuvent être évitées grâce à la mise en œuvre d'interventions efficaces fondées sur des preuves ».
Un rapport du ministère britannique de la Santé de 2011 sur les arguments économiques en faveur de la promotion de la santé mentale et de la prévention des maladies mentales a révélé que « de nombreuses interventions présentent un excellent rapport qualité-prix, sont peu coûteuses et s'autofinancent souvent avec le temps, ce qui permet d'économiser des dépenses publiques ».
En 2016, l'Institut national de la santé mentale a réaffirmé la prévention comme domaine prioritaire de recherche. La parentalité peut affecter la santé mentale de l'enfant, et les preuves suggèrent qu'aider les parents à être plus efficaces avec leurs enfants peut répondre aux besoins de santé mentale. à une population qui n'a pas de risque accru de développer un trouble mental, comme les programmes scolaires ou les campagnes médiatiques) ont besoin d'un très grand nombre de personnes pour montrer leur effet (parfois appelé problème de « pouvoir »).

Les approches pour surmonter ce problème sont (1) se concentrer sur les groupes à forte incidence (par exemple en ciblant les groupes présentant des facteurs de risque élevés), (2) utiliser plusieurs interventions pour obtenir des effets plus importants, et donc plus valides sur le plan statistique, (3) utiliser des méta- analyses de nombreux essais, et (4) exécuter de très grands essais.


== Gestion ==


Le traitement et le soutien des troubles mentaux sont fournis dans des hôpitaux psychiatriques, des cliniques ou une gamme de services de santé mentale communautaires.

Dans certains pays, les services sont de plus en plus basés sur une approche de rétablissement, destinée à soutenir le cheminement personnel de l'individu pour gagner le genre de vie qu'il souhaite.
Il existe une gamme de différents types de traitement et ce qui est le plus approprié dépend du trouble et de l'individu.

Beaucoup de choses ont été trouvées pour aider au moins certaines personnes, et un effet placebo peut jouer un rôle dans toute intervention ou médicament.

Dans une minorité de cas, des individus peuvent être traités contre leur gré, ce qui peut entraîner des difficultés particulières selon la manière dont cela est réalisé et perçu.

Le traitement obligatoire dans la communauté par rapport au traitement non obligatoire ne semble pas faire beaucoup de différence, sauf peut-être en diminuant la victimisation.


=== Style de vie ===

Les stratégies de style de vie, y compris les changements alimentaires, l'exercice et l'arrêt du tabac peuvent être bénéfiques.


=== Thérapie ===

Il existe également un large éventail de psychothérapeutes (y compris la thérapie familiale), de conseillers et de professionnels de la santé publique.

En outre, il existe des rôles de soutien par les pairs où l'expérience personnelle de problèmes similaires est la principale source d'expertise. Une option majeure pour de nombreux troubles mentaux est la psychothérapie.

Il existe plusieurs types principaux.

La thérapie cognitivo-comportementale (TCC) est largement utilisée et repose sur la modification des schémas de pensée et de comportement associés à un trouble particulier.

D'autres psychothérapies comprennent la thérapie comportementale dialectique (TCD) et la psychothérapie interpersonnelle (IPT).

La psychanalyse, traitant des conflits et des défenses psychiques sous-jacents, a été une école dominante de psychothérapie et est toujours utilisée.

La thérapie systémique ou la thérapie familiale est parfois utilisée, s'adressant à un réseau d'autres personnes importantes ainsi qu'à un individu.
Certaines psychothérapies sont basées sur une approche humaniste.

Il existe de nombreuses thérapies spécifiques utilisées pour des troubles particuliers, qui peuvent être des ramifications ou des hybrides des types ci-dessus.

Les professionnels de la santé mentale utilisent souvent une approche éclectique ou intégrative.

Beaucoup peut dépendre de la relation thérapeutique, et il peut y avoir des problèmes de confiance, de confidentialité et d'engagement.


=== Médicament ===

Une option majeure pour de nombreux troubles mentaux est la médication psychiatrique et il existe plusieurs groupes principaux.

Les antidépresseurs sont utilisés pour le traitement de la dépression clinique, ainsi que souvent pour l'anxiété et une gamme d'autres troubles.

Les anxiolytiques (y compris les sédatifs) sont utilisés pour les troubles anxieux et les problèmes connexes tels que l'insomnie.

Les stabilisateurs de l'humeur sont principalement utilisés dans les troubles bipolaires.

Les antipsychotiques sont utilisés pour les troubles psychotiques, notamment pour les symptômes positifs de la schizophrénie, et aussi de plus en plus pour une gamme d'autres troubles.

Les stimulants sont couramment utilisés, notamment pour le TDAH. Malgré les différents noms conventionnels des groupes de médicaments, il peut y avoir un chevauchement considérable dans les troubles pour lesquels ils sont réellement indiqués, et il peut également y avoir une utilisation hors AMM de médicaments.

Il peut y avoir des problèmes avec les effets indésirables des médicaments et leur adhésion, et il y a aussi des critiques du marketing pharmaceutique et des conflits d'intérêts professionnels.

Cependant, ces médicaments en combinaison avec des méthodes non pharmacologiques, telles que la thérapie cognitivo-comportementale (TCC), sont considérés comme les plus efficaces dans le traitement des troubles mentaux.


=== Autre ===

L'électroconvulsivothérapie (ECT) est parfois utilisée dans les cas graves lorsque d'autres interventions pour la dépression réfractaire grave ont échoué.

L'ECT est généralement indiquée pour la dépression résistante au traitement, les symptômes végétatifs graves, la dépression psychotique, les idées suicidaires intenses, la dépression pendant la grossesse et la catatonie.

La psychochirurgie est considérée comme expérimentale mais est préconisée par certains neurologues dans certains cas rares. Le conseil (professionnel) et le co-conseil (entre pairs) peuvent être utilisés.

Les programmes de psychoéducation peuvent fournir aux personnes les informations nécessaires pour comprendre et gérer leurs problèmes.

Des thérapies créatives sont parfois utilisées, notamment la musicothérapie, l'art-thérapie ou la dramathérapie.

Des ajustements au style de vie et des mesures de soutien sont souvent utilisés, notamment le soutien par les pairs, les groupes d'entraide pour la santé mentale et le logement accompagné ou l'emploi assisté (y compris les entreprises sociales).

Certains préconisent des compléments alimentaires. Des aménagements raisonnables (ajustements et soutiens) peuvent être mis en place pour aider une personne à faire face et à réussir dans des environnements malgré une incapacité potentielle liée à des problèmes de santé mentale.

Cela pourrait inclure un animal de soutien émotionnel ou un chien d'assistance psychiatrique spécialement formé.

Depuis 2019, le cannabis n'est spécifiquement pas recommandé comme traitement.


== Épidémiologie ==


Les troubles mentaux sont fréquents.

Dans le monde, plus d'une personne sur trois dans la plupart des pays rapporte des critères suffisants pour au moins un à un moment donné de leur vie.

Aux États-Unis, 46% se qualifient pour une maladie mentale à un moment donné.

Une enquête en cours indique que les troubles anxieux sont les plus courants dans tous les pays sauf un, suivis des troubles de l'humeur dans tous les pays sauf deux, tandis que les troubles liés à la toxicomanie et les troubles du contrôle des impulsions étaient systématiquement moins répandus.

Les taux variaient selon la région. Un examen des enquêtes sur les troubles anxieux dans différents pays a révélé des estimations moyennes de la prévalence au cours de la vie de 16,6 %, les femmes ayant des taux plus élevés en moyenne.

Un examen des enquêtes sur les troubles de l'humeur dans différents pays a révélé des taux à vie de 6,7 % pour le trouble dépressif majeur (plus élevé dans certaines études et chez les femmes) et de 0,8 % pour le trouble bipolaire I. Aux États-Unis, la fréquence du trouble est : trouble anxieux ( 28,8 %), trouble de l'humeur (20,8 %), trouble du contrôle des impulsions (24,8 %) ou trouble lié à l'utilisation de substances (14,6 %). pour au moins un des troubles du DSM-IV évalués, qui comprenaient les troubles de l'humeur (13,9 %), les troubles anxieux (13,6 %) ou les troubles liés à l'alcool (5,2 %).

Environ un sur dix répondait aux critères dans un délai de 12 mois.

Les femmes et les jeunes des deux sexes ont montré plus de cas de la maladie.

Une revue de 2005 des enquêtes dans 16 pays européens a révélé que 27% des Européens adultes sont touchés par au moins un trouble mental sur une période de 12 mois. Une revue internationale des études sur la prévalence de la schizophrénie a trouvé un chiffre moyen (médian) de 0,4 % pour la prévalence à vie ; il était systématiquement plus faible dans les pays les plus pauvres. Les études sur la prévalence des troubles de la personnalité (TP) ont été moins nombreuses et à plus petite échelle, mais une vaste enquête norvégienne a révélé une prévalence sur cinq ans de près de 1 sur 7 (13,4 %).

Les taux de troubles spécifiques variaient de 0,8 % à 2,8 %, différant selon les pays, et selon le sexe, le niveau d'éducation et d'autres facteurs.

Une enquête américaine sur le dépistage accidentel des troubles de la personnalité a révélé un taux de 14,79 %. Environ 7 % d'un échantillon pédiatrique préscolaire ont reçu un diagnostic psychiatrique dans une étude clinique, et environ 10 % des enfants de 1 et 2 ans ont reçu un dépistage du développement. ont été évalués comme ayant des problèmes émotionnels / comportementaux importants sur la base des rapports des parents et des pédiatres. Alors que les taux de troubles psychologiques sont souvent les mêmes pour les hommes et les femmes, les femmes ont tendance à avoir un taux plus élevé de dépression.

Chaque année, 73 millions de femmes sont touchées par une dépression majeure et le suicide est classé au 7e rang des causes de décès chez les femmes âgées de 20 à 59 ans.

Les troubles dépressifs représentent près de 41,9 % des incapacités liées aux troubles neuropsychiatriques chez les femmes contre 29,3 % chez les hommes.


== Historique ==



=== Civilisations anciennes ===

Les civilisations anciennes ont décrit et traité un certain nombre de troubles mentaux.

Les maladies mentales étaient bien connues dans l'ancienne Mésopotamie, où les maladies et les troubles mentaux étaient censés être causés par des divinités spécifiques.

Parce que les mains symbolisaient le contrôle sur une personne, les maladies mentales étaient connues sous le nom de «mains» de certaines divinités.

Une maladie psychologique était connue sous le nom de Qāt Ištar, signifiant "Main d'Ishtar".

D'autres étaient connus sous le nom de "Main de Shamash", "Main du Fantôme" et "Main du Dieu".

Les descriptions de ces maladies sont cependant si vagues qu'il est généralement impossible de déterminer à quelles maladies elles correspondent dans la terminologie moderne.

Les médecins mésopotamiens tenaient un registre détaillé des hallucinations de leurs patients et leur attribuaient des significations spirituelles.

La famille royale d'Elam était connue pour ses membres souffrant fréquemment de folie.

Les Grecs ont inventé des termes pour la mélancolie, l'hystérie et la phobie et ont développé la théorie de l'humourisme.

Des troubles mentaux ont été décrits et des traitements développés en Perse, en Arabie et dans le monde islamique médiéval.


=== Europe ===



==== Moyen Âge ====
Les conceptions de la folie au Moyen Âge dans l'Europe chrétienne étaient un mélange de divin, diabolique, magique et humoristique, et transcendantal.

Au début de la période moderne, certaines personnes atteintes de troubles mentaux peuvent avoir été victimes de la chasse aux sorcières.

Bien que tous les sorciers et sorciers accusés n'étaient pas des malades mentaux, tous les malades mentaux étaient considérés comme des sorciers ou des sorciers.

De nombreux termes pour les troubles mentaux qui ont trouvé leur place dans l'usage quotidien sont devenus populaires pour la première fois aux XVIe et XVIIe siècles.


==== XVIIIe siècle ====

À la fin du XVIIe siècle et au siècle des Lumières, la folie était de plus en plus considérée comme un phénomène physique organique sans lien avec l'âme ou la responsabilité morale.

La prise en charge des demandeurs d'asile était souvent dure et traitait les gens comme des animaux sauvages, mais vers la fin du XVIIIe siècle, un mouvement de traitement moral s'est progressivement développé.

Des descriptions claires de certains syndromes peuvent être rares avant le 19ème siècle.


==== XIXe siècle ====
L'industrialisation et la croissance démographique ont entraîné une expansion massive du nombre et de la taille des asiles d'aliénés dans tous les pays occidentaux au XIXe siècle.

De nombreux schémas de classification et termes de diagnostic différents ont été développés par différentes autorités, et le terme psychiatrie a été inventé (1808), bien que les surintendants médicaux soient encore connus sous le nom d'aliénistes.


==== XXème siècle ====

Le tournant du XXe siècle a vu le développement de la psychanalyse, qui viendra plus tard au premier plan, avec le schéma de classification de Kraepelin.

Les «détenus» d'asile étaient de plus en plus appelés «patients» et les asiles étaient renommés hôpitaux.


=== Europe et États-Unis ===


Au début du XXe siècle aux États-Unis, un mouvement d'hygiène mentale s'est développé, visant à prévenir les troubles mentaux.

La psychologie clinique et le travail social se sont développés en tant que professions.

La Première Guerre mondiale a vu une augmentation massive des conditions qui ont été qualifiées de «choc d'obus».
La Seconde Guerre mondiale a vu le développement aux États-Unis d'un nouveau manuel psychiatrique pour catégoriser les troubles mentaux, qui, avec les systèmes existants de collecte de recensement et de statistiques hospitalières, a conduit au premier Manuel diagnostique et statistique des troubles mentaux.

La Classification internationale des maladies (CIM) a également développé une section sur les troubles mentaux.

Le terme stress, issu des travaux d'endocrinologie dans les années 1930, est de plus en plus appliqué aux troubles mentaux.
L'électroconvulsivothérapie, l'insulinothérapie par choc, les lobotomies et la chlorpromazine neuroleptique ont été utilisées au milieu du siècle.

Dans les années 1960, le concept de maladie mentale lui-même a été contesté à de nombreuses reprises.

Ces défis sont venus de psychiatres comme Thomas Szasz qui ont soutenu que la maladie mentale était un mythe utilisé pour masquer les conflits moraux ; des sociologues comme Erving Goffman qui ont dit que la maladie mentale n'était qu'un autre exemple de la façon dont la société étiquette et contrôle les non-conformistes ; des psychologues du comportement qui ont contesté la dépendance fondamentale de la psychiatrie à des phénomènes non observables ; et des militants des droits des homosexuels qui ont critiqué l'inscription de l'APA sur l'homosexualité en tant que trouble mental.

Une étude publiée dans Science par Rosenhan a reçu beaucoup de publicité et a été considérée comme une attaque contre l'efficacité du diagnostic psychiatrique. La désinstitutionnalisation s'est progressivement produite en Occident, les hôpitaux psychiatriques isolés étant fermés au profit des services de santé mentale communautaires.

Un mouvement de consommateurs/survivants a pris de l'ampleur.

D'autres types de médicaments psychiatriques ont progressivement été utilisés, tels que les «énergisants psychiques» (plus tard les antidépresseurs) et le lithium.

Les benzodiazépines ont été largement utilisées dans les années 1970 pour l'anxiété et la dépression, jusqu'à ce que des problèmes de dépendance réduisent leur popularité.
Les progrès des neurosciences, de la génétique et de la psychologie ont conduit à de nouveaux programmes de recherche.

La thérapie cognitivo-comportementale et d'autres psychothérapies se sont développées.

Le DSM puis la CIM ont adopté de nouvelles classifications basées sur des critères, et le nombre de diagnostics "officiels" a connu une forte expansion.

Au cours des années 1990, de nouveaux antidépresseurs de type ISRS sont devenus certains des médicaments les plus largement prescrits dans le monde, tout comme les antipsychotiques plus tard.

Toujours au cours des années 1990, une approche de récupération s'est développée.


== Société et culture ==


Différentes sociétés ou cultures, voire différents individus dans une sous-culture, peuvent ne pas être d'accord sur ce qui constitue un fonctionnement biologique et psychologique optimal ou pathologique.

La recherche a démontré que les cultures varient dans l'importance relative accordée, par exemple, au bonheur, à l'autonomie ou aux relations sociales pour le plaisir.

De même, le fait qu'un modèle de comportement soit valorisé, accepté, encouragé ou même statistiquement normatif dans une culture ne signifie pas nécessairement qu'il est propice à un fonctionnement psychologique optimal.
Les gens de toutes les cultures trouvent certains comportements bizarres ou même incompréhensibles.

Mais ce qu'ils ressentent comme bizarre ou incompréhensible est ambigu et subjectif.

Ces différences de détermination peuvent devenir très controversées.

Le processus par lequel les conditions et les difficultés en viennent à être définies et traitées comme des conditions et problèmes médicaux, et relèvent ainsi de l'autorité des médecins et autres professionnels de la santé, est connu sous le nom de médicalisation ou pathologisation.


=== Religions ===


Les expériences et croyances religieuses, spirituelles ou transpersonnelles répondent à de nombreux critères de troubles délirants ou psychotiques.

Il peut parfois être démontré qu'une croyance ou une expérience produit de la détresse ou une incapacité - la norme ordinaire pour juger des troubles mentaux.

Il existe un lien entre la religion et la schizophrénie, un trouble mental complexe caractérisé par une difficulté à reconnaître la réalité, à réguler les réponses émotionnelles et à penser de manière claire et logique.

Les personnes atteintes de schizophrénie signalent généralement un certain type d'illusion religieuse, et la religion elle-même peut être un déclencheur de la schizophrénie.


=== Mouvements ===


La psychiatrie a souvent été controversée et le terme antipsychiatrie a été inventé par le psychiatre David Cooper en 1967.

Le message anti-psychiatrique est que les traitements psychiatriques sont finalement plus dommageables qu'utiles pour les patients, et l'histoire de la psychiatrie implique ce qui peut maintenant être considéré comme des traitements dangereux.

La thérapie électroconvulsive était l'une d'entre elles, qui a été largement utilisée entre les années 1930 et les années 1960.

La lobotomie était une autre pratique qui a finalement été considérée comme trop invasive et brutale.

Le diazépam et d'autres sédatifs étaient parfois sur-prescrits, ce qui a conduit à une épidémie de dépendance.

On s'est également inquiété de la forte augmentation de la prescription de médicaments psychiatriques pour les enfants.

Certains psychiatres charismatiques sont venus personnifier le mouvement contre la psychiatrie.

Le plus influent d'entre eux était RD

Laing qui a écrit une série de livres à succès, dont The Divided Self.

Thomas Szasz a écrit Le mythe de la maladie mentale.

Certains groupes d'anciens patients sont devenus des antipsychiatres militants, se qualifiant souvent de survivants.

Giorgio Antonucci a interrogé les fondements de la psychiatrie à travers son travail sur le démantèlement de deux hôpitaux psychiatriques (dans la ville d'Imola), mené de 1973 à 1996.
Le mouvement des usagers/survivants (également connu sous le nom de mouvement des usagers/survivants) est composé d'individus (et d'organisations qui les représentent) qui sont des clients des services de santé mentale ou qui se considèrent comme des survivants d'interventions psychiatriques.

Les militants font campagne pour améliorer les services de santé mentale et pour plus d'implication et d'autonomisation au sein des services de santé mentale, des politiques et de la société en général.

Les organisations de défense des patients se sont développées avec l'augmentation de la désinstitutionnalisation dans les pays développés, s'efforçant de remettre en question les stéréotypes, la stigmatisation et l'exclusion associés aux troubles psychiatriques.

Il existe également un mouvement pour les droits des aidants qui aide et soutient les personnes souffrant de troubles mentaux, qui peuvent être des proches, et qui travaillent souvent dans des circonstances difficiles et chronophages avec peu de reconnaissance et sans rémunération.

Un mouvement anti-psychiatrique remet fondamentalement en question la théorie et la pratique psychiatriques dominantes, notamment en affirmant dans certains cas que les concepts et les diagnostics psychiatriques de « maladie mentale » ne sont ni réels ni utiles. Alternativement, un mouvement pour la santé mentale mondiale a émergé, défini comme « le domaine d'étude, de recherche et de pratique qui accorde la priorité à l'amélioration de la santé mentale et à la réalisation de l'équité en matière de santé mentale pour tous dans le monde ».


=== Préjugés culturels ===


Les directives diagnostiques actuelles, à savoir le DSM et dans une certaine mesure la CIM, ont été critiquées comme ayant une perspective fondamentalement euro-américaine.

Les opposants soutiennent que même lorsque des critères de diagnostic sont utilisés dans différentes cultures, cela ne signifie pas que les concepts sous-jacents ont une validité au sein de ces cultures, car même une application fiable ne peut prouver que la cohérence, pas la légitimité.

Prônant une approche plus sensible à la culture, des critiques tels que Carl Bell et Marcello Maviglia soutiennent que la diversité culturelle et ethnique des individus est souvent ignorée par les chercheurs et les prestataires de services. Le psychiatre interculturel Arthur Kleinman soutient que le parti pris occidental est ironiquement illustré dans l'introduction des facteurs culturels au DSM-IV.

Les troubles ou les concepts des cultures non occidentales ou non dominantes sont décrits comme «liés à la culture», alors que les diagnostics psychiatriques standard ne reçoivent aucune qualification culturelle, révélant à Kleinman une hypothèse sous-jacente selon laquelle les phénomènes culturels occidentaux sont universels.

La vision négative de Kleinman envers le syndrome lié à la culture est largement partagée par d'autres critiques interculturels.

Les réponses courantes comprenaient à la fois la déception face au grand nombre de troubles mentaux non occidentaux documentés encore laissés de côté et la frustration que même ceux inclus sont souvent mal interprétés ou mal représentés. De nombreux psychiatres traditionnels sont mécontents des nouveaux diagnostics liés à la culture, bien que pour des raisons en partie différentes.

Robert Spitzer, l'un des principaux architectes du DSM-III, a fait valoir que l'ajout de formulations culturelles était une tentative d'apaiser les critiques culturels et a déclaré qu'elles manquaient de justification ou de soutien scientifique.

Spitzer postule également que les nouveaux diagnostics liés à la culture sont rarement utilisés, affirmant que les diagnostics standard s'appliquent quelle que soit la culture impliquée.

En général, l'opinion psychiatrique dominante reste que si une catégorie de diagnostic est valide, les facteurs interculturels sont soit non pertinents, soit significatifs uniquement pour des présentations de symptômes spécifiques. Les conceptions cliniques de la maladie mentale chevauchent également les valeurs personnelles et culturelles dans le domaine de la moralité, de sorte que à tel point qu'on prétend parfois qu'il est impossible de séparer les deux sans redéfinir fondamentalement l'essence d'être une personne particulière dans une société.

En psychiatrie clinique, une détresse et une incapacité persistantes indiquent un trouble interne nécessitant un traitement ; mais dans un autre contexte, ces mêmes détresse et handicap peuvent être considérés comme un indicateur de lutte émotionnelle et de la nécessité de résoudre des problèmes sociaux et structurels.

Cette dichotomie a conduit certains universitaires et cliniciens à préconiser une conceptualisation postmoderne de la détresse mentale et du bien-être. contrairement à l'évitement présumé de la communauté psychiatrique traditionnelle de toute implication explicite avec la moralité ou la culture.

Dans de nombreux pays, il y a des tentatives pour contester les préjugés perçus contre les groupes minoritaires, y compris le racisme institutionnel présumé au sein des services psychiatriques.

Il y a aussi des tentatives en cours pour améliorer la sensibilité interculturelle professionnelle.


=== Lois et politiques ===


Les trois quarts des pays du monde ont une législation sur la santé mentale.

L'admission obligatoire dans les établissements de santé mentale (également connue sous le nom d'internement involontaire) est un sujet controversé.

Elle peut empiéter sur la liberté personnelle et le droit de choisir, et comporter le risque d'abus pour des raisons politiques, sociales et autres ; pourtant, cela peut potentiellement prévenir les dommages à soi-même et aux autres, et aider certaines personnes à faire valoir leur droit aux soins de santé lorsqu'elles peuvent être incapables de décider dans leur propre intérêt.

Pour cette raison, il s'agit d'une préoccupation de l'éthique médicale.
Toutes les lois sur la santé mentale axées sur les droits de l'homme exigent la preuve de la présence d'un trouble mental tel que défini par les normes internationalement acceptées, mais le type et la gravité du trouble qui compte peuvent varier selon les juridictions.

Les deux motifs les plus souvent utilisés pour l'admission non volontaire sont la probabilité sérieuse d'un danger immédiat ou imminent pour soi-même ou pour autrui, et la nécessité d'un traitement.

Les demandes d'admission involontaire d'une personne proviennent généralement d'un praticien de la santé mentale, d'un membre de la famille, d'un parent proche ou d'un tuteur.

Les lois axées sur les droits de l'homme stipulent généralement que les médecins indépendants ou d'autres praticiens de la santé mentale accrédités doivent examiner le patient séparément et qu'il doit y avoir un examen régulier et limité dans le temps par un organe d'examen indépendant.

L'individu devrait également avoir un accès personnel à un plaidoyer indépendant.
Pour qu'un traitement involontaire soit administré (par la force si nécessaire), il doit être démontré qu'un individu n'a pas la capacité mentale de donner un consentement éclairé (c'est-à-dire de comprendre les informations sur le traitement et ses implications, et donc d'être en mesure de faire un choix éclairé d'accepter ou de refuser).

Des contestations judiciaires dans certains domaines ont abouti à des décisions de la Cour suprême selon lesquelles une personne n'a pas à être d'accord avec la caractérisation par un psychiatre des problèmes comme constituant une "maladie", ni à être d'accord avec la condamnation d'un psychiatre en matière de médicaments, mais seulement à reconnaître les problèmes et l'information sur les options de traitement. Le consentement par procuration (également connu sous le nom de prise de décision par substitution ou par substitution) peut être transféré à un représentant personnel, un membre de la famille ou un tuteur légalement nommé.

De plus, les patients peuvent être en mesure de faire, lorsqu'ils sont considérés comme bien portants, une directive préalable stipulant comment ils souhaitent être traités s'ils devaient être jugés incapables mentalement à l'avenir.

Le droit à une prise de décision assistée, où une personne est aidée à comprendre et à choisir des options de traitement avant qu'elle ne puisse être déclarée incapable, peut également être inclus dans la législation.

Il devrait à tout le moins y avoir une prise de décision partagée dans la mesure du possible.

Les lois sur le traitement involontaire sont de plus en plus étendues aux personnes vivant dans la communauté, par exemple les lois sur l'engagement ambulatoire (connues sous différents noms) sont utilisées en Nouvelle-Zélande, en Australie, au Royaume-Uni et dans la plupart des États-Unis.
L'Organisation mondiale de la santé rapporte que dans de nombreux cas, la législation nationale sur la santé mentale prive les personnes atteintes de troubles mentaux de leurs droits au lieu de les protéger, et est souvent obsolète.

En 1991, les Nations Unies ont adopté les Principes pour la protection des personnes atteintes de maladie mentale et l'amélioration des soins de santé mentale, qui établissent des normes minimales de pratique en matière de droits de l'homme dans le domaine de la santé mentale.

En 2006, l'ONU a officiellement adopté la Convention relative aux droits des personnes handicapées pour protéger et renforcer les droits et les opportunités des personnes handicapées, y compris celles souffrant de troubles psychosociaux. Le terme folie, parfois utilisé familièrement comme synonyme de maladie mentale, est souvent utilisé techniquement comme un terme juridique.

La défense d'aliénation mentale peut être utilisée dans un procès judiciaire (connue sous le nom de défense de trouble mental dans certains pays).


=== Perception et discrimination ===



==== Stigmate ====
La stigmatisation sociale associée aux troubles mentaux est un problème répandu.

Le Surgeon General des États-Unis a déclaré en 1999 que : "Puissante et omniprésente, la stigmatisation empêche les gens de reconnaître leurs propres problèmes de santé mentale, et encore moins de les divulguer aux autres." Aux États-Unis, les minorités raciales et ethniques sont plus susceptibles de souffrir de troubles de santé mentale, souvent dus à un statut socio-économique faible et à la discrimination.

À Taïwan, les personnes atteintes de troubles mentaux sont sujettes à la perception erronée du grand public selon laquelle les causes profondes des troubles mentaux sont "trop ​​de réflexion", "avoir beaucoup de temps et rien de mieux à faire", "stagnation", "pas sérieux dans la vie ", "ne pas accorder suffisamment d'attention aux affaires de la vie réelle", "mentalement faible", "refusant d'être résilient", "revenant à des efforts perfectionnistes", "pas de bravoure" et ainsi de suite. La discrimination à l'emploi jouerait un rôle important partie du taux de chômage élevé chez les personnes ayant reçu un diagnostic de maladie mentale.

Une étude australienne a révélé que le fait d'avoir une maladie mentale est un plus grand obstacle à l'emploi qu'un handicap physique.

Les malades mentaux sont stigmatisés dans la société chinoise et ne peuvent pas se marier légalement. Des efforts sont entrepris dans le monde entier pour éliminer la stigmatisation de la maladie mentale, bien que les méthodes et les résultats utilisés aient parfois été critiqués.


==== Médias et grand public ====

La couverture médiatique de la maladie mentale comprend principalement des représentations négatives et péjoratives, par exemple, de l'incompétence, de la violence ou de la criminalité, avec beaucoup moins de couverture des questions positives telles que les réalisations ou les questions relatives aux droits de l'homme.

On pense que de telles représentations négatives, y compris dans les dessins animés pour enfants, contribuent à la stigmatisation et aux attitudes négatives du public et des personnes souffrant elles-mêmes de problèmes de santé mentale, bien que la prévalence de représentations cinématographiques plus sensibles ou graves ait augmenté. Aux États-Unis, le Carter Center a créé des bourses pour les journalistes en Afrique du Sud, aux États-Unis et en Roumanie, afin de permettre aux journalistes de faire des recherches et d'écrire des articles sur des sujets liés à la santé mentale.

L'ancienne première dame des États-Unis, Rosalynn Carter, a lancé les bourses non seulement pour former les journalistes à discuter avec sensibilité et précision de la santé mentale et de la maladie mentale, mais aussi pour augmenter le nombre d'articles sur ces sujets dans les médias.

Il y a aussi une Journée mondiale de la santé mentale qui, aux États-Unis et au Canada, tombe dans le cadre d'une semaine de sensibilisation aux maladies mentales.
Il a été constaté que le grand public a un fort stéréotype de dangerosité et de désir de distance sociale vis-à-vis des personnes décrites comme souffrant de troubles mentaux.

Une enquête nationale américaine a révélé qu'un pourcentage plus élevé de personnes évaluent les personnes décrites comme présentant les caractéristiques d'un trouble mental comme "susceptibles de faire quelque chose de violent envers les autres", par rapport au pourcentage de personnes qui évaluent les personnes décrites comme étant troublées. dans les médias ont inclus des personnages principaux vivant avec succès et gérant une maladie mentale, y compris dans le trouble bipolaire dans Homeland (2011) et le trouble de stress post-traumatique dans Iron Man 3 (2013).


==== Violences ====
Malgré l'opinion publique ou médiatique, des études nationales ont indiqué que la maladie mentale grave ne prédit pas de manière indépendante un comportement violent futur, en moyenne, et n'est pas une cause majeure de violence dans la société.

Il existe une association statistique avec divers facteurs liés à la violence (chez n'importe qui), comme la consommation de substances et divers facteurs personnels, sociaux et économiques.

Une étude de 2015 a révélé qu'aux États-Unis, environ 4 % de la violence est attribuable aux personnes diagnostiquées avec une maladie mentale, et une étude de 2014 a révélé que 7,5 % des crimes commis par des personnes atteintes de maladie mentale étaient directement liés aux symptômes de leur maladie mentale.

La majorité des personnes atteintes d'une maladie mentale grave ne sont jamais violentes. En fait, les résultats indiquent systématiquement qu'il est beaucoup plus probable que les personnes atteintes d'une maladie mentale grave vivant dans la communauté soient les victimes plutôt que les auteurs de la violence.

Dans une étude portant sur des personnes ayant reçu un diagnostic de « maladie mentale grave » vivant dans un centre-ville américain, un quart ont été victimes d'au moins un crime violent au cours d'une année, une proportion onze fois plus élevée que la population du centre-ville. -moyenne de la ville, et plus élevée dans toutes les catégories de crimes, y compris les agressions violentes et les vols.

Cependant, les personnes ayant reçu un diagnostic peuvent avoir plus de mal à obtenir des poursuites, en partie à cause des préjugés et du fait qu'elles sont considérées comme moins crédibles. définis par, ou sont intrinsèquement associés à, des problèmes de conduite et à la violence.

Il existe des résultats contradictoires quant à la mesure dans laquelle certains symptômes spécifiques, notamment certains types de psychose (hallucinations ou délires) qui peuvent survenir dans des troubles tels que la schizophrénie, les troubles délirants ou les troubles de l'humeur, sont liés à un risque accru de violence grave en moyenne.

Les facteurs médiateurs des actes violents, cependant, se révèlent le plus systématiquement être principalement des facteurs sociodémographiques et socioéconomiques tels que le fait d'être jeune, de sexe masculin, d'un statut socioéconomique inférieur et, en particulier, la consommation de substances (y compris la consommation d'alcool) à laquelle certains les personnes peuvent être particulièrement vulnérables. Les cas très médiatisés ont fait craindre que les crimes graves, tels que les homicides, aient augmenté en raison de la désinstitutionnalisation, mais les preuves n'étayent pas cette conclusion.

La violence qui se produit en relation avec des troubles mentaux (contre des malades mentaux ou par des malades mentaux) se produit généralement dans le contexte d'interactions sociales complexes, souvent dans un cadre familial plutôt qu'entre étrangers.

C'est également un problème dans les établissements de soins de santé et dans la communauté au sens large.


== Santé mentale ==


La reconnaissance et la compréhension des problèmes de santé mentale ont changé au fil du temps et d'une culture à l'autre et il existe encore des variations dans la définition, l'évaluation et la classification, bien que les critères des lignes directrices standard soient largement utilisés.

Dans de nombreux cas, il semble y avoir un continuum entre la santé mentale et la maladie mentale, ce qui rend le diagnostic complexe.39 Selon l'Organisation mondiale de la santé (OMS), plus d'un tiers des personnes dans la plupart des pays signalent des problèmes à un moment de leur vie qui répondre aux critères de diagnostic d'un ou plusieurs des types courants de troubles mentaux.

Corey M Keyes a créé un modèle à deux continuums de la maladie mentale et de la santé qui soutient que les deux sont liés, mais des dimensions distinctes : un continuum indique la présence ou l'absence de santé mentale, l'autre la présence ou l'absence de maladie mentale.

Par exemple, les personnes ayant une santé mentale optimale peuvent également avoir une maladie mentale, et les personnes qui n'ont pas de maladie mentale peuvent également avoir une mauvaise santé mentale.


== Autres animaux ==


La psychopathologie chez les primates non humains est étudiée depuis le milieu du XXe siècle.

Plus de 20 modèles de comportement chez les chimpanzés en captivité ont été documentés comme (statistiquement) anormaux en termes de fréquence, de gravité ou d'étrangeté, dont certains ont également été observés dans la nature.

Les grands singes captifs présentent des anomalies comportementales flagrantes telles que la stéréotypie des mouvements, l'automutilation, des réactions émotionnelles perturbées (principalement la peur ou l'agressivité) envers leurs compagnons, le manque de communications typiques de l'espèce et une impuissance acquise généralisée.

Dans certains cas, on suppose que ces comportements sont équivalents à des symptômes associés à des troubles psychiatriques chez l'homme tels que la dépression, les troubles anxieux, les troubles de l'alimentation et le trouble de stress post-traumatique.

Les concepts de troubles de la personnalité antisociale, borderline et schizoïde ont également été appliqués aux grands singes non humains. Le risque d'anthropomorphisme est souvent soulevé concernant de telles comparaisons, et l'évaluation des animaux non humains ne peut pas intégrer les preuves de la communication linguistique.

Cependant, les preuves disponibles peuvent aller des comportements non verbaux - y compris les réponses physiologiques et les affichages faciaux homologues et les énoncés acoustiques - aux études neurochimiques.

Il est souligné que la classification psychiatrique humaine est souvent basée sur la description statistique et le jugement des comportements (en particulier lorsque la parole ou le langage est altéré) et que l'utilisation de l'auto-évaluation verbale est elle-même problématique et peu fiable. La psychopathologie a généralement été retracée, au moins en captivité, à des conditions d'élevage défavorables telles que la séparation précoce des nourrissons de leurs mères; privation sensorielle précoce; et de longues périodes d'isolement social.

Des études ont également indiqué une variation individuelle du tempérament, comme la sociabilité ou l'impulsivité.

Les causes particulières des problèmes en captivité ont inclus l'intégration d'étrangers dans des groupes existants et un manque d'espace individuel, dans lequel contexte certains comportements pathologiques ont également été considérés comme des mécanismes d'adaptation.

Les interventions correctives ont inclus des programmes de resocialisation soigneux et personnalisés, une thérapie comportementale, un enrichissement de l'environnement et, à de rares occasions, des médicaments psychiatriques.

Il a été constaté que la socialisation fonctionne 90 % du temps chez les chimpanzés perturbés, bien que la restauration de la sexualité fonctionnelle et de la prestation de soins ne soit souvent pas atteinte. Les chercheurs du laboratoire tentent parfois de développer des modèles animaux de troubles mentaux humains, notamment en induisant ou en traitant des , neurologique, chimique ou comportementale, mais cela a été critiqué pour des raisons empiriques et contesté pour des raisons de droits des animaux.


== Remarques ==



== Lectures complémentaires ==




https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mental_disorder
