

SKELETAL MUSCLE


Skeletal muscles (commonly referred to as muscles) are organs of the vertebrate muscular system that are mostly attached by tendons to bones of the skeleton. 

The muscle cells of skeletal muscles are much longer than in the other types of muscle tissue, and are often known as muscle fibers. 

The muscle tissue of a skeletal muscle is striated – having a striped appearance due to the arrangement of the sarcomeres.

Skeletal muscles are voluntary muscles under the control of the somatic nervous system. 

The other types of muscle are cardiac muscle which is also striated and smooth muscle which is non-striated; both of these types of muscle tissue are classified as involuntary, or, under the control of the autonomic nervous system.

A skeletal muscle contains multiple fascicles – bundles of muscle fibers. 

Each individual fiber, and each muscle is surrounded by a type of connective tissue layer of fascia. 

Muscle fibers are formed from the fusion of developmental myoblasts in a process known as myogenesis resulting in long multinucleated cells. 

In these cells the nuclei termed myonuclei are located along the inside of the cell membrane. 

Muscle fibers also have multiple mitochondria to meet energy needs.
Muscle fibers are in turn composed of myofibrils. 

The myofibrils are composed of actin and myosin filaments called myofilaments, repeated in units called sarcomeres, which are the basic functional, contractile units of the muscle fiber necessary for muscle contraction. 

Muscles are predominantly powered by the oxidation of fats and carbohydrates, but anaerobic chemical reactions are also used, particularly by fast twitch fibers. 

These chemical reactions produce adenosine triphosphate (ATP) molecules that are used to power the movement of the myosin heads.


== Structure ==

=== Gross anatomy ===

There are more than 600 skeletal muscles in the human body, making up around 40% to 50% of body weight. 

Most muscles occur in bilaterally-placed pairs to serve both sides of the body. 

Muscles are often classed as groups of muscles that work together to carry out an action. 

In the torso there are several major muscle groups including the pectoral, and abdominal muscles; intrinsic and extrinsic muscles are subdivisions of muscle groups in the hand, foot, tongue, and extraocular muscles of the eye. 

Muscles are also grouped into compartments including four groups in the arm, and the four groups in the leg.

Apart from the contractile part of a muscle consisting of its fibers, a muscle contains a non-contractile part of dense fibrous connective tissue that makes up the tendon at each end. 

The tendons attach the muscles to bones to give skeletal movement. 

The length of a muscle includes the tendons. 

Connective tissue is present in all muscles as deep fascia. 

Deep fascia specialises within muscles to enclose each muscle fiber as endomysium; each muscle fascicle as perimysium, and each individual muscle as epimysium. 

Together these layers are called mysia. 

Deep fascia also separates the groups of muscles into muscle compartments.

Two types of sensory receptors found in muscles are muscle spindles, and Golgi tendon organs. 

Muscle spindles are stretch receptors located in the muscle belly. 

Golgi tendon organs are proprioceptors located at the myotendinous junction that inform of a muscle's tension.


==== Skeletal muscle fibers ====

Skeletal muscle cells are the individual contractile cells within a muscle, and are often termed as muscle fibers. 

A single muscle such as the biceps in a young adult male contains around 253,000 muscle fibers.

Skeletal muscle fibers are the only muscle cells that are multinucleated with the nuclei often referred to as myonuclei. 

This occurs during myogenesis with the fusion of myoblasts each contributing a nucleus. 

Fusion depends on muscle-specific proteins known as fusogens called myomaker and myomerger.

Many nuclei are needed by the skeletal muscle cell for the large amounts of proteins and enzymes needed to be produced for the cell's normal functioning. 
 
A single muscle fiber can contain from hundreds to thousands of nuclei. 

A muscle fiber for example in the human biceps with a length of 10 cm can have as many as 3000 nuclei. 

Unlike in a non-muscle cell where the nucleus is centrally positioned, the myonucleus is elongated and located close to the sarcolemma. 

The myonuclei are quite uniformly arranged along the fiber with each nucleus having its own myonuclear domain where it is responsible for supporting the volume of cytoplasm in that particular section of the myofiber.

A group of muscle stem cells known as myosatellite cells, also satellite cells are found between the basement membrane and the sarcolemma of muscle fibers. 

These cells are normally quiescent but can be activated by exercise or pathology to provide additional myonuclei for muscle growth or repair.


==== Attachment to tendons ====

Muscles attach to tendons in a complex interface region known as the musculotendinous junction also known as the myotendinous junction, an area specialised for the primary transmission of force. 

At the muscle-tendon interface, force is transmitted from the sarcomeres in the muscle cells to the tendon. 

Muscles and tendons develop in close association, and after their joining at the myotendinous junction they constitute a dynamic unit for the transmission of force from muscle contraction to the skeletal system.


==== Arrangement of muscle fibers ====

Muscle architecture refers to the arrangement of muscle fibers relative to the axis of force generation, which runs from a muscle's origin to its insertion. 

The usual arrangements are types of parallel, and types of pennate muscle. 

In parallel muscles the fascicles run parallel to the axis of force generation, but the fascicles can vary in their relationship to one another, and to their tendons. 

These variations are seen in fusiform, strap, and convergent muscles. 

A convergent muscle has a triangular or fan-shape as the fibers converge at its insertion and are fanned out broadly at the origin. 

A less common example of a parallel muscle is a circular muscle such as the orbicularis oculi, in which the fibers are longitudinally arranged, but create a circle from origin to insertion. 

These different architectures, can cause variations in the tension that a muscle can create between its tendons.

The fibers in pennate muscles run at an angle to the axis of force generation. 

This pennation angle reduces the effective force of any individual fiber, as it is effectively pulling off-axis. 

However, because of this angle, more fibers can be packed into the same muscle volume, increasing the physiological cross-sectional area (PCSA). 

This effect is known as fiber packing, and in terms of force generation, it more than overcomes the efficiency-loss of the off-axis orientation. 

The trade-off comes in overall speed of muscle shortening and in the total excursion. 

Overall muscle shortening speed is reduced compared to fiber shortening speed, as is the total distance of shortening. 

All of these effects scale with pennation angle; greater angles lead to greater force due to increased fiber packing and PCSA, but with greater losses in shortening speed and excursion. 

Types of pennate muscle are unipennate, bipennate, and multipennate. 

A unipennate muscle has similarly angled fibers that are on one side of a tendon. 

A bipennate muscle has fibers on two sides of a tendon. 

Multipennate muscles have fibers that are oriented at multiple angles along the force-generating axis, and this is the most general and most common architecture.


=== Muscle fiber growth ===

Muscle fibers grow when exercised and shrink when not in use. 

This is due to the fact that exercise stimulates the increase in myofibrils which increase the overall size of muscle cells. 

Well exercised muscles can not only add more size but can also develop more mitochondria, myoglobin, glycogen and a higher density of capillaries. 

However muscle cells cannot divide to produce new cells, and as a result there are fewer muscle cells in an adult than in a newborn.


=== Muscle naming ===


There are a number of terms used in the naming of muscles including those relating to size, shape, action, location, their orientation, and their number of heads.

By size
brevis means short; longus means long; longissimus means longest; magnus means large; major means larger; maximus means largest; minor means smaller, and minimus smallest; latissimus means widest, and vastus means huge. 

These terms are often used after the particular muscle such as gluteus maximus, and gluteus minimus.

By relative shape
deltoid means triangular; quadratus means having four sides; rhomboideus means having a rhomboid shape; teres means round or cylindrical, and trapezius means having a trapezoid shape; serratus means saw-toothed; orbicularis means circular; pectinate means comblike; piriformis means pear-shaped; platys means flat and gracilis means slender. 

Examples are the pronator teres, and the pronator quadratus.

By action
abductor moving away from the midline; adductor moving towards the midline; depressor moving downwards; elevator moving upwards; flexor moving that decreases an angle; extensor moving that increase an angle or straightens; pronator moving to face down; supinator moving to face upwards; internal rotator rotating towards the body; external rotator rotating away from the body; sphincter decreases the size , and tensor gives tension to; fixator muscles serve to fix a joint in a given position by stabilizing the prime mover whilst other joints are moving.

By number of heads
biceps two; triceps three and quadriceps four.

By location
named after the near main structure such as the temporal muscle (temporalis) near to the temporal bone. 

Also supra- above; infra- below, and sub- under.

By fascicle orientation
Relative to the midline, rectus means parallel to the midline; transverse means perpendicular to the midline, and oblique means diagonal to the midline. 

Relative to the axis of the generation of force – types of parallel, and types of pennate muscles.


== Fiber types ==

Broadly there are two types of muscle fiber: Type I, which is slow, and Type II which are fast. 

Type II has two divisions of type IIA (oxidative), and type IIX (glycolytic), giving three main fiber types. 

These fibers have relatively distinct metabolic, contractile, and motor unit properties. 

The table below differentiates these types of properties. 

These types of properties—while they are partly dependent on the properties of individual fibers—tend to be relevant and measured at the level of the motor unit, rather than individual fiber.


=== Fiber color ===

Traditionally, fibers were categorized depending on their varying color, which is a reflection of myoglobin content. 

Type I fibers appear red due to the high levels of myoglobin. 

Red muscle fibers tend to have more mitochondria and greater local capillary density. 

These fibers are more suited for endurance and are slow to fatigue because they use oxidative metabolism to generate ATP (adenosine triphosphate). 

Less oxidative Type II fibers are white due to relatively low myoglobin and a reliance on glycolytic enzymes.


=== Twitch speed ===

Fibers can also be classified on their twitch capabilities, into fast and slow twitch. 

These traits largely, but not completely, overlap the classifications based on color, ATPase, or MHC.
Some authors define a fast twitch fiber as one in which the myosin can split ATP very quickly. 

These mainly include the ATPase type II and MHC type II fibers. 

However, fast twitch fibers also demonstrate a higher capability for electrochemical transmission of action potentials and a rapid level of calcium release and uptake by the sarcoplasmic reticulum. 

The fast twitch fibers rely on a well-developed, anaerobic, short term, glycolytic system for energy transfer and can contract and develop tension at 2–3 times the rate of slow twitch fibers. 

Fast twitch muscles are much better at generating short bursts of strength or speed than slow muscles, and so fatigue more quickly.

The slow twitch fibers generate energy for ATP re-synthesis by means of a long term system of aerobic energy transfer. 

These mainly include the ATPase type I and MHC type I fibers. 

They tend to have a low activity level of ATPase, a slower speed of contraction with a less well developed glycolytic capacity. 

Fibers that become slow-twitch develop greater numbers of mitochondria and capillaries making them better for prolonged work.

Type distribution
Individual muscles tend to be a mixture of various fiber types, but their proportions vary depending on the actions of that muscle. 

For instance, in humans, the quadriceps muscles contain ~52% type I fibers, while the soleus is ~80% type I. 

The orbicularis oculi muscle of the eye is only ~15% type I. 

Motor units within the muscle, however, have minimal variation between the fibers of that unit. 

It is this fact that makes the size principal of motor unit recruitment viable.

The total number of skeletal muscle fibers has traditionally been thought not to change.

It is believed there are no sex or age differences in fiber distribution; however, proportions of fiber types vary considerably from muscle to muscle and person to person. 

Among different species there is a much variation in the proportions of muscle fiber types.

Sedentary men and women (as well as young children) have 45% type II and 55% type I fibers.

People at the higher end of any sport tend to demonstrate patterns of fiber distribution e.g. endurance athletes show a higher level of type I fibers.

Sprint athletes, on the other hand, require large numbers of type IIX fibers.

Middle-distance event athletes show approximately equal distribution of the two types. 

This is also often the case for power athletes such as throwers and jumpers.

It has been suggested that various types of exercise can induce changes in the fibers of a skeletal muscle.

It is thought that if you perform endurance type events for a sustained period of time, some of the type IIX fibers transform into type IIA fibers. 

However, there is no consensus on the subject.

It may well be that the type IIX fibers show enhancements of the oxidative capacity after high intensity endurance training which brings them to a level at which they are able to perform oxidative metabolism as effectively as slow twitch fibers of untrained subjects. 

This would be brought about by an increase in mitochondrial size and number and the associated related changes, not a change in fiber type.


=== Fiber typing methods ===


There are numerous methods employed for fiber-typing, and confusion between the methods is common among non-experts. 

Two commonly confused methods are histochemical staining for myosin ATPase activity and immunohistochemical staining for myosin heavy chain (MHC) type. 

Myosin ATPase activity is commonly—and correctly—referred to as simply "fiber type", and results from the direct assaying of ATPase activity under various conditions (e.g. pH). 

Myosin heavy chain staining is most accurately referred to as "MHC fiber type", e.g. "MHC IIa fibers", and results from determination of different MHC isoforms. 

These methods are closely related physiologically, as the MHC type is the primary determinant of ATPase activity. 

However, neither of these typing methods is directly metabolic in nature; they do not directly address oxidative or glycolytic capacity of the fiber.

When "type I" or "type II" fibers are referred to generically, this most accurately refers to the sum of numerical fiber types (I vs. 

II) as assessed by myosin ATPase activity staining (e.g. "type II" fibers refers to type IIA + type IIAX + type IIXA ... etc.).

Below is a table showing the relationship between these two methods, limited to fiber types found in humans. 

Subtype capitalization is used in fiber typing vs. 

MHC typing, and some ATPase types actually contain multiple MHC types. 

Also, a subtype B or b is not expressed in humans by either method. 

Early researchers believed humans to express a MHC IIb, which led to the ATPase classification of IIB. 

However, later research showed that the human MHC IIb was in fact IIx, indicating that the IIB is better named IIX. 

IIb is expressed in other mammals, so is still accurately seen (along with IIB) in the literature. 

Non human fiber types include true IIb fibers, IIc, IId, etc.

Further fiber typing methods are less formally delineated, and exist on more of a spectrum. 

They tend to be focused more on metabolic and functional capacities (i.e., oxidative vs. glycolytic, fast vs. slow contraction time). 

As noted above, fiber typing by ATPase or MHC does not directly measure or dictate these parameters. 

However, many of the various methods are mechanistically linked, while others are correlated in vivo. 

For instance, ATPase fiber type is related to contraction speed, because high ATPase activity allows faster crossbridge cycling. 

While ATPase activity is only one component of contraction speed, Type I fibers are "slow", in part, because they have low speeds of ATPase activity in comparison to Type II fibers. 

However, measuring contraction speed is not the same as ATPase fiber typing.


== Microanatomy ==


Skeletal muscle exhibits a distinctive banding pattern when viewed under the microscope due to the arrangement of two contractile proteins myosin, and actin – that are two of the myofilaments in the myofibrils. 

The myosin forms the thick filaments, and actin forms the thin filaments, and are arranged in repeating units called sarcomeres. 

The interaction of both proteins results in muscle contraction.

The sarcomere is attached to other organelles such as the mitochondria by intermediate filaments in the cytoskeleton. 

The costamere attaches the sarcomere to the sarcolemma.Every single organelle and macromolecule of a muscle fiber is arranged to ensure that it meets desired functions. 

The cell membrane is called the sarcolemma with the cytoplasm known as the sarcoplasm. 

In the sarcoplasm are the myofibrils. 

The myofibrils are long protein bundles about one micrometer in diameter. 

Pressed against the inside of the sarcolemma are the unusual flattened myonuclei. 

Between the myofibrils are the mitochondria.

While the muscle fiber does not have smooth endoplasmic cisternae, it contains sarcoplasmic reticulum. 

The sarcoplasmic reticulum surrounds the myofibrils and holds a reserve of the calcium ions needed to cause a muscle contraction. 

Periodically, it has dilated end sacs known as terminal cisternae. 

These cross the muscle fiber from one side to the other. 

In between two terminal cisternae is a tubular infolding called a transverse tubule (T tubule). 

T tubules are the pathways for action potentials to signal the sarcoplasmic reticulum to release calcium, causing a muscle contraction. 

Together, two terminal cisternae and a transverse tubule form a triad.


== Development ==


All muscles are derived from paraxial mesoderm. 

During embryonic development in the process of somitogenesis the paraxial mesoderm is divided along the embryo's length to form somites, corresponding to the segmentation of the body most obviously seen in the vertebral column. 

Each somite has three divisions, sclerotome (which forms vertebrae), dermatome (which forms skin), and myotome (which forms muscle). 

The myotome is divided into two sections, the epimere and hypomere, which form epaxial and hypaxial muscles, respectively. 

The only epaxial muscles in humans are the erector spinae and small vertebral muscles, and are innervated by the dorsal rami of the spinal nerves. 

All other muscles, including those of the limbs are hypaxial, and innervated by the ventral rami of the spinal nerves.

During development, myoblasts (muscle progenitor cells) either remain in the somite to form muscles associated with the vertebral column or migrate out into the body to form all other muscles. 

Myoblast migration is preceded by the formation of connective tissue frameworks, usually formed from the somatic lateral plate mesoderm. 

Myoblasts follow chemical signals to the appropriate locations, where they fuse into elongated multinucleated skeletal muscle cells.

Between the tenth and the eighteenth weeks of gestation, all muscle cells have fast myosin heavy chains; two myotube types become distinguished in the developing fetus – both expressing fast chains but one expressing fast and slow chains. 

Between 10 and 40 per cent of the fibers express the slow myosin chain.

Fiber types are established during embryonic development and are remodelled later in the adult by neural and hormonal influences. 

The population of satellite cells present underneath the basal lamina is necessary for the postnatal development of muscle cells.


== Function ==

The primary function of muscle is contraction. 

Following contraction, skeletal muscle functions as an endocrine organ by secreting myokines – a wide range of cytokines and other peptides that act as signalling molecules. 

Myokines in turn are believed to mediate the health benefits of exercise. 

Myokines are secreted into the bloodstream after muscle contraction. 

Interleukin 6 (IL-6) is the most studied myokine, other muscle contraction-induced myokines include BDNF, FGF21, and SPARC.Muscle also functions to produce body heat. 

Muscle contraction is responsible for producing 85% of the body's heat. 

This heat produced is as a by-product of muscular activity, and is mostly wasted. 

As a homeostatic response to extreme cold, muscles are signaled to trigger contractions of shivering in order to generate heat.


=== Contraction ===


Contraction is achieved by the muscle's structural unit the muscle fiber, and by its functional unit, the motor unit. 

Muscle fibers are excitable cells stimulated by motor neurons. 

The motor unit consists of a motor neuron and the many fibers that it makes contact with. 

A single muscle is stimulated by many motor units. 

Muscle fibers are subject to depolarization by the neurotransmitter acetylcholine, released by the motor neurons at the neuromuscular junctions.

In addition to the actin and myosin myofilaments in the myofibrils that make up the contractile sarcomeres, there are two other important regulatory proteins – troponin and tropomyosin, that make muscle contraction possible. 

These proteins are associated with actin and cooperate to prevent its interaction with myosin. 

Once a cell is sufficiently stimulated, the cell's sarcoplasmic reticulum releases ionic calcium (Ca2+), which then interacts with the regulatory protein troponin. 

Calcium-bound troponin undergoes a conformational change that leads to the movement of tropomyosin, subsequently exposing the myosin-binding sites on actin. 

This allows for myosin and actin ATP-dependent cross-bridge cycling and shortening of the muscle.


==== Excitation-contraction coupling ====

Excitation contraction coupling is the process by which a muscular action potential in the muscle fiber causes the myofibrils to contract. 

This process relies on a direct coupling between the sarcoplasmic reticulum calcium release channel RYR1 (ryanodine receptor 1), and voltage-gated L-type calcium channels (identified as dihydropyridine receptors, DHPRs). 

DHPRs are located on the sarcolemma (which includes the surface sarcolemma and the transverse tubules), while the RyRs reside across the SR membrane. 

The close apposition of a transverse tubule and two SR regions containing RyRs is described as a triad and is predominantly where excitation–contraction coupling takes place. 

Excitation–contraction coupling occurs when depolarization of skeletal muscle cell results in a muscle action potential, which spreads across the cell surface and into the muscle fiber's network of T-tubules, thereby depolarizing the inner portion of the muscle fiber. 

Depolarization of the inner portions activates dihydropyridine receptors in the terminal cisternae, which are in close proximity to ryanodine receptors in the adjacent sarcoplasmic reticulum. 

The activated dihydropyridine receptors physically interact with ryanodine receptors to activate them via foot processes (involving conformational changes that allosterically activates the ryanodine receptors). 

As the ryanodine receptors open, Ca2+ is released from the sarcoplasmic reticulum into the local junctional space and diffuses into the bulk cytoplasm to cause a calcium spark. 

Note that the sarcoplasmic reticulum has a large calcium buffering capacity partially due to a calcium-binding protein called calsequestrin. 

The near synchronous activation of thousands of calcium sparks by the action potential causes a cell-wide increase in calcium giving rise to the upstroke of the calcium transient. 

The Ca2+ released into the cytosol binds to Troponin C by the actin filaments, to allow crossbridge cycling, producing force and, in some situations, motion. 

The sarco/endoplasmic reticulum calcium-ATPase (SERCA) actively pumps Ca2+ back into the sarcoplasmic reticulum. 

As Ca2+ declines back to resting levels, the force declines and relaxation occurs.


==== Muscle movement ====

The efferent leg of the peripheral nervous system is responsible for conveying commands to the muscles and glands, and is ultimately responsible for voluntary movement. 

Nerves move muscles in response to voluntary and autonomic (involuntary) signals from the brain. 

Deep muscles, superficial muscles, muscles of the face and internal muscles all correspond with dedicated regions in the primary motor cortex of the brain, directly anterior to the central sulcus that divides the frontal and parietal lobes.

In addition, muscles react to reflexive nerve stimuli that do not always send signals all the way to the brain. 

In this case, the signal from the afferent fiber does not reach the brain, but produces the reflexive movement by direct connections with the efferent nerves in the spine. 

However, the majority of muscle activity is volitional, and the result of complex interactions between various areas of the brain.

Nerves that control skeletal muscles in mammals correspond with neuron groups along the primary motor cortex of the brain's cerebral cortex. 

Commands are routed through the basal ganglia and are modified by input from the cerebellum before being relayed through the pyramidal tract to the spinal cord and from there to the motor end plate at the muscles. 

Along the way, feedback, such as that of the extrapyramidal system contribute signals to influence muscle tone and response.

Deeper muscles such as those involved in posture often are controlled from nuclei in the brain stem and basal ganglia.


==== Proprioception ====

In skeletal muscles, muscle spindles convey information about the degree of muscle length and stretch to the central nervous system to assist in maintaining posture and joint position. 

The sense of where our bodies are in space is called proprioception, the perception of body awareness, the "unconscious" awareness of where the various regions of the body are located at any one time. 

Several areas in the brain coordinate movement and position with the feedback information gained from proprioception. 

The cerebellum and red nucleus in particular continuously sample position against movement and make minor corrections to assure smooth motion.


=== Energy consumption ===


Muscular activity accounts for much of the body's energy consumption. 

All muscle cells produce adenosine triphosphate (ATP) molecules which are used to power the movement of the myosin heads. 

Muscles have a short-term store of energy in the form of creatine phosphate which is generated from ATP and can regenerate ATP when needed with creatine kinase. 

Muscles also keep a storage form of glucose in the form of glycogen. 

Glycogen can be rapidly converted to glucose when energy is required for sustained, powerful contractions. 

Within the voluntary skeletal muscles, the glucose molecule can be metabolized anaerobically in a process called glycolysis which produces two ATP and two lactic acid molecules in the process (note that in aerobic conditions, lactate is not formed; instead pyruvate is formed and transmitted through the citric acid cycle). 

Muscle cells also contain globules of fat, which are used for energy during aerobic exercise. 

The aerobic energy systems take longer to produce the ATP and reach peak efficiency, and requires many more biochemical steps, but produces significantly more ATP than anaerobic glycolysis. 

Cardiac muscle on the other hand, can readily consume any of the three macronutrients (protein, glucose and fat) aerobically without a 'warm up' period and always extracts the maximum ATP yield from any molecule involved. 

The heart, liver and red blood cells will also consume lactic acid produced and excreted by skeletal muscles during exercise.

Skeletal muscle uses more calories than other organs.

At rest it consumes 54.4 kJ/kg (13.0 kcal/kg) per day. 

This is larger than adipose tissue (fat) at 18.8 kJ/kg (4.5 kcal/kg), and bone at 9.6 kJ/kg (2.3 kcal/kg).


==== Efficiency ====

The efficiency of human muscle has been measured (in the context of rowing and cycling) at 18% to 26%. 

The efficiency is defined as the ratio of mechanical work output to the total metabolic cost, as can be calculated from oxygen consumption. 

This low efficiency is the result of about 40% efficiency of generating ATP from food energy, losses in converting energy from ATP into mechanical work inside the muscle, and mechanical losses inside the body. 

The latter two losses are dependent on the type of exercise and the type of muscle fibers being used (fast-twitch or slow-twitch). 

For an overall efficiency of 20 percent, one watt of mechanical power is equivalent to 4.3 kcal per hour. 

For example, one manufacturer of rowing equipment calibrates its rowing ergometer to count burned calories as equal to four times the actual mechanical work, plus 300 kcal per hour, this amounts to about 20 percent efficiency at 250 watts of mechanical output. 

The mechanical energy output of a cyclic contraction can depend upon many factors, including activation timing, muscle strain trajectory, and rates of force rise & decay. 

These can be synthesized experimentally using work loop analysis.


=== Muscle strength ===


Muscle strength is a result of three overlapping factors: physiological strength (muscle size, cross sectional area, available crossbridging, responses to training), neurological strength (how strong or weak is the signal that tells the muscle to contract), and mechanical strength (muscle's force angle on the lever, moment arm length, joint capabilities).

Vertebrate muscle typically produces approximately 25–33 N (5.6–7.4 lbf) of force per square centimeter of muscle cross-sectional area when isometric and at optimal length. 

Some invertebrate muscles, such as in crab claws, have much longer sarcomeres than vertebrates, resulting in many more sites for actin and myosin to bind and thus much greater force per square centimeter at the cost of much slower speed. 

The force generated by a contraction can be measured non-invasively using either mechanomyography or phonomyography, be measured in vivo using tendon strain (if a prominent tendon is present), or be measured directly using more invasive methods.

The strength of any given muscle, in terms of force exerted on the skeleton, depends upon length, shortening speed, cross sectional area, pennation, sarcomere length, myosin isoforms, and neural activation of motor units. 

Significant reductions in muscle strength can indicate underlying pathology, with the chart at right used as a guide.


==== The "strongest" human muscle ====

Since three factors affect muscular strength simultaneously and muscles never work individually, it is misleading to compare strength in individual muscles, and state that one is the "strongest". 

But below are several muscles whose strength is noteworthy for different reasons.

In ordinary parlance, muscular "strength" usually refers to the ability to exert a force on an external object—for example, lifting a weight. 

By this definition, the masseter or jaw muscle is the strongest. 

The 1992 Guinness Book of Records records the achievement of a bite strength of 4,337 N (975 lbf) for 2 seconds. 

What distinguishes the masseter is not anything special about the muscle itself, but its advantage in working against a much shorter lever arm than other muscles.

If "strength" refers to the force exerted by the muscle itself, e.g., on the place where it inserts into a bone, then the strongest muscles are those with the largest cross-sectional area. 

This is because the tension exerted by an individual skeletal muscle fiber does not vary much. 

Each fiber can exert a force on the order of 0.3 micronewton. 

By this definition, the strongest muscle of the body is usually said to be the quadriceps femoris or the gluteus maximus.

Because muscle strength is determined by cross-sectional area, a shorter muscle will be stronger "pound for pound" (i.e., by weight) than a longer muscle of the same cross-sectional area. 

The myometrial layer of the uterus may be the strongest muscle by weight in the female human body. 

At the time when an infant is delivered, the entire human uterus weighs about 1.1 kg (40 oz). 

During childbirth, the uterus exerts 100 to 400 N (25 to 100 lbf) of downward force with each contraction.

The external muscles of the eye are conspicuously large and strong in relation to the small size and weight of the eyeball. 

It is frequently said that they are "the strongest muscles for the job they have to do" and are sometimes claimed to be "100 times stronger than they need to be." 

However, eye movements (particularly saccades used on facial scanning and reading) do require high speed movements, and eye muscles are exercised nightly during rapid eye movement sleep.

The statement that "the tongue is the strongest muscle in the body" appears frequently in lists of surprising facts, but it is difficult to find any definition of "strength" that would make this statement true. 

Note that the tongue consists of eight muscles, not one.


==== Force generation ====

Muscle force is proportional to physiologic cross-sectional area (PCSA), and muscle velocity is proportional to muscle fiber length. 

The torque around a joint, however, is determined by a number of biomechanical parameters, including the distance between muscle insertions and pivot points, muscle size and architectural gear ratio. 

Muscles are normally arranged in opposition so that when one group of muscles contracts, another group relaxes or lengthens. 

Antagonism in the transmission of nerve impulses to the muscles means that it is impossible to fully stimulate the contraction of two antagonistic muscles at any one time. 

During ballistic motions such as throwing, the antagonist muscles act to 'brake' the agonist muscles throughout the contraction, particularly at the end of the motion. 

In the example of throwing, the chest and front of the shoulder (anterior deltoid) contract to pull the arm forward, while the muscles in the back and rear of the shoulder (posterior deltoid) also contract and undergo eccentric contraction to slow the motion down to avoid injury. 

Part of the training process is learning to relax the antagonist muscles to increase the force input of the chest and anterior shoulder.

Contracting muscles produce vibration and sound. 

Slow twitch fibers produce 10 to 30 contractions per second (10 to 30 Hz). 

Fast twitch fibers produce 30 to 70 contractions per second (30 to 70 Hz). 

The vibration can be witnessed and felt by highly tensing one's muscles, as when making a firm fist. 

The sound can be heard by pressing a highly tensed muscle against the ear, again a firm fist is a good example. 

The sound is usually described as a rumbling sound. 

Some individuals can voluntarily produce this rumbling sound by contracting the tensor tympani muscle of the middle ear. 

The rumbling sound can also be heard when the neck or jaw muscles are highly tensed.


=== Signal transduction pathways ===

Skeletal muscle fiber-type phenotype in adult animals is regulated by several independent signaling pathways. 

These include pathways involved with the Ras/mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway, calcineurin, calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase IV, and the peroxisome proliferator γ coactivator 1 (PGC-1). 

The Ras/MAPK signaling pathway links the motor neurons and signaling systems, coupling excitation and transcription regulation to promote the nerve-dependent induction of the slow program in regenerating muscle. 

Calcineurin, a Ca2+/calmodulin-activated phosphatase implicated in nerve activity-dependent fiber-type specification in skeletal muscle, directly controls the phosphorylation state of the transcription factor NFAT, allowing for its translocation to the nucleus and leading to the activation of slow-type muscle proteins in cooperation with myocyte enhancer factor 2 (MEF2) proteins and other regulatory proteins. 

Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase activity is also upregulated by slow motor neuron activity, possibly because it amplifies the slow-type calcineurin-generated responses by promoting MEF2 transactivator functions and enhancing oxidative capacity through stimulation of mitochondrial biogenesis.

Contraction-induced changes in intracellular calcium or reactive oxygen species provide signals to diverse pathways that include the MAPKs, calcineurin and calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase IV to activate transcription factors that regulate gene expression and enzyme activity in skeletal muscle.

PGC1-α (PPARGC1A), a transcriptional coactivator of nuclear receptors important to the regulation of a number of mitochondrial genes involved in oxidative metabolism, directly interacts with MEF2 to synergistically activate selective slow twitch (ST) muscle genes and also serves as a target for calcineurin signaling. 

A peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor δ (PPARδ)-mediated transcriptional pathway is involved in the regulation of the skeletal muscle fiber phenotype. 

Mice that harbor an activated form of PPARd display an "endurance" phenotype, with a coordinated increase in oxidative enzymes and mitochondrial biogenesis and an increased proportion of ST fibers. 

Thus—through functional genomics—calcineurin, calmodulin-dependent kinase, PGC-1α, and activated PPARδ form the basis of a signaling network that controls skeletal muscle fiber-type transformation and metabolic profiles that protect against insulin resistance and obesity.

The transition from aerobic to anaerobic metabolism during intense work requires that several systems are rapidly activated to ensure a constant supply of ATP for the working muscles. 

These include a switch from fat-based to carbohydrate-based fuels, a redistribution of blood flow from nonworking to exercising muscles, and the removal of several of the by-products of anaerobic metabolism, such as carbon dioxide and lactic acid. 

Some of these responses are governed by transcriptional control of the fast twitch (FT) glycolytic phenotype. 

For example, skeletal muscle reprogramming from an ST glycolytic phenotype to an FT glycolytic phenotype involves the Six1/Eya1 complex, composed of members of the Six protein family. 

Moreover, the hypoxia-inducible factor 1-α (HIF1A) has been identified as a master regulator for the expression of genes involved in essential hypoxic responses that maintain ATP levels in cells. 

Ablation of HIF-1α in skeletal muscle was associated with an increase in the activity of rate-limiting enzymes of the mitochondria, indicating that the citric acid cycle and increased fatty acid oxidation may be compensating for decreased flow through the glycolytic pathway in these animals. 

However, hypoxia-mediated HIF-1α responses are also linked to the regulation of mitochondrial dysfunction through the formation of excessive reactive oxygen species in mitochondria.

Other pathways also influence adult muscle character. 

For example, physical force inside a muscle fiber may release the transcription factor serum response factor from the structural protein titin, leading to altered muscle growth.


== Exercise ==

Exercise is often recommended as a means of improving motor skills, fitness, muscle and bone strength, and joint function. 

Exercise has several effects upon muscles, connective tissue, bone, and the nerves that stimulate the muscles. 

One such effect is muscle hypertrophy, an increase in size of muscle due to an increase in the number of muscle fibers or cross-sectional area of myofibrils. 

Muscle changes depend on the type of exercise used.
Generally, there are two types of exercise regimes, aerobic and anaerobic. 

Aerobic exercise (e.g. marathons) involves low intensity, but long duration activities during which, the muscles used are below their maximal contraction strength. 

Aerobic activities rely on the aerobic respiration (i.e. citric acid cycle and electron transport chain) for metabolic energy by consuming fat, protein, carbohydrates, and oxygen. 

Muscles involved in aerobic exercises contain a higher percentage of Type I (or slow-twitch) muscle fibers, which primarily contain mitochondrial and oxidation enzymes associated with aerobic respiration. 

On the contrary, anaerobic exercise is associated with short duration, but high intensity exercise (e.g. sprinting and weight lifting). 

The anaerobic activities predominately use Type II, fast-twitch, muscle fibers. 

Type II muscle fibers rely on glucogenesis for energy during anaerobic exercise. 

During anaerobic exercise, type II fibers consume little oxygen, protein and fat, produces large amounts of lactic acid and are fatigable. 

Many exercises are partially aerobic and anaerobic; for example, soccer and rock climbing.

The presence of lactic acid has an inhibitory effect on ATP generation within the muscle. 

It can even stop ATP production if the intracellular concentration becomes too high. 

However, endurance training mitigates the buildup of lactic acid through increased capillarization and myoglobin. 

This increases the ability to remove waste products, like lactic acid, out of the muscles in order to not impair muscle function. 

Once moved out of muscles, lactic acid can be used by other muscles or body tissues as a source of energy, or transported to the liver where it is converted back to pyruvate. 

In addition to increasing the level of lactic acid, strenuous exercise results in the loss of potassium ions in muscle. 

This may facilitate the recovery of muscle function by protecting against fatigue.

Delayed onset muscle soreness is pain or discomfort that may be felt one to three days after exercising and generally subsides two to three days after which. 

Once thought to be caused by lactic acid build-up, a more recent theory is that it is caused by tiny tears in the muscle fibers caused by eccentric contraction, or unaccustomed training levels. 

Since lactic acid disperses fairly rapidly, it could not explain pain experienced days after exercise.


== Clinical significance ==

=== Muscle disease ===

Diseases of skeletal muscle are termed myopathies, while diseases of nerves are called neuropathies. 

Both can affect muscle function or cause muscle pain, and fall under the umbrella of neuromuscular disease. 

The cause of many myopathies is attributed to mutations in the various associated muscle proteins. 

Some inflammatory myopathies include polymyositis and inclusion body myositis

Neuromuscular diseases affect the muscles and their nervous control. 

In general, problems with nervous control can cause spasticity or paralysis, depending on the location and nature of the problem. 

A number of movement disorders are caused by neurological disorders such as Parkinson's disease and Huntington's disease where there is central nervous system dysfunction.

Symptoms of muscle diseases may include weakness, spasticity, myoclonus and myalgia. 

Diagnostic procedures that may reveal muscular disorders include testing creatine kinase levels in the blood and electromyography (measuring electrical activity in muscles). 

In some cases, muscle biopsy may be done to identify a myopathy, as well as genetic testing to identify DNA abnormalities associated with specific myopathies and dystrophies.

A non-invasive elastography technique that measures muscle noise is undergoing experimentation to provide a way of monitoring neuromuscular disease. 

The sound produced by a muscle comes from the shortening of actomyosin filaments along the axis of the muscle. 

During contraction, the muscle shortens along its length and expands across its width, producing vibrations at the surface.


=== Hypertrophy ===

Independent of strength and performance measures, muscles can be induced to grow larger by a number of factors, including hormone signaling, developmental factors, strength training, and disease. 

Contrary to popular belief, the number of muscle fibres cannot be increased through exercise. 

Instead, muscles grow larger through a combination of muscle cell growth as new protein filaments are added along with additional mass provided by undifferentiated satellite cells alongside the existing muscle cells.

Biological factors such as age and hormone levels can affect muscle hypertrophy. 

During puberty in males, hypertrophy occurs at an accelerated rate as the levels of growth-stimulating hormones produced by the body increase. 

Natural hypertrophy normally stops at full growth in the late teens. 

As testosterone is one of the body's major growth hormones, on average, men find hypertrophy much easier to achieve than women. 

Taking additional testosterone or other anabolic steroids will increase muscular hypertrophy.

Muscular, spinal and neural factors all affect muscle building. 

Sometimes a person may notice an increase in strength in a given muscle even though only its opposite has been subject to exercise, such as when a bodybuilder finds her left biceps stronger after completing a regimen focusing only on the right biceps. 

This phenomenon is called cross education.


=== Atrophy ===
 
Every day between one and two percent of muscle is broken down and rebuilt. 

Inactivity, malnutrition, disease, and aging can increase the breakdown leading to muscle atrophy or sarcopenia. 

Sarcopenia is commonly an age-related process that can cause frailty and its consequences. 

A decrease in muscle mass may be accompanied by a smaller number and size of the muscle cells as well as lower protein content.

Human spaceflight, involving prolonged periods of immobilization and weightlessness is known to result in muscle weakening and atrophy resulting in a loss of as much as 30% of mass in some muscles. 

Such consequences are also noted in some mammals following hibernation.

Many diseases and conditions including cancer, AIDS, and heart failure can cause muscle loss known as cachexia.


=== Research ===

Myopathies have been modeled with cell culture systems of muscle from healthy or diseased tissue biopsies. 

Another source of skeletal muscle and progenitors is provided by the directed differentiation of pluripotent stem cells.

Research on skeletal muscle properties uses many techniques. 

Electrical muscle stimulation is used to determine force and contraction speed at different frequencies related to fiber-type composition and mix within an individual muscle group. 

In vitro muscle testing is used for more complete characterization of muscle properties.

The electrical activity associated with muscle contraction is measured via electromyography (EMG). 

Skeletal muscle has two physiological responses: relaxation and contraction. 

The mechanisms for which these responses occur generate electrical activity measured by EMG. 

Specifically, EMG can measure the action potential of a skeletal muscle, which occurs from the hyperpolarization of the motor axons from nerve impulses sent to the muscle. 

EMG is used in research for determining if the skeletal muscle of interest is being activated, the amount of force generated, and an indicator of muscle fatigue. 

The two types of EMG are intra-muscular EMG and the most common, surface EMG. 

The EMG signals are much greater when a skeletal muscle is contracting verses relaxing. 

However, for smaller and deeper skeletal muscles the EMG signals are reduced and therefore are viewed as a less valued technique for measuring the activation. 

In research using EMG, a maximal voluntary contraction (MVC) is commonly performed on the skeletal muscle of interest, to have reference data for the rest of the EMG recordings during the main experimental testing for that same skeletal muscle.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Skeletal_muscle
;;;ES;;;



MÚSCULO ESQUELÉTICO


Los músculos esqueléticos (comúnmente denominados músculos) son órganos del sistema muscular de los vertebrados que en su mayoría están unidos por tendones a los huesos del esqueleto.

Las células musculares de los músculos esqueléticos son mucho más largas que las de los otros tipos de tejido muscular y, a menudo, se conocen como fibras musculares.

El tejido muscular de un músculo esquelético es estriado, con un aspecto rayado debido a la disposición de los sarcómeros.

Los músculos esqueléticos son músculos voluntarios bajo el control del sistema nervioso somático.

Los otros tipos de músculo son el músculo cardíaco, que también es estriado, y el músculo liso, que no es estriado; ambos tipos de tejido muscular se clasifican como involuntarios o bajo el control del sistema nervioso autónomo.

Un músculo esquelético contiene múltiples fascículos, haces de fibras musculares.

Cada fibra individual y cada músculo están rodeados por un tipo de capa de fascia de tejido conectivo.

Las fibras musculares se forman a partir de la fusión de mioblastos en desarrollo en un proceso conocido como miogénesis que da como resultado células multinucleadas largas.

En estas células, los núcleos denominados mionúcleos se encuentran a lo largo del interior de la membrana celular.

Las fibras musculares también tienen múltiples mitocondrias para satisfacer las necesidades energéticas.
Las fibras musculares están compuestas a su vez por miofibrillas.

Las miofibrillas están compuestas de filamentos de actina y miosina llamados miofilamentos, repetidos en unidades llamadas sarcómeros, que son las unidades contráctiles funcionales básicas de la fibra muscular necesarias para la contracción muscular.

Los músculos son impulsados ​​predominantemente por la oxidación de grasas y carbohidratos, pero también se utilizan reacciones químicas anaeróbicas, particularmente por fibras de contracción rápida.

Estas reacciones químicas producen moléculas de trifosfato de adenosina (ATP) que se utilizan para impulsar el movimiento de las cabezas de miosina.


== Estructura ==

=== Anatomía macroscópica ===

Hay más de 600 músculos esqueléticos en el cuerpo humano, que constituyen alrededor del 40% al 50% del peso corporal.

La mayoría de los músculos ocurren en pares colocados bilateralmente para servir a ambos lados del cuerpo.

Los músculos a menudo se clasifican como grupos de músculos que trabajan juntos para llevar a cabo una acción.

En el torso hay varios grupos de músculos principales, incluidos los músculos pectorales y abdominales; Los músculos intrínsecos y extrínsecos son subdivisiones de grupos de músculos en la mano, el pie, la lengua y los músculos extraoculares del ojo.

Los músculos también se agrupan en compartimentos que incluyen cuatro grupos en el brazo y los cuatro grupos en la pierna.

Aparte de la parte contráctil de un músculo que consta de sus fibras, un músculo contiene una parte no contráctil de tejido conjuntivo fibroso denso que forma el tendón en cada extremo.

Los tendones unen los músculos a los huesos para dar movimiento esquelético.

La longitud de un músculo incluye los tendones.

El tejido conectivo está presente en todos los músculos como fascia profunda.

La fascia profunda se especializa dentro de los músculos para encerrar cada fibra muscular como endomisio; cada fascículo muscular como perimisio y cada músculo individual como epimisio.

Juntas, estas capas se llaman mysia.

La fascia profunda también separa los grupos de músculos en compartimentos musculares.

Dos tipos de receptores sensoriales que se encuentran en los músculos son los husos musculares y los órganos tendinosos de Golgi.

Los husos musculares son receptores de estiramiento ubicados en el vientre muscular.

Los órganos tendinosos de Golgi son propioceptores ubicados en la unión miotendinosa que informan de la tensión de un músculo.


==== Fibras musculares esqueléticas ====

Las células del músculo esquelético son las células contráctiles individuales dentro de un músculo y, a menudo, se denominan fibras musculares.

Un solo músculo como el bíceps en un hombre adulto joven contiene alrededor de 253.000 fibras musculares.

Las fibras del músculo esquelético son las únicas células musculares que son multinucleadas con los núcleos a menudo denominados mionúcleos.

Esto ocurre durante la miogénesis con la fusión de mioblastos, cada uno de los cuales contribuye con un núcleo.

La fusión depende de proteínas específicas del músculo conocidas como fusógenos llamados myomaker y myomerger.

La célula del músculo esquelético necesita muchos núcleos para producir las grandes cantidades de proteínas y enzimas necesarias para el funcionamiento normal de la célula.
 
Una sola fibra muscular puede contener de cientos a miles de núcleos.

Una fibra muscular, por ejemplo, en el bíceps humano con una longitud de 10 cm puede tener hasta 3000 núcleos.

A diferencia de una célula no muscular donde el núcleo está ubicado en el centro, el mionúcleo es alargado y está ubicado cerca del sarcolema.

Los mionúcleos están dispuestos de manera bastante uniforme a lo largo de la fibra y cada núcleo tiene su propio dominio mionuclear, donde es responsable de soportar el volumen de citoplasma en esa sección particular de la miofibra.

Un grupo de células madre musculares conocidas como células de miosatélite, también células satélite, se encuentran entre la membrana basal y el sarcolema de las fibras musculares.

Estas células normalmente están inactivas, pero pueden activarse mediante ejercicio o patología para proporcionar mionúcleos adicionales para el crecimiento o la reparación muscular.


==== Unión a los tendones ====

Los músculos se unen a los tendones en una región de interfaz compleja conocida como unión musculotendinosa, también conocida como unión miotendinosa, un área especializada para la transmisión primaria de fuerza.

En la interfaz músculo-tendón, la fuerza se transmite desde los sarcómeros de las células musculares hasta el tendón.

Los músculos y los tendones se desarrollan en estrecha asociación y, después de unirse en la unión miotendinosa, constituyen una unidad dinámica para la transmisión de la fuerza de la contracción muscular al sistema esquelético.


==== Disposición de las fibras musculares ====

La arquitectura muscular se refiere a la disposición de las fibras musculares en relación con el eje de generación de fuerza, que va desde el origen de un músculo hasta su inserción.

Los arreglos usuales son tipos de paralelos y tipos de músculos pennados.

En los músculos paralelos, los fascículos corren paralelos al eje de generación de fuerza, pero los fascículos pueden variar en su relación entre sí y con sus tendones.

Estas variaciones se observan en los músculos fusiformes, de correa y convergentes.

Un músculo convergente tiene forma triangular o de abanico, ya que las fibras convergen en su inserción y se abren ampliamente en abanico en el origen.

Un ejemplo menos común de un músculo paralelo es un músculo circular como el orbicularis oculi, en el que las fibras están dispuestas longitudinalmente, pero crean un círculo desde el origen hasta la inserción.

Estas diferentes arquitecturas, pueden provocar variaciones en la tensión que un músculo puede crear entre sus tendones.

Las fibras de los músculos pennados discurren en ángulo con respecto al eje de generación de fuerza.

Este ángulo de pennación reduce la fuerza efectiva de cualquier fibra individual, ya que efectivamente tira fuera del eje.

Sin embargo, debido a este ángulo, se pueden empaquetar más fibras en el mismo volumen muscular, lo que aumenta el área transversal fisiológica (PCSA).

Este efecto se conoce como empaquetamiento de fibra y, en términos de generación de fuerza, supera con creces la pérdida de eficiencia de la orientación fuera del eje.

La compensación viene en la velocidad general de acortamiento del músculo y en la excursión total.

La velocidad general de acortamiento del músculo se reduce en comparación con la velocidad de acortamiento de las fibras, al igual que la distancia total de acortamiento.

Todos estos efectos escalan con el ángulo de penación; los ángulos mayores conducen a una mayor fuerza debido al mayor empaquetamiento de fibra y PCSA, pero con mayores pérdidas en la velocidad de acortamiento y la excursión.

Los tipos de músculo pennado son unipennados, bipinnados y multipennados.

Un músculo unipeniforme tiene fibras anguladas de manera similar que se encuentran a un lado de un tendón.

Un músculo bipenado tiene fibras en dos lados de un tendón.

Los músculos multipeniformes tienen fibras que están orientadas en múltiples ángulos a lo largo del eje generador de fuerza, y esta es la arquitectura más general y común.


=== Crecimiento de fibra muscular ===

Las fibras musculares crecen cuando se ejercitan y se encogen cuando no se usan.

Esto se debe al hecho de que el ejercicio estimula el aumento de miofibrillas que aumentan el tamaño total de las células musculares.

Los músculos bien ejercitados no solo pueden agregar más tamaño, sino que también pueden desarrollar más mitocondrias, mioglobina, glucógeno y una mayor densidad de capilares.

Sin embargo, las células musculares no pueden dividirse para producir nuevas células y, como resultado, hay menos células musculares en un adulto que en un recién nacido.


=== Nombre de los músculos ===


Hay una serie de términos utilizados en la denominación de los músculos, incluidos los relacionados con el tamaño, la forma, la acción, la ubicación, su orientación y el número de cabezas.

Por tamaño
brevis significa corto; longus significa largo; longissimus significa más largo; magnus significa grande; mayor significa más grande; maximus significa más grande; minor significa más pequeño y minimus más pequeño; latissimus significa más ancho y vastus significa enorme.

Estos términos se usan a menudo después del músculo en particular, como glúteo mayor y glúteo menor.

Por forma relativa
deltoides significa triangular; quadratus significa que tiene cuatro lados; rhomboideus significa que tiene una forma romboidal; teres significa redondo o cilíndrico, y trapezius significa que tiene forma trapezoidal; serratus significa dientes de sierra; orbicularis significa circular; pectinato significa peine; piriforme significa en forma de pera; platys significa plano y gracilis significa esbelto.

Ejemplos son el pronador redondo y el pronador cuadrado.

por acción
abductor alejándose de la línea media; aductor moviéndose hacia la línea media; depresor moviéndose hacia abajo; ascensor moviéndose hacia arriba; movimiento flexor que disminuye un ángulo; movimiento extensor que aumenta un ángulo o endereza; pronador moviéndose hacia abajo; supinador moviéndose hacia arriba; rotador interno girando hacia el cuerpo; rotador externo girando alejándose del cuerpo; el esfínter disminuye de tamaño, y el tensor le da tensión; Los músculos fijadores sirven para fijar una articulación en una posición determinada al estabilizar el motor principal mientras se mueven otras articulaciones.

Por número de cabezas
bíceps dos; tríceps tres y cuádriceps cuatro.

Por localizacion
llamado así por la estructura principal cercana, como el músculo temporal (temporalis) cerca del hueso temporal.

También supra-arriba; infra-abajo, y sub-bajo.

Por orientación del fascículo
En relación con la línea media, recto significa paralelo a la línea media; transversal significa perpendicular a la línea media y oblicua significa diagonal a la línea media.

En relación con el eje de la generación de fuerza: tipos de paralelos y tipos de músculos pinnados.


== Tipos de fibra ==

En términos generales, hay dos tipos de fibra muscular: el tipo I, que es lento, y el tipo II, que es rápido.

El tipo II tiene dos divisiones de tipo IIA (oxidativo) y tipo IIX (glucolítico), dando tres tipos principales de fibra.

Estas fibras tienen propiedades metabólicas, contráctiles y de unidad motora relativamente distintas.

La siguiente tabla diferencia estos tipos de propiedades.

Estos tipos de propiedades, aunque dependen en parte de las propiedades de las fibras individuales, tienden a ser relevantes y medidos a nivel de la unidad motora, en lugar de fibra individual.


=== Color de la fibra ===

Tradicionalmente, las fibras se clasificaban según su color variable, que es un reflejo del contenido de mioglobina.

Las fibras tipo I aparecen rojas debido a los altos niveles de mioglobina.

Las fibras musculares rojas tienden a tener más mitocondrias y mayor densidad capilar local.

Estas fibras son más adecuadas para la resistencia y tardan en fatigarse porque utilizan el metabolismo oxidativo para generar ATP (trifosfato de adenosina).

Las fibras tipo II menos oxidantes son blancas debido a la mioglobina relativamente baja y la dependencia de las enzimas glucolíticas.


=== Velocidad de contracción ===

Las fibras también se pueden clasificar según su capacidad de contracción, en contracción rápida y contracción lenta.

Estos rasgos se superponen en gran parte, pero no completamente, a las clasificaciones basadas en el color, la ATPasa o el MHC.
Algunos autores definen una fibra de contracción rápida como aquella en la que la miosina puede dividir el ATP muy rápidamente.

Estos incluyen principalmente las fibras ATPasa tipo II y MHC tipo II.

Sin embargo, las fibras de contracción rápida también demuestran una mayor capacidad para la transmisión electroquímica de potenciales de acción y un nivel rápido de liberación y captación de calcio por parte del retículo sarcoplásmico.

Las fibras de contracción rápida dependen de un sistema glucolítico anaeróbico, de corto plazo y bien desarrollado para la transferencia de energía y pueden contraerse y desarrollar tensión a una velocidad de 2 a 3 veces mayor que la de las fibras de contracción lenta.

Los músculos de contracción rápida son mucho mejores para generar ráfagas cortas de fuerza o velocidad que los músculos lentos y, por lo tanto, se fatigan más rápidamente.

Las fibras de contracción lenta generan energía para la resíntesis de ATP por medio de un sistema a largo plazo de transferencia de energía aeróbica.

Estos incluyen principalmente las fibras ATPasa tipo I y MHC tipo I.

Tienden a tener un bajo nivel de actividad de ATPasa, una velocidad de contracción más lenta con una capacidad glicolítica menos desarrollada.

Las fibras que se vuelven de contracción lenta desarrollan una mayor cantidad de mitocondrias y capilares, lo que las hace mejores para un trabajo prolongado.

Distribución de tipos
Los músculos individuales tienden a ser una mezcla de varios tipos de fibras, pero sus proporciones varían según las acciones de ese músculo.

Por ejemplo, en los humanos, los músculos cuádriceps contienen ~52 % de fibras de tipo I, mientras que el sóleo contiene ~80 % de tipo I.

El músculo orbicularis oculi del ojo es solo ~15% de tipo I.

Sin embargo, las unidades motoras dentro del músculo tienen una variación mínima entre las fibras de esa unidad.

Es este hecho el que hace viable el tamaño principal del reclutamiento de unidades motoras.

Tradicionalmente se ha pensado que el número total de fibras musculares esqueléticas no cambia.

Se cree que no hay diferencias de sexo o edad en la distribución de fibra; sin embargo, las proporciones de los tipos de fibras varían considerablemente de un músculo a otro y de una persona a otra.

Entre las diferentes especies hay mucha variación en las proporciones de los tipos de fibras musculares.

Los hombres y mujeres sedentarios (así como los niños pequeños) tienen un 45 % de fibras de tipo II y un 55 % de fibras de tipo I.

Las personas en el extremo superior de cualquier deporte tienden a mostrar patrones de distribución de fibras, por ejemplo, los atletas de resistencia muestran un nivel más alto de fibras de tipo I.

Los atletas de velocidad, por otro lado, requieren una gran cantidad de fibras tipo IIX.

Los atletas de eventos de media distancia muestran una distribución aproximadamente igual de los dos tipos.

Este también suele ser el caso de los atletas de potencia, como los lanzadores y los saltadores.

Se ha sugerido que varios tipos de ejercicio pueden inducir cambios en las fibras de un músculo esquelético.

Se cree que si realiza eventos de resistencia durante un período sostenido de tiempo, algunas de las fibras de tipo IIX se transforman en fibras de tipo IIA.

Sin embargo, no hay consenso sobre el tema.

Bien puede ser que las fibras de tipo IIX muestren mejoras en la capacidad oxidativa después del entrenamiento de resistencia de alta intensidad, lo que las lleva a un nivel en el que pueden realizar el metabolismo oxidativo con la misma eficacia que las fibras de contracción lenta de sujetos no entrenados.

Esto se produciría por un aumento en el tamaño y el número de mitocondrias y los cambios relacionados asociados, no por un cambio en el tipo de fibra.


=== Métodos de tipado de fibras ===


Hay numerosos métodos empleados para la tipificación de fibras, y la confusión entre los métodos es común entre los no expertos.

Dos métodos comúnmente confundidos son la tinción histoquímica para la actividad de miosina ATPasa y la tinción inmunohistoquímica para el tipo de cadena pesada de miosina (MHC).

La actividad de la ATPasa de miosina se denomina comúnmente, y correctamente, simplemente "tipo de fibra" y resulta del ensayo directo de la actividad de la ATPasa en diversas condiciones (p. ej., pH).

La tinción de la cadena pesada de miosina se denomina con mayor precisión "tipo de fibra MHC", por ejemplo, "fibras MHC IIa", y resulta de la determinación de diferentes isoformas de MHC.

Estos métodos están estrechamente relacionados desde el punto de vista fisiológico, ya que el tipo de MHC es el principal determinante de la actividad de la ATPasa.

Sin embargo, ninguno de estos métodos de tipificación es de naturaleza directamente metabólica; no abordan directamente la capacidad oxidativa o glicolítica de la fibra.

Cuando se hace referencia genéricamente a las fibras "tipo I" o "tipo II", esto se refiere con mayor precisión a la suma de los tipos numéricos de fibra (I vs.

II) según lo evaluado por tinción de actividad de miosina ATPasa (p. ej., fibras de "tipo II" se refiere a tipo IIA + tipo IIAX + tipo IIXA... etc.).

A continuación se muestra una tabla que muestra la relación entre estos dos métodos, limitada a los tipos de fibra que se encuentran en los seres humanos.

La capitalización de subtipo se usa en la tipificación de fibra vs.

La tipificación de MHC, y algunos tipos de ATPasa en realidad contienen múltiples tipos de MHC.

Además, un subtipo B o b no se expresa en humanos por ninguno de los dos métodos.

Los primeros investigadores creían que los humanos expresaban un MHC IIb, lo que condujo a la clasificación ATPasa de IIB.

Sin embargo, investigaciones posteriores demostraron que el MHC IIb humano era de hecho IIx, lo que indica que el IIB se llama mejor IIX.

IIb se expresa en otros mamíferos, por lo que todavía se ve con precisión (junto con IIB) en la literatura.

Los tipos de fibras no humanas incluyen fibras verdaderas IIb, IIc, IId, etc.

Otros métodos de tipificación de fibras están delineados menos formalmente y existen en un espectro más amplio.

Tienden a centrarse más en las capacidades metabólicas y funcionales (es decir, oxidativo frente a glucolítico, tiempo de contracción rápido frente a lento).

Como se señaló anteriormente, la tipificación de fibras por ATPasa o MHC no mide ni dicta directamente estos parámetros.

Sin embargo, muchos de los diversos métodos están vinculados mecánicamente, mientras que otros están correlacionados in vivo.

Por ejemplo, el tipo de fibra de ATPasa está relacionado con la velocidad de contracción, porque la alta actividad de ATPasa permite ciclos de puentes cruzados más rápidos.

Si bien la actividad de ATPasa es solo un componente de la velocidad de contracción, las fibras de tipo I son "lentas", en parte, porque tienen velocidades bajas de actividad de ATPasa en comparación con las fibras de tipo II.

Sin embargo, medir la velocidad de contracción no es lo mismo que tipificar las fibras con ATPasa.


== Microanatomía ==


El músculo esquelético exhibe un patrón de bandas distintivo cuando se observa bajo el microscopio debido a la disposición de dos proteínas contráctiles, la miosina y la actina, que son dos de los miofilamentos en las miofibrillas.

La miosina forma los filamentos gruesos y la actina forma los filamentos delgados, y se organizan en unidades repetidas llamadas sarcómeros.

La interacción de ambas proteínas da como resultado la contracción muscular.

El sarcómero está unido a otros orgánulos, como las mitocondrias, mediante filamentos intermedios en el citoesqueleto.

El costómero une el sarcómero al sarcolema. Cada orgánulo y macromolécula de una fibra muscular está dispuesto para garantizar que cumple las funciones deseadas.

La membrana celular se llama sarcolema con el citoplasma conocido como sarcoplasma.

En el sarcoplasma se encuentran las miofibrillas.

Las miofibrillas son haces largos de proteínas de aproximadamente un micrómetro de diámetro.

Presionados contra el interior del sarcolema están los inusuales mionúcleos aplanados.

Entre las miofibrillas se encuentran las mitocondrias.

Si bien la fibra muscular no tiene cisternas endoplásmicas lisas, contiene retículo sarcoplásmico.

El retículo sarcoplásmico rodea las miofibrillas y mantiene una reserva de los iones de calcio necesarios para provocar una contracción muscular.

Periódicamente, tiene sacos terminales dilatados conocidos como cisternas terminales.

Estos atraviesan la fibra muscular de un lado al otro.

Entre dos cisternas terminales hay un pliegue tubular llamado túbulo transverso (túbulo T).

Los túbulos T son las vías para que los potenciales de acción le indiquen al retículo sarcoplásmico que libere calcio, lo que provoca una contracción muscular.

Juntos, dos cisternas terminales y un túbulo transverso forman una tríada.


== Desarrollo ==


Todos los músculos se derivan del mesodermo paraxial.

Durante el desarrollo embrionario en el proceso de somitogénesis, el mesodermo paraxial se divide a lo largo del embrión para formar somitas, que corresponden a la segmentación del cuerpo que se ve más claramente en la columna vertebral.

Cada somita tiene tres divisiones, esclerotomo (que forma las vértebras), dermatoma (que forma la piel) y miotomo (que forma el músculo).

El miotoma se divide en dos secciones, el epímero y el hipómero, que forman los músculos epaxial e hipaxial, respectivamente.

Los únicos músculos epaxiales en humanos son el erector de la columna y los músculos vertebrales pequeños, y están inervados por las ramas dorsales de los nervios espinales.

Todos los demás músculos, incluidos los de las extremidades, son hipaxiales y están inervados por las ramas ventrales de los nervios espinales.

Durante el desarrollo, los mioblastos (células progenitoras musculares) permanecen en el somita para formar músculos asociados con la columna vertebral o migran al cuerpo para formar todos los demás músculos.

La migración de mioblastos está precedida por la formación de estructuras de tejido conjuntivo, generalmente formadas a partir del mesodermo de la placa lateral somática.

Los mioblastos siguen las señales químicas a los lugares apropiados, donde se fusionan en células musculares esqueléticas multinucleadas alargadas.

Entre la décima y la decimoctava semana de gestación, todas las células musculares tienen cadenas pesadas rápidas de miosina; Se distinguen dos tipos de miotubos en el feto en desarrollo: ambos expresan cadenas rápidas pero uno expresa cadenas rápidas y lentas.

Entre el 10 y el 40 por ciento de las fibras expresan la cadena lenta de miosina.

Los tipos de fibras se establecen durante el desarrollo embrionario y se remodelan más tarde en el adulto por influencias neurales y hormonales.

La población de células satélite presentes debajo de la lámina basal es necesaria para el desarrollo posnatal de las células musculares.


== Función ==

La función principal del músculo es la contracción.

Después de la contracción, el músculo esquelético funciona como un órgano endocrino al secretar miocinas, una amplia gama de citocinas y otros péptidos que actúan como moléculas de señalización.

A su vez, se cree que las mioquinas median los beneficios del ejercicio para la salud.

Las mioquinas se secretan en el torrente sanguíneo después de la contracción muscular.

La interleucina 6 (IL-6) es la miocina más estudiada; otras miocinas inducidas por la contracción muscular incluyen BDNF, FGF21 y SPARC. El músculo también funciona para producir calor corporal.

La contracción muscular es responsable de producir el 85% del calor del cuerpo.

Este calor producido es un subproducto de la actividad muscular y, en su mayor parte, se desperdicia.

Como respuesta homeostática al frío extremo, se indica a los músculos que desencadenen contracciones de escalofríos para generar calor.


=== Contracción ===


La contracción se logra por la unidad estructural del músculo, la fibra muscular, y por su unidad funcional, la unidad motora.

Las fibras musculares son células excitables estimuladas por neuronas motoras.

La unidad motora consiste en una neurona motora y las muchas fibras con las que entra en contacto.

Un solo músculo es estimulado por muchas unidades motoras.

Las fibras musculares están sujetas a la despolarización por el neurotransmisor acetilcolina, liberado por las neuronas motoras en las uniones neuromusculares.

Además de los miofilamentos de actina y miosina en las miofibrillas que forman los sarcómeros contráctiles, existen otras dos proteínas reguladoras importantes, la troponina y la tropomiosina, que hacen posible la contracción muscular.

Estas proteínas están asociadas con la actina y cooperan para evitar su interacción con la miosina.

Una vez que una célula está suficientemente estimulada, el retículo sarcoplásmico de la célula libera calcio iónico (Ca2+), que luego interactúa con la proteína reguladora troponina.

La troponina unida al calcio sufre un cambio conformacional que conduce al movimiento de la tropomiosina, lo que posteriormente expone los sitios de unión de la miosina en la actina.

Esto permite el ciclo de puente cruzado dependiente de ATP de miosina y actina y el acortamiento del músculo.


==== Acoplamiento excitación-contracción ====

El acoplamiento de excitación-contracción es el proceso por el cual un potencial de acción muscular en la fibra muscular hace que las miofibrillas se contraigan.

Este proceso se basa en un acoplamiento directo entre el canal de liberación de calcio del retículo sarcoplásmico RYR1 (receptor de rianodina 1) y los canales de calcio de tipo L dependientes de voltaje (identificados como receptores de dihidropiridina, DHPR).

Los DHPR están ubicados en el sarcolema (que incluye el sarcolema superficial y los túbulos transversos), mientras que los RyR residen a través de la membrana del SR.

La estrecha aposición de un túbulo transversal y dos regiones SR que contienen RyR se describe como una tríada y es predominantemente donde tiene lugar el acoplamiento de excitación-contracción.

El acoplamiento excitación-contracción ocurre cuando la despolarización de las células del músculo esquelético da como resultado un potencial de acción muscular, que se propaga a través de la superficie celular y hacia la red de túbulos T de la fibra muscular, despolarizando así la porción interna de la fibra muscular.

La despolarización de las porciones internas activa los receptores de dihidropiridina en las cisternas terminales, que están muy cerca de los receptores de rianodina en el retículo sarcoplásmico adyacente.

Los receptores de dihidropiridina activados interactúan físicamente con los receptores de rianodina para activarlos a través de los procesos de los pies (lo que implica cambios conformacionales que activan alostéricamente los receptores de rianodina).

A medida que se abren los receptores de rianodina, se libera Ca2+ desde el retículo sarcoplásmico hacia el espacio de unión local y se difunde hacia el citoplasma a granel para provocar una chispa de calcio.

Tenga en cuenta que el retículo sarcoplásmico tiene una gran capacidad de amortiguación del calcio debido en parte a una proteína de unión al calcio llamada calsecuestrina.

La activación casi sincrónica de miles de chispas de calcio por el potencial de acción provoca un aumento de calcio en toda la célula que da lugar a la carrera ascendente del transitorio de calcio.

El Ca2+ liberado en el citosol se une a la troponina C por los filamentos de actina, para permitir el ciclo del puente cruzado, produciendo fuerza y, en algunas situaciones, movimiento.

La calcio-ATPasa del sarco/retículo endoplásmico (SERCA) bombea activamente Ca2+ de regreso al retículo sarcoplásmico.

A medida que el Ca2+ vuelve a descender a los niveles de reposo, la fuerza disminuye y se produce la relajación.


==== Movimiento muscular ====

La rama eferente del sistema nervioso periférico es responsable de transmitir las órdenes a los músculos y las glándulas y, en última instancia, es responsable del movimiento voluntario.

Los nervios mueven los músculos en respuesta a señales voluntarias y autonómicas (involuntarias) del cerebro.

Los músculos profundos, los músculos superficiales, los músculos de la cara y los músculos internos se corresponden con regiones dedicadas en la corteza motora primaria del cerebro, directamente anterior al surco central que divide los lóbulos frontal y parietal.

Además, los músculos reaccionan a los estímulos nerviosos reflejos que no siempre envían señales al cerebro.

En este caso, la señal de la fibra aferente no llega al cerebro, sino que produce el movimiento reflejo por conexiones directas con los nervios eferentes de la columna.

Sin embargo, la mayor parte de la actividad muscular es voluntaria y el resultado de interacciones complejas entre varias áreas del cerebro.

Los nervios que controlan los músculos esqueléticos en los mamíferos se corresponden con grupos de neuronas a lo largo de la corteza motora primaria de la corteza cerebral del cerebro.

Los comandos se enrutan a través de los ganglios basales y se modifican por la entrada del cerebelo antes de transmitirse a través del tracto piramidal a la médula espinal y de allí a la placa terminal motora en los músculos.

En el camino, la retroalimentación, como la del sistema extrapiramidal, aporta señales para influir en el tono y la respuesta muscular.

Los músculos más profundos, como los que intervienen en la postura, a menudo se controlan desde los núcleos del tronco encefálico y los ganglios basales.


==== Propiocepción ====

En los músculos esqueléticos, los husos musculares transmiten información sobre el grado de longitud y estiramiento de los músculos al sistema nervioso central para ayudar a mantener la postura y la posición de las articulaciones.

El sentido de dónde están nuestros cuerpos en el espacio se llama propiocepción, la percepción de la conciencia del cuerpo, la conciencia "inconsciente" de dónde se encuentran las diversas regiones del cuerpo en un momento dado.

Varias áreas del cerebro coordinan el movimiento y la posición con la información de retroalimentación obtenida de la propiocepción.

El cerebelo y el núcleo rojo en particular prueban continuamente la posición contra el movimiento y hacen correcciones menores para asegurar un movimiento suave.


=== Consumo de energía ===


La actividad muscular representa gran parte del consumo de energía del cuerpo.

Todas las células musculares producen moléculas de trifosfato de adenosina (ATP) que se utilizan para impulsar el movimiento de las cabezas de miosina.

Los músculos tienen una reserva de energía a corto plazo en forma de fosfato de creatina que se genera a partir de ATP y puede regenerar ATP cuando sea necesario con la creatina quinasa.

Los músculos también guardan una forma de almacenamiento de glucosa en forma de glucógeno.

El glucógeno se puede convertir rápidamente en glucosa cuando se requiere energía para contracciones fuertes y sostenidas.

Dentro de los músculos esqueléticos voluntarios, la molécula de glucosa se puede metabolizar anaeróbicamente en un proceso llamado glucólisis que produce dos moléculas de ATP y dos de ácido láctico en el proceso (tenga en cuenta que en condiciones aeróbicas, no se forma lactato; en cambio, se forma piruvato y se transmite a través del ciclo del ácido cítrico).

Las células musculares también contienen glóbulos de grasa, que se utilizan como energía durante el ejercicio aeróbico.

Los sistemas de energía aeróbicos tardan más en producir ATP y alcanzar la máxima eficiencia, y requieren muchos más pasos bioquímicos, pero producen significativamente más ATP que la glucólisis anaeróbica.

El músculo cardíaco, por otro lado, puede consumir fácilmente cualquiera de los tres macronutrientes (proteínas, glucosa y grasas) de forma aeróbica sin un período de "calentamiento" y siempre extrae el máximo rendimiento de ATP de cualquier molécula involucrada.

El corazón, el hígado y los glóbulos rojos también consumirán ácido láctico producido y excretado por los músculos esqueléticos durante el ejercicio.

El músculo esquelético usa más calorías que otros órganos.

En reposo consume 54,4 kJ/kg (13,0 kcal/kg) al día.

Esto es más grande que el tejido adiposo (grasa) con 18,8 kJ/kg (4,5 kcal/kg) y el hueso con 9,6 kJ/kg (2,3 kcal/kg).


==== Eficiencia ====

La eficiencia del músculo humano se ha medido (en el contexto del remo y el ciclismo) entre un 18 % y un 26 %.

La eficiencia se define como la relación entre la producción de trabajo mecánico y el costo metabólico total, que se puede calcular a partir del consumo de oxígeno.

Esta baja eficiencia es el resultado de una eficiencia de alrededor del 40 % en la generación de ATP a partir de la energía de los alimentos, pérdidas al convertir la energía del ATP en trabajo mecánico dentro del músculo y pérdidas mecánicas dentro del cuerpo.

Las dos últimas pérdidas dependen del tipo de ejercicio y del tipo de fibras musculares que se utilicen (de contracción rápida o de contracción lenta).

Para una eficiencia global del 20 por ciento, un vatio de potencia mecánica equivale a 4,3 kcal por hora.

Por ejemplo, un fabricante de equipos de remo calibra su ergómetro de remo para contar las calorías quemadas como equivalentes a cuatro veces el trabajo mecánico real, más 300 kcal por hora, lo que equivale a una eficiencia de alrededor del 20 por ciento a 250 vatios de potencia mecánica.

La producción de energía mecánica de una contracción cíclica puede depender de muchos factores, incluido el tiempo de activación, la trayectoria de tensión muscular y las tasas de aumento y disminución de la fuerza.

Estos se pueden sintetizar experimentalmente mediante análisis de bucle de trabajo.


=== Fuerza muscular ===


La fuerza muscular es el resultado de tres factores superpuestos: fuerza fisiológica (tamaño del músculo, área transversal, puentes cruzados disponibles, respuestas al entrenamiento), fuerza neurológica (qué tan fuerte o débil es la señal que le dice al músculo que se contraiga) y fuerza mecánica ( ángulo de fuerza del músculo en la palanca, longitud del brazo de momento, capacidades articulares).

El músculo vertebrado normalmente produce aproximadamente 25 a 33 N (5,6 a 7,4 lbf) de fuerza por centímetro cuadrado de área de sección transversal del músculo cuando es isométrico y tiene una longitud óptima.

Algunos músculos de invertebrados, como las pinzas de los cangrejos, tienen sarcómeros mucho más largos que los de los vertebrados, lo que da como resultado muchos más sitios para que la actina y la miosina se unan y, por lo tanto, una fuerza mucho mayor por centímetro cuadrado a costa de una velocidad mucho más lenta.

La fuerza generada por una contracción se puede medir de forma no invasiva usando mecanomiografía o fonomiografía, medirse in vivo usando la tensión del tendón (si hay un tendón prominente) o medirse directamente usando métodos más invasivos.

La fuerza de cualquier músculo dado, en términos de fuerza ejercida sobre el esqueleto, depende de la longitud, la velocidad de acortamiento, el área de la sección transversal, el penacho, la longitud del sarcómero, las isoformas de miosina y la activación neural de las unidades motoras.

Las reducciones significativas en la fuerza muscular pueden indicar una patología subyacente; el cuadro de la derecha se usa como guía.


==== El músculo humano "más fuerte" ====

Dado que tres factores afectan la fuerza muscular simultáneamente y los músculos nunca funcionan individualmente, es engañoso comparar la fuerza en músculos individuales y afirmar que uno es el "más fuerte".

Pero a continuación se muestran varios músculos cuya fuerza llama la atención por diferentes motivos.

En el lenguaje corriente, la "fuerza" muscular generalmente se refiere a la capacidad de ejercer una fuerza sobre un objeto externo, por ejemplo, levantar un peso.

Según esta definición, el músculo masetero o mandibular es el más fuerte.

El Libro Guinness de los récords de 1992 registra el logro de una fuerza de mordida de 4337 N (975 lbf) durante 2 segundos.

Lo que distingue al masetero no es nada especial sobre el músculo en sí, sino su ventaja para trabajar contra un brazo de palanca mucho más corto que otros músculos.

Si "fuerza" se refiere a la fuerza ejercida por el propio músculo, por ejemplo, en el lugar donde se inserta en un hueso, entonces los músculos más fuertes son los que tienen el área transversal más grande.

Esto se debe a que la tensión ejercida por una fibra muscular esquelética individual no varía mucho.

Cada fibra puede ejercer una fuerza del orden de 0,3 micronewton.

Según esta definición, generalmente se dice que el músculo más fuerte del cuerpo es el cuádriceps femoral o el glúteo mayor.

Debido a que la fuerza muscular está determinada por el área transversal, un músculo más corto será más fuerte "libra por libra" (es decir, por peso) que un músculo más largo de la misma área transversal.

La capa miometrial del útero puede ser el músculo más fuerte por peso en el cuerpo humano femenino.

En el momento en que nace un bebé, el útero humano completo pesa alrededor de 1,1 kg (40 oz).

Durante el parto, el útero ejerce de 100 a 400 N (25 a 100 lbf) de fuerza hacia abajo con cada contracción.

Los músculos externos del ojo son llamativamente grandes y fuertes en relación con el pequeño tamaño y peso del globo ocular.

Con frecuencia se dice que son "los músculos más fuertes para el trabajo que tienen que hacer" y, a veces, se afirma que son "100 veces más fuertes de lo que deben ser".

Sin embargo, los movimientos oculares (particularmente los movimientos sacádicos que se usan en la exploración y lectura faciales) requieren movimientos de alta velocidad, y los músculos oculares se ejercitan todas las noches durante el sueño con movimientos oculares rápidos.

La afirmación de que "la lengua es el músculo más fuerte del cuerpo" aparece con frecuencia en listas de hechos sorprendentes, pero es difícil encontrar una definición de "fuerza" que haga verdadera esta afirmación.

Tenga en cuenta que la lengua consta de ocho músculos, no de uno.


==== Generación de fuerza ====

La fuerza muscular es proporcional al área transversal fisiológica (PCSA) y la velocidad muscular es proporcional a la longitud de la fibra muscular.

Sin embargo, el torque alrededor de una articulación está determinado por una serie de parámetros biomecánicos, incluida la distancia entre las inserciones musculares y los puntos de pivote, el tamaño del músculo y la relación de transmisión arquitectónica.

Los músculos normalmente están dispuestos en oposición, de modo que cuando un grupo de músculos se contrae, otro grupo se relaja o se alarga.

El antagonismo en la transmisión de los impulsos nerviosos a los músculos significa que es imposible estimular completamente la contracción de dos músculos antagónicos al mismo tiempo.

Durante los movimientos balísticos como lanzar, los músculos antagonistas actúan para "frenar" a los músculos agonistas durante la contracción, particularmente al final del movimiento.

En el ejemplo del lanzamiento, el pecho y la parte frontal del hombro (deltoides anterior) se contraen para tirar del brazo hacia adelante, mientras que los músculos de la parte posterior y posterior del hombro (deltoides posterior) también se contraen y experimentan una contracción excéntrica para ralentizar el movimiento. para evitar lesiones.

Parte del proceso de entrenamiento es aprender a relajar los músculos antagonistas para aumentar la entrada de fuerza del tórax y la parte anterior del hombro.

Los músculos que se contraen producen vibración y sonido.

Las fibras de contracción lenta producen de 10 a 30 contracciones por segundo (10 a 30 Hz).

Las fibras de contracción rápida producen de 30 a 70 contracciones por segundo (30 a 70 Hz).

La vibración se puede presenciar y sentir al tensar mucho los músculos, como cuando se cierra el puño con firmeza.

El sonido se puede escuchar presionando un músculo muy tenso contra la oreja, nuevamente un puño firme es un buen ejemplo.

El sonido generalmente se describe como un sonido retumbante.

Algunas personas pueden producir voluntariamente este sonido retumbante al contraer el músculo tensor del tímpano del oído medio.

El sonido retumbante también se puede escuchar cuando los músculos del cuello o la mandíbula están muy tensos.


=== Vías de transducción de señales ===

El fenotipo del tipo de fibra muscular esquelética en animales adultos está regulado por varias vías de señalización independientes.

Estas incluyen vías involucradas con la vía Ras/proteína quinasa activada por mitógeno (MAPK), calcineurina, proteína quinasa IV dependiente de calcio/calmodulina y el coactivador 1 del proliferador de peroxisomas γ (PGC-1).

La vía de señalización Ras/MAPK vincula las neuronas motoras y los sistemas de señalización, acoplando la excitación y la regulación de la transcripción para promover la inducción dependiente de los nervios del programa lento en la regeneración muscular.

La calcineurina, una fosfatasa activada por Ca2+/calmodulina implicada en la especificación del tipo de fibra dependiente de la actividad nerviosa en el músculo esquelético, controla directamente el estado de fosforilación del factor de transcripción NFAT, lo que permite su translocación al núcleo y conduce a la activación de fibras de tipo lento. proteínas musculares en cooperación con proteínas del factor 2 potenciador de miocitos (MEF2) y otras proteínas reguladoras.

La actividad de la proteína cinasa dependiente de Ca2+/calmodulina también se regula positivamente por la actividad de las neuronas motoras lentas, posiblemente porque amplifica las respuestas generadas por la calcineurina de tipo lento al promover las funciones del transactivador MEF2 y mejorar la capacidad oxidativa a través de la estimulación de la biogénesis mitocondrial.

Los cambios inducidos por la contracción en el calcio intracelular o las especies reactivas del oxígeno proporcionan señales a diversas vías que incluyen las MAPK, la calcineurina y la proteína quinasa IV dependiente de calcio/calmodulina para activar los factores de transcripción que regulan la expresión génica y la actividad enzimática en el músculo esquelético.

PGC1-α (PPARGC1A), un coactivador transcripcional de receptores nucleares importante para la regulación de una serie de genes mitocondriales involucrados en el metabolismo oxidativo, interactúa directamente con MEF2 para activar sinérgicamente los genes musculares de contracción lenta selectiva (ST) y también sirve como objetivo para señalización de calcineurina.

Una vía transcripcional mediada por el receptor activado por el proliferador de peroxisomas δ (PPARδ) está involucrada en la regulación del fenotipo de la fibra muscular esquelética.

Los ratones que albergan una forma activada de PPARd muestran un fenotipo de "resistencia", con un aumento coordinado de las enzimas oxidativas y la biogénesis mitocondrial y una mayor proporción de fibras ST.

Por lo tanto, a través de la genómica funcional, la calcineurina, la cinasa dependiente de calmodulina, la PGC-1α y el PPARδ activado forman la base de una red de señalización que controla la transformación del tipo de fibra muscular esquelética y los perfiles metabólicos que protegen contra la resistencia a la insulina y la obesidad.

La transición del metabolismo aeróbico al anaeróbico durante el trabajo intenso requiere que varios sistemas se activen rápidamente para garantizar un suministro constante de ATP para los músculos que trabajan.

Estos incluyen un cambio de combustibles basados ​​en grasas a carbohidratos, una redistribución del flujo sanguíneo de los músculos que no trabajan a los que están en ejercicio, y la eliminación de varios de los subproductos del metabolismo anaeróbico, como el dióxido de carbono y el ácido láctico.

Algunas de estas respuestas se rigen por el control transcripcional del fenotipo glucolítico de contracción rápida (FT).

Por ejemplo, la reprogramación del músculo esquelético de un fenotipo glucolítico ST a un fenotipo glucolítico FT implica el complejo Six1/Eya1, compuesto por miembros de la familia de proteínas Six.

Además, el factor inducible por hipoxia 1-α (HIF1A) ha sido identificado como un regulador maestro para la expresión de genes involucrados en respuestas hipóxicas esenciales que mantienen los niveles de ATP en las células.

La ablación de HIF-1α en el músculo esquelético se asoció con un aumento en la actividad de las enzimas limitantes de la velocidad de las mitocondrias, lo que indica que el ciclo del ácido cítrico y el aumento de la oxidación de ácidos grasos pueden compensar la disminución del flujo a través de la vía glucolítica en estos animales.

Sin embargo, las respuestas de HIF-1α mediadas por hipoxia también están vinculadas a la regulación de la disfunción mitocondrial a través de la formación de especies de oxígeno reactivas excesivas en las mitocondrias.

Otras vías también influyen en el carácter del músculo adulto.

Por ejemplo, la fuerza física dentro de una fibra muscular puede liberar el factor de respuesta del suero del factor de transcripción de la proteína estructural titina, lo que lleva a un crecimiento muscular alterado.


== Ejercicio ==

El ejercicio a menudo se recomienda como un medio para mejorar las habilidades motoras, el estado físico, la fuerza muscular y ósea y la función articular.

El ejercicio tiene varios efectos sobre los músculos, el tejido conectivo, los huesos y los nervios que estimulan los músculos.

Uno de estos efectos es la hipertrofia muscular, un aumento en el tamaño del músculo debido a un aumento en el número de fibras musculares o el área transversal de las miofibrillas.

Los cambios musculares dependen del tipo de ejercicio utilizado.
Generalmente, hay dos tipos de regímenes de ejercicio, aeróbicos y anaeróbicos.

El ejercicio aeróbico (p. ej., maratones) implica actividades de baja intensidad pero de larga duración durante las cuales los músculos utilizados están por debajo de su fuerza de contracción máxima.

Las actividades aeróbicas se basan en la respiración aeróbica (es decir, el ciclo del ácido cítrico y la cadena de transporte de electrones) para obtener energía metabólica mediante el consumo de grasas, proteínas, carbohidratos y oxígeno.

Los músculos involucrados en los ejercicios aeróbicos contienen un mayor porcentaje de fibras musculares Tipo I (o de contracción lenta), que contienen principalmente enzimas mitocondriales y de oxidación asociadas con la respiración aeróbica.

Por el contrario, el ejercicio anaeróbico se asocia con ejercicio de corta duración pero de alta intensidad (p. ej., carreras de velocidad y levantamiento de pesas).

Las actividades anaeróbicas utilizan predominantemente fibras musculares tipo II, de contracción rápida.

Las fibras musculares tipo II dependen de la glucogénesis para obtener energía durante el ejercicio anaeróbico.

Durante el ejercicio anaeróbico, las fibras de tipo II consumen poco oxígeno, proteínas y grasas, producen grandes cantidades de ácido láctico y son fatigables.

Muchos ejercicios son parcialmente aeróbicos y anaeróbicos; por ejemplo, fútbol y escalada en roca.

La presencia de ácido láctico tiene un efecto inhibitorio sobre la generación de ATP dentro del músculo.

Incluso puede detener la producción de ATP si la concentración intracelular se vuelve demasiado alta.

Sin embargo, el entrenamiento de resistencia mitiga la acumulación de ácido láctico a través de una mayor capilarización y mioglobina.

Esto aumenta la capacidad de eliminar los productos de desecho, como el ácido láctico, de los músculos para no afectar la función muscular.

Una vez extraído de los músculos, el ácido láctico puede ser utilizado por otros músculos o tejidos corporales como fuente de energía, o transportado al hígado, donde se convierte de nuevo en piruvato.

Además de aumentar el nivel de ácido láctico, el ejercicio extenuante provoca la pérdida de iones de potasio en el músculo.

Esto puede facilitar la recuperación de la función muscular al proteger contra la fatiga.

El dolor muscular de aparición tardía es un dolor o una molestia que se puede sentir entre uno y tres días después de hacer ejercicio y, por lo general, desaparece dos o tres días después.

Una vez que se pensó que era causado por la acumulación de ácido láctico, una teoría más reciente es que es causado por pequeños desgarros en las fibras musculares causados ​​por contracción excéntrica o niveles de entrenamiento no acostumbrados.

Dado que el ácido láctico se dispersa con bastante rapidez, no podría explicar el dolor experimentado días después del ejercicio.


== Importancia clínica ==

=== Enfermedad muscular ===

Las enfermedades del músculo esquelético se denominan miopatías, mientras que las enfermedades de los nervios se denominan neuropatías.

Ambos pueden afectar la función muscular o causar dolor muscular y caer bajo el paraguas de la enfermedad neuromuscular.

La causa de muchas miopatías se atribuye a mutaciones en las diversas proteínas musculares asociadas.

Algunas miopatías inflamatorias incluyen polimiositis y miositis por cuerpos de inclusión.

Las enfermedades neuromusculares afectan a los músculos y su control nervioso.

En general, los problemas con el control nervioso pueden causar espasticidad o parálisis, según la ubicación y la naturaleza del problema.

Una serie de trastornos del movimiento están causados ​​por trastornos neurológicos, como la enfermedad de Parkinson y la enfermedad de Huntington, en las que existe una disfunción del sistema nervioso central.

Los síntomas de las enfermedades musculares pueden incluir debilidad, espasticidad, mioclonías y mialgias.

Los procedimientos de diagnóstico que pueden revelar trastornos musculares incluyen pruebas de niveles de creatina quinasa en la sangre y electromiografía (que mide la actividad eléctrica en los músculos).

En algunos casos, se puede realizar una biopsia muscular para identificar una miopatía, así como pruebas genéticas para identificar anomalías en el ADN asociadas con miopatías y distrofias específicas.

Se está experimentando una técnica de elastografía no invasiva que mide el ruido muscular para proporcionar una forma de monitorear la enfermedad neuromuscular.

El sonido producido por un músculo proviene del acortamiento de los filamentos de actomiosina a lo largo del eje del músculo.

Durante la contracción, el músculo se acorta a lo largo y se expande a lo ancho, produciendo vibraciones en la superficie.


=== Hipertrofia ===

Independientemente de las medidas de fuerza y ​​rendimiento, los músculos pueden ser inducidos a crecer más por una serie de factores, que incluyen señales hormonales, factores de desarrollo, entrenamiento de fuerza y ​​​​enfermedad.

Contrariamente a la creencia popular, el número de fibras musculares no se puede aumentar mediante el ejercicio.

En cambio, los músculos crecen a través de una combinación de crecimiento de células musculares a medida que se agregan nuevos filamentos de proteínas junto con masa adicional proporcionada por células satélite indiferenciadas junto con las células musculares existentes.

Los factores biológicos como la edad y los niveles hormonales pueden afectar la hipertrofia muscular.

Durante la pubertad en los hombres, la hipertrofia ocurre a un ritmo acelerado a medida que aumentan los niveles de hormonas estimulantes del crecimiento producidas por el cuerpo.

La hipertrofia natural normalmente se detiene en pleno crecimiento al final de la adolescencia.

Como la testosterona es una de las principales hormonas de crecimiento del cuerpo, en promedio, los hombres encuentran que la hipertrofia es mucho más fácil de lograr que las mujeres.

Tomar testosterona adicional u otros esteroides anabólicos aumentará la hipertrofia muscular.

Los factores musculares, espinales y neurales afectan la construcción de músculos.

A veces, una persona puede notar un aumento en la fuerza de un músculo determinado aunque solo se haya ejercitado su opuesto, como cuando un fisicoculturista encuentra que su bíceps izquierdo es más fuerte después de completar un régimen centrado solo en el bíceps derecho.

Este fenómeno se llama educación cruzada.


=== Atrofia ===
 
Todos los días, entre el uno y el dos por ciento del músculo se descompone y se reconstruye.

La inactividad, la desnutrición, las enfermedades y el envejecimiento pueden aumentar la descomposición que conduce a la atrofia muscular o la sarcopenia.

La sarcopenia es comúnmente un proceso relacionado con la edad que puede causar fragilidad y sus consecuencias.

Una disminución de la masa muscular puede ir acompañada de un menor número y tamaño de las células musculares, así como de un menor contenido de proteínas.

Se sabe que los vuelos espaciales tripulados, que implican períodos prolongados de inmovilización e ingravidez, provocan el debilitamiento y la atrofia muscular, lo que provoca una pérdida de hasta el 30% de la masa en algunos músculos.

Estas consecuencias también se observan en algunos mamíferos después de la hibernación.

Muchas enfermedades y afecciones, como el cáncer, el SIDA y la insuficiencia cardíaca, pueden causar pérdida de masa muscular conocida como caquexia.


=== Investigación ===

Las miopatías se han modelado con sistemas de cultivo celular de músculo a partir de biopsias de tejido sano o enfermo.

Otra fuente de músculo esquelético y progenitores la proporciona la diferenciación dirigida de células madre pluripotentes.

La investigación sobre las propiedades del músculo esquelético utiliza muchas técnicas.

La estimulación muscular eléctrica se utiliza para determinar la fuerza y ​​la velocidad de contracción a diferentes frecuencias relacionadas con la composición y mezcla del tipo de fibra dentro de un grupo muscular individual.

Las pruebas musculares in vitro se utilizan para una caracterización más completa de las propiedades musculares.

La actividad eléctrica asociada con la contracción muscular se mide mediante electromiografía (EMG).

El músculo esquelético tiene dos respuestas fisiológicas: relajación y contracción.

Los mecanismos por los cuales ocurren estas respuestas generan actividad eléctrica medida por EMG.

Específicamente, EMG puede medir el potencial de acción de un músculo esquelético, que ocurre a partir de la hiperpolarización de los axones motores de los impulsos nerviosos enviados al músculo.

La EMG se utiliza en la investigación para determinar si el músculo esquelético de interés se está activando, la cantidad de fuerza generada y un indicador de fatiga muscular.

Los dos tipos de EMG son la EMG intramuscular y la más común, la EMG de superficie.

Las señales EMG son mucho mayores cuando un músculo esquelético se contrae que cuando se relaja.

Sin embargo, para los músculos esqueléticos más pequeños y profundos, las señales EMG se reducen y, por lo tanto, se consideran una técnica menos valiosa para medir la activación.

En la investigación que usa EMG, se suele realizar una contracción voluntaria máxima (MVC) en el músculo esquelético de interés, para tener datos de referencia para el resto de las grabaciones de EMG durante la prueba experimental principal para ese mismo músculo esquelético.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Músculo_esquelético

;;;PT;;;



MÚSCULO ESQUELÉTICO


Os músculos esqueléticos (comumente chamados de músculos) são órgãos do sistema muscular dos vertebrados que estão principalmente ligados por tendões aos ossos do esqueleto.

As células musculares dos músculos esqueléticos são muito mais longas do que nos outros tipos de tecido muscular e são frequentemente conhecidas como fibras musculares.

O tecido muscular de um músculo esquelético é estriado – tendo uma aparência listrada devido ao arranjo dos sarcômeros.

Os músculos esqueléticos são músculos voluntários sob o controle do sistema nervoso somático.

Os outros tipos de músculo são o músculo cardíaco que também é estriado e o músculo liso que não é estriado; ambos os tipos de tecido muscular são classificados como involuntários, ou sob o controle do sistema nervoso autônomo.

Um músculo esquelético contém vários fascículos – feixes de fibras musculares.

Cada fibra individual e cada músculo é cercado por um tipo de camada de tecido conjuntivo de fáscia.

As fibras musculares são formadas a partir da fusão de mioblastos em desenvolvimento em um processo conhecido como miogênese, resultando em células multinucleadas longas.

Nestas células, os núcleos denominados mionúcleos estão localizados ao longo do interior da membrana celular.

As fibras musculares também possuem múltiplas mitocôndrias para suprir as necessidades energéticas.
As fibras musculares, por sua vez, são compostas por miofibrilas.

As miofibrilas são compostas por filamentos de actina e miosina chamados miofilamentos, repetidos em unidades chamadas sarcômeros, que são as unidades funcionais básicas e contráteis da fibra muscular necessárias para a contração muscular.

Os músculos são predominantemente alimentados pela oxidação de gorduras e carboidratos, mas reações químicas anaeróbicas também são usadas, principalmente por fibras de contração rápida.

Essas reações químicas produzem moléculas de trifosfato de adenosina (ATP) que são usadas para alimentar o movimento das cabeças de miosina.


== Estrutura ==

=== Anatomia geral ===

Existem mais de 600 músculos esqueléticos no corpo humano, representando cerca de 40% a 50% do peso corporal.

A maioria dos músculos ocorre em pares posicionados bilateralmente para servir ambos os lados do corpo.

Os músculos são frequentemente classificados como grupos de músculos que trabalham juntos para realizar uma ação.

No tronco existem vários grupos musculares principais, incluindo os músculos peitorais e abdominais; músculos intrínsecos e extrínsecos são subdivisões de grupos musculares na mão, pé, língua e músculos extraoculares do olho.

Os músculos também são agrupados em compartimentos, incluindo quatro grupos no braço e os quatro grupos na perna.

Além da parte contrátil de um músculo que consiste em suas fibras, um músculo contém uma parte não contrátil de tecido conjuntivo fibroso denso que compõe o tendão em cada extremidade.

Os tendões prendem os músculos aos ossos para dar movimento esquelético.

O comprimento de um músculo inclui os tendões.

O tecido conjuntivo está presente em todos os músculos como fáscia profunda.

A fáscia profunda especializa-se dentro dos músculos para envolver cada fibra muscular como endomísio; cada fascículo muscular como perimísio e cada músculo individual como epimísio.

Juntas, essas camadas são chamadas de mysia.

A fáscia profunda também separa os grupos de músculos em compartimentos musculares.

Dois tipos de receptores sensoriais encontrados nos músculos são os fusos musculares e os órgãos tendinosos de Golgi.

Os fusos musculares são receptores de estiramento localizados no ventre muscular.

Os órgãos tendinosos de Golgi são proprioceptores localizados na junção miotendínea que informam sobre a tensão de um músculo.


==== Fibras musculares esqueléticas ====

As células musculares esqueléticas são as células contráteis individuais dentro de um músculo e são frequentemente chamadas de fibras musculares.

Um único músculo, como o bíceps em um homem adulto jovem, contém cerca de 253.000 fibras musculares.

As fibras musculares esqueléticas são as únicas células musculares que são multinucleadas com os núcleos frequentemente chamados de mionúcleos.

Isso ocorre durante a miogênese com a fusão de mioblastos, cada um contribuindo com um núcleo.

A fusão depende de proteínas específicas do músculo conhecidas como fusogens chamadas miofabricantes e miomerger.

Muitos núcleos são necessários para a célula do músculo esquelético para as grandes quantidades de proteínas e enzimas necessárias para serem produzidas para o funcionamento normal da célula.
 
Uma única fibra muscular pode conter de centenas a milhares de núcleos.

Uma fibra muscular, por exemplo, no bíceps humano com um comprimento de 10 cm pode ter até 3.000 núcleos.

Ao contrário de uma célula não muscular onde o núcleo está posicionado centralmente, o mionúcleo é alongado e localizado próximo ao sarcolema.

Os mionúcleos estão dispostos de maneira bastante uniforme ao longo da fibra, com cada núcleo tendo seu próprio domínio mionuclear, onde é responsável por suportar o volume de citoplasma naquela seção específica da miofibra.

Um grupo de células-tronco musculares conhecidas como células miossatélites, também células satélites, são encontradas entre a membrana basal e o sarcolema das fibras musculares.

Essas células são normalmente quiescentes, mas podem ser ativadas por exercício ou patologia para fornecer mionúcleos adicionais para crescimento ou reparo muscular.


==== Fixação aos tendões ====

Os músculos se ligam aos tendões em uma região de interface complexa conhecida como junção musculotendínea, também conhecida como junção miotendínea, uma área especializada para a transmissão primária de força.

Na interface músculo-tendão, a força é transmitida dos sarcômeros nas células musculares para o tendão.

Músculos e tendões se desenvolvem em estreita associação e, após sua junção na junção miotendínea, constituem uma unidade dinâmica para a transmissão de força da contração muscular para o sistema esquelético.


==== Disposição das fibras musculares ====

A arquitetura muscular refere-se ao arranjo das fibras musculares em relação ao eixo de geração de força, que vai da origem de um músculo até sua inserção.

Os arranjos usuais são tipos de músculos paralelos e tipos de músculos penados.

Nos músculos paralelos, os fascículos correm paralelos ao eixo de geração de força, mas os fascículos podem variar em sua relação uns com os outros e com seus tendões.

Essas variações são observadas nos músculos fusiformes, em cinta e convergentes.

Um músculo convergente tem uma forma triangular ou em leque, pois as fibras convergem em sua inserção e se espalham amplamente na origem.

Um exemplo menos comum de músculo paralelo é um músculo circular, como o orbicular do olho, no qual as fibras são dispostas longitudinalmente, mas criam um círculo da origem à inserção.

Essas diferentes arquiteturas podem causar variações na tensão que um músculo pode criar entre seus tendões.

As fibras nos músculos penados correm em um ângulo em relação ao eixo de geração de força.

Este ângulo de penação reduz a força efetiva de qualquer fibra individual, pois está efetivamente puxando para fora do eixo.

No entanto, devido a esse ângulo, mais fibras podem ser empacotadas no mesmo volume muscular, aumentando a área de seção transversal fisiológica (PCSA).

Este efeito é conhecido como empacotamento de fibra e, em termos de geração de força, mais do que supera a perda de eficiência da orientação fora do eixo.

A compensação vem na velocidade geral de encurtamento muscular e na excursão total.

A velocidade geral de encurtamento muscular é reduzida em comparação com a velocidade de encurtamento da fibra, assim como a distância total de encurtamento.

Todos esses efeitos são escalonados com o ângulo de penação; ângulos maiores levam a uma força maior devido ao aumento do empacotamento de fibras e PCSA, mas com maiores perdas na velocidade de encurtamento e excursão.

Os tipos de músculo penado são unipenados, bipenados e multipenados.

Um músculo unipenado tem fibras anguladas semelhantes que estão em um lado de um tendão.

Um músculo bipenado tem fibras em dois lados de um tendão.

Músculos multipenados têm fibras que são orientadas em vários ângulos ao longo do eixo gerador de força, e essa é a arquitetura mais geral e comum.


=== Crescimento da fibra muscular ===

As fibras musculares crescem quando exercitadas e encolhem quando não estão em uso.

Isso se deve ao fato de que o exercício estimula o aumento das miofibrilas que aumentam o tamanho total das células musculares.

Músculos bem exercitados podem não apenas aumentar o tamanho, mas também desenvolver mais mitocôndrias, mioglobina, glicogênio e uma maior densidade de capilares.

No entanto, as células musculares não podem se dividir para produzir novas células e, como resultado, há menos células musculares em um adulto do que em um recém-nascido.


=== Nomeação muscular ===


Há uma série de termos usados ​​na nomeação dos músculos, incluindo aqueles relacionados ao tamanho, forma, ação, localização, orientação e número de cabeças.

Por tamanho
brevis significa curto; longus significa longo; longissimus significa mais longo; magnus significa grande; principal significa maior; maximus significa maior; menor significa menor e mínimo menor; latissimus significa mais largo e vastus significa enorme.

Esses termos são frequentemente usados ​​após o músculo específico, como glúteo máximo e glúteo mínimo.

Por forma relativa
deltoide significa triangular; quadrado significa ter quatro lados; rhomboideus significa ter uma forma rombóide; teres significa redondo ou cilíndrico e trapézio significa ter uma forma trapezoidal; serratus significa dente de serra; orbicularis significa circular; pectinato significa pente; piriforme significa em forma de pêra; platys significa plano e gracilis significa esbelto.

Exemplos são o pronador redondo e o pronador quadrado.

Por ação
abdutor se afastando da linha média; adutor movendo-se em direção à linha média; depressor se movendo para baixo; elevador subindo; movimento flexor que diminui um ângulo; movimento extensor que aumenta um ângulo ou endireita; pronador movendo-se para baixo; supinador movendo-se para cima; rotador interno girando em direção ao corpo; rotador externo girando para longe do corpo; esfíncter diminui o tamanho , e tensor dá tensão a; Os músculos fixadores servem para fixar uma articulação em uma determinada posição, estabilizando o motor primário enquanto outras articulações estão se movendo.

Por número de cabeças
bíceps dois; tríceps três e quadríceps quatro.

Por localização
nomeado após a estrutura principal próxima, como o músculo temporal (temporalis) próximo ao osso temporal.

Também supra-acima; infra-abaixo e subabaixo.

Por orientação do fascículo
Em relação à linha média, reto significa paralelo à linha média; transversal significa perpendicular à linha média e oblíqua significa diagonal à linha média.

Em relação ao eixo de geração de força – tipos de músculos paralelos e tipos de músculos penados.


== Tipos de fibra ==

Em geral, existem dois tipos de fibra muscular: Tipo I, que é lenta, e Tipo II, que é rápida.

O tipo II tem duas divisões do tipo IIA (oxidativo) e tipo IIX (glicolítico), dando três tipos principais de fibras.

Essas fibras têm propriedades metabólicas, contráteis e de unidade motora relativamente distintas.

A tabela abaixo diferencia esses tipos de propriedades.

Esses tipos de propriedades - embora sejam parcialmente dependentes das propriedades de fibras individuais - tendem a ser relevantes e medidos no nível da unidade motora, em vez de fibra individual.


=== Cor da fibra ===

Tradicionalmente, as fibras eram categorizadas de acordo com sua cor variável, que é um reflexo do conteúdo de mioglobina.

As fibras do tipo I aparecem vermelhas devido aos altos níveis de mioglobina.

As fibras musculares vermelhas tendem a ter mais mitocôndrias e maior densidade capilar local.

Essas fibras são mais adequadas para resistência e são lentas para fadiga porque usam o metabolismo oxidativo para gerar ATP (trifosfato de adenosina).

As fibras do Tipo II menos oxidativas são brancas devido à mioglobina relativamente baixa e à dependência de enzimas glicolíticas.


=== Velocidade de contração ===

As fibras também podem ser classificadas em suas capacidades de contração, em contração rápida e lenta.

Esses traços em grande parte, mas não completamente, se sobrepõem às classificações baseadas em cor, ATPase ou MHC.
Alguns autores definem uma fibra de contração rápida como aquela em que a miosina pode dividir o ATP muito rapidamente.

Estes incluem principalmente as fibras ATPase tipo II e MHC tipo II.

No entanto, as fibras de contração rápida também demonstram uma maior capacidade de transmissão eletroquímica de potenciais de ação e um rápido nível de liberação e captação de cálcio pelo retículo sarcoplasmático.

As fibras de contração rápida dependem de um sistema glicolítico bem desenvolvido, anaeróbico e de curto prazo para transferência de energia e podem contrair e desenvolver tensão em 2 a 3 vezes a taxa das fibras de contração lenta.

Músculos de contração rápida são muito melhores em gerar rajadas curtas de força ou velocidade do que músculos lentos e, portanto, fatigam mais rapidamente.

As fibras de contração lenta geram energia para a ressíntese de ATP por meio de um sistema de transferência de energia aeróbica de longo prazo.

Estes incluem principalmente as fibras ATPase tipo I e MHC tipo I.

Eles tendem a ter um baixo nível de atividade de ATPase, uma velocidade de contração mais lenta com uma capacidade glicolítica menos desenvolvida.

As fibras que se tornam de contração lenta desenvolvem um maior número de mitocôndrias e capilares, tornando-as melhores para o trabalho prolongado.

Distribuição de tipos
Músculos individuais tendem a ser uma mistura de vários tipos de fibras, mas suas proporções variam dependendo das ações desse músculo.

Por exemplo, em humanos, os músculos quadríceps contêm ~ 52% de fibras do tipo I, enquanto o sóleo é ~ 80% do tipo I.

O músculo orbicular do olho é apenas ~ 15% do tipo I.

As unidades motoras dentro do músculo, no entanto, têm variação mínima entre as fibras dessa unidade.

É este fato que torna viável o princípio do tamanho do recrutamento de unidades motoras.

O número total de fibras musculares esqueléticas tem sido tradicionalmente pensado para não mudar.

Acredita-se que não haja diferenças de sexo ou idade na distribuição de fibras; no entanto, as proporções dos tipos de fibras variam consideravelmente de músculo para músculo e de pessoa para pessoa.

Entre as diferentes espécies há uma grande variação nas proporções dos tipos de fibras musculares.

Homens e mulheres sedentários (assim como crianças pequenas) têm 45% de fibras do tipo II e 55% do tipo I.

Pessoas na extremidade superior de qualquer esporte tendem a demonstrar padrões de distribuição de fibras, por exemplo, atletas de resistência mostram um nível mais alto de fibras do tipo I.

Atletas de sprint, por outro lado, requerem um grande número de fibras do tipo IIX.

Atletas de eventos de média distância mostram distribuição aproximadamente igual dos dois tipos.

Este também é frequentemente o caso de atletas de força, como arremessadores e saltadores.

Tem sido sugerido que vários tipos de exercício podem induzir alterações nas fibras de um músculo esquelético.

Acredita-se que, se você realizar eventos do tipo resistência por um período prolongado de tempo, algumas das fibras do tipo IIX se transformarão em fibras do tipo IIA.

No entanto, não há consenso sobre o assunto.

Pode ser que as fibras do tipo IIX mostrem melhorias na capacidade oxidativa após treinamento de resistência de alta intensidade, o que as leva a um nível em que são capazes de realizar o metabolismo oxidativo de forma tão eficaz quanto as fibras de contração lenta de indivíduos não treinados.

Isso seria causado por um aumento no tamanho e número mitocondrial e as mudanças relacionadas associadas, não uma mudança no tipo de fibra.


=== Métodos de tipagem de fibra ===


Existem vários métodos empregados para tipagem de fibras, e a confusão entre os métodos é comum entre os não especialistas.

Dois métodos comumente confundidos são a coloração histoquímica para a atividade da ATPase da miosina e a coloração imuno-histoquímica para o tipo de cadeia pesada de miosina (MHC).

A atividade da ATPase da miosina é comumente - e corretamente - referida simplesmente como "tipo de fibra" e resulta do ensaio direto da atividade da ATPase sob várias condições (por exemplo, pH).

A coloração da cadeia pesada de miosina é mais precisamente referida como "tipo de fibra MHC", por exemplo, "fibras MHC IIa", e resulta da determinação de diferentes isoformas de MHC.

Esses métodos estão intimamente relacionados fisiologicamente, pois o tipo MHC é o principal determinante da atividade da ATPase.

No entanto, nenhum desses métodos de tipagem é de natureza diretamente metabólica; eles não abordam diretamente a capacidade oxidativa ou glicolítica da fibra.

Quando as fibras "tipo I" ou "tipo II" são referidas genericamente, isso se refere com mais precisão à soma dos tipos numéricos de fibras (I vs.

II) conforme avaliado pela coloração da atividade da miosina ATPase (por exemplo, fibras "tipo II" referem-se ao tipo IIA + tipo IIAX + tipo IIXA ... etc.).

Abaixo está uma tabela que mostra a relação entre esses dois métodos, limitados aos tipos de fibra encontrados em humanos.

A capitalização de subtipo é usada na tipagem de fibra vs.

A tipagem do MHC e alguns tipos de ATPase contêm vários tipos de MHC.

Além disso, um subtipo B ou b não é expresso em humanos por nenhum dos métodos.

Os primeiros pesquisadores acreditavam que os humanos expressavam um MHC IIb, o que levou à classificação ATPase de IIB.

No entanto, pesquisas posteriores mostraram que o MHC IIb humano era de fato IIx, indicando que o IIB é melhor chamado IIX.

IIb é expresso em outros mamíferos, então ainda é visto com precisão (junto com IIB) na literatura.

Os tipos de fibras não humanas incluem fibras IIb verdadeiras, IIc, IId, etc.

Outros métodos de tipagem de fibra são menos formalmente delineados e existem em mais de um espectro.

Eles tendem a se concentrar mais nas capacidades metabólicas e funcionais (ou seja, tempo de contração oxidativo versus glicolítico, rápido versus lento).

Como observado acima, a tipagem de fibra por ATPase ou MHC não mede ou dita diretamente esses parâmetros.

No entanto, muitos dos vários métodos estão mecanicamente ligados, enquanto outros estão correlacionados in vivo.

Por exemplo, o tipo de fibra ATPase está relacionado à velocidade de contração, porque a alta atividade da ATPase permite um ciclo mais rápido da ponte cruzada.

Enquanto a atividade da ATPase é apenas um componente da velocidade de contração, as fibras do Tipo I são "lentas", em parte, porque têm baixas velocidades de atividade da ATPase em comparação com as fibras do Tipo II.

No entanto, medir a velocidade de contração não é o mesmo que tipagem de fibra ATPase.


== Microanatomia ==


O músculo esquelético exibe um padrão de bandas distinto quando visto ao microscópio devido ao arranjo de duas proteínas contráteis miosina e actina – que são dois dos miofilamentos nas miofibrilas.

A miosina forma os filamentos grossos e a actina forma os filamentos finos, e estão dispostos em unidades repetidas chamadas sarcômeros.

A interação de ambas as proteínas resulta na contração muscular.

O sarcômero está ligado a outras organelas, como as mitocôndrias, por filamentos intermediários no citoesqueleto.

O costâmero liga o sarcômero ao sarcolema. Cada organela e macromolécula de uma fibra muscular é organizada para garantir que ela atenda às funções desejadas.

A membrana celular é chamada de sarcolema com o citoplasma conhecido como sarcoplasma.

No sarcoplasma estão as miofibrilas.

As miofibrilas são longos feixes de proteínas com cerca de um micrômetro de diâmetro.

Pressionados contra o interior do sarcolema estão os incomuns mionúcleos achatados.

Entre as miofibrilas estão as mitocôndrias.

Enquanto a fibra muscular não possui cisternas endoplasmáticas lisas, ela contém retículo sarcoplasmático.

O retículo sarcoplasmático envolve as miofibrilas e mantém uma reserva dos íons de cálcio necessários para causar uma contração muscular.

Periodicamente, tem sacos terminais dilatados conhecidos como cisternas terminais.

Estes atravessam a fibra muscular de um lado para o outro.

Entre duas cisternas terminais há uma dobra tubular chamada túbulo transverso (túbulo T).

Os túbulos T são as vias para os potenciais de ação para sinalizar o retículo sarcoplasmático para liberar cálcio, causando uma contração muscular.

Juntos, duas cisternas terminais e um túbulo transverso formam uma tríade.


== Desenvolvimento ==


Todos os músculos são derivados do mesoderma paraxial.

Durante o desenvolvimento embrionário no processo de somitogênese, o mesoderma paraxial é dividido ao longo do comprimento do embrião para formar os somitos, correspondendo à segmentação do corpo mais evidente na coluna vertebral.

Cada somito tem três divisões, esclerótomo (que forma as vértebras), dermátomo (que forma a pele) e miótomo (que forma o músculo).

O miótomo é dividido em duas seções, o epímero e o hipômero, que formam os músculos epaxial e hipaxial, respectivamente.

Os únicos músculos epaxiais em humanos são os eretores da espinha e os pequenos músculos vertebrais, e são inervados pelos ramos dorsais dos nervos espinhais.

Todos os outros músculos, incluindo os dos membros, são hipaxiais e inervados pelos ramos ventrais dos nervos espinhais.

Durante o desenvolvimento, os mioblastos (células progenitoras musculares) permanecem no somito para formar músculos associados à coluna vertebral ou migram para o corpo para formar todos os outros músculos.

A migração dos mioblastos é precedida pela formação de estruturas de tecido conjuntivo, geralmente formadas a partir do mesoderma somático da placa lateral.

Os mioblastos seguem sinais químicos para os locais apropriados, onde se fundem em células musculares esqueléticas multinucleadas alongadas.

Entre a décima e a décima oitava semana de gestação, todas as células musculares possuem cadeias pesadas de miosina rápida; dois tipos de miotubos se distinguem no feto em desenvolvimento – ambos expressando cadeias rápidas, mas um expressando cadeias rápidas e lentas.

Entre 10 e 40 por cento das fibras expressam a cadeia lenta de miosina.

Os tipos de fibra são estabelecidos durante o desenvolvimento embrionário e são remodelados posteriormente no adulto por influências neurais e hormonais.

A população de células satélites presentes abaixo da lâmina basal é necessária para o desenvolvimento pós-natal das células musculares.


== Função ==

A principal função do músculo é a contração.

Após a contração, o músculo esquelético funciona como um órgão endócrino, secretando miocinas – uma ampla gama de citocinas e outros peptídeos que atuam como moléculas sinalizadoras.

Acredita-se que as miocinas, por sua vez, mediam os benefícios do exercício para a saúde.

As miocinas são secretadas na corrente sanguínea após a contração muscular.

A interleucina 6 (IL-6) é a miocina mais estudada, outras miocinas induzidas pela contração muscular incluem BDNF, FGF21 e SPARC. O músculo também funciona para produzir calor corporal.

A contração muscular é responsável por produzir 85% do calor do corpo.

Este calor produzido é como um subproduto da atividade muscular e é principalmente desperdiçado.

Como uma resposta homeostática ao frio extremo, os músculos são sinalizados para desencadear contrações de calafrios para gerar calor.


=== Contração ===


A contração é alcançada pela unidade estrutural do músculo, a fibra muscular, e por sua unidade funcional, a unidade motora.

As fibras musculares são células excitáveis ​​estimuladas por neurônios motores.

A unidade motora consiste em um neurônio motor e as muitas fibras com as quais ele faz contato.

Um único músculo é estimulado por muitas unidades motoras.

As fibras musculares estão sujeitas à despolarização pelo neurotransmissor acetilcolina, liberado pelos neurônios motores nas junções neuromusculares.

Além dos miofilamentos de actina e miosina nas miofibrilas que compõem os sarcômeros contráteis, existem duas outras importantes proteínas reguladoras – troponina e tropomiosina, que possibilitam a contração muscular.

Essas proteínas estão associadas à actina e cooperam para evitar sua interação com a miosina.

Uma vez que uma célula é suficientemente estimulada, o retículo sarcoplasmático da célula libera cálcio iônico (Ca2+), que então interage com a proteína reguladora troponina.

A troponina ligada ao cálcio sofre uma mudança conformacional que leva ao movimento da tropomiosina, expondo posteriormente os sítios de ligação da miosina na actina.

Isso permite a ciclagem de pontes cruzadas dependentes de ATP de miosina e actina e o encurtamento do músculo.


==== Acoplamento excitação-contração ====

O acoplamento de contração de excitação é o processo pelo qual um potencial de ação muscular na fibra muscular faz com que as miofibrilas se contraiam.

Esse processo depende de um acoplamento direto entre o canal de liberação de cálcio do retículo sarcoplasmático RYR1 (receptor 1 de rianodina) e os canais de cálcio do tipo L dependentes de voltagem (identificados como receptores de dihidropiridina, DHPRs).

Os DHPRs estão localizados no sarcolema (que inclui o sarcolema superficial e os túbulos transversos), enquanto os RyRs residem através da membrana SR.

A justaposição de um túbulo transverso e duas regiões SR contendo RyRs é descrita como uma tríade e é predominantemente onde ocorre o acoplamento excitação-contração.

O acoplamento excitação-contração ocorre quando a despolarização da célula muscular esquelética resulta em um potencial de ação muscular, que se espalha pela superfície da célula e pela rede de túbulos T da fibra muscular, despolarizando assim a porção interna da fibra muscular.

A despolarização das porções internas ativa os receptores de diidropiridina nas cisternas terminais, que estão próximos aos receptores de rianodina no retículo sarcoplasmático adjacente.

Os receptores de dihidropiridina ativados interagem fisicamente com os receptores de rianodina para ativá-los por meio de processos do pé (envolvendo mudanças conformacionais que ativam alostericamente os receptores de rianodina).

À medida que os receptores de rianodina se abrem, o Ca2+ é liberado do retículo sarcoplasmático para o espaço juncional local e se difunde no citoplasma para causar uma faísca de cálcio.

Observe que o retículo sarcoplasmático tem uma grande capacidade de tamponamento de cálcio, parcialmente devido a uma proteína de ligação ao cálcio chamada calsequestrina.

A ativação quase síncrona de milhares de faíscas de cálcio pelo potencial de ação causa um aumento de cálcio em toda a célula dando origem ao movimento ascendente do transiente de cálcio.

O Ca2+ liberado no citosol se liga à Troponina C pelos filamentos de actina, para permitir a ciclagem de pontes cruzadas, produzindo força e, em algumas situações, movimento.

A sarco/retículo endoplasmático cálcio-ATPase (SERCA) bombeia ativamente Ca2+ de volta para o retículo sarcoplasmático.

À medida que o Ca2+ volta aos níveis de repouso, a força diminui e ocorre o relaxamento.


==== Movimento muscular ====

A perna eferente do sistema nervoso periférico é responsável por transmitir comandos aos músculos e glândulas e, em última análise, responsável pelo movimento voluntário.

Os nervos movem os músculos em resposta a sinais voluntários e autonômicos (involuntários) do cérebro.

Músculos profundos, músculos superficiais, músculos da face e músculos internos, todos correspondem a regiões dedicadas no córtex motor primário do cérebro, diretamente anterior ao sulco central que divide os lobos frontal e parietal.

Além disso, os músculos reagem a estímulos nervosos reflexivos que nem sempre enviam sinais até o cérebro.

Nesse caso, o sinal da fibra aferente não chega ao cérebro, mas produz o movimento reflexo por conexões diretas com os nervos eferentes da coluna.

No entanto, a maior parte da atividade muscular é volitiva e o resultado de interações complexas entre várias áreas do cérebro.

Os nervos que controlam os músculos esqueléticos em mamíferos correspondem a grupos de neurônios ao longo do córtex motor primário do córtex cerebral do cérebro.

Os comandos são encaminhados através dos gânglios da base e são modificados pela entrada do cerebelo antes de serem retransmitidos através do trato piramidal para a medula espinhal e de lá para a placa motora nos músculos.

Ao longo do caminho, o feedback, como o do sistema extrapiramidal, contribui com sinais para influenciar o tônus ​​e a resposta muscular.

Músculos mais profundos, como os envolvidos na postura, geralmente são controlados a partir de núcleos no tronco cerebral e nos gânglios da base.


==== Propriocepção ====

Nos músculos esqueléticos, os fusos musculares transmitem informações sobre o grau de comprimento e alongamento do músculo para o sistema nervoso central para auxiliar na manutenção da postura e da posição articular.

A sensação de onde nossos corpos estão no espaço é chamada propriocepção, a percepção da consciência corporal, a consciência "inconsciente" de onde as várias regiões do corpo estão localizadas em um determinado momento.

Várias áreas do cérebro coordenam o movimento e a posição com as informações de feedback obtidas da propriocepção.

O cerebelo e o núcleo vermelho, em particular, amostram continuamente a posição contra o movimento e fazem pequenas correções para garantir um movimento suave.


=== Consumo de energia ===


A atividade muscular é responsável por grande parte do consumo de energia do corpo.

Todas as células musculares produzem moléculas de trifosfato de adenosina (ATP) que são usadas para alimentar o movimento das cabeças de miosina.

Os músculos têm uma reserva de energia de curto prazo na forma de fosfato de creatina que é gerado a partir de ATP e pode regenerar ATP quando necessário com creatina quinase.

Os músculos também mantêm uma forma de armazenamento de glicose na forma de glicogênio.

O glicogênio pode ser rapidamente convertido em glicose quando a energia é necessária para contrações fortes e sustentadas.

Dentro dos músculos esqueléticos voluntários, a molécula de glicose pode ser metabolizada anaerobicamente em um processo chamado glicólise que produz duas moléculas de ATP e duas moléculas de ácido lático no processo (observe que em condições aeróbicas, o lactato não é formado; em vez disso, o piruvato é formado e transmitido através do ciclo do ácido cítrico).

As células musculares também contêm glóbulos de gordura, que são usados ​​como energia durante o exercício aeróbico.

Os sistemas de energia aeróbica levam mais tempo para produzir o ATP e atingir o pico de eficiência e requerem muito mais etapas bioquímicas, mas produzem significativamente mais ATP do que a glicólise anaeróbica.

O músculo cardíaco, por outro lado, pode consumir prontamente qualquer um dos três macronutrientes (proteína, glicose e gordura) aerobicamente sem um período de 'aquecimento' e sempre extrai o máximo rendimento de ATP de qualquer molécula envolvida.

O coração, o fígado e os glóbulos vermelhos também consumirão o ácido lático produzido e excretado pelos músculos esqueléticos durante o exercício.

O músculo esquelético usa mais calorias do que outros órgãos.

Em repouso consome 54,4 kJ/kg (13,0 kcal/kg) por dia.

Isso é maior que o tecido adiposo (gordura) com 18,8 kJ/kg (4,5 kcal/kg) e o osso com 9,6 kJ/kg (2,3 kcal/kg).


==== Eficiência ====

A eficiência do músculo humano foi medida (no contexto de remo e ciclismo) em 18% a 26%.

A eficiência é definida como a razão entre o trabalho mecânico produzido e o custo metabólico total, que pode ser calculado a partir do consumo de oxigênio.

Essa baixa eficiência é resultado de cerca de 40% de eficiência na geração de ATP a partir da energia dos alimentos, perdas na conversão de energia do ATP em trabalho mecânico dentro do músculo e perdas mecânicas dentro do corpo.

As duas últimas perdas dependem do tipo de exercício e do tipo de fibra muscular utilizada (contração rápida ou contração lenta).

Para uma eficiência geral de 20%, um watt de potência mecânica equivale a 4,3 kcal por hora.

Por exemplo, um fabricante de equipamento de remo calibra seu ergômetro de remo para contar as calorias queimadas como quatro vezes o trabalho mecânico real, mais 300 kcal por hora, o que equivale a cerca de 20% de eficiência a 250 watts de potência mecânica.

A produção de energia mecânica de uma contração cíclica pode depender de muitos fatores, incluindo tempo de ativação, trajetória de tensão muscular e taxas de aumento e diminuição da força.

Estes podem ser sintetizados experimentalmente usando análise de loop de trabalho.


=== Força muscular ===


A força muscular é o resultado de três fatores sobrepostos: força fisiológica (tamanho do músculo, área da seção transversal, ponte cruzada disponível, respostas ao treinamento), força neurológica (quão forte ou fraco é o sinal que diz ao músculo para se contrair) e força mecânica. ângulo de força do músculo na alavanca, comprimento do braço de momento, capacidades articulares).

O músculo vertebrado normalmente produz aproximadamente 25–33 N (5,6–7,4 lbf) de força por centímetro quadrado de área de seção transversal do músculo quando isométrico e em comprimento ideal.

Alguns músculos de invertebrados, como nas garras de caranguejo, têm sarcômeros muito mais longos do que os vertebrados, resultando em muito mais locais para a ligação de actina e miosina e, portanto, uma força muito maior por centímetro quadrado ao custo de uma velocidade muito mais lenta.

A força gerada por uma contração pode ser medida de forma não invasiva usando mecanomiografia ou fonomicografia, ser medida in vivo usando tensão do tendão (se um tendão proeminente estiver presente) ou ser medida diretamente usando métodos mais invasivos.

A força de qualquer músculo, em termos de força exercida sobre o esqueleto, depende do comprimento, velocidade de encurtamento, área de seção transversal, penação, comprimento do sarcômero, isoformas de miosina e ativação neural de unidades motoras.

Reduções significativas na força muscular podem indicar patologia subjacente, com o gráfico à direita usado como guia.


==== O músculo humano "mais forte" ====

Como três fatores afetam a força muscular simultaneamente e os músculos nunca trabalham individualmente, é enganoso comparar a força em músculos individuais e afirmar que um é o "mais forte".

Mas abaixo estão vários músculos cuja força é notável por diferentes razões.

Na linguagem comum, "força" muscular geralmente se refere à capacidade de exercer uma força sobre um objeto externo - por exemplo, levantar um peso.

Por esta definição, o masseter ou músculo da mandíbula é o mais forte.

O Guinness Book of Records de 1992 registra a conquista de uma força de mordida de 4.337 N (975 lbf) por 2 segundos.

O que distingue o masseter não é nada de especial no músculo em si, mas sua vantagem em trabalhar contra um braço de alavanca muito mais curto do que outros músculos.

Se "força" se refere à força exercida pelo próprio músculo, por exemplo, no local onde ele se insere em um osso, então os músculos mais fortes são aqueles com a maior área de seção transversal.

Isso ocorre porque a tensão exercida por uma fibra muscular esquelética individual não varia muito.

Cada fibra pode exercer uma força da ordem de 0,3 micronewton.

Por esta definição, o músculo mais forte do corpo é geralmente chamado de quadríceps femoral ou glúteo máximo.

Como a força muscular é determinada pela área da seção transversal, um músculo mais curto será mais forte "libra por libra" (ou seja, por peso) do que um músculo mais longo da mesma área da seção transversal.

A camada miometrial do útero pode ser o músculo mais forte em peso no corpo humano feminino.

No momento em que um bebê nasce, todo o útero humano pesa cerca de 1,1 kg (40 onças).

Durante o parto, o útero exerce 100 a 400 N (25 a 100 lbf) de força para baixo a cada contração.

Os músculos externos do olho são visivelmente grandes e fortes em relação ao pequeno tamanho e peso do globo ocular.

Costuma-se dizer que eles são "os músculos mais fortes para o trabalho que têm que fazer" e às vezes são considerados "100 vezes mais fortes do que precisam ser".

No entanto, os movimentos oculares (particularmente as sacadas usadas no escaneamento facial e na leitura) exigem movimentos de alta velocidade, e os músculos oculares são exercitados todas as noites durante o sono com movimentos oculares rápidos.

A afirmação de que "a língua é o músculo mais forte do corpo" aparece frequentemente em listas de fatos surpreendentes, mas é difícil encontrar qualquer definição de "força" que torne essa afirmação verdadeira.

Observe que a língua consiste em oito músculos, não um.


==== Geração de força ====

A força muscular é proporcional à área de seção transversal fisiológica (PCSA), e a velocidade muscular é proporcional ao comprimento da fibra muscular.

O torque em torno de uma articulação, no entanto, é determinado por vários parâmetros biomecânicos, incluindo a distância entre as inserções musculares e os pontos de articulação, o tamanho do músculo e a relação de engrenagem arquitetônica.

Os músculos são normalmente dispostos em oposição, de modo que, quando um grupo de músculos se contrai, outro grupo relaxa ou alonga.

O antagonismo na transmissão de impulsos nervosos para os músculos significa que é impossível estimular totalmente a contração de dois músculos antagônicos ao mesmo tempo.

Durante os movimentos balísticos, como o arremesso, os músculos antagonistas agem para "frear" os músculos agonistas durante a contração, particularmente no final do movimento.

No exemplo do arremesso, o peito e a frente do ombro (deltoide anterior) se contraem para puxar o braço para frente, enquanto os músculos da parte de trás e de trás do ombro (deltoide posterior) também se contraem e sofrem contração excêntrica para diminuir o movimento para evitar lesões.

Parte do processo de treinamento é aprender a relaxar os músculos antagonistas para aumentar a entrada de força do tórax e ombro anterior.

Músculos contraídos produzem vibração e som.

As fibras de contração lenta produzem 10 a 30 contrações por segundo (10 a 30 Hz).

As fibras de contração rápida produzem 30 a 70 contrações por segundo (30 a 70 Hz).

A vibração pode ser testemunhada e sentida pela tensão dos músculos, como quando se fecha o punho.

O som pode ser ouvido pressionando um músculo altamente tenso contra a orelha, novamente um punho firme é um bom exemplo.

O som é geralmente descrito como um som estrondoso.

Alguns indivíduos podem voluntariamente produzir esse som estrondoso contraindo o músculo tensor do tímpano do ouvido médio.

O som estrondoso também pode ser ouvido quando os músculos do pescoço ou da mandíbula estão muito tensos.


=== Vias de transdução de sinal ===

O fenótipo do tipo fibra muscular esquelética em animais adultos é regulado por várias vias de sinalização independentes.

Estes incluem vias envolvidas com a via Ras/proteína quinase ativada por mitógeno (MAPK), calcineurina, proteína quinase IV dependente de cálcio/calmodulina e o proliferador de peroxissoma γ coativador 1 (PGC-1).

A via de sinalização Ras/MAPK liga os neurônios motores e os sistemas de sinalização, acoplando a excitação e a regulação da transcrição para promover a indução dependente do nervo do programa lento na regeneração muscular.

A calcineurina, uma fosfatase ativada por Ca2+/calmodulina implicada na especificação do tipo de fibra dependente da atividade nervosa no músculo esquelético, controla diretamente o estado de fosforilação do fator de transcrição NFAT, permitindo sua translocação para o núcleo e levando à ativação do tipo lento. proteínas musculares em cooperação com proteínas do fator 2 de aumento de miócitos (MEF2) e outras proteínas reguladoras.

A atividade da proteína quinase dependente de Ca2+/calmodulina também é regulada positivamente pela atividade do neurônio motor lento, possivelmente porque amplifica as respostas geradas pela calcineurina do tipo lento, promovendo funções transativadoras de MEF2 e aumentando a capacidade oxidativa através da estimulação da biogênese mitocondrial.

Alterações induzidas por contração no cálcio intracelular ou espécies reativas de oxigênio fornecem sinais para diversas vias que incluem as MAPKs, calcineurina e proteína quinase IV dependente de cálcio/calmodulina para ativar fatores de transcrição que regulam a expressão gênica e a atividade enzimática no músculo esquelético.

O PGC1-α (PPARGC1A), um coativador transcricional de receptores nucleares importantes para a regulação de vários genes mitocondriais envolvidos no metabolismo oxidativo, interage diretamente com o MEF2 para ativar sinergicamente genes musculares seletivos de contração lenta (ST) e também serve como alvo para sinalização de calcineurina.

Uma via transcricional mediada pelo receptor δ ativado por proliferador de peroxissoma (PPARδ) está envolvida na regulação do fenótipo da fibra muscular esquelética.

Camundongos que abrigam uma forma ativada de PPARd exibem um fenótipo de "resistência", com um aumento coordenado de enzimas oxidativas e biogênese mitocondrial e uma proporção aumentada de fibras ST.

Assim, por meio da genômica funcional, calcineurina, quinase dependente de calmodulina, PGC-1α e PPARδ ativado formam a base de uma rede de sinalização que controla a transformação do tipo de fibra muscular esquelética e os perfis metabólicos que protegem contra a resistência à insulina e a obesidade.

A transição do metabolismo aeróbico para o anaeróbio durante o trabalho intenso exige que vários sistemas sejam rapidamente ativados para garantir um suprimento constante de ATP para os músculos em atividade.

Isso inclui uma mudança de combustíveis baseados em gordura para carboidratos, uma redistribuição do fluxo sanguíneo de músculos não funcionais para músculos exercitados e a remoção de vários subprodutos do metabolismo anaeróbico, como dióxido de carbono e ácido lático.

Algumas dessas respostas são governadas pelo controle transcricional do fenótipo glicolítico de contração rápida (FT).

Por exemplo, a reprogramação do músculo esquelético de um fenótipo glicolítico ST para um fenótipo glicolítico FT envolve o complexo Six1/Eya1, composto por membros da família de proteínas Six.

Além disso, o fator 1-α induzível por hipóxia (HIF1A) foi identificado como um regulador mestre para a expressão de genes envolvidos em respostas hipóxicas essenciais que mantêm os níveis de ATP nas células.

A ablação de HIF-1α no músculo esquelético foi associada a um aumento na atividade de enzimas limitantes de velocidade da mitocôndria, indicando que o ciclo do ácido cítrico e o aumento da oxidação de ácidos graxos podem estar compensando a diminuição do fluxo pela via glicolítica nesses animais.

No entanto, as respostas de HIF-1α mediadas por hipóxia também estão ligadas à regulação da disfunção mitocondrial através da formação de espécies reativas de oxigênio excessivas nas mitocôndrias.

Outras vias também influenciam o caráter do músculo adulto.

Por exemplo, a força física dentro de uma fibra muscular pode liberar o fator de resposta do soro do fator de transcrição da proteína estrutural titina, levando a um crescimento muscular alterado.


== Exercício ==

O exercício é frequentemente recomendado como meio de melhorar as habilidades motoras, condicionamento físico, força muscular e óssea e função articular.

O exercício tem vários efeitos sobre os músculos, tecido conjuntivo, osso e os nervos que estimulam os músculos.

Um desses efeitos é a hipertrofia muscular, um aumento no tamanho do músculo devido a um aumento no número de fibras musculares ou na área transversal das miofibrilas.

As alterações musculares dependem do tipo de exercício utilizado.
Geralmente, existem dois tipos de regimes de exercícios, aeróbicos e anaeróbicos.

O exercício aeróbico (por exemplo, maratonas) envolve atividades de baixa intensidade, mas de longa duração, durante as quais os músculos usados ​​estão abaixo de sua força de contração máxima.

As atividades aeróbicas dependem da respiração aeróbica (ou seja, ciclo do ácido cítrico e cadeia de transporte de elétrons) para obter energia metabólica, consumindo gordura, proteína, carboidratos e oxigênio.

Os músculos envolvidos em exercícios aeróbicos contêm uma porcentagem maior de fibras musculares do Tipo I (ou de contração lenta), que contêm principalmente enzimas mitocondriais e de oxidação associadas à respiração aeróbica.

Pelo contrário, o exercício anaeróbico está associado a exercícios de curta duração, mas de alta intensidade (por exemplo, corrida e levantamento de peso).

As atividades anaeróbicas usam predominantemente fibras musculares do Tipo II, de contração rápida.

As fibras musculares do tipo II dependem da glicogênese para obter energia durante o exercício anaeróbico.

Durante o exercício anaeróbico, as fibras do tipo II consomem pouco oxigênio, proteína e gordura, produzem grandes quantidades de ácido lático e são fatigáveis.

Muitos exercícios são parcialmente aeróbicos e anaeróbicos; por exemplo, futebol e escalada.

A presença de ácido lático tem um efeito inibitório na geração de ATP dentro do músculo.

Pode até interromper a produção de ATP se a concentração intracelular se tornar muito alta.

No entanto, o treinamento de resistência mitiga o acúmulo de ácido lático através do aumento da capilarização e da mioglobina.

Isso aumenta a capacidade de remover produtos residuais, como o ácido lático, dos músculos para não prejudicar a função muscular.

Uma vez removido dos músculos, o ácido lático pode ser usado por outros músculos ou tecidos do corpo como fonte de energia ou transportado para o fígado, onde é convertido novamente em piruvato.

Além de aumentar o nível de ácido lático, o exercício extenuante resulta na perda de íons de potássio no músculo.

Isso pode facilitar a recuperação da função muscular, protegendo contra a fadiga.

A dor muscular de início tardio é dor ou desconforto que pode ser sentido um a três dias após o exercício e geralmente desaparece dois a três dias após o qual.

Uma vez que se pensava ser causado pelo acúmulo de ácido lático, uma teoria mais recente é que é causado por pequenas lágrimas nas fibras musculares causadas por contrações excêntricas ou níveis de treinamento inusitados.

Como o ácido lático se dispersa com bastante rapidez, isso não explica a dor sentida dias após o exercício.


== Significado clínico ==

=== Doença muscular ===

As doenças do músculo esquelético são chamadas de miopatias, enquanto as doenças dos nervos são chamadas de neuropatias.

Ambos podem afetar a função muscular ou causar dor muscular e cair sob o guarda-chuva da doença neuromuscular.

A causa de muitas miopatias é atribuída a mutações nas várias proteínas musculares associadas.

Algumas miopatias inflamatórias incluem polimiosite e miosite de corpos de inclusão

As doenças neuromusculares afetam os músculos e seu controle nervoso.

Em geral, problemas de controle nervoso podem causar espasticidade ou paralisia, dependendo da localização e natureza do problema.

Vários distúrbios do movimento são causados ​​por distúrbios neurológicos, como a doença de Parkinson e a doença de Huntington, onde há disfunção do sistema nervoso central.

Os sintomas de doenças musculares podem incluir fraqueza, espasticidade, mioclonia e mialgia.

Os procedimentos de diagnóstico que podem revelar distúrbios musculares incluem testes dos níveis de creatina quinase no sangue e eletromiografia (medição da atividade elétrica nos músculos).

Em alguns casos, a biópsia muscular pode ser feita para identificar uma miopatia, bem como testes genéticos para identificar anormalidades de DNA associadas a miopatias e distrofias específicas.

Uma técnica de elastografia não invasiva que mede o ruído muscular está sendo experimentada para fornecer uma maneira de monitorar doenças neuromusculares.

O som produzido por um músculo vem do encurtamento dos filamentos de actomiosina ao longo do eixo do músculo.

Durante a contração, o músculo encurta ao longo de seu comprimento e expande ao longo de sua largura, produzindo vibrações na superfície.


=== Hipertrofia ===

Independentemente das medidas de força e desempenho, os músculos podem ser induzidos a crescer por vários fatores, incluindo sinalização hormonal, fatores de desenvolvimento, treinamento de força e doenças.

Ao contrário da crença popular, o número de fibras musculares não pode ser aumentado através do exercício.

Em vez disso, os músculos crescem através de uma combinação de crescimento de células musculares à medida que novos filamentos de proteína são adicionados juntamente com massa adicional fornecida por células satélites indiferenciadas ao lado das células musculares existentes.

Fatores biológicos como idade e níveis hormonais podem afetar a hipertrofia muscular.

Durante a puberdade nos homens, a hipertrofia ocorre em um ritmo acelerado à medida que os níveis de hormônios estimulantes do crescimento produzidos pelo corpo aumentam.

A hipertrofia natural normalmente para no crescimento completo no final da adolescência.

Como a testosterona é um dos principais hormônios de crescimento do corpo, em média, os homens acham a hipertrofia muito mais fácil de alcançar do que as mulheres.

Tomar testosterona adicional ou outros esteróides anabolizantes aumentará a hipertrofia muscular.

Fatores musculares, espinhais e neurais afetam a construção muscular.

Às vezes, uma pessoa pode notar um aumento na força de um determinado músculo, mesmo que apenas seu oposto tenha sido submetido ao exercício, como quando um fisiculturista encontra seu bíceps esquerdo mais forte após completar um regime focando apenas no bíceps direito.

Esse fenômeno é chamado de educação cruzada.


=== Atrofia ===
 
Todos os dias, entre um e dois por cento do músculo é quebrado e reconstruído.

Inatividade, desnutrição, doença e envelhecimento podem aumentar a degradação levando à atrofia muscular ou sarcopenia.

A sarcopenia é comumente um processo relacionado à idade que pode causar fragilidade e suas consequências.

Uma diminuição na massa muscular pode ser acompanhada por um menor número e tamanho das células musculares, bem como menor teor de proteína.

O voo espacial humano, envolvendo períodos prolongados de imobilização e ausência de peso, é conhecido por resultar em enfraquecimento e atrofia muscular, resultando em uma perda de até 30% da massa em alguns músculos.

Tais consequências também são observadas em alguns mamíferos após a hibernação.

Muitas doenças e condições, incluindo câncer, AIDS e insuficiência cardíaca, podem causar perda muscular conhecida como caquexia.


=== Pesquisa ===

As miopatias foram modeladas com sistemas de cultura de células de músculo de biópsias de tecidos saudáveis ​​ou doentes.

Outra fonte de músculo esquelético e progenitores é fornecida pela diferenciação direcionada de células-tronco pluripotentes.

A pesquisa sobre as propriedades do músculo esquelético usa muitas técnicas.

A estimulação elétrica muscular é usada para determinar a força e a velocidade de contração em diferentes frequências relacionadas à composição do tipo de fibra e mistura dentro de um grupo muscular individual.

O teste muscular in vitro é usado para uma caracterização mais completa das propriedades musculares.

A atividade elétrica associada à contração muscular é medida por meio de eletromiografia (EMG).

O músculo esquelético tem duas respostas fisiológicas: relaxamento e contração.

Os mecanismos pelos quais essas respostas ocorrem geram atividade elétrica medida por EMG.

Especificamente, a EMG pode medir o potencial de ação de um músculo esquelético, que ocorre a partir da hiperpolarização dos axônios motores dos impulsos nervosos enviados ao músculo.

A EMG é usada em pesquisas para determinar se o músculo esquelético de interesse está sendo ativado, a quantidade de força gerada e um indicador de fadiga muscular.

Os dois tipos de EMG são EMG intramuscular e o mais comum, EMG de superfície.

Os sinais EMG são muito maiores quando um músculo esquelético está contraindo versus relaxando.

No entanto, para músculos esqueléticos menores e mais profundos, os sinais EMG são reduzidos e, portanto, são vistos como uma técnica menos valorizada para medir a ativação.

Em pesquisas usando EMG, uma contração voluntária máxima (CVM) é comumente realizada no músculo esquelético de interesse, para ter dados de referência para o restante das gravações EMG durante os principais testes experimentais para esse mesmo músculo esquelético.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Skeletal_muscle

;;;FR;;;



MUSCLE SQUELETTIQUE


Les muscles squelettiques (communément appelés muscles) sont des organes du système musculaire des vertébrés qui sont principalement attachés par des tendons aux os du squelette.

Les cellules musculaires des muscles squelettiques sont beaucoup plus longues que dans les autres types de tissus musculaires et sont souvent appelées fibres musculaires.

Le tissu musculaire d'un muscle squelettique est strié - ayant un aspect rayé en raison de la disposition des sarcomères.

Les muscles squelettiques sont des muscles volontaires sous le contrôle du système nerveux somatique.

Les autres types de muscles sont le muscle cardiaque qui est également strié et le muscle lisse qui est non strié ; ces deux types de tissus musculaires sont classés comme involontaires ou sous le contrôle du système nerveux autonome.

Un muscle squelettique contient plusieurs fascicules - des faisceaux de fibres musculaires.

Chaque fibre individuelle et chaque muscle est entouré d'un type de couche de tissu conjonctif de fascia.

Les fibres musculaires sont formées à partir de la fusion de myoblastes de développement dans un processus connu sous le nom de myogenèse résultant en de longues cellules multinucléées.

Dans ces cellules, les noyaux appelés myonucléi sont situés à l'intérieur de la membrane cellulaire.

Les fibres musculaires possèdent également de multiples mitochondries pour répondre aux besoins énergétiques.
Les fibres musculaires sont à leur tour composées de myofibrilles.

Les myofibrilles sont composées de filaments d'actine et de myosine appelés myofilaments, répétés en unités appelées sarcomères, qui sont les unités fonctionnelles et contractiles de base de la fibre musculaire nécessaires à la contraction musculaire.

Les muscles sont principalement alimentés par l'oxydation des graisses et des glucides, mais des réactions chimiques anaérobies sont également utilisées, en particulier par les fibres à contraction rapide.

Ces réactions chimiques produisent des molécules d'adénosine triphosphate (ATP) qui sont utilisées pour alimenter le mouvement des têtes de myosine.


== Structure ==

=== Anatomie brute ===

Il y a plus de 600 muscles squelettiques dans le corps humain, représentant environ 40 à 50 % du poids corporel.

La plupart des muscles se présentent en paires placées bilatéralement pour servir les deux côtés du corps.

Les muscles sont souvent classés comme des groupes de muscles qui travaillent ensemble pour effectuer une action.

Dans le torse, il existe plusieurs groupes musculaires majeurs, notamment les muscles pectoraux et abdominaux; Les muscles intrinsèques et extrinsèques sont des subdivisions des groupes musculaires de la main, du pied, de la langue et des muscles extraoculaires de l'œil.

Les muscles sont également regroupés en compartiments comprenant quatre groupes dans le bras et les quatre groupes dans la jambe.

Outre la partie contractile d'un muscle constituée de ses fibres, un muscle contient une partie non contractile de tissu conjonctif fibreux dense qui constitue le tendon à chaque extrémité.

Les tendons attachent les muscles aux os pour donner le mouvement squelettique.

La longueur d'un muscle comprend les tendons.

Le tissu conjonctif est présent dans tous les muscles sous forme de fascia profond.

Le fascia profond se spécialise dans les muscles pour enfermer chaque fibre musculaire sous forme d'endomysium; chaque fascicule musculaire comme périmysium et chaque muscle individuel comme épimysium.

Ensemble, ces couches sont appelées mysie.

Le fascia profond sépare également les groupes de muscles en compartiments musculaires.

Deux types de récepteurs sensoriels trouvés dans les muscles sont les fuseaux musculaires et les organes tendineux de Golgi.

Les fuseaux musculaires sont des récepteurs d'étirement situés dans le ventre musculaire.

Les organes tendineux de Golgi sont des propriocepteurs situés à la jonction myotendineuse qui informent de la tension d'un muscle.


==== Fibres musculaires squelettiques ====

Les cellules musculaires squelettiques sont les cellules contractiles individuelles d'un muscle et sont souvent appelées fibres musculaires.

Un seul muscle tel que le biceps chez un jeune homme adulte contient environ 253 000 fibres musculaires.

Les fibres musculaires squelettiques sont les seules cellules musculaires multinucléées avec les noyaux souvent appelés myonuclei.

Cela se produit pendant la myogenèse avec la fusion de myoblastes apportant chacun un noyau.

La fusion dépend de protéines musculaires spécifiques appelées fusogènes appelées myomaker et myomerger.

De nombreux noyaux sont nécessaires à la cellule musculaire squelettique pour les grandes quantités de protéines et d'enzymes nécessaires à la production du fonctionnement normal de la cellule.
 
Une seule fibre musculaire peut contenir des centaines à des milliers de noyaux.

Une fibre musculaire par exemple dans le biceps humain d'une longueur de 10 cm peut avoir jusqu'à 3000 noyaux.

Contrairement à une cellule non musculaire où le noyau est positionné au centre, le myonucléus est allongé et situé à proximité du sarcolemme.

Les myonucléi sont assez uniformément disposés le long de la fibre, chaque noyau ayant son propre domaine myonucléaire où il est responsable du support du volume de cytoplasme dans cette section particulière de la myofibre.

Un groupe de cellules souches musculaires appelées cellules myosatellites, également des cellules satellites, se trouve entre la membrane basale et le sarcolemme des fibres musculaires.

Ces cellules sont normalement au repos mais peuvent être activées par l'exercice ou la pathologie pour fournir des myonucléi supplémentaires pour la croissance ou la réparation musculaire.


==== Fixation aux tendons ====

Les muscles s'attachent aux tendons dans une région d'interface complexe connue sous le nom de jonction musculotendineuse également connue sous le nom de jonction myotendineuse, une zone spécialisée pour la transmission primaire de la force.

À l'interface muscle-tendon, la force est transmise des sarcomères des cellules musculaires au tendon.

Les muscles et les tendons se développent en étroite association et, après leur jonction à la jonction myotendineuse, ils constituent une unité dynamique pour la transmission de la force de la contraction musculaire au système squelettique.


==== Disposition des fibres musculaires ====

L'architecture musculaire fait référence à la disposition des fibres musculaires par rapport à l'axe de génération de force, qui va de l'origine d'un muscle à son insertion.

Les arrangements habituels sont des types de muscles parallèles et des types de muscles pennés.

Dans les muscles parallèles, les faisceaux sont parallèles à l'axe de génération de force, mais les faisceaux peuvent varier dans leur relation les uns avec les autres et avec leurs tendons.

Ces variations sont observées dans les muscles fusiformes, en sangle et convergents.

Un muscle convergent a une forme triangulaire ou en éventail lorsque les fibres convergent à son insertion et sont largement déployées à l'origine.

Un exemple moins courant de muscle parallèle est un muscle circulaire tel que l'orbicularis oculi, dans lequel les fibres sont disposées longitudinalement, mais créent un cercle de l'origine à l'insertion.

Ces différentes architectures, peuvent entraîner des variations de tension qu'un muscle peut créer entre ses tendons.

Les fibres des muscles pennés forment un angle avec l'axe de génération de force.

Cet angle de pennation réduit la force effective de toute fibre individuelle, car elle tire efficacement hors de l'axe.

Cependant, en raison de cet angle, plus de fibres peuvent être emballées dans le même volume musculaire, augmentant ainsi la surface de section physiologique (PCSA).

Cet effet est connu sous le nom de bourrage de fibres et, en termes de génération de force, il surmonte largement la perte d'efficacité de l'orientation hors axe.

Le compromis vient de la vitesse globale de raccourcissement musculaire et de l'excursion totale.

La vitesse globale de raccourcissement musculaire est réduite par rapport à la vitesse de raccourcissement des fibres, tout comme la distance totale de raccourcissement.

Tous ces effets évoluent avec l'angle de pennation; des angles plus grands conduisent à une plus grande force en raison de l'augmentation du tassement des fibres et du PCSA, mais avec des pertes plus importantes de vitesse de raccourcissement et d'excursion.

Les types de muscles pennés sont unipennés, bipennés et multipennés.

Un muscle unipenné a des fibres angulaires similaires qui se trouvent d'un côté d'un tendon.

Un muscle bipenné a des fibres sur les deux côtés d'un tendon.

Les muscles multipennés ont des fibres orientées à plusieurs angles le long de l'axe générateur de force, et c'est l'architecture la plus générale et la plus courante.


=== Croissance des fibres musculaires ===

Les fibres musculaires se développent lorsqu'elles sont exercées et rétrécissent lorsqu'elles ne sont pas utilisées.

Cela est dû au fait que l'exercice stimule l'augmentation des myofibrilles qui augmentent la taille globale des cellules musculaires.

Des muscles bien exercés peuvent non seulement ajouter plus de taille, mais peuvent également développer plus de mitochondries, de myoglobine, de glycogène et une densité plus élevée de capillaires.

Cependant, les cellules musculaires ne peuvent pas se diviser pour produire de nouvelles cellules et, par conséquent, il y a moins de cellules musculaires chez un adulte que chez un nouveau-né.


=== Dénomination musculaire ===


Il existe un certain nombre de termes utilisés dans la dénomination des muscles, notamment ceux relatifs à la taille, la forme, l'action, l'emplacement, leur orientation et leur nombre de têtes.

Par taille
brevis signifie court; long signifie long; longissimus signifie le plus long; magnus signifie grand; majeur signifie plus grand; maximus signifie le plus grand; mineur signifie plus petit et minimus le plus petit; latissimus signifie le plus large et vastus signifie énorme.

Ces termes sont souvent utilisés après le muscle particulier tel que le grand fessier et le petit fessier.

Par forme relative
deltoïde signifie triangulaire; quadratus signifie avoir quatre côtés; rhomboideus signifie ayant une forme rhomboïdale ; teres signifie rond ou cylindrique, et trapezius signifie ayant une forme trapézoïdale ; serratus signifie en dents de scie; orbiculaire signifie circulaire ; pectiné signifie en forme de peigne; piriformis signifie en forme de poire; platys signifie plat et gracilis signifie élancé.

Les exemples sont le pronator teres et le pronator quadratus.

Par acte
ravisseur s'éloignant de la ligne médiane ; adducteur se déplaçant vers la ligne médiane ; abaisseur se déplaçant vers le bas ; ascenseur se déplaçant vers le haut ; mouvement des fléchisseurs qui diminue d'un angle ; extenseur en mouvement qui augmente un angle ou se redresse ; pronateur se déplaçant vers le bas ; supinateur se déplaçant pour faire face vers le haut ; rotateur interne tournant vers le corps ; rotateur externe s'éloignant du corps ; le sphincter diminue la taille, et le tenseur donne de la tension à ; Les muscles fixateurs servent à fixer une articulation dans une position donnée en stabilisant le moteur principal pendant que les autres articulations bougent.

Par nombre de têtes
biceps deux ; triceps trois et quadriceps quatre.

Par emplacement
nommé d'après la structure principale proche telle que le muscle temporal (temporalis) près de l'os temporal.

Aussi supra- ci-dessus; infra- ci-dessous, et sous- sous.

Par orientation fasciculaire
Par rapport à la ligne médiane, rectus signifie parallèle à la ligne médiane ; transverse signifie perpendiculaire à la ligne médiane et oblique signifie diagonale à la ligne médiane.

Par rapport à l'axe de la génération de force - types de muscles parallèles et types de muscles pennés.


== Types de fibres ==

En gros, il existe deux types de fibres musculaires : le type I, qui est lent, et le type II, qui est rapide.

Le type II a deux divisions de type IIA (oxydant) et de type IIX (glycolytique), donnant trois principaux types de fibres.

Ces fibres ont des propriétés métaboliques, contractiles et motrices relativement distinctes.

Le tableau ci-dessous différencie ces types de biens.

Ces types de propriétés, bien qu'elles dépendent en partie des propriétés des fibres individuelles, ont tendance à être pertinentes et mesurées au niveau de l'unité motrice, plutôt qu'au niveau de la fibre individuelle.


=== Couleur de la fibre ===

Traditionnellement, les fibres étaient classées en fonction de leur couleur variable, qui reflète la teneur en myoglobine.

Les fibres de type I apparaissent rouges en raison des niveaux élevés de myoglobine.

Les fibres musculaires rouges ont tendance à avoir plus de mitochondries et une plus grande densité capillaire locale.

Ces fibres sont plus adaptées à l'endurance et sont lentes à se fatiguer car elles utilisent le métabolisme oxydatif pour générer de l'ATP (adénosine triphosphate).

Les fibres de type II moins oxydatives sont blanches en raison d'une myoglobine relativement faible et d'une dépendance aux enzymes glycolytiques.


=== Vitesse de contraction ===

Les fibres peuvent également être classées en fonction de leurs capacités de contraction, en contractions rapides et lentes.

Ces traits chevauchent largement, mais pas complètement, les classifications basées sur la couleur, l'ATPase ou le CMH.
Certains auteurs définissent une fibre à contraction rapide comme une fibre dans laquelle la myosine peut diviser l'ATP très rapidement.

Il s'agit principalement des fibres ATPase de type II et MHC de type II.

Cependant, les fibres à contraction rapide démontrent également une plus grande capacité de transmission électrochimique des potentiels d'action et un niveau rapide de libération et d'absorption de calcium par le réticulum sarcoplasmique.

Les fibres à contraction rapide reposent sur un système glycolytique anaérobie à court terme bien développé pour le transfert d'énergie et peuvent se contracter et développer une tension à 2 à 3 fois la vitesse des fibres à contraction lente.

Les muscles à contraction rapide sont bien meilleurs pour générer de courtes rafales de force ou de vitesse que les muscles lents, et donc se fatiguent plus rapidement.

Les fibres à contraction lente génèrent de l'énergie pour la resynthèse de l'ATP au moyen d'un système à long terme de transfert d'énergie aérobie.

Il s'agit principalement des fibres ATPase de type I et MHC de type I.

Ils ont tendance à avoir un faible niveau d'activité de l'ATPase, une vitesse de contraction plus lente avec une capacité glycolytique moins bien développée.

Les fibres qui deviennent à contraction lente développent un plus grand nombre de mitochondries et de capillaires, ce qui les rend meilleures pour un travail prolongé.

Répartition des types
Les muscles individuels ont tendance à être un mélange de divers types de fibres, mais leurs proportions varient en fonction des actions de ce muscle.

Par exemple, chez l'homme, les muscles quadriceps contiennent environ 52 % de fibres de type I, tandis que le soléaire est d'environ 80 % de type I.

Le muscle orbicularis oculi de l'œil n'est que d'environ 15 % de type I.

Les unités motrices dans le muscle, cependant, ont une variation minimale entre les fibres de cette unité.

C'est ce fait qui rend viable la taille principale du recrutement des unités motrices.

On pense traditionnellement que le nombre total de fibres musculaires squelettiques ne change pas.

On pense qu'il n'y a pas de différences de sexe ou d'âge dans la distribution des fibres; cependant, les proportions de types de fibres varient considérablement d'un muscle à l'autre et d'une personne à l'autre.

Parmi les différentes espèces, il existe une grande variation dans les proportions des types de fibres musculaires.

Les hommes et les femmes sédentaires (ainsi que les jeunes enfants) ont 45 % de fibres de type II et 55 % de fibres de type I.

Les personnes à l'extrémité supérieure de n'importe quel sport ont tendance à démontrer des modèles de distribution de fibres, par exemple les athlètes d'endurance présentent un niveau plus élevé de fibres de type I.

Les athlètes de sprint, d'autre part, ont besoin d'un grand nombre de fibres de type IIX.

Les athlètes des épreuves de demi-fond présentent une répartition à peu près égale des deux types.

C'est aussi souvent le cas pour les athlètes de puissance tels que les lanceurs et les sauteurs.

Il a été suggéré que divers types d'exercices peuvent induire des changements dans les fibres d'un muscle squelettique.

On pense que si vous effectuez des événements de type endurance pendant une période prolongée, certaines des fibres de type IIX se transforment en fibres de type IIA.

Cependant, il n'y a pas de consensus sur le sujet.

Il se peut que les fibres de type IIX présentent des améliorations de la capacité oxydative après un entraînement d'endurance à haute intensité, ce qui les amène à un niveau auquel elles sont capables d'effectuer un métabolisme oxydatif aussi efficacement que les fibres à contraction lente de sujets non entraînés.

Cela serait provoqué par une augmentation de la taille et du nombre des mitochondries et des changements associés associés, et non par un changement de type de fibre.


=== Méthodes de typage des fibres ===


Il existe de nombreuses méthodes employées pour le typage des fibres, et la confusion entre les méthodes est courante chez les non-experts.

Deux méthodes couramment confondues sont la coloration histochimique pour l'activité ATPase de la myosine et la coloration immunohistochimique pour le type de chaîne lourde de la myosine (MHC).

L'activité de la myosine ATPase est communément - et correctement - appelée simplement "type de fibre" et résulte du dosage direct de l'activité ATPase dans diverses conditions (par exemple, le pH).

La coloration de la chaîne lourde de la myosine est plus précisément appelée "type de fibre du CMH", par exemple "fibres du CMH IIa", et résulte de la détermination de différentes isoformes du CMH.

Ces méthodes sont étroitement liées physiologiquement, car le type de CMH est le principal déterminant de l'activité ATPase.

Cependant, aucune de ces méthodes de typage n'est directement de nature métabolique; ils n'abordent pas directement la capacité oxydative ou glycolytique de la fibre.

Lorsque les fibres de « type I » ou de « type II » sont désignées de manière générique, cela se réfère le plus précisément à la somme des types de fibres numériques (I vs.

II) tel qu'évalué par la coloration de l'activité de la myosine ATPase (par exemple, les fibres de "type II" désignent le type IIA + le type IIAX + le type IIXA ... etc.).

Vous trouverez ci-dessous un tableau montrant la relation entre ces deux méthodes, limitée aux types de fibres trouvées chez l'homme.

La capitalisation des sous-types est utilisée dans le typage des fibres vs.

Le typage du CMH et certains types d'ATPase contiennent en fait plusieurs types de CMH.

En outre, un sous-type B ou b n'est pas exprimé chez l'homme par l'une ou l'autre méthode.

Les premiers chercheurs croyaient que les humains exprimaient un CMH IIb, ce qui a conduit à la classification ATPase de IIB.

Cependant, des recherches ultérieures ont montré que le CMH humain IIb était en fait IIx, indiquant que le IIB est mieux nommé IIX.

IIb est exprimé chez d'autres mammifères, il est donc toujours observé avec précision (avec IIB) dans la littérature.

Les types de fibres non humaines comprennent les vraies fibres IIb, IIc, IId, etc.

D'autres méthodes de typage des fibres sont moins formellement délimitées et existent sur plus d'un spectre.

Ils ont tendance à se concentrer davantage sur les capacités métaboliques et fonctionnelles (c'est-à-dire, temps de contraction oxydatif vs glycolytique, rapide vs lent).

Comme indiqué ci-dessus, le typage des fibres par ATPase ou MHC ne mesure ni ne dicte directement ces paramètres.

Cependant, bon nombre des diverses méthodes sont liées mécaniquement, tandis que d'autres sont corrélées in vivo.

Par exemple, le type de fibre ATPase est lié à la vitesse de contraction, car une activité ATPase élevée permet un cycle de pontage plus rapide.

Alors que l'activité ATPase n'est qu'une composante de la vitesse de contraction, les fibres de type I sont « lentes », en partie parce qu'elles ont de faibles vitesses d'activité ATPase par rapport aux fibres de type II.

Cependant, mesurer la vitesse de contraction n'est pas la même chose que le typage des fibres ATPase.


== Microanatomie ==


Le muscle squelettique présente un motif de bandes distinctif lorsqu'il est observé au microscope en raison de la disposition de deux protéines contractiles, la myosine et l'actine, qui sont deux des myofilaments des myofibrilles.

La myosine forme les filaments épais et l'actine forme les filaments minces et sont disposées en unités répétitives appelées sarcomères.

L'interaction des deux protéines entraîne une contraction musculaire.

Le sarcomère est attaché à d'autres organites tels que les mitochondries par des filaments intermédiaires dans le cytosquelette.

Le costamère attache le sarcomère au sarcolemme. Chaque organite et macromolécule d'une fibre musculaire est arrangée pour s'assurer qu'elle répond aux fonctions souhaitées.

La membrane cellulaire s'appelle le sarcolemme avec le cytoplasme connu sous le nom de sarcoplasme.

Dans le sarcoplasme se trouvent les myofibrilles.

Les myofibrilles sont de longs faisceaux de protéines d'environ un micromètre de diamètre.

Pressés contre l'intérieur du sarcolemme se trouvent les myonuclei aplatis inhabituels.

Entre les myofibrilles se trouvent les mitochondries.

Alors que la fibre musculaire n'a pas de citernes endoplasmiques lisses, elle contient du réticulum sarcoplasmique.

Le réticulum sarcoplasmique entoure les myofibrilles et contient une réserve d'ions calcium nécessaires pour provoquer une contraction musculaire.

Périodiquement, il a des sacs terminaux dilatés appelés citernes terminales.

Ceux-ci traversent la fibre musculaire d'un côté à l'autre.

Entre deux citernes terminales se trouve un repli tubulaire appelé tubule transversal (tubule en T).

Les tubules T sont les voies par lesquelles les potentiels d'action signalent au réticulum sarcoplasmique de libérer du calcium, provoquant une contraction musculaire.

Ensemble, deux citernes terminales et un tubule transverse forment une triade.


== Développement ==


Tous les muscles sont dérivés du mésoderme paraxial.

Au cours du développement embryonnaire dans le processus de somitogenèse, le mésoderme paraxial est divisé sur la longueur de l'embryon pour former des somites, correspondant à la segmentation du corps la plus visible dans la colonne vertébrale.

Chaque somite a trois divisions, le sclérotome (qui forme les vertèbres), le dermatome (qui forme la peau) et le myotome (qui forme le muscle).

Le myotome est divisé en deux sections, l'épimère et l'hypomère, qui forment respectivement les muscles épaxial et hypaxial.

Les seuls muscles épaxiaux chez l'homme sont les épines érectrices et les petits muscles vertébraux, et sont innervés par les rameaux dorsaux des nerfs rachidiens.

Tous les autres muscles, y compris ceux des membres, sont hypoaxiaux et innervés par les branches ventrales des nerfs spinaux.

Au cours du développement, les myoblastes (cellules progénitrices musculaires) restent dans le somite pour former les muscles associés à la colonne vertébrale ou migrent dans le corps pour former tous les autres muscles.

La migration des myoblastes est précédée par la formation d'armatures de tissu conjonctif, généralement formées à partir du mésoderme de la plaque latérale somatique.

Les myoblastes suivent les signaux chimiques jusqu'aux emplacements appropriés, où ils fusionnent en cellules musculaires squelettiques multinucléées allongées.

Entre la dixième et la dix-huitième semaine de gestation, toutes les cellules musculaires possèdent des chaînes lourdes de myosine rapides ; deux types de myotubes se distinguent chez le fœtus en développement - tous deux exprimant des chaînes rapides mais un exprimant des chaînes rapides et lentes.

Entre 10 et 40 % des fibres expriment la chaîne lente de la myosine.

Les types de fibres sont établis au cours du développement embryonnaire et sont remodelés plus tard chez l'adulte par des influences neurales et hormonales.

La population de cellules satellites présentes sous la lame basale est nécessaire au développement postnatal des cellules musculaires.


== Fonction ==

La fonction première du muscle est la contraction.

Après la contraction, le muscle squelettique fonctionne comme un organe endocrinien en sécrétant des myokines - un large éventail de cytokines et d'autres peptides qui agissent comme des molécules de signalisation.

On pense que les myokines à leur tour sont à l'origine des bienfaits de l'exercice pour la santé.

Les myokines sont sécrétées dans la circulation sanguine après la contraction musculaire.

L'interleukine 6 (IL-6) est la myokine la plus étudiée, les autres myokines induites par la contraction musculaire comprennent le BDNF, le FGF21 et le SPARC. Le muscle fonctionne également pour produire de la chaleur corporelle.

La contraction musculaire est responsable de la production de 85 % de la chaleur corporelle.

Cette chaleur produite est un sous-produit de l'activité musculaire et est principalement gaspillée.

En réponse homéostatique au froid extrême, les muscles sont signalés pour déclencher des contractions de frissons afin de générer de la chaleur.


=== Contractions ===


La contraction est réalisée par l'unité structurelle du muscle, la fibre musculaire, et par son unité fonctionnelle, l'unité motrice.

Les fibres musculaires sont des cellules excitables stimulées par les motoneurones.

L'unité motrice est constituée d'un motoneurone et des nombreuses fibres avec lesquelles il entre en contact.

Un même muscle est stimulé par plusieurs unités motrices.

Les fibres musculaires sont soumises à une dépolarisation par le neurotransmetteur acétylcholine, libéré par les motoneurones au niveau des jonctions neuromusculaires.

En plus des myofilaments d'actine et de myosine dans les myofibrilles qui composent les sarcomères contractiles, il existe deux autres protéines régulatrices importantes - la troponine et la tropomyosine, qui rendent possible la contraction musculaire.

Ces protéines sont associées à l'actine et coopèrent pour empêcher son interaction avec la myosine.

Une fois qu'une cellule est suffisamment stimulée, le réticulum sarcoplasmique de la cellule libère du calcium ionique (Ca2+), qui interagit alors avec la protéine régulatrice troponine.

La troponine liée au calcium subit un changement conformationnel qui conduit au mouvement de la tropomyosine, exposant par la suite les sites de liaison à la myosine sur l'actine.

Cela permet le cycle de pont croisé dépendant de la myosine et de l'actine ATP et le raccourcissement du muscle.


==== Couplage excitation-contraction ====

Le couplage excitation-contraction est le processus par lequel un potentiel d'action musculaire dans la fibre musculaire provoque la contraction des myofibrilles.

Ce processus repose sur un couplage direct entre le canal de libération de calcium du réticulum sarcoplasmique RYR1 (récepteur de la ryanodine 1) et les canaux calciques de type L voltage-dépendants (identifiés comme récepteurs de la dihydropyridine, DHPR).

Les DHPR sont situés sur le sarcolemme (qui comprend le sarcolemme de surface et les tubules transversaux), tandis que les RyR résident à travers la membrane SR.

L'apposition étroite d'un tubule transverse et de deux régions SR contenant des RyR est décrite comme une triade et est principalement l'endroit où le couplage excitation-contraction a lieu.

Le couplage excitation-contraction se produit lorsque la dépolarisation des cellules musculaires squelettiques entraîne un potentiel d'action musculaire, qui se propage à travers la surface cellulaire et dans le réseau de tubules en T de la fibre musculaire, dépolarisant ainsi la partie interne de la fibre musculaire.

La dépolarisation des parties internes active les récepteurs de la dihydropyridine dans les citernes terminales, qui sont à proximité immédiate des récepteurs de la ryanodine dans le réticulum sarcoplasmique adjacent.

Les récepteurs activés de la dihydropyridine interagissent physiquement avec les récepteurs de la ryanodine pour les activer via des processus du pied (impliquant des changements conformationnels qui activent de manière allostérique les récepteurs de la ryanodine).

Lorsque les récepteurs de la ryanodine s'ouvrent, le Ca2+ est libéré du réticulum sarcoplasmique dans l'espace jonctionnel local et se diffuse dans le cytoplasme en vrac pour provoquer une étincelle de calcium.

Notez que le réticulum sarcoplasmique a une grande capacité de tamponnage du calcium, en partie grâce à une protéine liant le calcium appelée calséquestrine.

L'activation quasi synchrone de milliers d'étincelles de calcium par le potentiel d'action provoque une augmentation du calcium à l'échelle de la cellule, donnant lieu à la montée du transitoire de calcium.

Le Ca2+ libéré dans le cytosol se lie à la troponine C par les filaments d'actine, pour permettre le cycle des ponts croisés, produisant de la force et, dans certaines situations, du mouvement.

La calcium-ATPase du réticulum sarco/endoplasmique (SERCA) pompe activement le Ca2+ dans le réticulum sarcoplasmique.

Au fur et à mesure que Ca2+ redescend aux niveaux de repos, la force diminue et une relaxation se produit.


==== Mouvement musculaire ====

La jambe efférente du système nerveux périphérique est responsable de la transmission des commandes aux muscles et aux glandes, et est finalement responsable du mouvement volontaire.

Les nerfs déplacent les muscles en réponse aux signaux volontaires et autonomes (involontaires) du cerveau.

Les muscles profonds, les muscles superficiels, les muscles du visage et les muscles internes correspondent tous à des régions dédiées dans le cortex moteur primaire du cerveau, directement en avant du sillon central qui divise les lobes frontal et pariétal.

De plus, les muscles réagissent aux stimuli nerveux réflexifs qui n'envoient pas toujours des signaux jusqu'au cerveau.

Dans ce cas, le signal de la fibre afférente n'atteint pas le cerveau, mais produit le mouvement réflexif par des connexions directes avec les nerfs efférents de la colonne vertébrale.

Cependant, la majorité de l'activité musculaire est volontaire et résulte d'interactions complexes entre diverses zones du cerveau.

Les nerfs qui contrôlent les muscles squelettiques chez les mammifères correspondent à des groupes de neurones le long du cortex moteur primaire du cortex cérébral du cerveau.

Les commandes sont acheminées à travers les ganglions de la base et sont modifiées par l'entrée du cervelet avant d'être relayées par le tractus pyramidal jusqu'à la moelle épinière et de là à la plaque d'extrémité motrice au niveau des muscles.

En cours de route, les rétroactions, telles que celles du système extrapyramidal, contribuent aux signaux qui influencent le tonus musculaire et la réponse.

Les muscles plus profonds tels que ceux impliqués dans la posture sont souvent contrôlés à partir des noyaux du tronc cérébral et des ganglions de la base.


==== Proprioception ====

Dans les muscles squelettiques, les fuseaux musculaires transmettent des informations sur le degré de longueur et d'étirement des muscles au système nerveux central pour aider à maintenir la posture et la position des articulations.

Le sens de l'endroit où se trouve notre corps dans l'espace est appelé proprioception, la perception de la conscience du corps, la conscience "inconsciente" de l'emplacement des différentes régions du corps à un moment donné.

Plusieurs zones du cerveau coordonnent le mouvement et la position avec les informations de rétroaction obtenues à partir de la proprioception.

Le cervelet et le noyau rouge en particulier échantillonnent continuellement la position par rapport au mouvement et apportent des corrections mineures pour assurer un mouvement fluide.


=== Consommation d'énergie ===


L'activité musculaire représente une grande partie de la consommation d'énergie du corps.

Toutes les cellules musculaires produisent des molécules d'adénosine triphosphate (ATP) qui sont utilisées pour alimenter le mouvement des têtes de myosine.

Les muscles ont une réserve d'énergie à court terme sous forme de phosphate de créatine qui est généré à partir de l'ATP et peut régénérer l'ATP en cas de besoin avec la créatine kinase.

Les muscles conservent également une forme de stockage du glucose sous forme de glycogène.

Le glycogène peut être rapidement converti en glucose lorsque de l'énergie est nécessaire pour des contractions soutenues et puissantes.

Dans les muscles squelettiques volontaires, la molécule de glucose peut être métabolisée de manière anaérobie dans un processus appelé glycolyse qui produit deux molécules d'ATP et deux molécules d'acide lactique dans le processus (notez que dans des conditions aérobies, le lactate ne se forme pas ; au lieu de cela, le pyruvate est formé et transmis par le le cycle de l'acide citrique).

Les cellules musculaires contiennent également des globules de graisse, qui sont utilisés comme source d'énergie pendant l'exercice aérobique.

Les systèmes énergétiques aérobies mettent plus de temps à produire l'ATP et à atteindre une efficacité maximale, et nécessitent beaucoup plus d'étapes biochimiques, mais produisent beaucoup plus d'ATP que la glycolyse anaérobie.

Le muscle cardiaque, d'autre part, peut facilement consommer l'un des trois macronutriments (protéines, glucose et graisses) de manière aérobie sans période de «réchauffement» et extrait toujours le rendement maximal en ATP de toute molécule impliquée.

Le cœur, le foie et les globules rouges consomment également de l'acide lactique produit et excrété par les muscles squelettiques pendant l'exercice.

Le muscle squelettique utilise plus de calories que les autres organes.

Au repos, il consomme 54,4 kJ/kg (13,0 kcal/kg) par jour.

C'est plus grand que le tissu adipeux (graisse) à 18,8 kJ/kg (4,5 kcal/kg) et que l'os à 9,6 kJ/kg (2,3 kcal/kg).


==== Efficacité ====

L'efficacité du muscle humain a été mesurée (dans le cadre de l'aviron et du cyclisme) entre 18% et 26%.

L'efficacité est définie comme le rapport entre la production de travail mécanique et le coût métabolique total, tel qu'il peut être calculé à partir de la consommation d'oxygène.

Cette faible efficacité est le résultat d'une efficacité d'environ 40% de la génération d'ATP à partir de l'énergie alimentaire, des pertes de conversion de l'énergie de l'ATP en travail mécanique à l'intérieur du muscle et des pertes mécaniques à l'intérieur du corps.

Ces deux dernières pertes dépendent du type d'exercice et du type de fibres musculaires utilisées (contraction rapide ou contraction lente).

Pour une efficacité globale de 20 %, un watt de puissance mécanique équivaut à 4,3 kcal par heure.

Par exemple, un fabricant d'équipement d'aviron calibre son ergomètre d'aviron pour compter les calories brûlées comme égales à quatre fois le travail mécanique réel, plus 300 kcal par heure, ce qui équivaut à une efficacité d'environ 20 % à 250 watts de puissance mécanique.

La production d'énergie mécanique d'une contraction cyclique peut dépendre de nombreux facteurs, notamment le moment de l'activation, la trajectoire de la tension musculaire et les taux d'augmentation et de décroissance de la force.

Ceux-ci peuvent être synthétisés expérimentalement à l'aide d'une analyse en boucle de travail.


=== Force musculaire ===


La force musculaire est le résultat de trois facteurs qui se chevauchent : la force physiologique (taille du muscle, section transversale, ponts croisés disponibles, réponses à l'entraînement), la force neurologique (la force ou la faiblesse du signal qui indique au muscle de se contracter) et la force mécanique ( angle de force du muscle sur le levier, longueur du bras de moment, capacités articulaires).

Le muscle des vertébrés produit généralement environ 25 à 33 N (5,6 à 7,4 lbf) de force par centimètre carré de section transversale du muscle lorsqu'il est isométrique et à une longueur optimale.

Certains muscles d'invertébrés, comme dans les pinces de crabe, ont des sarcomères beaucoup plus longs que les vertébrés, ce qui entraîne beaucoup plus de sites de liaison de l'actine et de la myosine et donc une force beaucoup plus grande par centimètre carré au prix d'une vitesse beaucoup plus lente.

La force générée par une contraction peut être mesurée de manière non invasive à l'aide de la mécanomyographie ou de la phonomyographie, être mesurée in vivo à l'aide d'une contrainte tendineuse (si un tendon proéminent est présent) ou être mesurée directement à l'aide de méthodes plus invasives.

La force d'un muscle donné, en termes de force exercée sur le squelette, dépend de la longueur, de la vitesse de raccourcissement, de la section transversale, de la pennation, de la longueur du sarcomère, des isoformes de la myosine et de l'activation neurale des unités motrices.

Des réductions importantes de la force musculaire peuvent indiquer une pathologie sous-jacente, le tableau de droite étant utilisé comme guide.


==== Le muscle humain "le plus fort" ====

Étant donné que trois facteurs affectent simultanément la force musculaire et que les muscles ne fonctionnent jamais individuellement, il est trompeur de comparer la force des muscles individuels et d'affirmer que l'un est le "plus fort".

Mais ci-dessous se trouvent plusieurs muscles dont la force est remarquable pour différentes raisons.

Dans le langage courant, la « force » musculaire fait généralement référence à la capacité d'exercer une force sur un objet externe, par exemple, soulever un poids.

Selon cette définition, le masséter ou muscle de la mâchoire est le plus fort.

Le livre Guinness des records de 1992 enregistre l'atteinte d'une force de morsure de 4 337 N (975 lbf) pendant 2 secondes.

Ce qui distingue le masséter n'est pas quelque chose de spécial concernant le muscle lui-même, mais son avantage à travailler contre un bras de levier beaucoup plus court que les autres muscles.

Si la "force" fait référence à la force exercée par le muscle lui-même, par exemple à l'endroit où il s'insère dans un os, alors les muscles les plus forts sont ceux dont la section transversale est la plus grande.

En effet, la tension exercée par une fibre musculaire squelettique individuelle ne varie pas beaucoup.

Chaque fibre peut exercer une force de l'ordre de 0,3 micronewton.

Selon cette définition, on dit généralement que le muscle le plus fort du corps est le quadriceps fémoral ou le grand fessier.

Étant donné que la force musculaire est déterminée par la section transversale, un muscle plus court sera plus fort "livre pour livre" (c'est-à-dire en poids) qu'un muscle plus long de la même section transversale.

La couche myométriale de l'utérus peut être le muscle le plus fort en poids du corps humain féminin.

Au moment de la naissance d'un nourrisson, l'utérus humain entier pèse environ 1,1 kg (40 oz).

Pendant l'accouchement, l'utérus exerce une force descendante de 100 à 400 N (25 à 100 lbf) à chaque contraction.

Les muscles externes de l'œil sont remarquablement grands et forts par rapport à la petite taille et au poids du globe oculaire.

On dit souvent qu'ils sont "les muscles les plus forts pour le travail qu'ils ont à faire" et on prétend parfois qu'ils sont "100 fois plus forts qu'ils ne devraient l'être".

Cependant, les mouvements oculaires (en particulier les saccades utilisées pour le balayage et la lecture du visage) nécessitent des mouvements à grande vitesse, et les muscles oculaires sont exercés la nuit pendant le sommeil à mouvements oculaires rapides.

L'affirmation selon laquelle "la langue est le muscle le plus fort du corps" apparaît fréquemment dans des listes de faits surprenants, mais il est difficile de trouver une définition de la "force" qui rendrait cette affirmation vraie.

Notez que la langue est constituée de huit muscles, et non d'un seul.


==== Génération de force ====

La force musculaire est proportionnelle à la section transversale physiologique (PCSA) et la vitesse musculaire est proportionnelle à la longueur des fibres musculaires.

Le couple autour d'une articulation, cependant, est déterminé par un certain nombre de paramètres biomécaniques, notamment la distance entre les insertions musculaires et les points de pivot, la taille des muscles et le rapport d'engrenage architectural.

Les muscles sont normalement disposés en opposition de sorte que lorsqu'un groupe de muscles se contracte, un autre groupe se détend ou s'allonge.

L'antagonisme dans la transmission de l'influx nerveux aux muscles signifie qu'il est impossible de stimuler pleinement la contraction de deux muscles antagonistes à la fois.

Lors de mouvements balistiques tels que le lancer, les muscles antagonistes agissent pour « freiner » les muscles agonistes tout au long de la contraction, en particulier à la fin du mouvement.

Dans l'exemple du lancer, la poitrine et l'avant de l'épaule (deltoïde antérieur) se contractent pour tirer le bras vers l'avant, tandis que les muscles du dos et de l'arrière de l'épaule (deltoïde postérieur) se contractent également et subissent une contraction excentrique pour ralentir le mouvement. pour éviter les blessures.

Une partie du processus d'entraînement consiste à apprendre à détendre les muscles antagonistes pour augmenter l'apport de force de la poitrine et de l'épaule antérieure.

Les muscles qui se contractent produisent des vibrations et des sons.

Les fibres à contraction lente produisent 10 à 30 contractions par seconde (10 à 30 Hz).

Les fibres à contraction rapide produisent 30 à 70 contractions par seconde (30 à 70 Hz).

La vibration peut être observée et ressentie en contractant fortement les muscles, comme lorsque l'on ferme le poing.

Le son peut être entendu en pressant un muscle très tendu contre l'oreille, encore une fois un poing ferme est un bon exemple.

Le son est généralement décrit comme un grondement.

Certaines personnes peuvent produire volontairement ce grondement en contractant le muscle tenseur du tympan de l'oreille moyenne.

Le grondement peut également être entendu lorsque les muscles du cou ou de la mâchoire sont très tendus.


=== Voies de transduction du signal ===

Le phénotype de type fibre musculaire squelettique chez les animaux adultes est régulé par plusieurs voies de signalisation indépendantes.

Il s'agit notamment des voies impliquées dans la voie Ras/mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), la calcineurine, la protéine kinase IV dépendante du calcium/calmoduline et le coactivateur γ proliférateur de peroxysomes 1 (PGC-1).

La voie de signalisation Ras/MAPK relie les motoneurones et les systèmes de signalisation, couplant excitation et régulation de la transcription pour favoriser l'induction dépendante des nerfs du programme lent de régénération musculaire.

La calcineurine, une phosphatase activée par Ca2+/calmoduline impliquée dans la spécification du type de fibre dépendante de l'activité nerveuse dans le muscle squelettique, contrôle directement l'état de phosphorylation du facteur de transcription NFAT, permettant sa translocation vers le noyau et conduisant à l'activation du type lent. protéines musculaires en coopération avec les protéines myocyte enhancer factor 2 (MEF2) et d'autres protéines régulatrices.

L'activité de la protéine kinase dépendante de Ca2+/calmoduline est également régulée positivement par l'activité lente des motoneurones, peut-être parce qu'elle amplifie les réponses générées par la calcineurine de type lent en favorisant les fonctions de transactivateur MEF2 et en améliorant la capacité oxydative par la stimulation de la biogenèse mitochondriale.

Les modifications induites par la contraction du calcium intracellulaire ou des espèces réactives de l'oxygène fournissent des signaux à diverses voies qui incluent les MAPK, la calcineurine et la protéine kinase IV dépendante du calcium/calmoduline pour activer les facteurs de transcription qui régulent l'expression des gènes et l'activité enzymatique dans le muscle squelettique.

PGC1-α (PPARGC1A), un coactivateur transcriptionnel des récepteurs nucléaires important pour la régulation d'un certain nombre de gènes mitochondriaux impliqués dans le métabolisme oxydatif, interagit directement avec MEF2 pour activer de manière synergique les gènes sélectifs des muscles à contraction lente (ST) et sert également de cible pour signalisation de la calcineurine.

Une voie transcriptionnelle médiée par le récepteur δ activé par les proliférateurs de peroxysomes (PPARδ) est impliquée dans la régulation du phénotype des fibres musculaires squelettiques.

Les souris qui hébergent une forme activée de PPARd présentent un phénotype "d'endurance", avec une augmentation coordonnée des enzymes oxydatives et de la biogenèse mitochondriale et une proportion accrue de fibres ST.

Ainsi, grâce à la génomique fonctionnelle, la calcineurine, la kinase dépendante de la calmoduline, la PGC-1α et le PPARδ activé forment la base d'un réseau de signalisation qui contrôle la transformation du type de fibre musculaire squelettique et les profils métaboliques qui protègent contre la résistance à l'insuline et l'obésité.

Le passage du métabolisme aérobie au métabolisme anaérobie lors d'un travail intense nécessite l'activation rapide de plusieurs systèmes pour assurer un apport constant d'ATP aux muscles qui travaillent.

Celles-ci incluent un passage des carburants à base de graisses aux carburants à base de glucides, une redistribution du flux sanguin des muscles qui ne travaillent pas aux muscles en exercice et l'élimination de plusieurs des sous-produits du métabolisme anaérobie, tels que le dioxyde de carbone et l'acide lactique.

Certaines de ces réponses sont régies par le contrôle transcriptionnel du phénotype glycolytique à contraction rapide (FT).

Par exemple, la reprogrammation du muscle squelettique d'un phénotype glycolytique ST à un phénotype glycolytique FT implique le complexe Six1/Eya1, composé de membres de la famille des protéines Six.

De plus, le facteur 1-α inductible par l'hypoxie (HIF1A) a été identifié comme un régulateur maître de l'expression de gènes impliqués dans les réponses hypoxiques essentielles qui maintiennent les niveaux d'ATP dans les cellules.

L'ablation de HIF-1α dans le muscle squelettique était associée à une augmentation de l'activité des enzymes limitant la vitesse des mitochondries, indiquant que le cycle de l'acide citrique et l'augmentation de l'oxydation des acides gras pourraient compenser la diminution du débit à travers la voie glycolytique chez ces animaux.

Cependant, les réponses HIF-1α médiées par l'hypoxie sont également liées à la régulation du dysfonctionnement mitochondrial par la formation d'espèces réactives excessives de l'oxygène dans les mitochondries.

D'autres voies influencent également le caractère musculaire adulte.

Par exemple, la force physique à l'intérieur d'une fibre musculaire peut libérer le facteur de réponse sérique du facteur de transcription de la titine, une protéine structurelle, entraînant une croissance musculaire altérée.


== Exercice ==

L'exercice est souvent recommandé comme moyen d'améliorer les habiletés motrices, la condition physique, la force musculaire et osseuse et la fonction articulaire.

L'exercice a plusieurs effets sur les muscles, le tissu conjonctif, les os et les nerfs qui stimulent les muscles.

L'un de ces effets est l'hypertrophie musculaire, une augmentation de la taille du muscle due à une augmentation du nombre de fibres musculaires ou de la section transversale des myofibrilles.

Les changements musculaires dépendent du type d'exercice utilisé.
Généralement, il existe deux types de régimes d'exercice, aérobie et anaérobie.

L'exercice aérobie (par exemple, les marathons) implique des activités de faible intensité, mais de longue durée, au cours desquelles les muscles sollicités sont en dessous de leur force de contraction maximale.

Les activités aérobies reposent sur la respiration aérobie (c'est-à-dire le cycle de l'acide citrique et la chaîne de transport d'électrons) pour l'énergie métabolique en consommant des graisses, des protéines, des glucides et de l'oxygène.

Les muscles impliqués dans les exercices aérobies contiennent un pourcentage plus élevé de fibres musculaires de type I (ou à contraction lente), qui contiennent principalement des mitochondries et des enzymes d'oxydation associées à la respiration aérobie.

Au contraire, l'exercice anaérobie est associé à des exercices de courte durée mais de haute intensité (par exemple, sprint et haltérophilie).

Les activités anaérobies utilisent principalement des fibres musculaires de type II à contraction rapide.

Les fibres musculaires de type II dépendent de la glucogenèse pour l'énergie pendant l'exercice anaérobie.

Pendant l'exercice anaérobie, les fibres de type II consomment peu d'oxygène, de protéines et de graisses, produisent de grandes quantités d'acide lactique et sont fatigables.

De nombreux exercices sont partiellement aérobies et anaérobies; par exemple, le football et l'escalade.

La présence d'acide lactique a un effet inhibiteur sur la génération d'ATP dans le muscle.

Il peut même arrêter la production d'ATP si la concentration intracellulaire devient trop élevée.

Cependant, l'entraînement d'endurance atténue l'accumulation d'acide lactique en augmentant la capillarisation et la myoglobine.

Cela augmente la capacité d'éliminer les déchets, comme l'acide lactique, des muscles afin de ne pas altérer la fonction musculaire.

Une fois sorti des muscles, l'acide lactique peut être utilisé par d'autres muscles ou tissus corporels comme source d'énergie, ou transporté vers le foie où il est reconverti en pyruvate.

En plus d'augmenter le niveau d'acide lactique, un exercice intense entraîne la perte d'ions potassium dans les muscles.

Cela peut faciliter la récupération de la fonction musculaire en protégeant contre la fatigue.

Les douleurs musculaires d'apparition retardée sont des douleurs ou des malaises qui peuvent être ressentis un à trois jours après l'exercice et disparaissent généralement deux à trois jours après quoi.

On pensait autrefois qu'elle était causée par l'accumulation d'acide lactique, une théorie plus récente est qu'elle est causée par de minuscules déchirures dans les fibres musculaires causées par une contraction excentrique ou des niveaux d'entraînement inhabituels.

Étant donné que l'acide lactique se disperse assez rapidement, il ne peut pas expliquer la douleur ressentie quelques jours après l'exercice.


== Signification clinique ==

=== Maladie musculaire ===

Les maladies du muscle squelettique sont appelées myopathies, tandis que les maladies des nerfs sont appelées neuropathies.

Les deux peuvent affecter la fonction musculaire ou provoquer des douleurs musculaires et relèvent de la catégorie des maladies neuromusculaires.

La cause de nombreuses myopathies est attribuée à des mutations des différentes protéines musculaires associées.

Certaines myopathies inflammatoires comprennent la polymyosite et la myosite à inclusions

Les maladies neuromusculaires affectent les muscles et leur contrôle nerveux.

En général, les problèmes de contrôle nerveux peuvent provoquer une spasticité ou une paralysie, selon l'emplacement et la nature du problème.

Un certain nombre de troubles du mouvement sont causés par des troubles neurologiques tels que la maladie de Parkinson et la maladie de Huntington où il existe un dysfonctionnement du système nerveux central.

Les symptômes des maladies musculaires peuvent inclure la faiblesse, la spasticité, les myoclonies et les myalgies.

Les procédures de diagnostic qui peuvent révéler des troubles musculaires comprennent le test des niveaux de créatine kinase dans le sang et l'électromyographie (mesure de l'activité électrique dans les muscles).

Dans certains cas, une biopsie musculaire peut être effectuée pour identifier une myopathie, ainsi que des tests génétiques pour identifier les anomalies de l'ADN associées à des myopathies et dystrophies spécifiques.

Une technique d'élastographie non invasive qui mesure le bruit musculaire est en cours d'expérimentation pour fournir un moyen de suivi des maladies neuromusculaires.

Le son produit par un muscle provient du raccourcissement des filaments d'actomyosine le long de l'axe du muscle.

Lors de la contraction, le muscle se raccourcit sur sa longueur et se dilate sur sa largeur, produisant des vibrations à la surface.


=== Hypertrophie ===

Indépendamment des mesures de force et de performance, les muscles peuvent être incités à grossir par un certain nombre de facteurs, notamment la signalisation hormonale, les facteurs de développement, l'entraînement en force et la maladie.

Contrairement à la croyance populaire, le nombre de fibres musculaires ne peut pas être augmenté par l'exercice.

Au lieu de cela, les muscles grossissent grâce à une combinaison de croissance des cellules musculaires à mesure que de nouveaux filaments de protéines sont ajoutés avec une masse supplémentaire fournie par des cellules satellites indifférenciées aux côtés des cellules musculaires existantes.

Des facteurs biologiques tels que l'âge et les niveaux d'hormones peuvent affecter l'hypertrophie musculaire.

Pendant la puberté chez les hommes, l'hypertrophie se produit à un rythme accéléré à mesure que les niveaux d'hormones stimulant la croissance produites par l'organisme augmentent.

L'hypertrophie naturelle s'arrête normalement à la pleine croissance à la fin de l'adolescence.

Comme la testostérone est l'une des principales hormones de croissance du corps, en moyenne, les hommes trouvent l'hypertrophie beaucoup plus facile à atteindre que les femmes.

La prise supplémentaire de testostérone ou d'autres stéroïdes anabolisants augmentera l'hypertrophie musculaire.

Les facteurs musculaires, rachidiens et neuronaux affectent tous la construction musculaire.

Parfois, une personne peut remarquer une augmentation de la force d'un muscle donné même si seul son opposé a fait l'objet d'un exercice, comme lorsqu'un bodybuilder trouve son biceps gauche plus fort après avoir terminé un régime axé uniquement sur le biceps droit.

Ce phénomène s'appelle l'éducation croisée.


=== Atrophie ===
 
Chaque jour, entre un et deux pour cent des muscles sont détruits et reconstruits.

L'inactivité, la malnutrition, la maladie et le vieillissement peuvent augmenter la dégradation conduisant à l'atrophie musculaire ou à la sarcopénie.

La sarcopénie est généralement un processus lié à l'âge qui peut entraîner la fragilité et ses conséquences.

Une diminution de la masse musculaire peut s'accompagner d'une diminution du nombre et de la taille des cellules musculaires ainsi que d'une teneur en protéines plus faible.

Les vols spatiaux habités, impliquant des périodes prolongées d'immobilisation et d'apesanteur, sont connus pour entraîner un affaiblissement et une atrophie musculaire entraînant une perte pouvant atteindre 30 % de la masse de certains muscles.

De telles conséquences sont également notées chez certains mammifères après l'hibernation.

De nombreuses maladies et affections, notamment le cancer, le sida et l'insuffisance cardiaque, peuvent entraîner une perte musculaire connue sous le nom de cachexie.


=== Recherche ===

Les myopathies ont été modélisées avec des systèmes de culture cellulaire de muscle provenant de biopsies de tissus sains ou malades.

Une autre source de muscle squelettique et de progéniteurs est fournie par la différenciation dirigée des cellules souches pluripotentes.

La recherche sur les propriétés des muscles squelettiques utilise de nombreuses techniques.

La stimulation musculaire électrique est utilisée pour déterminer la force et la vitesse de contraction à différentes fréquences liées à la composition et au mélange des types de fibres au sein d'un groupe musculaire individuel.

Les tests musculaires in vitro sont utilisés pour une caractérisation plus complète des propriétés musculaires.

L'activité électrique associée à la contraction musculaire est mesurée par électromyographie (EMG).

Le muscle squelettique a deux réponses physiologiques : la relaxation et la contraction.

Les mécanismes pour lesquels ces réponses se produisent génèrent une activité électrique mesurée par EMG.

Plus précisément, l'EMG peut mesurer le potentiel d'action d'un muscle squelettique, qui se produit à partir de l'hyperpolarisation des axones moteurs à partir des impulsions nerveuses envoyées au muscle.

L'EMG est utilisé dans la recherche pour déterminer si le muscle squelettique d'intérêt est activé, la quantité de force générée et un indicateur de fatigue musculaire.

Les deux types d'EMG sont l'EMG intramusculaire et l'EMG de surface le plus courant.

Les signaux EMG sont beaucoup plus importants lorsqu'un muscle squelettique se contracte au lieu de se détendre.

Cependant, pour les muscles squelettiques plus petits et plus profonds, les signaux EMG sont réduits et sont donc considérés comme une technique moins appréciée pour mesurer l'activation.

Dans la recherche utilisant l'EMG, une contraction volontaire maximale (MVC) est couramment effectuée sur le muscle squelettique d'intérêt, afin d'avoir des données de référence pour le reste des enregistrements EMG lors des principaux tests expérimentaux pour ce même muscle squelettique.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Skeletal_muscle
