

SENSE ORGANS


-Olfactory organ
-Eye
-Ear
-Gustatory organ


NERVOUS SYSTEM


In biology, the classical doctrine of the nervous system determines that it is a highly complex part of an animal that coordinates its actions and sensory information by transmitting signals to and from different parts of its body. 

The nervous system detects environmental changes that impact the body, then works in tandem with the endocrine system to respond to such events. 

Nervous tissue first arose in wormlike organisms about 550 to 600 million years ago. 

However, this classical doctrine has been challenged in recent decades by discoveries about the existence and use of electrical signals in plants. 

On the basis of these findings, some scientists have proposed that a plant nervous system exists and that a scientific field called plant neurobiology should be created. 

This proposal has led to a dispute in the scientific community between those who think we should talk about the nervous system of plants and those who are against it. 

The inflexibility of the positions in the scientific debate on both sides has led to the proposal of a solution to the debate, consisting of redefining the concept of the nervous system by using only physiological criteria and avoiding phylogenetic criteria.

In vertebrates it consists of two main parts, the central nervous system (CNS) and the peripheral nervous system (PNS). 

The CNS consists of the brain and spinal cord. 

The PNS consists mainly of nerves, which are enclosed bundles of the long fibers or axons, that connect the CNS to every other part of the body. 

Nerves that transmit signals from the brain are called motor nerves or efferent nerves, while those nerves that transmit information from the body to the CNS are called sensory nerves or afferent. 

Spinal nerves are mixed nerves that serve both functions. 

The PNS is divided into three separate subsystems, the somatic, autonomic, and enteric nervous systems. 

Somatic nerves mediate voluntary movement. 

The autonomic nervous system is further subdivided into the sympathetic and the parasympathetic nervous systems. 

The sympathetic nervous system is activated in cases of emergencies to mobilize energy, while the parasympathetic nervous system is activated when organisms are in a relaxed state. 

The enteric nervous system functions to control the gastrointestinal system. 

Both autonomic and enteric nervous systems function involuntarily. 

Nerves that exit from the cranium are called cranial nerves while those exiting from the spinal cord are called spinal nerves.

At the cellular level, the nervous system is defined by the presence of a special type of cell, called the neuron, also known as a "nerve cell." 

Neurons have special structures that allow them to send signals rapidly and precisely to other cells. 

They send these signals in the form of electrochemical impulses traveling along thin fibers called axons, which can be directly transmitted to neighboring cells through electrical synapses or cause chemicals called neurotransmitters to be released at chemical synapses. 

A cell that receives a synaptic signal from a neuron may be excited, inhibited, or otherwise modulated. 

The connections between neurons can form neural pathways, neural circuits, and larger networks that generate an organism's perception of the world and determine its behavior. 

Along with neurons, the nervous system contains other specialized cells called glial cells (or simply glia), which provide structural and metabolic support.

Nervous systems are found in most multicellular animals, but vary greatly in complexity. 

The only multicellular animals that have no nervous system at all are sponges, placozoans, and mesozoans, which have very simple body plans. 

The nervous systems of the radially symmetric organisms ctenophores (comb jellies) and cnidarians (which include anemones, hydras, corals and jellyfish) consist of a diffuse nerve net. 

All other animal species, with the exception of a few types of worms, have a nervous system containing a brain, a central cord (or two cords running in parallel), and nerves radiating from the brain and central cord. 

The size of the nervous system ranges from a few hundred cells in the simplest worms, to around 300 billion cells in African elephants.

The central nervous system functions to send signals from one cell to others, or from one part of the body to others and to receive feedback. 

Malfunction of the nervous system can occur as a result of genetic defects, physical damage due to trauma or toxicity, infection, or simply senesence. 

The medical specialty of neurology studies disorders of the nervous system and looks for interventions that can prevent or treat them. 

In the peripheral nervous system, the most common problem is the failure of nerve conduction, which can be due to different causes including diabetic neuropathy and demyelinating disorders such as multiple sclerosis and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. 

Neuroscience is the field of science that focuses on the study of the nervous system.


== Structure ==

The nervous system derives its name from nerves, which are cylindrical bundles of fibers (the axons of neurons), that emanate from the brain and spinal cord, and branch repeatedly to innervate every part of the body. 

Nerves are large enough to have been recognized by the ancient Egyptians, Greeks, and Romans, but their internal structure was not understood until it became possible to examine them using a microscope. 

The author Michael Nikoletseas wrote:
"It is difficult to believe that until approximately year 1900 it was not known that neurons are the basic units of the brain (Santiago Ramón y Cajal). 

Equally surprising is the fact that the concept of chemical transmission in the brain was not known until around 1930 (Henry Hallett Dale and Otto Loewi). 

We began to understand the basic electrical phenomenon that neurons use in order to communicate among themselves, the action potential, in the 1950s (Alan Lloyd Hodgkin, Andrew Huxley and John Eccles). 

It was in the 1960s that we became aware of how basic neuronal networks code stimuli and thus basic concepts are possible (David H. Hubel and Torsten Wiesel). 

The molecular revolution swept across US universities in the 1980s. 

It was in the 1990s that molecular mechanisms of behavioral phenomena became widely known (Eric Richard Kandel)." 

A microscopic examination shows that nerves consist primarily of axons, along with different membranes that wrap around them and segregate them into fascicles. 

The neurons that give rise to nerves do not lie entirely within the nerves themselves—their cell bodies reside within the brain, spinal cord, or peripheral ganglia.

All animals more advanced than sponges have nervous systems. 

However, even sponges, unicellular animals, and non-animals such as slime molds have cell-to-cell signalling mechanisms that are precursors to those of neurons. 

In radially symmetric animals such as the jellyfish and hydra, the nervous system consists of a nerve net, a diffuse network of isolated cells. 

In bilaterian animals, which make up the great majority of existing species, the nervous system has a common structure that originated early in the Ediacaran period, over 550 million years ago.


=== Cells ===

The nervous system contains two main categories or types of cells: neurons and glial cells.


==== Neurons ====

The nervous system is defined by the presence of a special type of cell—the neuron (sometimes called "neurone" or "nerve cell"). 

Neurons can be distinguished from other cells in a number of ways, but their most fundamental property is that they communicate with other cells via synapses, which are membrane-to-membrane junctions containing molecular machinery that allows rapid transmission of signals, either electrical or chemical. 

Many types of neuron possess an axon, a protoplasmic protrusion that can extend to distant parts of the body and make thousands of synaptic contacts; axons typically extend throughout the body in bundles called nerves.

Even in the nervous system of a single species such as humans, hundreds of different types of neurons exist, with a wide variety of morphologies and functions. 

These include sensory neurons that transmute physical stimuli such as light and sound into neural signals, and motor neurons that transmute neural signals into activation of muscles or glands; however in many species the great majority of neurons participate in the formation of centralized structures (the brain and ganglia) and they receive all of their input from other neurons and send their output to other neurons.


==== Glial cells ====

Glial cells (named from the Greek for "glue") are non-neuronal cells that provide support and nutrition, maintain homeostasis, form myelin, and participate in signal transmission in the nervous system. 

In the human brain, it is estimated that the total number of glia roughly equals the number of neurons, although the proportions vary in different brain areas. 

Among the most important functions of glial cells are to support neurons and hold them in place; to supply nutrients to neurons; to insulate neurons electrically; to destroy pathogens and remove dead neurons; and to provide guidance cues directing the axons of neurons to their targets. 

A very important type of glial cell (oligodendrocytes in the central nervous system, and Schwann cells in the peripheral nervous system) generates layers of a fatty substance called myelin that wraps around axons and provides electrical insulation which allows them to transmit action potentials much more rapidly and efficiently. 

Recent findings indicate that glial cells, such as microglia and astrocytes, serve as important resident immune cells within the central nervous system.


=== Anatomy in vertebrates ===

The nervous system of vertebrates (including humans) is divided into the central nervous system (CNS) and the peripheral nervous system (PNS).

The (CNS) is the major division, and consists of the brain and the spinal cord. 

The spinal canal contains the spinal cord, while the cranial cavity contains the brain. 

The CNS is enclosed and protected by the meninges, a three-layered system of membranes, including a tough, leathery outer layer called the dura mater. 

The brain is also protected by the skull, and the spinal cord by the vertebrae.

The peripheral nervous system (PNS) is a collective term for the nervous system structures that do not lie within the CNS. 

The large majority of the axon bundles called nerves are considered to belong to the PNS, even when the cell bodies of the neurons to which they belong reside within the brain or spinal cord. 

The PNS is divided into somatic and visceral parts. 

The somatic part consists of the nerves that innervate the skin, joints, and muscles. 

The cell bodies of somatic sensory neurons lie in dorsal root ganglia of the spinal cord. 

The visceral part, also known as the autonomic nervous system, contains neurons that innervate the internal organs, blood vessels, and glands. 

The autonomic nervous system itself consists of two parts: the sympathetic nervous system and the parasympathetic nervous system. 

Some authors also include sensory neurons whose cell bodies lie in the periphery (for senses such as hearing) as part of the PNS; others, however, omit them.

The vertebrate nervous system can also be divided into areas called gray matter and white matter. 

Gray matter (which is only gray in preserved tissue, and is better described as pink or light brown in living tissue) contains a high proportion of cell bodies of neurons. 

White matter is composed mainly of myelinated axons, and takes its color from the myelin. 

White matter includes all of the nerves, and much of the interior of the brain and spinal cord. 

Gray matter is found in clusters of neurons in the brain and spinal cord, and in cortical layers that line their surfaces. 

There is an anatomical convention that a cluster of neurons in the brain or spinal cord is called a nucleus, whereas a cluster of neurons in the periphery is called a ganglion. 

There are, however, a few exceptions to this rule, notably including the part of the forebrain called the basal ganglia.


=== Comparative anatomy and evolution ===

==== Neural precursors in sponges ====

Sponges have no cells connected to each other by synaptic junctions, that is, no neurons, and therefore no nervous system. 

They do, however, have homologs of many genes that play key roles in synaptic function. 

Recent studies have shown that sponge cells express a group of proteins that cluster together to form a structure resembling a postsynaptic density (the signal-receiving part of a synapse). 

However, the function of this structure is currently unclear. 

Although sponge cells do not show synaptic transmission, they do communicate with each other via calcium waves and other impulses, which mediate some simple actions such as whole-body contraction.


==== Radiata ====

Jellyfish, comb jellies, and related animals have diffuse nerve nets rather than a central nervous system. 

In most jellyfish the nerve net is spread more or less evenly across the body; in comb jellies it is concentrated near the mouth. 

The nerve nets consist of sensory neurons, which pick up chemical, tactile, and visual signals; motor neurons, which can activate contractions of the body wall; and intermediate neurons, which detect patterns of activity in the sensory neurons and, in response, send signals to groups of motor neurons. 

In some cases groups of intermediate neurons are clustered into discrete ganglia.

The development of the nervous system in radiata is relatively unstructured. 

Unlike bilaterians, radiata only have two primordial cell layers, endoderm and ectoderm. 

Neurons are generated from a special set of ectodermal precursor cells, which also serve as precursors for every other ectodermal cell type.


==== Bilateria ====

The vast majority of existing animals are bilaterians, meaning animals with left and right sides that are approximate mirror images of each other. 

All bilateria are thought to have descended from a common wormlike ancestor that appeared in the Ediacaran period, 550–600 million years ago. 

The fundamental bilaterian body form is a tube with a hollow gut cavity running from mouth to anus, and a nerve cord with an enlargement (a "ganglion") for each body segment, with an especially large ganglion at the front, called the "brain".

Even mammals, including humans, show the segmented bilaterian body plan at the level of the nervous system. 

The spinal cord contains a series of segmental ganglia, each giving rise to motor and sensory nerves that innervate a portion of the body surface and underlying musculature. 

On the limbs, the layout of the innervation pattern is complex, but on the trunk it gives rise to a series of narrow bands. 

The top three segments belong to the brain, giving rise to the forebrain, midbrain, and hindbrain.

Bilaterians can be divided, based on events that occur very early in embryonic development, into two groups (superphyla) called protostomes and deuterostomes. 

Deuterostomes include vertebrates as well as echinoderms, hemichordates (mainly acorn worms), and Xenoturbellidans. 

Protostomes, the more diverse group, include arthropods, molluscs, and numerous types of worms. 

There is a basic difference between the two groups in the placement of the nervous system within the body: 
    protostomes possess a nerve cord on the ventral (usually bottom) side of the body, whereas in deuterostomes the nerve cord is on the dorsal (usually top) side. 

In fact, numerous aspects of the body are inverted between the two groups, including the expression patterns of several genes that show dorsal-to-ventral gradients. 

Most anatomists now consider that the bodies of protostomes and deuterostomes are "flipped over" with respect to each other, a hypothesis that was first proposed by Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire for insects in comparison to vertebrates. 

Thus insects, for example, have nerve cords that run along the ventral midline of the body, while all vertebrates have spinal cords that run along the dorsal midline.


==== Worms ====

Worms are the simplest bilaterian animals, and reveal the basic structure of the bilaterian nervous system in the most straightforward way. 

As an example, earthworms have dual nerve cords running along the length of the body and merging at the tail and the mouth. 

These nerve cords are connected by transverse nerves like the rungs of a ladder. 

These transverse nerves help coordinate the two sides of the animal. 

Two ganglia at the head (the "nerve ring") end function similar to a simple brain. 

Photoreceptors on the animal's eyespots provide sensory information on light and dark.

The nervous system of one very small roundworm, the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans, has been completely mapped out in a connectome including its synapses. 

Every neuron and its cellular lineage has been recorded and most, if not all, of the neural connections are known. 

In this species, the nervous system is sexually dimorphic; the nervous systems of the two sexes, males and female hermaphrodites, have different numbers of neurons and groups of neurons that perform sex-specific functions. 

In C. elegans, males have exactly 383 neurons, while hermaphrodites have exactly 302 neurons.


==== Arthropods ====

Arthropods, such as insects and crustaceans, have a nervous system made up of a series of ganglia, connected by a ventral nerve cord made up of two parallel connectives running along the length of the belly. 

Typically, each body segment has one ganglion on each side, though some ganglia are fused to form the brain and other large ganglia. 

The head segment contains the brain, also known as the supraesophageal ganglion. 

In the insect nervous system, the brain is anatomically divided into the protocerebrum, deutocerebrum, and tritocerebrum. 

Immediately behind the brain is the subesophageal ganglion, which is composed of three pairs of fused ganglia. 

It controls the mouthparts, the salivary glands and certain muscles. 

Many arthropods have well-developed sensory organs, including compound eyes for vision and antennae for olfaction and pheromone sensation. 

The sensory information from these organs is processed by the brain.

In insects, many neurons have cell bodies that are positioned at the edge of the brain and are electrically passive—the cell bodies serve only to provide metabolic support and do not participate in signalling. 

A protoplasmic fiber runs from the cell body and branches profusely, with some parts transmitting signals and other parts receiving signals. 

Thus, most parts of the insect brain have passive cell bodies arranged around the periphery, while the neural signal processing takes place in a tangle of protoplasmic fibers called neuropil, in the interior.


==== "Identified" neurons ====

A neuron is called identified if it has properties that distinguish it from every other neuron in the same animal—properties such as location, neurotransmitter, gene expression pattern, and connectivity—and if every individual organism belonging to the same species has one and only one neuron with the same set of properties. 

In vertebrate nervous systems very few neurons are "identified" in this sense—in humans, there are believed to be none—but in simpler nervous systems, some or all neurons may be thus unique. 

In the roundworm C. elegans, whose nervous system is the most thoroughly described of any animal's, every neuron in the body is uniquely identifiable, with the same location and the same connections in every individual worm. 

One notable consequence of this fact is that the form of the C. elegans nervous system is completely specified by the genome, with no experience-dependent plasticity.The brains of many molluscs and insects also contain substantial numbers of identified neurons. 

In vertebrates, the best known identified neurons are the gigantic Mauthner cells of fish. 

Every fish has two Mauthner cells, in the bottom part of the brainstem, one on the left side and one on the right. 

Each Mauthner cell has an axon that crosses over, innervating neurons at the same brain level and then travelling down through the spinal cord, making numerous connections as it goes. 

The synapses generated by a Mauthner cell are so powerful that a single action potential gives rise to a major behavioral response: 
    within milliseconds the fish curves its body into a C-shape, then straightens, thereby propelling itself rapidly forward. 

Functionally this is a fast escape response, triggered most easily by a strong sound wave or pressure wave impinging on the lateral line organ of the fish. 

Mauthner cells are not the only identified neurons in fish—there are about 20 more types, including pairs of "Mauthner cell analogs" in each spinal segmental nucleus. 

Although a Mauthner cell is capable of bringing about an escape response individually, in the context of ordinary behavior other types of cells usually contribute to shaping the amplitude and direction of the response.

Mauthner cells have been described as command neurons. 

A command neuron is a special type of identified neuron, defined as a neuron that is capable of driving a specific behavior individually. 

Such neurons appear most commonly in the fast escape systems of various species—the squid giant axon and squid giant synapse, used for pioneering experiments in neurophysiology because of their enormous size, both participate in the fast escape circuit of the squid. 

The concept of a command neuron has, however, become controversial, because of studies showing that some neurons that initially appeared to fit the description were really only capable of evoking a response in a limited set of circumstances.


== Function ==

At the most basic level, the function of the nervous system is to send signals from one cell to others, or from one part of the body to others. 

There are multiple ways that a cell can send signals to other cells. 

One is by releasing chemicals called hormones into the internal circulation, so that they can diffuse to distant sites. 

In contrast to this "broadcast" mode of signaling, the nervous system provides "point-to-point" signals—neurons project their axons to specific target areas and make synaptic connections with specific target cells. 

Thus, neural signaling is capable of a much higher level of specificity than hormonal signaling. 

It is also much faster: the fastest nerve signals travel at speeds that exceed 100 meters per second.
At a more integrative level, the primary function of the nervous system is to control the body. 

It does this by extracting information from the environment using sensory receptors, sending signals that encode this information into the central nervous system, processing the information to determine an appropriate response, and sending output signals to muscles or glands to activate the response. 

The evolution of a complex nervous system has made it possible for various animal species to have advanced perception abilities such as vision, complex social interactions, rapid coordination of organ systems, and integrated processing of concurrent signals. 

In humans, the sophistication of the nervous system makes it possible to have language, abstract representation of concepts, transmission of culture, and many other features of human society that would not exist without the human brain.


=== Neurons and synapses ===

Most neurons send signals via their axons, although some types are capable of dendrite-to-dendrite communication. 

(In fact, the types of neurons called amacrine cells have no axons, and communicate only via their dendrites.) 

Neural signals propagate along an axon in the form of electrochemical waves called action potentials, which produce cell-to-cell signals at points where axon terminals make synaptic contact with other cells.Synapses may be electrical or chemical. 

Electrical synapses make direct electrical connections between neurons, but chemical synapses are much more common, and much more diverse in function. 

At a chemical synapse, the cell that sends signals is called presynaptic, and the cell that receives signals is called postsynaptic. 

Both the presynaptic and postsynaptic areas are full of molecular machinery that carries out the signalling process. 

The presynaptic area contains large numbers of tiny spherical vessels called synaptic vesicles, packed with neurotransmitter chemicals. 

When the presynaptic terminal is electrically stimulated, an array of molecules embedded in the membrane are activated, and cause the contents of the vesicles to be released into the narrow space between the presynaptic and postsynaptic membranes, called the synaptic cleft. 

The neurotransmitter then binds to receptors embedded in the postsynaptic membrane, causing them to enter an activated state. 

Depending on the type of receptor, the resulting effect on the postsynaptic cell may be excitatory, inhibitory, or modulatory in more complex ways. 

For example, release of the neurotransmitter acetylcholine at a synaptic contact between a motor neuron and a muscle cell induces rapid contraction of the muscle cell. 

The entire synaptic transmission process takes only a fraction of a millisecond, although the effects on the postsynaptic cell may last much longer (even indefinitely, in cases where the synaptic signal leads to the formation of a memory trace).

There are literally hundreds of different types of synapses. 

In fact, there are over a hundred known neurotransmitters, and many of them have multiple types of receptors. 

Many synapses use more than one neurotransmitter—a common arrangement is for a synapse to use one fast-acting small-molecule neurotransmitter such as glutamate or GABA, along with one or more peptide neurotransmitters that play slower-acting modulatory roles. 

Molecular neuroscientists generally divide receptors into two broad groups: 
    chemically gated ion channels and second messenger systems. 

When a chemically gated ion channel is activated, it forms a passage that allows specific types of ions to flow across the membrane. 

Depending on the type of ion, the effect on the target cell may be excitatory or inhibitory. 

When a second messenger system is activated, it starts a cascade of molecular interactions inside the target cell, which may ultimately produce a wide variety of complex effects, such as increasing or decreasing the sensitivity of the cell to stimuli, or even altering gene transcription.

According to a rule called Dale's principle, which has only a few known exceptions, a neuron releases the same neurotransmitters at all of its synapses. 

This does not mean, though, that a neuron exerts the same effect on all of its targets, because the effect of a synapse depends not on the neurotransmitter, but on the receptors that it activates. 

Because different targets can (and frequently do) use different types of receptors, it is possible for a neuron to have excitatory effects on one set of target cells, inhibitory effects on others, and complex modulatory effects on others still. 

Nevertheless, it happens that the two most widely used neurotransmitters, glutamate and GABA, each have largely consistent effects. 

Glutamate has several widely occurring types of receptors, but all of them are excitatory or modulatory. 

Similarly, GABA has several widely occurring receptor types, but all of them are inhibitory. 

Because of this consistency, glutamatergic cells are frequently referred to as "excitatory neurons", and GABAergic cells as "inhibitory neurons". 

Strictly speaking, this is an abuse of terminology—it is the receptors that are excitatory and inhibitory, not the neurons—but it is commonly seen even in scholarly publications.

One very important subset of synapses are capable of forming memory traces by means of long-lasting activity-dependent changes in synaptic strength. 

The best-known form of neural memory is a process called long-term potentiation (abbreviated LTP), which operates at synapses that use the neurotransmitter glutamate acting on a special type of receptor known as the NMDA receptor. 

The NMDA receptor has an "associative" property: if the two cells involved in the synapse are both activated at approximately the same time, a channel opens that permits calcium to flow into the target cell. 

The calcium entry initiates a second messenger cascade that ultimately leads to an increase in the number of glutamate receptors in the target cell, thereby increasing the effective strength of the synapse. 

This change in strength can last for weeks or longer. 

Since the discovery of LTP in 1973, many other types of synaptic memory traces have been found, involving increases or decreases in synaptic strength that are induced by varying conditions, and last for variable periods of time. 

The reward system, that reinforces desired behaviour for example, depends on a variant form of LTP that is conditioned on an extra input coming from a reward-signalling pathway that uses dopamine as neurotransmitter. 

All these forms of synaptic modifiability, taken collectively, give rise to neural plasticity, that is, to a capability for the nervous system to adapt itself to variations in the environment.


=== Neural circuits and systems ===

The basic neuronal function of sending signals to other cells includes a capability for neurons to exchange signals with each other. 

Networks formed by interconnected groups of neurons are capable of a wide variety of functions, including feature detection, pattern generation and timing, and there are seen to be countless types of information processing possible. 

Warren McCulloch and Walter Pitts showed in 1943 that even artificial neural networks formed from a greatly simplified mathematical abstraction of a neuron are capable of universal computation.

Historically, for many years the predominant view of the function of the nervous system was as a stimulus-response associator. 

In this conception, neural processing begins with stimuli that activate sensory neurons, producing signals that propagate through chains of connections in the spinal cord and brain, giving rise eventually to activation of motor neurons and thereby to muscle contraction, i.e., to overt responses. 

Descartes believed that all of the behaviors of animals, and most of the behaviors of humans, could be explained in terms of stimulus-response circuits, although he also believed that higher cognitive functions such as language were not capable of being explained mechanistically. 

Charles Sherrington, in his influential 1906 book 'The Integrative Action of the Nervous System', developed the concept of stimulus-response mechanisms in much more detail, and Behaviorism, the school of thought that dominated Psychology through the middle of the 20th century, attempted to explain every aspect of human behavior in stimulus-response terms.

However, experimental studies of electrophysiology, beginning in the early 20th century and reaching high productivity by the 1940s, showed that the nervous system contains many mechanisms for maintaining cell excitability and generating patterns of activity intrinsically, without requiring an external stimulus. 

Neurons were found to be capable of producing regular sequences of action potentials, or sequences of bursts, even in complete isolation. 

When intrinsically active neurons are connected to each other in complex circuits, the possibilities for generating intricate temporal patterns become far more extensive. 

A modern conception views the function of the nervous system partly in terms of stimulus-response chains, and partly in terms of intrinsically generated activity patterns—both types of activity interact with each other to generate the full repertoire of behavior.


==== Reflexes and other stimulus-response circuits ====

The simplest type of neural circuit is a reflex arc, which begins with a sensory input and ends with a motor output, passing through a sequence of neurons connected in series. 

This can be shown in the "withdrawal reflex" causing a hand to jerk back after a hot stove is touched. 

The circuit begins with sensory receptors in the skin that are activated by harmful levels of heat: 
    a special type of molecular structure embedded in the membrane causes heat to change the electrical field across the membrane. 

If the change in electrical potential is large enough to pass the given threshold, it evokes an action potential, which is transmitted along the axon of the receptor cell, into the spinal cord. 

There the axon makes excitatory synaptic contacts with other cells, some of which project (send axonal output) to the same region of the spinal cord, others projecting into the brain. 

One target is a set of spinal interneurons that project to motor neurons controlling the arm muscles. 

The interneurons excite the motor neurons, and if the excitation is strong enough, some of the motor neurons generate action potentials, which travel down their axons to the point where they make excitatory synaptic contacts with muscle cells. 

The excitatory signals induce contraction of the muscle cells, which causes the joint angles in the arm to change, pulling the arm away.

In reality, this straightforward schema is subject to numerous complications. 

Although for the simplest reflexes there are short neural paths from sensory neuron to motor neuron, there are also other nearby neurons that participate in the circuit and modulate the response. 

Furthermore, there are projections from the brain to the spinal cord that are capable of enhancing or inhibiting the reflex.

Although the simplest reflexes may be mediated by circuits lying entirely within the spinal cord, more complex responses rely on signal processing in the brain. 

For example, when an object in the periphery of the visual field moves, and a person looks toward it many stages of signal processing are initiated. 

The initial sensory response, in the retina of the eye, and the final motor response, in the oculomotor nuclei of the brain stem, are not all that different from those in a simple reflex, but the intermediate stages are completely different. 

Instead of a one or two step chain of processing, the visual signals pass through perhaps a dozen stages of integration, involving the thalamus, cerebral cortex, basal ganglia, superior colliculus, cerebellum, and several brainstem nuclei. 

These areas perform signal-processing functions that include feature detection, perceptual analysis, memory recall, decision-making, and motor planning.

Feature detection is the ability to extract biologically relevant information from combinations of sensory signals. 

In the visual system, for example, sensory receptors in the retina of the eye are only individually capable of detecting "points of light" in the outside world. 

Second-level visual neurons receive input from groups of primary receptors, higher-level neurons receive input from groups of second-level neurons, and so on, forming a hierarchy of processing stages. 

At each stage, important information is extracted from the signal ensemble and unimportant information is discarded. 

By the end of the process, input signals representing "points of light" have been transformed into a neural representation of objects in the surrounding world and their properties. 

The most sophisticated sensory processing occurs inside the brain, but complex feature extraction also takes place in the spinal cord and in peripheral sensory organs such as the retina.


==== Intrinsic pattern generation ====
Although stimulus-response mechanisms are the easiest to understand, the nervous system is also capable of controlling the body in ways that do not require an external stimulus, by means of internally generated rhythms of activity. 

Because of the variety of voltage-sensitive ion channels that can be embedded in the membrane of a neuron, many types of neurons are capable, even in isolation, of generating rhythmic sequences of action potentials, or rhythmic alternations between high-rate bursting and quiescence. 

When neurons that are intrinsically rhythmic are connected to each other by excitatory or inhibitory synapses, the resulting networks are capable of a wide variety of dynamical behaviors, including attractor dynamics, periodicity, and even chaos. 

A network of neurons that uses its internal structure to generate temporally structured output, without requiring a corresponding temporally structured stimulus, is called a central pattern generator.

Internal pattern generation operates on a wide range of time scales, from milliseconds to hours or longer. 

One of the most important types of temporal pattern is circadian rhythmicity—that is, rhythmicity with a period of approximately 24 hours. 

All animals that have been studied show circadian fluctuations in neural activity, which control circadian alternations in behavior such as the sleep-wake cycle. 

Experimental studies dating from the 1990s have shown that circadian rhythms are generated by a "genetic clock" consisting of a special set of genes whose expression level rises and falls over the course of the day. 

Animals as diverse as insects and vertebrates share a similar genetic clock system. 

The circadian clock is influenced by light but continues to operate even when light levels are held constant and no other external time-of-day cues are available. 

The clock genes are expressed in many parts of the nervous system as well as many peripheral organs, but in mammals, all of these "tissue clocks" are kept in synchrony by signals that emanate from a master timekeeper in a tiny part of the brain called the suprachiasmatic nucleus.


=== Mirror neurons ===

A mirror neuron is a neuron that fires both when an animal acts and when the animal observes the same action performed by another. 

Thus, the neuron "mirrors" the behavior of the other, as though the observer were itself acting. 

Such neurons have been directly observed in primate species. 

Birds have been shown to have imitative resonance behaviors and neurological evidence suggests the presence of some form of mirroring system. 

In humans, brain activity consistent with that of mirror neurons has been found in the premotor cortex, the supplementary motor area, the primary somatosensory cortex and the inferior parietal cortex. 

The function of the mirror system is a subject of much speculation. 

Many researchers in cognitive neuroscience and cognitive psychology consider that this system provides the physiological mechanism for the perception/action coupling (see the common coding theory). 

They argue that mirror neurons may be important for understanding the actions of other people, and for learning new skills by imitation. 

Some researchers also speculate that mirror systems may simulate observed actions, and thus contribute to theory of mind skills, while others relate mirror neurons to language abilities. 

However, to date, no widely accepted neural or computational models have been put forward to describe how mirror neuron activity supports cognitive functions such as imitation. 

There are neuroscientists who caution that the claims being made for the role of mirror neurons are not supported by adequate research.


== Development ==

In vertebrates, landmarks of embryonic neural development include the birth and differentiation of neurons from stem cell precursors, the migration of immature neurons from their birthplaces in the embryo to their final positions, outgrowth of axons from neurons and guidance of the motile growth cone through the embryo towards postsynaptic partners, the generation of synapses between these axons and their postsynaptic partners, and finally the lifelong changes in synapses which are thought to underlie learning and memory.

All bilaterian animals at an early stage of development form a gastrula, which is polarized, with one end called the animal pole and the other the vegetal pole. 

The gastrula has the shape of a disk with three layers of cells, an inner layer called the endoderm, which gives rise to the lining of most internal organs, a middle layer called the mesoderm, which gives rise to the bones and muscles, and an outer layer called the ectoderm, which gives rise to the skin and nervous system.

In vertebrates, the first sign of the nervous system is the appearance of a thin strip of cells along the center of the back, called the neural plate. 

The inner portion of the neural plate (along the midline) is destined to become the central nervous system (CNS), the outer portion the peripheral nervous system (PNS). 

As development proceeds, a fold called the neural groove appears along the midline. 

This fold deepens, and then closes up at the top. 

At this point the future CNS appears as a cylindrical structure called the neural tube, whereas the future PNS appears as two strips of tissue called the neural crest, running lengthwise above the neural tube. 

The sequence of stages from neural plate to neural tube and neural crest is known as neurulation.

In the early 20th century, a set of famous experiments by Hans Spemann and Hilde Mangold showed that the formation of nervous tissue is "induced" by signals from a group of mesodermal cells called the organizer region. 

For decades, though, the nature of neural induction defeated every attempt to figure it out, until finally it was resolved by genetic approaches in the 1990s. 

Induction of neural tissue requires inhibition of the gene for a so-called bone morphogenetic protein, or BMP. 

Specifically the protein BMP4 appears to be involved. 

Two proteins called Noggin and Chordin, both secreted by the mesoderm, are capable of inhibiting BMP4 and thereby inducing ectoderm to turn into neural tissue. 

It appears that a similar molecular mechanism is involved for widely disparate types of animals, including arthropods as well as vertebrates. 

In some animals, however, another type of molecule called Fibroblast Growth Factor or FGF may also play an important role in induction.

Induction of neural tissues causes formation of neural precursor cells, called neuroblasts. 

In drosophila, neuroblasts divide asymmetrically, so that one product is a "ganglion mother cell" (GMC), and the other is a neuroblast. 

A GMC divides once, to give rise to either a pair of neurons or a pair of glial cells. 

In all, a neuroblast is capable of generating an indefinite number of neurons or glia.

As shown in a 2008 study, one factor common to all bilateral organisms (including humans) is a family of secreted signaling molecules called neurotrophins which regulate the growth and survival of neurons. 

Zhu et al. identified DNT1, the first neurotrophin found in flies. 

DNT1 shares structural similarity with all known neurotrophins and is a key factor in the fate of neurons in Drosophila. 

Because neurotrophins have now been identified in both vertebrate and invertebrates, this evidence suggests that neurotrophins were present in an ancestor common to bilateral organisms and may represent a common mechanism for nervous system formation.


== Pathology ==

The central nervous system is protected by major physical and chemical barriers. 

Physically, the brain and spinal cord are surrounded by tough meningeal membranes, and enclosed in the bones of the skull and vertebral column, which combine to form a strong physical shield. 

Chemically, the brain and spinal cord are isolated by the blood–brain barrier, which prevents most types of chemicals from moving from the bloodstream into the interior of the CNS. 

These protections make the CNS less susceptible in many ways than the PNS; the flip side, however, is that damage to the CNS tends to have more serious consequences.

Although nerves tend to lie deep under the skin except in a few places such as the ulnar nerve near the elbow joint, they are still relatively exposed to physical damage, which can cause pain, loss of sensation, or loss of muscle control. 

Damage to nerves can also be caused by swelling or bruises at places where a nerve passes through a tight bony channel, as happens in carpal tunnel syndrome. 

If a nerve is completely transected, it will often regenerate, but for long nerves this process may take months to complete. 

In addition to physical damage, peripheral neuropathy may be caused by many other medical problems, including genetic conditions, metabolic conditions such as diabetes, inflammatory conditions such as Guillain–Barré syndrome, vitamin deficiency, infectious diseases such as leprosy or shingles, or poisoning by toxins such as heavy metals. 

Many cases have no cause that can be identified, and are referred to as idiopathic. 

It is also possible for nerves to lose function temporarily, resulting in numbness as stiffness—common causes include mechanical pressure, a drop in temperature, or chemical interactions with local anesthetic drugs such as lidocaine.

Physical damage to the spinal cord may result in loss of sensation or movement. 

If an injury to the spine produces nothing worse than swelling, the symptoms may be transient, but if nerve fibers in the spine are actually destroyed, the loss of function is usually permanent. 

Experimental studies have shown that spinal nerve fibers attempt to regrow in the same way as nerve fibers, but in the spinal cord, tissue destruction usually produces scar tissue that cannot be penetrated by the regrowing nerves.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nervous_system
;;;ES;;;



ÓRGANOS SENSORIALES


-órgano olfativo
-Ojo
-Oído
-órgano gustativo


SISTEMA NERVIOSO


En biología, la doctrina clásica del sistema nervioso determina que es una parte altamente compleja de un animal que coordina sus acciones e información sensorial mediante la transmisión de señales hacia y desde diferentes partes de su cuerpo.

El sistema nervioso detecta los cambios ambientales que afectan el cuerpo y luego trabaja en conjunto con el sistema endocrino para responder a tales eventos.

El tejido nervioso surgió por primera vez en organismos parecidos a gusanos hace unos 550 a 600 millones de años.

Sin embargo, esta doctrina clásica ha sido cuestionada en las últimas décadas por los descubrimientos sobre la existencia y uso de señales eléctricas en las plantas.

Sobre la base de estos hallazgos, algunos científicos han propuesto que existe un sistema nervioso vegetal y que debería crearse un campo científico llamado neurobiología vegetal.

Esta propuesta ha provocado una disputa en la comunidad científica entre los que piensan que deberíamos hablar del sistema nervioso de las plantas y los que están en contra.

La rigidez de las posiciones en el debate científico por ambas partes ha llevado a proponer una solución al debate, consistente en redefinir el concepto de sistema nervioso utilizando únicamente criterios fisiológicos y evitando criterios filogenéticos.

En los vertebrados consta de dos partes principales, el sistema nervioso central (SNC) y el sistema nervioso periférico (SNP).

El SNC está formado por el cerebro y la médula espinal.

El SNP consta principalmente de nervios, que son haces cerrados de fibras largas o axones, que conectan el SNC con todas las demás partes del cuerpo.

Los nervios que transmiten señales desde el cerebro se denominan nervios motores o nervios eferentes, mientras que los nervios que transmiten información del cuerpo al SNC se denominan nervios sensoriales o aferentes.

Los nervios espinales son nervios mixtos que cumplen ambas funciones.

El SNP se divide en tres subsistemas separados, los sistemas nerviosos somático, autónomo y entérico.

Los nervios somáticos median el movimiento voluntario.

El sistema nervioso autónomo se subdivide en los sistemas nerviosos simpático y parasimpático.

El sistema nervioso simpático se activa en casos de emergencias para movilizar energía, mientras que el sistema nervioso parasimpático se activa cuando los organismos se encuentran en un estado relajado.

El sistema nervioso entérico funciona para controlar el sistema gastrointestinal.

Tanto el sistema nervioso autónomo como el entérico funcionan de manera involuntaria.

Los nervios que salen del cráneo se llaman nervios craneales, mientras que los que salen de la médula espinal se llaman nervios espinales.

A nivel celular, el sistema nervioso se define por la presencia de un tipo especial de célula, llamada neurona, también conocida como "célula nerviosa".

Las neuronas tienen estructuras especiales que les permiten enviar señales con rapidez y precisión a otras células.

Envían estas señales en forma de impulsos electroquímicos que viajan a lo largo de fibras delgadas llamadas axones, que pueden transmitirse directamente a las células vecinas a través de sinapsis eléctricas o hacer que se liberen sustancias químicas llamadas neurotransmisores en las sinapsis químicas.

Una célula que recibe una señal sináptica de una neurona puede ser excitada, inhibida o modulada de otra manera.

Las conexiones entre las neuronas pueden formar vías neuronales, circuitos neuronales y redes más grandes que generan la percepción del mundo de un organismo y determinan su comportamiento.

Junto con las neuronas, el sistema nervioso contiene otras células especializadas llamadas células gliales (o simplemente glía), que brindan apoyo estructural y metabólico.

Los sistemas nerviosos se encuentran en la mayoría de los animales multicelulares, pero varían mucho en complejidad.

Los únicos animales multicelulares que no tienen ningún sistema nervioso son las esponjas, los placozoos y los mesozoos, que tienen planes corporales muy simples.

Los sistemas nerviosos de los organismos radialmente simétricos ctenóforos (medusas de peine) y cnidarios (que incluyen anémonas, hidras, corales y medusas) consisten en una red nerviosa difusa.

Todas las demás especies animales, con la excepción de algunos tipos de gusanos, tienen un sistema nervioso que contiene un cerebro, un cordón central (o dos cordones paralelos) y nervios que se irradian desde el cerebro y el cordón central.

El tamaño del sistema nervioso varía desde unos pocos cientos de células en los gusanos más simples hasta alrededor de 300 mil millones de células en los elefantes africanos.

El sistema nervioso central funciona para enviar señales de una célula a otra, o de una parte del cuerpo a otra y recibir retroalimentación.

El mal funcionamiento del sistema nervioso puede ocurrir como resultado de defectos genéticos, daño físico debido a trauma o toxicidad, infección o simplemente senectud.

La especialidad médica de neurología estudia los trastornos del sistema nervioso y busca intervenciones que puedan prevenirlos o tratarlos.

En el sistema nervioso periférico, el problema más común es la falla en la conducción nerviosa, que puede deberse a diferentes causas que incluyen la neuropatía diabética y los trastornos desmielinizantes como la esclerosis múltiple y la esclerosis lateral amiotrófica.

La neurociencia es el campo de la ciencia que se centra en el estudio del sistema nervioso.


== Estructura ==

El sistema nervioso deriva su nombre de los nervios, que son haces cilíndricos de fibras (los axones de las neuronas), que emanan del cerebro y la médula espinal, y se ramifican repetidamente para inervar cada parte del cuerpo.

Los nervios son lo suficientemente grandes como para haber sido reconocidos por los antiguos egipcios, griegos y romanos, pero su estructura interna no se entendió hasta que fue posible examinarlos con un microscopio.

El autor Michael Nikoletseas escribió:
“Cuesta creer que hasta aproximadamente el año 1900 no se supiera que las neuronas son las unidades básicas del cerebro (Santiago Ramón y Cajal).

Igualmente sorprendente es el hecho de que el concepto de transmisión química en el cerebro no se conociera hasta alrededor de 1930 (Henry Hallett Dale y Otto Loewi).

Empezamos a comprender el fenómeno eléctrico básico que utilizan las neuronas para comunicarse entre sí, el potencial de acción, en la década de 1950 (Alan Lloyd Hodgkin, Andrew Huxley y John Eccles).

Fue en la década de 1960 cuando nos dimos cuenta de cómo las redes neuronales básicas codifican los estímulos y, por lo tanto, son posibles los conceptos básicos (David H. Hubel y Torsten Wiesel).

La revolución molecular barrió las universidades estadounidenses en la década de 1980.

Fue en la década de 1990 cuando los mecanismos moleculares de los fenómenos conductuales se hicieron ampliamente conocidos (Eric Richard Kandel)".

Un examen microscópico muestra que los nervios consisten principalmente en axones, junto con diferentes membranas que los envuelven y los segregan en fascículos.

Las neuronas que dan lugar a los nervios no se encuentran completamente dentro de los nervios mismos: sus cuerpos celulares residen dentro del cerebro, la médula espinal o los ganglios periféricos.

Todos los animales más avanzados que las esponjas tienen sistemas nerviosos.

Sin embargo, incluso las esponjas, los animales unicelulares y los no animales, como los mohos mucilaginosos, tienen mecanismos de señalización de célula a célula que son precursores de los de las neuronas.

En animales radialmente simétricos como la medusa y la hidra, el sistema nervioso consta de una red nerviosa, una red difusa de células aisladas.

En los animales bilaterales, que constituyen la gran mayoría de las especies existentes, el sistema nervioso tiene una estructura común que se originó temprano en el período Ediacárico, hace más de 550 millones de años.


=== Células ===

El sistema nervioso contiene dos categorías principales o tipos de células: neuronas y células gliales.


==== Neuronas ====

El sistema nervioso se define por la presencia de un tipo especial de célula: la neurona (a veces llamada "neurona" o "célula nerviosa").

Las neuronas se pueden distinguir de otras células de varias maneras, pero su propiedad más fundamental es que se comunican con otras células a través de sinapsis, que son uniones de membrana a membrana que contienen maquinaria molecular que permite la transmisión rápida de señales, ya sean eléctricas o químicas. .

Muchos tipos de neuronas poseen un axón, una protuberancia protoplásmica que puede extenderse a partes distantes del cuerpo y establecer miles de contactos sinápticos; los axones normalmente se extienden por todo el cuerpo en haces llamados nervios.

Incluso en el sistema nervioso de una sola especie como los humanos, existen cientos de tipos diferentes de neuronas, con una amplia variedad de morfologías y funciones.

Estos incluyen neuronas sensoriales que transmutan estímulos físicos como luz y sonido en señales neuronales y neuronas motoras que transmutan señales neuronales en activación de músculos o glándulas; sin embargo, en muchas especies, la gran mayoría de las neuronas participan en la formación de estructuras centralizadas (el cerebro y los ganglios) y reciben todas sus entradas de otras neuronas y envían sus salidas a otras neuronas.


==== Células gliales ====

Las células gliales (llamadas del griego "pegamento") son células no neuronales que brindan soporte y nutrición, mantienen la homeostasis, forman mielina y participan en la transmisión de señales en el sistema nervioso.

En el cerebro humano, se estima que el número total de glía es aproximadamente igual al número de neuronas, aunque las proporciones varían en diferentes áreas del cerebro.

Entre las funciones más importantes de las células gliales está la de apoyar a las neuronas y mantenerlas en su lugar; suministrar nutrientes a las neuronas; para aislar las neuronas eléctricamente; para destruir patógenos y eliminar neuronas muertas; y para proporcionar señales de orientación que dirijan los axones de las neuronas a sus objetivos.

Un tipo muy importante de células gliales (oligodendrocitos en el sistema nervioso central y células de Schwann en el sistema nervioso periférico) genera capas de una sustancia grasa llamada mielina que envuelve los axones y proporciona aislamiento eléctrico que les permite transmitir potenciales de acción mucho más rápidamente. y eficientemente.

Hallazgos recientes indican que las células gliales, como la microglia y los astrocitos, sirven como importantes células inmunitarias residentes dentro del sistema nervioso central.


=== Anatomía en vertebrados ===

El sistema nervioso de los vertebrados (incluidos los humanos) se divide en sistema nervioso central (SNC) y sistema nervioso periférico (SNP).

El (SNC) es la división principal y consiste en el cerebro y la médula espinal.

El canal espinal contiene la médula espinal, mientras que la cavidad craneal contiene el cerebro.

El SNC está encerrado y protegido por las meninges, un sistema de membranas de tres capas, que incluye una capa externa resistente y coriácea llamada duramadre.

El cerebro también está protegido por el cráneo y la médula espinal por las vértebras.

El sistema nervioso periférico (SNP) es un término colectivo para las estructuras del sistema nervioso que no se encuentran dentro del SNC.

Se considera que la gran mayoría de los haces de axones llamados nervios pertenecen al SNP, incluso cuando los cuerpos celulares de las neuronas a las que pertenecen residen dentro del cerebro o la médula espinal.

El SNP se divide en partes somáticas y viscerales.

La parte somática consiste en los nervios que inervan la piel, las articulaciones y los músculos.

Los cuerpos celulares de las neuronas sensoriales somáticas se encuentran en los ganglios de la raíz dorsal de la médula espinal.

La parte visceral, también conocida como sistema nervioso autónomo, contiene neuronas que inervan los órganos internos, los vasos sanguíneos y las glándulas.

El sistema nervioso autónomo en sí consta de dos partes: el sistema nervioso simpático y el sistema nervioso parasimpático.

Algunos autores también incluyen neuronas sensoriales cuyos cuerpos celulares se encuentran en la periferia (para sentidos como el oído) como parte del SNP; otros, sin embargo, los omiten.

El sistema nervioso de los vertebrados también se puede dividir en áreas denominadas materia gris y materia blanca.

La materia gris (que es solo gris en el tejido conservado y se describe mejor como rosa o marrón claro en el tejido vivo) contiene una alta proporción de cuerpos celulares de neuronas.

La sustancia blanca se compone principalmente de axones mielinizados y toma su color de la mielina.

La materia blanca incluye todos los nervios y gran parte del interior del cerebro y la médula espinal.

La materia gris se encuentra en grupos de neuronas en el cerebro y la médula espinal, y en las capas corticales que recubren sus superficies.

Existe una convención anatómica de que un grupo de neuronas en el cerebro o la médula espinal se llama núcleo, mientras que un grupo de neuronas en la periferia se llama ganglio.

Sin embargo, hay algunas excepciones a esta regla, en particular la parte del cerebro anterior llamada ganglios basales.


=== Anatomía comparada y evolución ===

==== Precursores neurales en esponjas ====

Las esponjas no tienen células conectadas entre sí por uniones sinápticas, es decir, no tienen neuronas y, por lo tanto, no tienen sistema nervioso.

Sin embargo, tienen homólogos de muchos genes que desempeñan funciones clave en la función sináptica.

Estudios recientes han demostrado que las células de esponja expresan un grupo de proteínas que se agrupan para formar una estructura que se asemeja a una densidad postsináptica (la parte receptora de señales de una sinapsis).

Sin embargo, la función de esta estructura actualmente no está clara.

Aunque las células de esponja no muestran transmisión sináptica, se comunican entre sí a través de ondas de calcio y otros impulsos, que median algunas acciones simples, como la contracción de todo el cuerpo.


==== Radiada ====

Las medusas, las medusas peine y los animales relacionados tienen redes nerviosas difusas en lugar de un sistema nervioso central.

En la mayoría de las medusas, la red nerviosa se extiende más o menos uniformemente por todo el cuerpo; en las jaleas en peine se concentra cerca de la boca.

Las redes nerviosas consisten en neuronas sensoriales, que captan señales químicas, táctiles y visuales; neuronas motoras, que pueden activar las contracciones de la pared del cuerpo; y neuronas intermedias, que detectan patrones de actividad en las neuronas sensoriales y, en respuesta, envían señales a grupos de neuronas motoras.

En algunos casos, los grupos de neuronas intermedias se agrupan en ganglios discretos.

El desarrollo del sistema nervioso en radiata está relativamente desestructurado.

A diferencia de los bilaterales, los radiata solo tienen dos capas de células primordiales, endodermo y ectodermo.

Las neuronas se generan a partir de un conjunto especial de células precursoras ectodérmicas, que también sirven como precursoras para todos los demás tipos de células ectodérmicas.


==== Bilateria ====

La gran mayoría de los animales existentes son bilaterales, es decir, animales con lados izquierdo y derecho que son imágenes especulares aproximadas entre sí.

Se cree que todos los bilateria descienden de un ancestro similar a un gusano común que apareció en el período Ediacarano, hace 550-600 millones de años.

La forma corporal bilateral fundamental es un tubo con una cavidad intestinal hueca que va desde la boca hasta el ano, y un cordón nervioso con un agrandamiento (un "ganglio") para cada segmento del cuerpo, con un ganglio especialmente grande en la parte delantera, llamado "cerebro". ".

Incluso los mamíferos, incluidos los humanos, muestran el plan corporal bilateriano segmentado a nivel del sistema nervioso.

La médula espinal contiene una serie de ganglios segmentarios, cada uno de los cuales da lugar a nervios motores y sensitivos que inervan una parte de la superficie corporal y la musculatura subyacente.

En las extremidades, la disposición del patrón de inervación es compleja, pero en el tronco da lugar a una serie de bandas estrechas.

Los tres segmentos superiores pertenecen al encéfalo y dan lugar al prosencéfalo, el mesencéfalo y el rombencéfalo.

Los bilaterales se pueden dividir, según los eventos que ocurren muy temprano en el desarrollo embrionario, en dos grupos (superphyla) llamados protostomas y deuterostomas.

Los deuterostomados incluyen vertebrados, así como equinodermos, hemicordados (principalmente gusanos de bellota) y Xenoturbellidans.

Los protostomas, el grupo más diverso, incluyen artrópodos, moluscos y numerosos tipos de gusanos.

Hay una diferencia básica entre los dos grupos en la ubicación del sistema nervioso dentro del cuerpo:
los protostomes poseen un cordón nervioso en el lado ventral (generalmente inferior) del cuerpo, mientras que en los deuterostomes el cordón nervioso está en el lado dorsal (generalmente superior).

De hecho, numerosos aspectos del cuerpo se invierten entre los dos grupos, incluidos los patrones de expresión de varios genes que muestran gradientes de dorsal a ventral.

La mayoría de los anatomistas ahora consideran que los cuerpos de los protostomas y los deuterostomas están "volteados" entre sí, una hipótesis que Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire propuso por primera vez para los insectos en comparación con los vertebrados.

Así, los insectos, por ejemplo, tienen cordones nerviosos que corren a lo largo de la línea media ventral del cuerpo, mientras que todos los vertebrados tienen cordones espinales que corren a lo largo de la línea media dorsal.


==== Gusanos ====

Los gusanos son los animales bilaterales más simples y revelan la estructura básica del sistema nervioso bilateral de la manera más directa.

Como ejemplo, las lombrices de tierra tienen cordones nerviosos duales que corren a lo largo del cuerpo y se unen en la cola y la boca.

Estos cordones nerviosos están conectados por nervios transversales como los peldaños de una escalera.

Estos nervios transversales ayudan a coordinar los dos lados del animal.

Dos ganglios en la cabeza (el "anillo nervioso") terminan funcionando de manera similar a un cerebro simple.

Los fotorreceptores en las manchas oculares del animal brindan información sensorial sobre la luz y la oscuridad.

El sistema nervioso de un gusano redondo muy pequeño, el nematodo Caenorhabditis elegans, se ha mapeado completamente en un conectoma que incluye sus sinapsis.

Se ha registrado cada neurona y su linaje celular y se conocen la mayoría, si no todas, las conexiones neuronales.

En esta especie, el sistema nervioso es sexualmente dimórfico; los sistemas nerviosos de los dos sexos, machos y hembras hermafroditas, tienen diferente número de neuronas y grupos de neuronas que realizan funciones específicas del sexo.

En C. elegans, los machos tienen exactamente 383 neuronas, mientras que los hermafroditas tienen exactamente 302 neuronas.


==== Artrópodos ====

Los artrópodos, como los insectos y los crustáceos, tienen un sistema nervioso formado por una serie de ganglios, conectados por un cordón nervioso ventral formado por dos conectores paralelos que recorren la longitud del vientre.

Por lo general, cada segmento del cuerpo tiene un ganglio a cada lado, aunque algunos ganglios se fusionan para formar el cerebro y otros ganglios grandes.

El segmento de la cabeza contiene el cerebro, también conocido como el ganglio supraesofágico.

En el sistema nervioso de los insectos, el cerebro se divide anatómicamente en protocerebrum, deutocerebrum y tritocerebrum.

Inmediatamente detrás del cerebro se encuentra el ganglio subesofágico, que se compone de tres pares de ganglios fusionados.

Controla el aparato bucal, las glándulas salivales y ciertos músculos.

Muchos artrópodos tienen órganos sensoriales bien desarrollados, incluidos ojos compuestos para la visión y antenas para el olfato y la sensación de feromonas.

La información sensorial de estos órganos es procesada por el cerebro.

En los insectos, muchas neuronas tienen cuerpos celulares que se colocan en el borde del cerebro y son eléctricamente pasivos; los cuerpos celulares sirven solo para brindar apoyo metabólico y no participan en la señalización.

Una fibra protoplásmica sale del cuerpo celular y se ramifica profusamente, con algunas partes que transmiten señales y otras que las reciben.

Por lo tanto, la mayor parte del cerebro del insecto tiene cuerpos celulares pasivos dispuestos alrededor de la periferia, mientras que el procesamiento de la señal neural tiene lugar en una maraña de fibras protoplásmicas llamada neuropilo, en el interior.


==== Neuronas "identificadas" ====

Se dice que una neurona está identificada si tiene propiedades que la distinguen de cualquier otra neurona en el mismo animal —propiedades como ubicación, neurotransmisor, patrón de expresión génica y conectividad— y si cada organismo individual que pertenece a la misma especie tiene uno y solo uno. neurona con el mismo conjunto de propiedades.

En los sistemas nerviosos de los vertebrados, se "identifican" muy pocas neuronas en este sentido (en los humanos, se cree que no hay ninguna), pero en los sistemas nerviosos más simples, algunas o todas las neuronas pueden ser únicas.

En el gusano redondo C. elegans, cuyo sistema nervioso es el más completo descrito de cualquier animal, cada neurona del cuerpo es identificable de forma única, con la misma ubicación y las mismas conexiones en cada gusano individual.

Una consecuencia notable de este hecho es que la forma del sistema nervioso de C. elegans está completamente especificada por el genoma, sin plasticidad dependiente de la experiencia. Los cerebros de muchos moluscos e insectos también contienen cantidades sustanciales de neuronas identificadas.

En los vertebrados, las neuronas identificadas más conocidas son las gigantescas células de Mauthner de los peces.

Cada pez tiene dos células de Mauthner, en la parte inferior del tronco encefálico, una en el lado izquierdo y otra en el derecho.

Cada célula de Mauthner tiene un axón que se cruza, inervando las neuronas al mismo nivel del cerebro y luego viaja a través de la médula espinal, haciendo numerosas conexiones a medida que avanza.

Las sinapsis generadas por una célula de Mauthner son tan poderosas que un solo potencial de acción da lugar a una importante respuesta conductual:
en milisegundos, el pez curva su cuerpo en forma de C, luego se endereza, impulsándose rápidamente hacia adelante.

Funcionalmente, esta es una respuesta de escape rápida, desencadenada más fácilmente por una onda de sonido fuerte o una onda de presión que incide en el órgano de la línea lateral del pez.

Las células de Mauthner no son las únicas neuronas identificadas en los peces: hay alrededor de 20 tipos más, incluidos pares de "análogos de células de Mauthner" en cada núcleo segmentario espinal.

Aunque una célula de Mauthner es capaz de provocar una respuesta de escape individualmente, en el contexto del comportamiento ordinario, otros tipos de células suelen contribuir a dar forma a la amplitud y dirección de la respuesta.

Las células de Mauthner se han descrito como neuronas de mando.

Una neurona de comando es un tipo especial de neurona identificada, definida como una neurona que es capaz de impulsar un comportamiento específico individualmente.

Tales neuronas aparecen más comúnmente en los sistemas de escape rápido de varias especies: el axón gigante del calamar y la sinapsis gigante del calamar, utilizados para experimentos pioneros en neurofisiología debido a su enorme tamaño, ambos participan en el circuito de escape rápido del calamar.

Sin embargo, el concepto de neurona de comando se ha vuelto controvertido debido a estudios que muestran que algunas neuronas que inicialmente parecían encajar en la descripción en realidad solo eran capaces de provocar una respuesta en un conjunto limitado de circunstancias.


== Función ==

En el nivel más básico, la función del sistema nervioso es enviar señales de una célula a otra, o de una parte del cuerpo a otra.

Hay varias formas en que una célula puede enviar señales a otras células.

Una es liberando sustancias químicas llamadas hormonas en la circulación interna, para que puedan difundirse a sitios distantes.

En contraste con este modo de señalización de "transmisión", el sistema nervioso proporciona señales "punto a punto": las neuronas proyectan sus axones a áreas objetivo específicas y establecen conexiones sinápticas con células objetivo específicas.

Por lo tanto, la señalización neuronal es capaz de un nivel mucho más alto de especificidad que la señalización hormonal.

También es mucho más rápido: las señales nerviosas más rápidas viajan a velocidades que superan los 100 metros por segundo.
A un nivel más integrador, la función principal del sistema nervioso es controlar el cuerpo.

Lo hace extrayendo información del entorno utilizando receptores sensoriales, enviando señales que codifican esta información al sistema nervioso central, procesando la información para determinar una respuesta adecuada y enviando señales de salida a los músculos o glándulas para activar la respuesta.

La evolución de un sistema nervioso complejo ha hecho posible que varias especies animales tengan habilidades de percepción avanzadas como visión, interacciones sociales complejas, coordinación rápida de sistemas de órganos y procesamiento integrado de señales concurrentes.

En los humanos, la sofisticación del sistema nervioso hace posible tener lenguaje, representación abstracta de conceptos, transmisión de cultura y muchas otras características de la sociedad humana que no existirían sin el cerebro humano.


=== Neuronas y sinapsis ===

La mayoría de las neuronas envían señales a través de sus axones, aunque algunos tipos son capaces de comunicarse dendrita a dendrita.

(De hecho, los tipos de neuronas llamadas células amacrinas no tienen axones y se comunican solo a través de sus dendritas).

Las señales neuronales se propagan a lo largo de un axón en forma de ondas electroquímicas llamadas potenciales de acción, que producen señales de célula a célula en los puntos donde las terminales del axón hacen contacto sináptico con otras células. Las sinapsis pueden ser eléctricas o químicas.

Las sinapsis eléctricas establecen conexiones eléctricas directas entre las neuronas, pero las sinapsis químicas son mucho más comunes y tienen funciones mucho más diversas.

En una sinapsis química, la célula que envía señales se llama presináptica y la célula que recibe señales se llama postsináptica.

Tanto las áreas presinápticas como postsinápticas están llenas de maquinaria molecular que lleva a cabo el proceso de señalización.

El área presináptica contiene una gran cantidad de diminutos vasos esféricos llamados vesículas sinápticas, repletos de neurotransmisores químicos.

Cuando se estimula eléctricamente la terminal presináptica, se activa una serie de moléculas incrustadas en la membrana y hacen que el contenido de las vesículas se libere en el estrecho espacio entre las membranas presináptica y postsináptica, llamado hendidura sináptica.

Luego, el neurotransmisor se une a los receptores incrustados en la membrana postsináptica, lo que hace que entren en un estado activado.

Según el tipo de receptor, el efecto resultante sobre la célula postsináptica puede ser excitatorio, inhibidor o modulador de formas más complejas.

Por ejemplo, la liberación del neurotransmisor acetilcolina en un contacto sináptico entre una neurona motora y una célula muscular induce una contracción rápida de la célula muscular.

Todo el proceso de transmisión sináptica toma solo una fracción de milisegundo, aunque los efectos en la célula postsináptica pueden durar mucho más (incluso indefinidamente, en los casos en que la señal sináptica conduce a la formación de un rastro de memoria).

Hay literalmente cientos de diferentes tipos de sinapsis.

De hecho, hay más de cien neurotransmisores conocidos y muchos de ellos tienen múltiples tipos de receptores.

Muchas sinapsis usan más de un neurotransmisor; un arreglo común es que una sinapsis use un neurotransmisor de molécula pequeña de acción rápida, como el glutamato o GABA, junto con uno o más neurotransmisores peptídicos que desempeñan funciones moduladoras de acción más lenta.

Los neurocientíficos moleculares generalmente dividen los receptores en dos grandes grupos:
canales iónicos controlados químicamente y sistemas de segundos mensajeros.

Cuando se activa un canal iónico controlado químicamente, forma un pasaje que permite que tipos específicos de iones fluyan a través de la membrana.

Según el tipo de ion, el efecto sobre la célula diana puede ser excitatorio o inhibitorio.

Cuando se activa un sistema de segundo mensajero, inicia una cascada de interacciones moleculares dentro de la célula diana, que en última instancia pueden producir una amplia variedad de efectos complejos, como aumentar o disminuir la sensibilidad de la célula a los estímulos, o incluso alterar la transcripción de genes.

De acuerdo con una regla llamada principio de Dale, que tiene solo unas pocas excepciones conocidas, una neurona libera los mismos neurotransmisores en todas sus sinapsis.

Esto no significa, sin embargo, que una neurona ejerza el mismo efecto sobre todas sus dianas, porque el efecto de una sinapsis no depende del neurotransmisor, sino de los receptores que activa.

Debido a que diferentes objetivos pueden (y con frecuencia lo hacen) usar diferentes tipos de receptores, es posible que una neurona tenga efectos excitadores en un conjunto de células objetivo, efectos inhibidores en otros y efectos moduladores complejos en otros aún.

Sin embargo, sucede que los dos neurotransmisores más utilizados, el glutamato y el GABA, tienen efectos en gran medida consistentes.

El glutamato tiene varios tipos de receptores ampliamente presentes, pero todos ellos son excitadores o moduladores.

De manera similar, GABA tiene varios tipos de receptores ampliamente presentes, pero todos ellos son inhibitorios.

Debido a esta consistencia, las células glutamatérgicas se denominan con frecuencia "neuronas excitadoras" y las células GABAérgicas como "neuronas inhibidoras".

Estrictamente hablando, esto es un abuso de la terminología (son los receptores los que excitan e inhiben, no las neuronas), pero se ve comúnmente incluso en publicaciones académicas.

Un subconjunto muy importante de sinapsis es capaz de formar huellas de memoria por medio de cambios duraderos dependientes de la actividad en la fuerza sináptica.

La forma más conocida de memoria neuronal es un proceso llamado potenciación a largo plazo (LTP, por sus siglas en inglés), que opera en las sinapsis que usan el neurotransmisor glutamato que actúa sobre un tipo especial de receptor conocido como receptor NMDA.

El receptor NMDA tiene una propiedad "asociativa": si las dos células involucradas en la sinapsis se activan aproximadamente al mismo tiempo, se abre un canal que permite que el calcio fluya hacia la célula objetivo.

La entrada de calcio inicia una cascada de segundos mensajeros que finalmente conduce a un aumento en el número de receptores de glutamato en la célula diana, lo que aumenta la fuerza efectiva de la sinapsis.

Este cambio en la fuerza puede durar semanas o más.

Desde el descubrimiento de LTP en 1973, se han encontrado muchos otros tipos de rastros de memoria sináptica, que implican aumentos o disminuciones en la fuerza sináptica que son inducidos por condiciones variables y duran períodos de tiempo variables.

El sistema de recompensa, que refuerza el comportamiento deseado, por ejemplo, depende de una forma variante de LTP que está condicionada a una entrada adicional proveniente de una vía de señalización de recompensa que usa dopamina como neurotransmisor.

Todas estas formas de modificabilidad sináptica, tomadas en conjunto, dan lugar a la plasticidad neuronal, es decir, a la capacidad del sistema nervioso para adaptarse a las variaciones del entorno.


=== Circuitos y sistemas neuronales ===

La función neuronal básica de enviar señales a otras células incluye la capacidad de las neuronas para intercambiar señales entre sí.

Las redes formadas por grupos interconectados de neuronas son capaces de una amplia variedad de funciones, incluida la detección de características, la generación de patrones y el tiempo, y se ve que hay innumerables tipos de procesamiento de información posibles.

Warren McCulloch y Walter Pitts demostraron en 1943 que incluso las redes neuronales artificiales formadas a partir de una abstracción matemática muy simplificada de una neurona son capaces de computación universal.

Históricamente, durante muchos años, la visión predominante de la función del sistema nervioso fue la de un asociador de estímulo-respuesta.

En esta concepción, el procesamiento neural comienza con estímulos que activan las neuronas sensoriales, produciendo señales que se propagan a través de cadenas de conexiones en la médula espinal y el cerebro, dando lugar finalmente a la activación de las neuronas motoras y, por tanto, a la contracción muscular, es decir, a respuestas manifiestas.

Descartes creía que todos los comportamientos de los animales, y la mayoría de los comportamientos de los humanos, podían explicarse en términos de circuitos de estímulo-respuesta, aunque también creía que las funciones cognitivas superiores, como el lenguaje, no podían explicarse mecánicamente.

Charles Sherrington, en su influyente libro de 1906 'La acción integradora del sistema nervioso', desarrolló el concepto de mecanismos de estímulo-respuesta con mucho más detalle, y el conductismo, la escuela de pensamiento que dominó la psicología a mediados del siglo XX, intentó explicar cada aspecto del comportamiento humano en términos de estímulo-respuesta.

Sin embargo, los estudios experimentales de electrofisiología, que comenzaron a principios del siglo XX y alcanzaron una gran productividad en la década de 1940, demostraron que el sistema nervioso contiene muchos mecanismos para mantener la excitabilidad celular y generar patrones de actividad intrínsecamente, sin necesidad de un estímulo externo.

Se descubrió que las neuronas eran capaces de producir secuencias regulares de potenciales de acción, o secuencias de ráfagas, incluso en completo aislamiento.

Cuando las neuronas intrínsecamente activas se conectan entre sí en circuitos complejos, las posibilidades de generar patrones temporales intrincados se vuelven mucho más amplias.

Una concepción moderna ve la función del sistema nervioso en parte en términos de cadenas de estímulo-respuesta y en parte en términos de patrones de actividad generados intrínsecamente; ambos tipos de actividad interactúan entre sí para generar el repertorio completo de comportamiento.


==== Reflejos y otros circuitos estímulo-respuesta ====

El tipo más simple de circuito neuronal es un arco reflejo, que comienza con una entrada sensorial y termina con una salida motora, pasando por una secuencia de neuronas conectadas en serie.

Esto se puede mostrar en el "reflejo de retirada" que hace que una mano retroceda bruscamente después de tocar una estufa caliente.

El circuito comienza con receptores sensoriales en la piel que son activados por niveles dañinos de calor:
un tipo especial de estructura molecular incrustada en la membrana hace que el calor cambie el campo eléctrico a través de la membrana.

Si el cambio en el potencial eléctrico es lo suficientemente grande como para pasar el umbral dado, provoca un potencial de acción, que se transmite a lo largo del axón de la célula receptora hacia la médula espinal.

Allí, el axón establece contactos sinápticos excitadores con otras células, algunas de las cuales se proyectan (envían señales axonales) a la misma región de la médula espinal, otras se proyectan hacia el cerebro.

Un objetivo es un conjunto de interneuronas espinales que se proyectan a las neuronas motoras que controlan los músculos del brazo.

Las interneuronas excitan a las neuronas motoras, y si la excitación es lo suficientemente fuerte, algunas de las neuronas motoras generan potenciales de acción, que viajan por sus axones hasta el punto en que establecen contactos sinápticos excitadores con las células musculares.

Las señales excitatorias inducen la contracción de las células musculares, lo que hace que cambien los ángulos de las articulaciones en el brazo, tirando del brazo hacia afuera.

En realidad, este sencillo esquema está sujeto a numerosas complicaciones.

Aunque para los reflejos más simples existen caminos neuronales cortos desde la neurona sensorial a la neurona motora, también existen otras neuronas cercanas que participan en el circuito y modulan la respuesta.

Además, existen proyecciones desde el cerebro hacia la médula espinal que son capaces de potenciar o inhibir el reflejo.

Aunque los reflejos más simples pueden estar mediados por circuitos que se encuentran completamente dentro de la médula espinal, las respuestas más complejas dependen del procesamiento de señales en el cerebro.

Por ejemplo, cuando un objeto en la periferia del campo visual se mueve y una persona mira hacia él, se inician muchas etapas de procesamiento de señales.

La respuesta sensorial inicial, en la retina del ojo, y la respuesta motora final, en los núcleos oculomotores del tronco encefálico, no son tan diferentes de las de un reflejo simple, pero las etapas intermedias son completamente diferentes.

En lugar de una cadena de procesamiento de uno o dos pasos, las señales visuales pasan quizás por una docena de etapas de integración, que involucran el tálamo, la corteza cerebral, los ganglios basales, el colículo superior, el cerebelo y varios núcleos del tronco encefálico.

Estas áreas realizan funciones de procesamiento de señales que incluyen detección de características, análisis de percepción, recuperación de memoria, toma de decisiones y planificación motora.

La detección de características es la capacidad de extraer información biológicamente relevante de combinaciones de señales sensoriales.

En el sistema visual, por ejemplo, los receptores sensoriales en la retina del ojo solo son capaces individualmente de detectar "puntos de luz" en el mundo exterior.

Las neuronas visuales de segundo nivel reciben información de grupos de receptores primarios, las neuronas de nivel superior reciben información de grupos de neuronas de segundo nivel, y así sucesivamente, formando una jerarquía de etapas de procesamiento.

En cada etapa, la información importante se extrae del conjunto de señales y la información no importante se descarta.

Al final del proceso, las señales de entrada que representan "puntos de luz" se han transformado en una representación neuronal de los objetos del mundo circundante y sus propiedades.

El procesamiento sensorial más sofisticado ocurre dentro del cerebro, pero la extracción de características complejas también tiene lugar en la médula espinal y en los órganos sensoriales periféricos, como la retina.


==== Generación de patrón intrínseco ====
Aunque los mecanismos de estímulo-respuesta son los más fáciles de entender, el sistema nervioso también es capaz de controlar el cuerpo de formas que no requieren un estímulo externo, por medio de ritmos de actividad generados internamente.

Debido a la variedad de canales iónicos sensibles al voltaje que se pueden incrustar en la membrana de una neurona, muchos tipos de neuronas son capaces, incluso de forma aislada, de generar secuencias rítmicas de potenciales de acción o alternancias rítmicas entre estallidos de alta velocidad y reposo. .

Cuando las neuronas que son intrínsecamente rítmicas se conectan entre sí mediante sinapsis inhibidoras o excitatorias, las redes resultantes son capaces de una amplia variedad de comportamientos dinámicos, que incluyen la dinámica del atractor, la periodicidad e incluso el caos.

Una red de neuronas que usa su estructura interna para generar una salida estructurada temporalmente, sin requerir un estímulo estructurado temporalmente correspondiente, se denomina generador de patrón central.

La generación de patrones internos opera en una amplia gama de escalas de tiempo, desde milisegundos hasta horas o más.

Uno de los tipos más importantes de patrón temporal es la ritmicidad circadiana, es decir, la ritmicidad con un período de aproximadamente 24 horas.

Todos los animales que se han estudiado muestran fluctuaciones circadianas en la actividad neuronal, que controlan las alternancias circadianas en el comportamiento, como el ciclo de sueño y vigilia.

Estudios experimentales que datan de la década de 1990 han demostrado que los ritmos circadianos son generados por un "reloj genético" que consta de un conjunto especial de genes cuyo nivel de expresión aumenta y disminuye a lo largo del día.

Animales tan diversos como los insectos y los vertebrados comparten un sistema de reloj genético similar.

El reloj circadiano está influenciado por la luz, pero continúa funcionando incluso cuando los niveles de luz se mantienen constantes y no hay otras señales externas de la hora del día disponibles.

Los genes del reloj se expresan en muchas partes del sistema nervioso, así como en muchos órganos periféricos, pero en los mamíferos, todos estos "relojes de tejido" se mantienen sincronizados mediante señales que emanan de un cronometrador maestro en una pequeña parte del cerebro llamada el núcleo supraquiasmático.


=== Neuronas espejo ===

Una neurona espejo es una neurona que se dispara tanto cuando un animal actúa como cuando el animal observa la misma acción realizada por otro.

Así, la neurona "refleja" el comportamiento del otro, como si el observador mismo estuviera actuando.

Estas neuronas se han observado directamente en especies de primates.

Se ha demostrado que las aves tienen comportamientos de resonancia imitativa y la evidencia neurológica sugiere la presencia de algún tipo de sistema de espejo.

En humanos, se ha encontrado actividad cerebral consistente con la de las neuronas espejo en la corteza premotora, el área motora suplementaria, la corteza somatosensorial primaria y la corteza parietal inferior.

La función del sistema de espejos es un tema de mucha especulación.

Muchos investigadores en neurociencia cognitiva y psicología cognitiva consideran que este sistema proporciona el mecanismo fisiológico para el acoplamiento percepción/acción (ver la teoría de la codificación común).

Argumentan que las neuronas espejo pueden ser importantes para comprender las acciones de otras personas y para aprender nuevas habilidades por imitación.

Algunos investigadores también especulan que los sistemas espejo pueden simular acciones observadas y, por lo tanto, contribuir a las habilidades de la teoría de la mente, mientras que otros relacionan las neuronas espejo con las habilidades del lenguaje.

Sin embargo, hasta la fecha, no se han presentado modelos neuronales o computacionales ampliamente aceptados para describir cómo la actividad de las neuronas espejo respalda funciones cognitivas como la imitación.

Hay neurocientíficos que advierten que las afirmaciones sobre el papel de las neuronas espejo no están respaldadas por una investigación adecuada.


== Desarrollo ==

En los vertebrados, los puntos de referencia del desarrollo neuronal embrionario incluyen el nacimiento y la diferenciación de neuronas a partir de precursores de células madre, la migración de neuronas inmaduras desde sus lugares de nacimiento en el embrión hasta sus posiciones finales, el crecimiento de axones de las neuronas y la guía del cono de crecimiento móvil a través del embrión hacia compañeros postsinápticos, la generación de sinapsis entre estos axones y sus compañeros postsinápticos y, finalmente, los cambios de por vida en las sinapsis que se cree que subyacen al aprendizaje y la memoria.

Todos los animales bilaterales en una etapa temprana de desarrollo forman una gástrula, que está polarizada, con un extremo llamado polo animal y el otro polo vegetal.

La gástrula tiene la forma de un disco con tres capas de células, una capa interna llamada endodermo, que da origen al revestimiento de la mayoría de los órganos internos, una capa intermedia llamada mesodermo, que da origen a los huesos y músculos, y una capa externa llamada ectodermo, que da origen a la piel y al sistema nervioso.

En los vertebrados, el primer signo del sistema nervioso es la aparición de una delgada tira de células a lo largo del centro de la espalda, llamada placa neural.

La porción interna de la placa neural (a lo largo de la línea media) está destinada a convertirse en el sistema nervioso central (SNC), la porción externa en el sistema nervioso periférico (SNP).

A medida que avanza el desarrollo, aparece un pliegue llamado surco neural a lo largo de la línea media.

Este pliegue se profundiza y luego se cierra en la parte superior.

En este punto, el futuro SNC aparece como una estructura cilíndrica llamada tubo neural, mientras que el futuro SNP aparece como dos tiras de tejido llamadas cresta neural, que corren longitudinalmente por encima del tubo neural.

La secuencia de etapas desde la placa neural hasta el tubo neural y la cresta neural se conoce como neurulación.

A principios del siglo XX, una serie de famosos experimentos de Hans Spemann y Hilde Mangold demostraron que la formación de tejido nervioso es "inducida" por señales de un grupo de células mesodérmicas denominadas región organizadora.

Sin embargo, durante décadas, la naturaleza de la inducción neuronal derrotó todos los intentos de resolverlo, hasta que finalmente se resolvió mediante enfoques genéticos en la década de 1990.

La inducción del tejido neural requiere la inhibición del gen de la denominada proteína morfogenética ósea o BMP.

Específicamente, la proteína BMP4 parece estar involucrada.

Dos proteínas llamadas Noggin y Chordin, ambas secretadas por el mesodermo, son capaces de inhibir BMP4 y, por lo tanto, inducir al ectodermo a convertirse en tejido neural.

Parece que un mecanismo molecular similar está involucrado en tipos de animales muy dispares, incluidos los artrópodos y los vertebrados.

En algunos animales, sin embargo, otro tipo de molécula llamada factor de crecimiento de fibroblastos o FGF también puede desempeñar un papel importante en la inducción.

La inducción de tejidos neurales provoca la formación de células precursoras neurales, denominadas neuroblastos.

En drosophila, los neuroblastos se dividen asimétricamente, de modo que un producto es una "célula madre ganglionar" (GMC) y el otro es un neuroblasto.

Un GMC se divide una vez para dar lugar a un par de neuronas o un par de células gliales.

En total, un neuroblasto es capaz de generar un número indefinido de neuronas o glía.

Como se muestra en un estudio de 2008, un factor común a todos los organismos bilaterales (incluidos los humanos) es una familia de moléculas de señalización secretadas llamadas neurotrofinas que regulan el crecimiento y la supervivencia de las neuronas.

Zhu et al. identificó DNT1, la primera neurotrofina que se encuentra en las moscas.

DNT1 comparte similitud estructural con todas las neurotrofinas conocidas y es un factor clave en el destino de las neuronas en Drosophila.

Debido a que ahora se han identificado neurotrofinas tanto en vertebrados como en invertebrados, esta evidencia sugiere que las neurotrofinas estaban presentes en un ancestro común a los organismos bilaterales y pueden representar un mecanismo común para la formación del sistema nervioso.


== Patología ==

El sistema nervioso central está protegido por importantes barreras físicas y químicas.

Físicamente, el cerebro y la médula espinal están rodeados por fuertes membranas meníngeas y encerrados en los huesos del cráneo y la columna vertebral, que se combinan para formar un fuerte escudo físico.

Químicamente, el cerebro y la médula espinal están aislados por la barrera hematoencefálica, que evita que la mayoría de los tipos de sustancias químicas pasen del torrente sanguíneo al interior del SNC.

Estas protecciones hacen que el SNC sea menos susceptible en muchos aspectos que el SNP; la otra cara, sin embargo, es que el daño al SNC tiende a tener consecuencias más graves.

Aunque los nervios tienden a estar profundamente debajo de la piel, excepto en algunos lugares, como el nervio cubital cerca de la articulación del codo, aún están relativamente expuestos al daño físico, que puede causar dolor, pérdida de sensibilidad o pérdida de control muscular.

El daño a los nervios también puede ser causado por hinchazón o hematomas en los lugares donde un nervio pasa a través de un estrecho canal óseo, como sucede en el síndrome del túnel carpiano.

Si un nervio se secciona por completo, a menudo se regenerará, pero para los nervios largos, este proceso puede tardar meses en completarse.

Además del daño físico, la neuropatía periférica puede ser causada por muchos otros problemas médicos, que incluyen condiciones genéticas, condiciones metabólicas como la diabetes, condiciones inflamatorias como el síndrome de Guillain-Barré, deficiencia de vitaminas, enfermedades infecciosas como la lepra o la culebrilla, o envenenamiento por toxinas como los metales pesados.

Muchos casos no tienen una causa que pueda identificarse y se denominan idiopáticos.

También es posible que los nervios pierdan su función temporalmente, lo que resulta en entumecimiento como rigidez; las causas comunes incluyen presión mecánica, disminución de la temperatura o interacciones químicas con anestésicos locales como la lidocaína.

El daño físico a la médula espinal puede resultar en pérdida de sensibilidad o movimiento.

Si una lesión en la columna no produce nada peor que la hinchazón, los síntomas pueden ser transitorios, pero si las fibras nerviosas de la columna se destruyen, la pérdida de función suele ser permanente.

Los estudios experimentales han demostrado que las fibras nerviosas espinales intentan volver a crecer de la misma manera que las fibras nerviosas, pero en la médula espinal, la destrucción del tejido generalmente produce tejido cicatricial que no puede ser penetrado por los nervios que vuelven a crecer.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nervous_system

;;;PT;;;



ÓRGÃOS SENSORIAIS


- Órgão olfativo
-Olho
-Orelha
- Órgão gustativo


SISTEMA NERVOSO


Na biologia, a doutrina clássica do sistema nervoso determina que é uma parte altamente complexa de um animal que coordena suas ações e informações sensoriais transmitindo sinais de e para diferentes partes de seu corpo.

O sistema nervoso detecta mudanças ambientais que impactam o corpo, então trabalha em conjunto com o sistema endócrino para responder a tais eventos.

O tecido nervoso surgiu pela primeira vez em organismos semelhantes a vermes cerca de 550 a 600 milhões de anos atrás.

No entanto, esta doutrina clássica tem sido desafiada nas últimas décadas por descobertas sobre a existência e uso de sinais elétricos em plantas.

Com base nessas descobertas, alguns cientistas propuseram que existe um sistema nervoso vegetal e que um campo científico chamado neurobiologia vegetal deveria ser criado.

Essa proposta gerou uma disputa na comunidade científica entre aqueles que acham que devemos falar sobre o sistema nervoso das plantas e aqueles que são contra.

A inflexibilidade das posições no debate científico de ambos os lados levou à proposta de uma solução para o debate, consistindo em redefinir o conceito de sistema nervoso usando apenas critérios fisiológicos e evitando critérios filogenéticos.

Nos vertebrados, consiste em duas partes principais, o sistema nervoso central (SNC) e o sistema nervoso periférico (SNP).

O SNC consiste no encéfalo e na medula espinhal.

O SNP consiste principalmente de nervos, que são feixes fechados de fibras longas ou axônios, que conectam o SNC a todas as outras partes do corpo.

Os nervos que transmitem sinais do cérebro são chamados de nervos motores ou nervos eferentes, enquanto os nervos que transmitem informações do corpo para o SNC são chamados de nervos sensoriais ou aferentes.

Os nervos espinhais são nervos mistos que servem a ambas as funções.

O SNP é dividido em três subsistemas separados, os sistemas nervoso somático, autônomo e entérico.

Os nervos somáticos medeiam o movimento voluntário.

O sistema nervoso autônomo é subdividido em sistema nervoso simpático e parassimpático.

O sistema nervoso simpático é ativado em casos de emergência para mobilizar energia, enquanto o sistema nervoso parassimpático é ativado quando os organismos estão em estado de relaxamento.

O sistema nervoso entérico funciona para controlar o sistema gastrointestinal.

Tanto o sistema nervoso autônomo quanto o entérico funcionam involuntariamente.

Os nervos que saem do crânio são chamados de nervos cranianos, enquanto aqueles que saem da medula espinhal são chamados de nervos espinhais.

No nível celular, o sistema nervoso é definido pela presença de um tipo especial de célula, chamado neurônio, também conhecido como "célula nervosa".

Os neurônios têm estruturas especiais que lhes permitem enviar sinais de forma rápida e precisa para outras células.

Eles enviam esses sinais na forma de impulsos eletroquímicos que viajam ao longo de fibras finas chamadas axônios, que podem ser transmitidos diretamente para células vizinhas através de sinapses elétricas ou causar a liberação de substâncias químicas chamadas neurotransmissores nas sinapses químicas.

Uma célula que recebe um sinal sináptico de um neurônio pode ser excitada, inibida ou modulada de outra forma.

As conexões entre os neurônios podem formar caminhos neurais, circuitos neurais e redes maiores que geram a percepção do mundo de um organismo e determinam seu comportamento.

Junto com os neurônios, o sistema nervoso contém outras células especializadas chamadas células gliais (ou simplesmente glia), que fornecem suporte estrutural e metabólico.

Os sistemas nervosos são encontrados na maioria dos animais multicelulares, mas variam muito em complexidade.

Os únicos animais multicelulares que não têm nenhum sistema nervoso são as esponjas, os placozoários e os mesozoários, que têm planos corporais muito simples.

Os sistemas nervosos dos organismos radialmente simétricos ctenóforos (geleias de pente) e cnidários (que incluem anêmonas, hidras, corais e águas-vivas) consistem em uma rede nervosa difusa.

Todas as outras espécies animais, com exceção de alguns tipos de vermes, têm um sistema nervoso contendo um cérebro, um cordão central (ou dois cordões paralelos) e nervos que irradiam do cérebro e do cordão central.

O tamanho do sistema nervoso varia de algumas centenas de células nos vermes mais simples, a cerca de 300 bilhões de células nos elefantes africanos.

O sistema nervoso central funciona para enviar sinais de uma célula para outras, ou de uma parte do corpo para outras e receber feedback.

O mau funcionamento do sistema nervoso pode ocorrer como resultado de defeitos genéticos, danos físicos devido a trauma ou toxicidade, infecção ou simplesmente senescência.

A especialidade médica da neurologia estuda os distúrbios do sistema nervoso e procura intervenções que possam preveni-los ou tratá-los.

No sistema nervoso periférico, o problema mais comum é a falha na condução nervosa, que pode ser devido a diferentes causas, incluindo neuropatia diabética e distúrbios desmielinizantes, como esclerose múltipla e esclerose lateral amiotrófica.

A neurociência é o campo da ciência que se concentra no estudo do sistema nervoso.


== Estrutura ==

O sistema nervoso deriva seu nome dos nervos, que são feixes cilíndricos de fibras (os axônios dos neurônios), que emanam do cérebro e da medula espinhal e se ramificam repetidamente para inervar todas as partes do corpo.

Os nervos são grandes o suficiente para terem sido reconhecidos pelos antigos egípcios, gregos e romanos, mas sua estrutura interna não foi compreendida até que se tornou possível examiná-los usando um microscópio.

O autor Michael Nikoletseas escreveu:
"É difícil acreditar que até aproximadamente o ano de 1900 não se sabia que os neurônios são as unidades básicas do cérebro (Santiago Ramón y Cajal).

Igualmente surpreendente é o fato de que o conceito de transmissão química no cérebro não era conhecido até por volta de 1930 (Henry Hallett Dale e Otto Loewi).

Começamos a entender o fenômeno elétrico básico que os neurônios usam para se comunicar entre si, o potencial de ação, na década de 1950 (Alan Lloyd Hodgkin, Andrew Huxley e John Eccles).

Foi na década de 1960 que tomamos consciência de como as redes neuronais básicas codificam estímulos e, portanto, os conceitos básicos são possíveis (David H. Hubel e Torsten Wiesel).

A revolução molecular varreu as universidades americanas na década de 1980.

Foi na década de 1990 que os mecanismos moleculares dos fenômenos comportamentais se tornaram amplamente conhecidos (Eric Richard Kandel)."

Um exame microscópico mostra que os nervos consistem principalmente em axônios, juntamente com diferentes membranas que os envolvem e os segregam em fascículos.

Os neurônios que dão origem aos nervos não estão inteiramente dentro dos próprios nervos – seus corpos celulares residem no cérebro, na medula espinhal ou nos gânglios periféricos.

Todos os animais mais avançados que as esponjas têm sistema nervoso.

No entanto, mesmo esponjas, animais unicelulares e não animais, como os bolores limosos, têm mecanismos de sinalização célula a célula que são precursores dos neurônios.

Em animais radialmente simétricos, como a água-viva e a hidra, o sistema nervoso consiste em uma rede nervosa, uma rede difusa de células isoladas.

Nos animais bilaterais, que compõem a grande maioria das espécies existentes, o sistema nervoso possui uma estrutura comum que se originou no início do período Ediacarano, há mais de 550 milhões de anos.


=== Células ===

O sistema nervoso contém duas categorias principais ou tipos de células: neurônios e células gliais.


==== Neurônios ====

O sistema nervoso é definido pela presença de um tipo especial de célula - o neurônio (às vezes chamado de "neurônio" ou "célula nervosa").

Os neurônios podem ser distinguidos de outras células de várias maneiras, mas sua propriedade mais fundamental é que eles se comunicam com outras células por meio de sinapses, que são junções membrana a membrana contendo maquinaria molecular que permite a transmissão rápida de sinais, sejam elétricos ou químicos. .

Muitos tipos de neurônio possuem um axônio, uma protuberância protoplasmática que pode se estender a partes distantes do corpo e fazer milhares de contatos sinápticos; os axônios normalmente se estendem por todo o corpo em feixes chamados nervos.

Mesmo no sistema nervoso de uma única espécie, como os humanos, existem centenas de tipos diferentes de neurônios, com uma grande variedade de morfologias e funções.

Estes incluem neurônios sensoriais que transmutam estímulos físicos como luz e som em sinais neurais e neurônios motores que transmutam sinais neurais em ativação de músculos ou glândulas; no entanto, em muitas espécies, a grande maioria dos neurônios participa da formação de estruturas centralizadas (o cérebro e os gânglios) e recebem todas as suas entradas de outros neurônios e enviam suas saídas para outros neurônios.


==== Células gliais ====

As células gliais (nomeadas do grego para "cola") são células não neuronais que fornecem suporte e nutrição, mantêm a homeostase, formam mielina e participam da transmissão de sinais no sistema nervoso.

No cérebro humano, estima-se que o número total de células da glia seja aproximadamente igual ao número de neurônios, embora as proporções variem em diferentes áreas do cérebro.

Entre as funções mais importantes das células gliais estão apoiar os neurônios e mantê-los no lugar; fornecer nutrientes aos neurônios; isolar eletricamente os neurônios; destruir patógenos e remover neurônios mortos; e fornecer pistas de orientação direcionando os axônios dos neurônios para seus alvos.

Um tipo muito importante de célula glial (oligodendrócitos no sistema nervoso central e células de Schwann no sistema nervoso periférico) gera camadas de uma substância gordurosa chamada mielina que envolve os axônios e fornece isolamento elétrico que lhes permite transmitir potenciais de ação muito mais rapidamente e eficiente.

Descobertas recentes indicam que as células da glia, como a microglia e os astrócitos, servem como importantes células imunes residentes no sistema nervoso central.


=== Anatomia em vertebrados ===

O sistema nervoso dos vertebrados (incluindo os humanos) é dividido em sistema nervoso central (SNC) e sistema nervoso periférico (SNP).

O (SNC) é a divisão principal e consiste no cérebro e na medula espinhal.

O canal espinhal contém a medula espinhal, enquanto a cavidade craniana contém o cérebro.

O SNC é fechado e protegido pelas meninges, um sistema de três camadas de membranas, incluindo uma camada externa dura e coriácea chamada dura-máter.

O cérebro também é protegido pelo crânio e a medula espinhal pelas vértebras.

O sistema nervoso periférico (SNP) é um termo coletivo para as estruturas do sistema nervoso que não se encontram dentro do SNC.

A grande maioria dos feixes de axônios chamados nervos são considerados como pertencentes ao SNP, mesmo quando os corpos celulares dos neurônios aos quais pertencem residem no cérebro ou na medula espinhal.

O SNP é dividido em partes somáticas e viscerais.

A parte somática consiste nos nervos que inervam a pele, articulações e músculos.

Os corpos celulares dos neurônios sensoriais somáticos situam-se nos gânglios da raiz dorsal da medula espinhal.

A parte visceral, também conhecida como sistema nervoso autônomo, contém neurônios que inervam os órgãos internos, vasos sanguíneos e glândulas.

O próprio sistema nervoso autônomo consiste em duas partes: o sistema nervoso simpático e o sistema nervoso parassimpático.

Alguns autores também incluem neurônios sensoriais cujos corpos celulares estão na periferia (para sentidos como a audição) como parte do SNP; outros, porém, os omitem.

O sistema nervoso dos vertebrados também pode ser dividido em áreas chamadas de substância cinzenta e substância branca.

A matéria cinzenta (que é apenas cinza em tecido preservado e é melhor descrita como rosa ou marrom claro em tecido vivo) contém uma alta proporção de corpos celulares de neurônios.

A substância branca é composta principalmente de axônios mielinizados e recebe sua cor da mielina.

A substância branca inclui todos os nervos e grande parte do interior do cérebro e da medula espinhal.

A matéria cinzenta é encontrada em aglomerados de neurônios no cérebro e na medula espinhal e nas camadas corticais que revestem suas superfícies.

Existe uma convenção anatômica de que um aglomerado de neurônios no cérebro ou na medula espinhal é chamado de núcleo, enquanto um aglomerado de neurônios na periferia é chamado de gânglio.

Existem, no entanto, algumas exceções a essa regra, incluindo a parte do prosencéfalo chamada gânglios da base.


=== Anatomia comparada e evolução ===

==== Precursores neurais em esponjas ====

As esponjas não têm células conectadas umas às outras por junções sinápticas, ou seja, não há neurônios e, portanto, nenhum sistema nervoso.

Eles, no entanto, têm homólogos de muitos genes que desempenham papéis-chave na função sináptica.

Estudos recentes mostraram que as células da esponja expressam um grupo de proteínas que se agrupam para formar uma estrutura semelhante a uma densidade pós-sináptica (a parte receptora de sinal de uma sinapse).

No entanto, a função desta estrutura ainda não está clara.

Embora as células esponjosas não mostrem transmissão sináptica, elas se comunicam por meio de ondas de cálcio e outros impulsos, que mediam algumas ações simples, como a contração de todo o corpo.


==== Radiação ====

Medusas, geleias de pente e animais relacionados têm redes nervosas difusas em vez de um sistema nervoso central.

Na maioria das águas-vivas, a rede nervosa se espalha mais ou menos uniformemente pelo corpo; nas geleias de pente concentra-se perto da boca.

As redes nervosas consistem em neurônios sensoriais, que captam sinais químicos, táteis e visuais; neurônios motores, que podem ativar as contrações da parede do corpo; e neurônios intermediários, que detectam padrões de atividade nos neurônios sensoriais e, em resposta, enviam sinais para grupos de neurônios motores.

Em alguns casos, grupos de neurônios intermediários são agrupados em gânglios discretos.

O desenvolvimento do sistema nervoso em radiata é relativamente desestruturado.

Ao contrário dos bilaterais, os radiata têm apenas duas camadas celulares primordiais, endoderme e ectoderme.

Os neurônios são gerados a partir de um conjunto especial de células precursoras ectodérmicas, que também servem como precursoras para todos os outros tipos de células ectodérmicas.


==== Bilateria ====

A grande maioria dos animais existentes são bilaterais, ou seja, animais com lados esquerdo e direito que são imagens espelhadas aproximadas um do outro.

Acredita-se que todos os bilateria descendem de um ancestral comum semelhante a um verme que apareceu no período Ediacarano, 550 a 600 milhões de anos atrás.

A forma bilateriana fundamental do corpo é um tubo com uma cavidade intestinal oca que vai da boca ao ânus e um cordão nervoso com uma ampliação (um "gânglio") para cada segmento do corpo, com um gânglio especialmente grande na frente, chamado de "cérebro". ".

Mesmo os mamíferos, incluindo os humanos, mostram o plano corporal bilateriano segmentado ao nível do sistema nervoso.

A medula espinhal contém uma série de gânglios segmentares, cada um dando origem a nervos motores e sensoriais que inervam uma porção da superfície do corpo e da musculatura subjacente.

Nos membros, a disposição do padrão de inervação é complexa, mas no tronco dá origem a uma série de faixas estreitas.

Os três segmentos superiores pertencem ao cérebro, dando origem ao prosencéfalo, mesencéfalo e rombencéfalo.

Os bilatérios podem ser divididos, com base em eventos que ocorrem muito cedo no desenvolvimento embrionário, em dois grupos (superfilos) chamados protostômios e deuterostômios.

Os deuterostômios incluem vertebrados, bem como equinodermos, hemicordados (principalmente vermes de bolota) e Xenoturbellidans.

Os protostômios, o grupo mais diversificado, incluem artrópodes, moluscos e vários tipos de vermes.

Há uma diferença básica entre os dois grupos na colocação do sistema nervoso dentro do corpo:
os protostômios possuem um cordão nervoso no lado ventral (geralmente inferior) do corpo, enquanto nos deuterostômios o cordão nervoso está no lado dorsal (geralmente superior).

De fato, vários aspectos do corpo estão invertidos entre os dois grupos, incluindo os padrões de expressão de vários genes que mostram gradientes dorsais a ventrais.

A maioria dos anatomistas agora considera que os corpos de protostômios e deuterostômios são "invertidos" um em relação ao outro, uma hipótese que foi proposta pela primeira vez por Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire para insetos em comparação com vertebrados.

Assim, os insetos, por exemplo, têm cordões nervosos que correm ao longo da linha média ventral do corpo, enquanto todos os vertebrados têm medulas espinhais que correm ao longo da linha média dorsal.


==== Vermes ====

Os vermes são os animais bilaterais mais simples e revelam a estrutura básica do sistema nervoso bilateral da maneira mais direta.

Como exemplo, as minhocas têm cordões nervosos duplos que percorrem o comprimento do corpo e se fundem na cauda e na boca.

Esses cordões nervosos são conectados por nervos transversais como os degraus de uma escada.

Esses nervos transversais ajudam a coordenar os dois lados do animal.

Dois gânglios na cabeça (o "anel nervoso") funcionam de forma semelhante a um cérebro simples.

Os fotorreceptores nas manchas oculares do animal fornecem informações sensoriais sobre a luz e a escuridão.

O sistema nervoso de uma lombriga muito pequena, o nematóide Caenorhabditis elegans, foi completamente mapeado em um conectoma, incluindo suas sinapses.

Cada neurônio e sua linhagem celular foram registrados e a maioria, se não todas, as conexões neurais são conhecidas.

Nesta espécie, o sistema nervoso é sexualmente dimórfico; os sistemas nervosos dos dois sexos, machos e fêmeas hermafroditas, possuem diferentes números de neurônios e grupos de neurônios que realizam funções específicas do sexo.

Em C. elegans, os machos têm exatamente 383 neurônios, enquanto os hermafroditas têm exatamente 302 neurônios.


==== Artrópodes ====

Artrópodes, como insetos e crustáceos, têm um sistema nervoso composto por uma série de gânglios, conectados por um cordão nervoso ventral composto por dois conectivos paralelos ao longo do comprimento da barriga.

Normalmente, cada segmento do corpo tem um gânglio de cada lado, embora alguns gânglios sejam fundidos para formar o cérebro e outros gânglios grandes.

O segmento da cabeça contém o cérebro, também conhecido como gânglio supraesofágico.

No sistema nervoso dos insetos, o cérebro é anatomicamente dividido em protocérebro, deutocérebro e tritocérebro.

Imediatamente atrás do cérebro está o gânglio subesofágico, que é composto por três pares de gânglios fundidos.

Ele controla as peças bucais, as glândulas salivares e certos músculos.

Muitos artrópodes têm órgãos sensoriais bem desenvolvidos, incluindo olhos compostos para visão e antenas para olfato e sensação de feromônio.

A informação sensorial desses órgãos é processada pelo cérebro.

Nos insetos, muitos neurônios têm corpos celulares posicionados na borda do cérebro e são eletricamente passivos – os corpos celulares servem apenas para fornecer suporte metabólico e não participam da sinalização.

Uma fibra protoplasmática sai do corpo celular e se ramifica profusamente, com algumas partes transmitindo sinais e outras recebendo sinais.

Assim, a maioria das partes do cérebro do inseto tem corpos celulares passivos dispostos em torno da periferia, enquanto o processamento do sinal neural ocorre em um emaranhado de fibras protoplasmáticas chamadas neurópilos, no interior.


==== Neurônios "identificados" ====

Um neurônio é denominado identificado se possuir propriedades que o distinguem de todos os outros neurônios do mesmo animal – propriedades como localização, neurotransmissor, padrão de expressão gênica e conectividade – e se cada organismo individual pertencente à mesma espécie possui um e apenas um neurônio. neurônio com o mesmo conjunto de propriedades.

Nos sistemas nervosos dos vertebrados, muito poucos neurônios são "identificados" nesse sentido — nos humanos, acredita-se que não haja nenhum —, mas nos sistemas nervosos mais simples, alguns ou todos os neurônios podem ser assim únicos.

Na lombriga C. elegans, cujo sistema nervoso é o mais minuciosamente descrito de qualquer animal, cada neurônio do corpo é identificável de forma única, com a mesma localização e as mesmas conexões em cada verme individual.

Uma consequência notável desse fato é que a forma do sistema nervoso do C. elegans é completamente especificada pelo genoma, sem plasticidade dependente da experiência. Os cérebros de muitos moluscos e insetos também contêm um número substancial de neurônios identificados.

Nos vertebrados, os neurônios identificados mais conhecidos são as gigantescas células de Mauthner de peixes.

Todo peixe tem duas células de Mauthner, na parte inferior do tronco encefálico, uma do lado esquerdo e outra do lado direito.

Cada célula de Mauthner tem um axônio que cruza, inervando neurônios no mesmo nível do cérebro e depois descendo pela medula espinhal, fazendo inúmeras conexões à medida que avança.

As sinapses geradas por uma célula de Mauthner são tão poderosas que um único potencial de ação dá origem a uma resposta comportamental importante:
em milissegundos, o peixe curva seu corpo em forma de C, depois se endireita, impulsionando-se rapidamente para a frente.

Funcionalmente, esta é uma resposta de fuga rápida, desencadeada mais facilmente por uma forte onda de som ou onda de pressão que atinge o órgão da linha lateral do peixe.

As células de Mauthner não são os únicos neurônios identificados em peixes - existem cerca de 20 tipos mais, incluindo pares de "análogos de células de Mauthner" em cada núcleo segmentar espinhal.

Embora uma célula de Mauthner seja capaz de provocar uma resposta de fuga individualmente, no contexto do comportamento comum, outros tipos de células geralmente contribuem para moldar a amplitude e a direção da resposta.

As células de Mauthner foram descritas como neurônios de comando.

Um neurônio de comando é um tipo especial de neurônio identificado, definido como um neurônio capaz de conduzir um comportamento específico individualmente.

Esses neurônios aparecem mais comumente nos sistemas de escape rápido de várias espécies – o axônio gigante da lula e a sinapse gigante da lula, usados ​​para experimentos pioneiros em neurofisiologia devido ao seu enorme tamanho, ambos participam do circuito de escape rápido da lula.

O conceito de um neurônio de comando, no entanto, tornou-se controverso, por causa de estudos que mostram que alguns neurônios que inicialmente pareciam se encaixar na descrição eram realmente capazes de evocar uma resposta em um conjunto limitado de circunstâncias.


== Função ==

No nível mais básico, a função do sistema nervoso é enviar sinais de uma célula para outras, ou de uma parte do corpo para outras.

Existem várias maneiras pelas quais uma célula pode enviar sinais para outras células.

Uma delas é a liberação de substâncias químicas chamadas hormônios na circulação interna, para que possam se difundir para locais distantes.

Em contraste com esse modo de sinalização de "difusão", o sistema nervoso fornece sinais "ponto a ponto" - os neurônios projetam seus axônios para áreas-alvo específicas e fazem conexões sinápticas com células-alvo específicas.

Assim, a sinalização neural é capaz de um nível de especificidade muito maior do que a sinalização hormonal.

Também é muito mais rápido: os sinais nervosos mais rápidos viajam a velocidades superiores a 100 metros por segundo.
Em um nível mais integrador, a função primária do sistema nervoso é controlar o corpo.

Ele faz isso extraindo informações do ambiente usando receptores sensoriais, enviando sinais que codificam essas informações para o sistema nervoso central, processando as informações para determinar uma resposta apropriada e enviando sinais de saída para músculos ou glândulas para ativar a resposta.

A evolução de um sistema nervoso complexo tornou possível que várias espécies animais tivessem habilidades avançadas de percepção, como visão, interações sociais complexas, coordenação rápida de sistemas orgânicos e processamento integrado de sinais simultâneos.

Nos humanos, a sofisticação do sistema nervoso possibilita a linguagem, a representação abstrata de conceitos, a transmissão da cultura e muitas outras características da sociedade humana que não existiriam sem o cérebro humano.


=== Neurônios e sinapses ===

A maioria dos neurônios envia sinais por meio de seus axônios, embora alguns tipos sejam capazes de comunicação dendrito a dendrito.

(Na verdade, os tipos de neurônios chamados células amácrinas não têm axônios e se comunicam apenas por meio de seus dendritos.)

Os sinais neurais se propagam ao longo de um axônio na forma de ondas eletroquímicas chamadas potenciais de ação, que produzem sinais célula a célula em pontos onde os terminais do axônio fazem contato sináptico com outras células. As sinapses podem ser elétricas ou químicas.

As sinapses elétricas fazem conexões elétricas diretas entre os neurônios, mas as sinapses químicas são muito mais comuns e muito mais diversas em função.

Em uma sinapse química, a célula que envia os sinais é chamada de pré-sináptica, e a célula que recebe os sinais é chamada de pós-sináptica.

Ambas as áreas pré-sinápticas e pós-sinápticas estão repletas de maquinaria molecular que realiza o processo de sinalização.

A área pré-sináptica contém um grande número de minúsculos vasos esféricos chamados vesículas sinápticas, repletos de substâncias químicas neurotransmissoras.

Quando o terminal pré-sináptico é eletricamente estimulado, uma série de moléculas embutidas na membrana são ativadas e fazem com que o conteúdo das vesículas seja liberado no estreito espaço entre as membranas pré-sinápticas e pós-sinápticas, chamado de fenda sináptica.

O neurotransmissor então se liga a receptores embutidos na membrana pós-sináptica, fazendo com que eles entrem em um estado ativado.

Dependendo do tipo de receptor, o efeito resultante na célula pós-sináptica pode ser excitatório, inibitório ou modulatório de formas mais complexas.

Por exemplo, a liberação do neurotransmissor acetilcolina em um contato sináptico entre um neurônio motor e uma célula muscular induz a contração rápida da célula muscular.

Todo o processo de transmissão sináptica leva apenas uma fração de milissegundo, embora os efeitos na célula pós-sináptica possam durar muito mais tempo (mesmo indefinidamente, nos casos em que o sinal sináptico leva à formação de um traço de memória).

Existem literalmente centenas de diferentes tipos de sinapses.

Na verdade, existem mais de cem neurotransmissores conhecidos, e muitos deles têm vários tipos de receptores.

Muitas sinapses usam mais de um neurotransmissor – um arranjo comum é para uma sinapse usar um neurotransmissor de pequena molécula de ação rápida, como glutamato ou GABA, juntamente com um ou mais neurotransmissores peptídicos que desempenham papéis moduladores de ação mais lenta.

Os neurocientistas moleculares geralmente dividem os receptores em dois grandes grupos:
canais iônicos quimicamente fechados e sistemas de segundos mensageiros.

Quando um canal iônico fechado quimicamente é ativado, ele forma uma passagem que permite que tipos específicos de íons fluam através da membrana.

Dependendo do tipo de íon, o efeito na célula alvo pode ser excitatório ou inibitório.

Quando um segundo sistema mensageiro é ativado, ele inicia uma cascata de interações moleculares dentro da célula-alvo, que pode produzir uma ampla variedade de efeitos complexos, como aumentar ou diminuir a sensibilidade da célula a estímulos, ou mesmo alterar a transcrição gênica.

De acordo com uma regra chamada princípio de Dale, que tem apenas algumas exceções conhecidas, um neurônio libera os mesmos neurotransmissores em todas as suas sinapses.

Isso não significa, porém, que um neurônio exerça o mesmo efeito em todos os seus alvos, pois o efeito de uma sinapse não depende do neurotransmissor, mas dos receptores que ele ativa.

Como alvos diferentes podem (e frequentemente usam) diferentes tipos de receptores, é possível que um neurônio tenha efeitos excitatórios em um conjunto de células-alvo, efeitos inibitórios em outros e efeitos modulatórios complexos em outros ainda.

No entanto, acontece que os dois neurotransmissores mais usados, glutamato e GABA, cada um tem efeitos amplamente consistentes.

O glutamato tem vários tipos de receptores que ocorrem amplamente, mas todos eles são excitatórios ou moduladores.

Da mesma forma, o GABA tem vários tipos de receptores de ocorrência ampla, mas todos eles são inibitórios.

Devido a esta consistência, as células glutamatérgicas são frequentemente referidas como "neurónios excitatórios" e as células GABAérgicas como "neurónios inibitórios".

Estritamente falando, isso é um abuso de terminologia – são os receptores que são excitatórios e inibitórios, não os neurônios – mas é comumente visto mesmo em publicações acadêmicas.

Um subconjunto muito importante de sinapses é capaz de formar traços de memória por meio de mudanças de longa duração dependentes de atividade na força sináptica.

A forma mais conhecida de memória neural é um processo chamado de potenciação de longo prazo (abreviado LTP), que opera em sinapses que usam o neurotransmissor glutamato atuando em um tipo especial de receptor conhecido como receptor NMDA.

O receptor NMDA tem uma propriedade "associativa": se as duas células envolvidas na sinapse forem ativadas aproximadamente ao mesmo tempo, abre-se um canal que permite que o cálcio flua para a célula-alvo.

A entrada de cálcio inicia uma cascata de segundos mensageiros que, em última análise, leva a um aumento no número de receptores de glutamato na célula-alvo, aumentando assim a força efetiva da sinapse.

Essa mudança na força pode durar semanas ou mais.

Desde a descoberta da LTP em 1973, muitos outros tipos de traços de memória sináptica foram encontrados, envolvendo aumentos ou diminuições na força sináptica que são induzidas por condições variadas e duram por períodos de tempo variáveis.

O sistema de recompensa, que reforça o comportamento desejado, por exemplo, depende de uma forma variante de LTP que é condicionada a uma entrada extra proveniente de uma via de sinalização de recompensa que usa dopamina como neurotransmissor.

Todas essas formas de modificabilidade sináptica, tomadas coletivamente, dão origem à plasticidade neural, ou seja, à capacidade do sistema nervoso de se adaptar às variações do ambiente.


=== Circuitos e sistemas neurais ===

A função neuronal básica de enviar sinais para outras células inclui a capacidade de os neurônios trocarem sinais entre si.

Redes formadas por grupos de neurônios interconectados são capazes de uma ampla variedade de funções, incluindo detecção de características, geração de padrões e temporização, e há inúmeros tipos de processamento de informações possíveis.

Warren McCulloch e Walter Pitts mostraram em 1943 que mesmo redes neurais artificiais formadas a partir de uma abstração matemática bastante simplificada de um neurônio são capazes de computação universal.

Historicamente, por muitos anos a visão predominante da função do sistema nervoso foi como um associador estímulo-resposta.

Nessa concepção, o processamento neural começa com estímulos que ativam os neurônios sensoriais, produzindo sinais que se propagam através de cadeias de conexões na medula espinhal e no cérebro, dando origem eventualmente à ativação dos neurônios motores e, portanto, à contração muscular, ou seja, às respostas evidentes.

Descartes acreditava que todos os comportamentos dos animais, e a maioria dos comportamentos dos humanos, poderiam ser explicados em termos de circuitos estímulo-resposta, embora também acreditasse que funções cognitivas superiores, como a linguagem, não fossem capazes de ser explicadas mecanicamente.

Charles Sherrington, em seu influente livro de 1906 "A Ação Integrativa do Sistema Nervoso", desenvolveu o conceito de mecanismos de estímulo-resposta com muito mais detalhes, e o Behaviorismo, a escola de pensamento que dominou a Psicologia em meados do século XX, tentou explicar cada aspecto do comportamento humano em termos de estímulo-resposta.

No entanto, estudos experimentais de eletrofisiologia, iniciados no início do século 20 e atingindo alta produtividade na década de 1940, mostraram que o sistema nervoso contém muitos mecanismos para manter a excitabilidade celular e gerar padrões de atividade intrinsecamente, sem a necessidade de um estímulo externo.

Descobriu-se que os neurônios são capazes de produzir sequências regulares de potenciais de ação, ou sequências de rajadas, mesmo em completo isolamento.

Quando neurônios intrinsecamente ativos são conectados uns aos outros em circuitos complexos, as possibilidades de gerar padrões temporais intrincados se tornam muito mais extensas.

Uma concepção moderna vê a função do sistema nervoso em parte em termos de cadeias de estímulo-resposta e em parte em termos de padrões de atividade intrinsecamente gerados – ambos os tipos de atividade interagem entre si para gerar o repertório completo de comportamento.


==== Reflexos e outros circuitos estímulo-resposta ====

O tipo mais simples de circuito neural é um arco reflexo, que começa com uma entrada sensorial e termina com uma saída motora, passando por uma sequência de neurônios conectados em série.

Isso pode ser mostrado no "reflexo de retirada" fazendo com que uma mão seja puxada para trás depois que um fogão quente é tocado.

O circuito começa com os receptores sensoriais na pele que são ativados por níveis nocivos de calor:
um tipo especial de estrutura molecular embutida na membrana faz com que o calor altere o campo elétrico através da membrana.

Se a mudança no potencial elétrico for grande o suficiente para ultrapassar um determinado limiar, ela evoca um potencial de ação, que é transmitido ao longo do axônio da célula receptora para a medula espinhal.

Lá o axônio faz contatos sinápticos excitatórios com outras células, algumas das quais se projetam (enviam saída axonal) para a mesma região da medula espinhal, outras projetando-se no cérebro.

Um alvo é um conjunto de interneurônios espinhais que se projetam para neurônios motores que controlam os músculos do braço.

Os interneurônios excitam os neurônios motores e, se a excitação for forte o suficiente, alguns dos neurônios motores geram potenciais de ação, que percorrem seus axônios até o ponto em que fazem contatos sinápticos excitatórios com as células musculares.

Os sinais excitatórios induzem a contração das células musculares, o que faz com que os ângulos articulares do braço mudem, afastando o braço.

Na realidade, esse esquema simples está sujeito a inúmeras complicações.

Embora para os reflexos mais simples existam caminhos neurais curtos do neurônio sensorial ao neurônio motor, também existem outros neurônios próximos que participam do circuito e modulam a resposta.

Além disso, existem projeções do cérebro para a medula espinhal que são capazes de aumentar ou inibir o reflexo.

Embora os reflexos mais simples possam ser mediados por circuitos inteiramente localizados na medula espinhal, as respostas mais complexas dependem do processamento de sinais no cérebro.

Por exemplo, quando um objeto na periferia do campo visual se move e uma pessoa olha para ele, muitos estágios de processamento de sinal são iniciados.

A resposta sensorial inicial, na retina do olho, e a resposta motora final, nos núcleos oculomotores do tronco cerebral, não são tão diferentes daquelas em um simples reflexo, mas os estágios intermediários são completamente diferentes.

Em vez de uma cadeia de processamento de uma ou duas etapas, os sinais visuais passam por talvez uma dúzia de estágios de integração, envolvendo o tálamo, córtex cerebral, gânglios da base, colículo superior, cerebelo e vários núcleos do tronco cerebral.

Essas áreas executam funções de processamento de sinal que incluem detecção de características, análise perceptiva, recuperação de memória, tomada de decisão e planejamento motor.

A detecção de recursos é a capacidade de extrair informações biologicamente relevantes de combinações de sinais sensoriais.

No sistema visual, por exemplo, os receptores sensoriais na retina do olho são apenas individualmente capazes de detectar "pontos de luz" no mundo exterior.

Neurônios visuais de segundo nível recebem informações de grupos de receptores primários, neurônios de nível superior recebem informações de grupos de neurônios de segundo nível e assim por diante, formando uma hierarquia de estágios de processamento.

Em cada estágio, informações importantes são extraídas do conjunto de sinais e informações sem importância são descartadas.

Ao final do processo, os sinais de entrada representando "pontos de luz" foram transformados em uma representação neural de objetos no mundo circundante e suas propriedades.

O processamento sensorial mais sofisticado ocorre dentro do cérebro, mas a extração de características complexas também ocorre na medula espinhal e em órgãos sensoriais periféricos, como a retina.


==== Geração de padrão intrínseco ====
Embora os mecanismos estímulo-resposta sejam os mais fáceis de entender, o sistema nervoso também é capaz de controlar o corpo de maneiras que não requerem um estímulo externo, por meio de ritmos de atividade gerados internamente.

Devido à variedade de canais iônicos sensíveis à voltagem que podem ser incorporados na membrana de um neurônio, muitos tipos de neurônios são capazes, mesmo isoladamente, de gerar sequências rítmicas de potenciais de ação, ou alternâncias rítmicas entre estouro de alta taxa e quiescência. .

Quando neurônios que são intrinsecamente rítmicos são conectados uns aos outros por sinapses excitatórias ou inibitórias, as redes resultantes são capazes de uma ampla variedade de comportamentos dinâmicos, incluindo dinâmica de atratores, periodicidade e até caos.

Uma rede de neurônios que usa sua estrutura interna para gerar uma saída estruturada temporalmente, sem a necessidade de um estímulo estruturado temporalmente correspondente, é chamada de gerador de padrão central.

A geração interna de padrões opera em uma ampla faixa de escalas de tempo, de milissegundos a horas ou mais.

Um dos tipos mais importantes de padrão temporal é a ritmicidade circadiana, ou seja, a ritmicidade com um período de aproximadamente 24 horas.

Todos os animais estudados mostram flutuações circadianas na atividade neural, que controlam as alternâncias circadianas no comportamento, como o ciclo sono-vigília.

Estudos experimentais datados da década de 1990 mostraram que os ritmos circadianos são gerados por um "relógio genético" composto por um conjunto especial de genes cujo nível de expressão aumenta e diminui ao longo do dia.

Animais tão diversos quanto insetos e vertebrados compartilham um sistema de relógio genético semelhante.

O relógio circadiano é influenciado pela luz, mas continua a funcionar mesmo quando os níveis de luz são mantidos constantes e não há outras indicações externas de hora do dia disponíveis.

Os genes do relógio são expressos em muitas partes do sistema nervoso, bem como em muitos órgãos periféricos, mas nos mamíferos, todos esses "relógios teciduais" são mantidos em sincronia por sinais que emanam de um cronometrista mestre em uma pequena parte do cérebro chamada o núcleo supraquiasmático.


=== Neurônios espelho ===

Um neurônio espelho é um neurônio que dispara tanto quando um animal age quanto quando o animal observa a mesma ação realizada por outro.

Assim, o neurônio "espelha" o comportamento do outro, como se o próprio observador estivesse agindo.

Esses neurônios foram observados diretamente em espécies de primatas.

As aves demonstraram ter comportamentos de ressonância imitativa e evidências neurológicas sugerem a presença de alguma forma de sistema de espelhamento.

Em humanos, a atividade cerebral consistente com a dos neurônios-espelho foi encontrada no córtex pré-motor, na área motora suplementar, no córtex somatossensorial primário e no córtex parietal inferior.

A função do sistema de espelhos é objeto de muita especulação.

Muitos pesquisadores em neurociência cognitiva e psicologia cognitiva consideram que este sistema fornece o mecanismo fisiológico para o acoplamento percepção/ação (veja a teoria de codificação comum).

Eles argumentam que os neurônios-espelho podem ser importantes para entender as ações de outras pessoas e para aprender novas habilidades por imitação.

Alguns pesquisadores também especulam que os sistemas-espelho podem simular ações observadas e, assim, contribuir para as habilidades da teoria da mente, enquanto outros relacionam os neurônios-espelho às habilidades de linguagem.

No entanto, até o momento, nenhum modelo neural ou computacional amplamente aceito foi apresentado para descrever como a atividade do neurônio-espelho suporta funções cognitivas como a imitação.

Há neurocientistas que alertam que as alegações feitas sobre o papel dos neurônios-espelho não são apoiadas por pesquisas adequadas.


== Desenvolvimento ==

Em vertebrados, os marcos do desenvolvimento neural embrionário incluem o nascimento e a diferenciação de neurônios de precursores de células-tronco, a migração de neurônios imaturos de seus locais de nascimento no embrião para suas posições finais, o crescimento de axônios de neurônios e a orientação do cone de crescimento móvel através do embrião em direção aos parceiros pós-sinápticos, a geração de sinapses entre esses axônios e seus parceiros pós-sinápticos e, finalmente, as mudanças ao longo da vida nas sinapses que se acredita serem a base do aprendizado e da memória.

Todos os animais bilaterais em estágio inicial de desenvolvimento formam uma gástrula, que é polarizada, com uma extremidade chamada de pólo animal e a outra de pólo vegetal.

A gástrula tem a forma de um disco com três camadas de células, uma camada interna chamada endoderma, que dá origem ao revestimento da maioria dos órgãos internos, uma camada intermediária chamada mesoderme, que dá origem aos ossos e músculos, e uma camada externa chamada ectoderme, que dá origem à pele e ao sistema nervoso.

Nos vertebrados, o primeiro sinal do sistema nervoso é o aparecimento de uma fina faixa de células ao longo do centro das costas, chamada de placa neural.

A porção interna da placa neural (ao longo da linha média) está destinada a se tornar o sistema nervoso central (SNC), a porção externa o sistema nervoso periférico (SNP).

À medida que o desenvolvimento prossegue, uma dobra chamada sulco neural aparece ao longo da linha média.

Essa dobra se aprofunda e depois se fecha no topo.

Nesse ponto, o futuro SNC aparece como uma estrutura cilíndrica chamada tubo neural, enquanto o futuro SNP aparece como duas tiras de tecido chamadas crista neural, correndo longitudinalmente acima do tubo neural.

A sequência de estágios da placa neural ao tubo neural e crista neural é conhecida como neurulação.

No início do século 20, um conjunto de experimentos famosos de Hans Spemann e Hilde Mangold mostrou que a formação do tecido nervoso é "induzida" por sinais de um grupo de células mesodérmicas chamado região organizadora.

Por décadas, porém, a natureza da indução neural derrotou todas as tentativas de entendê-la, até que finalmente foi resolvida por abordagens genéticas na década de 1990.

A indução do tecido neural requer a inibição do gene para a chamada proteína morfogenética óssea, ou BMP.

Especificamente, a proteína BMP4 parece estar envolvida.

Duas proteínas chamadas Noggin e Chordin, ambas secretadas pelo mesoderma, são capazes de inibir BMP4 e, assim, induzir o ectoderma a se transformar em tecido neural.

Parece que um mecanismo molecular semelhante está envolvido para tipos amplamente díspares de animais, incluindo artrópodes e vertebrados.

Em alguns animais, no entanto, outro tipo de molécula chamada Fator de Crescimento de Fibroblastos ou FGF também pode desempenhar um papel importante na indução.

A indução de tecidos neurais causa a formação de células precursoras neurais, chamadas neuroblastos.

Na drosófila, os neuroblastos se dividem assimetricamente, de modo que um produto é uma "célula-mãe ganglionar" (GMC) e o outro é um neuroblasto.

Um GMC se divide uma vez, para dar origem a um par de neurônios ou a um par de células gliais.

Ao todo, um neuroblasto é capaz de gerar um número indefinido de neurônios ou glia.

Como mostrado em um estudo de 2008, um fator comum a todos os organismos bilaterais (incluindo humanos) é uma família de moléculas sinalizadoras secretadas chamadas neurotrofinas que regulam o crescimento e a sobrevivência dos neurônios.

Zhu et ai. identificaram DNT1, a primeira neurotrofina encontrada em moscas.

DNT1 compartilha semelhança estrutural com todas as neurotrofinas conhecidas e é um fator chave no destino dos neurônios em Drosophila.

Como as neurotrofinas já foram identificadas em vertebrados e invertebrados, essa evidência sugere que as neurotrofinas estavam presentes em um ancestral comum a organismos bilaterais e podem representar um mecanismo comum para a formação do sistema nervoso.


== Patologia ==

O sistema nervoso central é protegido por grandes barreiras físicas e químicas.

Fisicamente, o encéfalo e a medula espinhal são circundados por membranas meníngeas resistentes e encerradas nos ossos do crânio e da coluna vertebral, que se combinam para formar um forte escudo físico.

Quimicamente, o cérebro e a medula espinhal são isolados pela barreira hematoencefálica, que impede que a maioria dos tipos de substâncias químicas se movam da corrente sanguínea para o interior do SNC.

Essas proteções tornam o SNC menos suscetível em muitos aspectos do que o PNS; o outro lado, no entanto, é que danos ao SNC tendem a ter consequências mais sérias.

Embora os nervos tendam a ficar profundamente sob a pele, exceto em alguns lugares, como o nervo ulnar perto da articulação do cotovelo, eles ainda estão relativamente expostos a danos físicos, que podem causar dor, perda de sensibilidade ou perda de controle muscular.

Danos aos nervos também podem ser causados ​​por inchaço ou hematomas em locais onde um nervo passa por um canal ósseo apertado, como acontece na síndrome do túnel do carpo.

Se um nervo for completamente seccionado, ele geralmente se regenerará, mas para nervos longos esse processo pode levar meses para ser concluído.

Além do dano físico, a neuropatia periférica pode ser causada por muitos outros problemas médicos, incluindo condições genéticas, condições metabólicas como diabetes, condições inflamatórias como síndrome de Guillain-Barré, deficiência de vitaminas, doenças infecciosas como hanseníase ou herpes zoster, ou envenenamento por toxinas, como metais pesados.

Muitos casos não têm causa que possa ser identificada e são referidos como idiopáticos.

Também é possível que os nervos percam a função temporariamente, resultando em dormência como rigidez – as causas comuns incluem pressão mecânica, queda de temperatura ou interações químicas com drogas anestésicas locais, como a lidocaína.

Danos físicos à medula espinhal podem resultar em perda de sensação ou movimento.

Se uma lesão na coluna não produzir nada pior do que inchaço, os sintomas podem ser transitórios, mas se as fibras nervosas da coluna forem realmente destruídas, a perda de função geralmente é permanente.

Estudos experimentais mostraram que as fibras nervosas espinhais tentam crescer novamente da mesma forma que as fibras nervosas, mas na medula espinhal, a destruição do tecido geralmente produz tecido cicatricial que não pode ser penetrado pelos nervos em crescimento.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nervous_system

;;;FR;;;



ORGANES SENSORIELS


-Organe olfactif
-Œil
-Oreille
-Organe gustatif


SYSTÈME NERVEUX


En biologie, la doctrine classique du système nerveux détermine qu'il s'agit d'une partie très complexe d'un animal qui coordonne ses actions et ses informations sensorielles en transmettant des signaux vers et depuis différentes parties de son corps.

Le système nerveux détecte les changements environnementaux qui ont un impact sur le corps, puis travaille en tandem avec le système endocrinien pour répondre à de tels événements.

Le tissu nerveux est apparu pour la première fois dans des organismes ressemblant à des vers il y a environ 550 à 600 millions d'années.

Cependant, cette doctrine classique a été remise en question au cours des dernières décennies par les découvertes sur l'existence et l'utilisation des signaux électriques dans les plantes.

Sur la base de ces découvertes, certains scientifiques ont proposé l'existence d'un système nerveux végétal et la création d'un domaine scientifique appelé neurobiologie végétale.

Cette proposition a provoqué une polémique dans la communauté scientifique entre ceux qui pensent qu'il faut parler du système nerveux des plantes et ceux qui s'y opposent.

La rigidité des positions dans le débat scientifique de part et d'autre a conduit à proposer une solution au débat, consistant à redéfinir le concept de système nerveux en n'utilisant que des critères physiologiques et en évitant les critères phylogénétiques.

Chez les vertébrés, il se compose de deux parties principales, le système nerveux central (SNC) et le système nerveux périphérique (SNP).

Le SNC comprend le cerveau et la moelle épinière.

Le SNP se compose principalement de nerfs, qui sont des faisceaux fermés de longues fibres ou axones, qui relient le SNC à toutes les autres parties du corps.

Les nerfs qui transmettent les signaux du cerveau sont appelés nerfs moteurs ou nerfs efférents, tandis que les nerfs qui transmettent les informations du corps au SNC sont appelés nerfs sensoriels ou afférents.

Les nerfs rachidiens sont des nerfs mixtes qui remplissent les deux fonctions.

Le SNP est divisé en trois sous-systèmes distincts, les systèmes nerveux somatique, autonome et entérique.

Les nerfs somatiques assurent la médiation des mouvements volontaires.

Le système nerveux autonome est subdivisé en systèmes nerveux sympathique et parasympathique.

Le système nerveux sympathique est activé en cas d'urgence pour mobiliser l'énergie, tandis que le système nerveux parasympathique est activé lorsque les organismes sont dans un état détendu.

Le système nerveux entérique fonctionne pour contrôler le système gastro-intestinal.

Les systèmes nerveux autonome et entérique fonctionnent involontairement.

Les nerfs qui sortent du crâne sont appelés nerfs crâniens tandis que ceux qui sortent de la moelle épinière sont appelés nerfs rachidiens.

Au niveau cellulaire, le système nerveux est défini par la présence d'un type particulier de cellule, appelé neurone, également appelé « cellule nerveuse ».

Les neurones ont des structures spéciales qui leur permettent d'envoyer des signaux rapidement et précisément à d'autres cellules.

Ils envoient ces signaux sous la forme d'impulsions électrochimiques se déplaçant le long de fines fibres appelées axones, qui peuvent être directement transmises aux cellules voisines via des synapses électriques ou provoquer la libération de substances chimiques appelées neurotransmetteurs au niveau des synapses chimiques.

Une cellule qui reçoit un signal synaptique d'un neurone peut être excitée, inhibée ou autrement modulée.

Les connexions entre les neurones peuvent former des voies neuronales, des circuits neuronaux et des réseaux plus vastes qui génèrent la perception du monde d'un organisme et déterminent son comportement.

Outre les neurones, le système nerveux contient d'autres cellules spécialisées appelées cellules gliales (ou simplement glie), qui fournissent un soutien structurel et métabolique.

Les systèmes nerveux se trouvent chez la plupart des animaux multicellulaires, mais varient considérablement en complexité.

Les seuls animaux multicellulaires qui n'ont pas du tout de système nerveux sont les éponges, les placozoaires et les mésozoaires, qui ont des plans corporels très simples.

Les systèmes nerveux des organismes à symétrie radiale cténophores (gelées en peigne) et cnidaires (qui comprennent les anémones, les hydres, les coraux et les méduses) consistent en un réseau nerveux diffus.

Toutes les autres espèces animales, à l'exception de quelques types de vers, ont un système nerveux contenant un cerveau, un cordon central (ou deux cordons parallèles) et des nerfs rayonnant du cerveau et du cordon central.

La taille du système nerveux varie de quelques centaines de cellules chez les vers les plus simples à environ 300 milliards de cellules chez les éléphants d'Afrique.

Le système nerveux central fonctionne pour envoyer des signaux d'une cellule à d'autres, ou d'une partie du corps à d'autres et pour recevoir une rétroaction.

Un dysfonctionnement du système nerveux peut survenir à la suite de défauts génétiques, de dommages physiques dus à un traumatisme ou à une toxicité, à une infection ou simplement à la sénescence.

La spécialité médicale de la neurologie étudie les troubles du système nerveux et recherche des interventions susceptibles de les prévenir ou de les traiter.

Dans le système nerveux périphérique, le problème le plus courant est l'échec de la conduction nerveuse, qui peut être dû à différentes causes, notamment la neuropathie diabétique et les troubles démyélinisants tels que la sclérose en plaques et la sclérose latérale amyotrophique.

Les neurosciences sont le domaine de la science qui se concentre sur l'étude du système nerveux.


== Structure ==

Le système nerveux tire son nom des nerfs, qui sont des faisceaux cylindriques de fibres (les axones des neurones), qui émanent du cerveau et de la moelle épinière, et se ramifient à plusieurs reprises pour innerver chaque partie du corps.

Les nerfs sont suffisamment gros pour avoir été reconnus par les anciens Égyptiens, Grecs et Romains, mais leur structure interne n'a pas été comprise jusqu'à ce qu'il soit devenu possible de les examiner à l'aide d'un microscope.

L'auteur Michael Nikoletseas a écrit:
"Il est difficile de croire que jusqu'à environ l'an 1900, on ne savait pas que les neurones sont les unités de base du cerveau (Santiago Ramón y Cajal).

Tout aussi surprenant est le fait que le concept de transmission chimique dans le cerveau n'a été connu que vers 1930 (Henry Hallett Dale et Otto Loewi).

Nous avons commencé à comprendre le phénomène électrique de base que les neurones utilisent pour communiquer entre eux, le potentiel d'action, dans les années 1950 (Alan Lloyd Hodgkin, Andrew Huxley et John Eccles).

C'est dans les années 1960 que nous avons pris conscience de la possibilité pour les réseaux neuronaux de base de coder les stimuli et donc les concepts de base (David H. Hubel et Torsten Wiesel).

La révolution moléculaire a balayé les universités américaines dans les années 1980.

C'est dans les années 1990 que les mécanismes moléculaires des phénomènes comportementaux sont devenus largement connus (Eric Richard Kandel)."

Un examen microscopique montre que les nerfs sont principalement constitués d'axones, ainsi que de différentes membranes qui les entourent et les séparent en fascicules.

Les neurones qui donnent naissance aux nerfs ne se trouvent pas entièrement dans les nerfs eux-mêmes - leurs corps cellulaires résident dans le cerveau, la moelle épinière ou les ganglions périphériques.

Tous les animaux plus avancés que les éponges ont un système nerveux.

Cependant, même les éponges, les animaux unicellulaires et les non-animaux tels que les moisissures visqueuses ont des mécanismes de signalisation de cellule à cellule qui sont des précurseurs de ceux des neurones.

Chez les animaux à symétrie radiale tels que la méduse et l'hydre, le système nerveux est constitué d'un réseau nerveux, un réseau diffus de cellules isolées.

Chez les animaux bilatéraux, qui constituent la grande majorité des espèces existantes, le système nerveux a une structure commune qui est née au début de la période édiacarienne, il y a plus de 550 millions d'années.


=== Cellules ===

Le système nerveux contient deux grandes catégories ou types de cellules : les neurones et les cellules gliales.


==== Neurones ====

Le système nerveux est défini par la présence d'un type particulier de cellule, le neurone (parfois appelé « neurone » ou « cellule nerveuse »).

Les neurones peuvent être distingués des autres cellules de plusieurs façons, mais leur propriété la plus fondamentale est qu'ils communiquent avec d'autres cellules via des synapses, qui sont des jonctions membrane à membrane contenant une machinerie moléculaire qui permet une transmission rapide de signaux, électriques ou chimiques. .

De nombreux types de neurones possèdent un axone, une saillie protoplasmique qui peut s'étendre à des parties éloignées du corps et établir des milliers de contacts synaptiques ; les axones s'étendent généralement dans tout le corps en faisceaux appelés nerfs.

Même dans le système nerveux d'une seule espèce comme l'homme, il existe des centaines de types différents de neurones, avec une grande variété de morphologies et de fonctions.

Ceux-ci incluent les neurones sensoriels qui transmutent les stimuli physiques tels que la lumière et le son en signaux neuronaux, et les motoneurones qui transmutent les signaux neuronaux en activation des muscles ou des glandes ; cependant, chez de nombreuses espèces, la grande majorité des neurones participent à la formation de structures centralisées (le cerveau et les ganglions) et ils reçoivent toutes leurs entrées d'autres neurones et envoient leur sortie à d'autres neurones.


==== Cellules gliales ====

Les cellules gliales (nommées du grec pour « colle ») sont des cellules non neuronales qui fournissent un soutien et une nutrition, maintiennent l'homéostasie, forment de la myéline et participent à la transmission des signaux dans le système nerveux.

Dans le cerveau humain, on estime que le nombre total de cellules gliales est à peu près égal au nombre de neurones, bien que les proportions varient dans les différentes zones du cerveau.

L'une des fonctions les plus importantes des cellules gliales est de soutenir les neurones et de les maintenir en place ; fournir des nutriments aux neurones; isoler électriquement les neurones ; détruire les agents pathogènes et éliminer les neurones morts ; et de fournir des signaux de guidage dirigeant les axones des neurones vers leurs cibles.

Un type très important de cellules gliales (oligodendrocytes dans le système nerveux central et cellules de Schwann dans le système nerveux périphérique) génère des couches d'une substance grasse appelée myéline qui s'enroule autour des axones et fournit une isolation électrique qui leur permet de transmettre des potentiels d'action beaucoup plus rapidement et efficacement.

Des découvertes récentes indiquent que les cellules gliales, telles que la microglie et les astrocytes, servent de cellules immunitaires résidentes importantes dans le système nerveux central.


=== Anatomie chez les vertébrés ===

Le système nerveux des vertébrés (y compris les humains) est divisé en système nerveux central (SNC) et système nerveux périphérique (SNP).

Le (CNS) est la division principale et se compose du cerveau et de la moelle épinière.

Le canal rachidien contient la moelle épinière, tandis que la cavité crânienne contient le cerveau.

Le SNC est entouré et protégé par les méninges, un système de membranes à trois couches, dont une couche externe dure et coriace appelée la dure-mère.

Le cerveau est également protégé par le crâne et la moelle épinière par les vertèbres.

Le système nerveux périphérique (SNP) est un terme collectif désignant les structures du système nerveux qui ne se trouvent pas dans le SNC.

La grande majorité des faisceaux d'axones appelés nerfs sont considérés comme appartenant au SNP, même lorsque les corps cellulaires des neurones auxquels ils appartiennent résident dans le cerveau ou la moelle épinière.

Le SNP est divisé en parties somatiques et viscérales.

La partie somatique comprend les nerfs qui innervent la peau, les articulations et les muscles.

Les corps cellulaires des neurones sensoriels somatiques se trouvent dans les ganglions de la racine dorsale de la moelle épinière.

La partie viscérale, également connue sous le nom de système nerveux autonome, contient des neurones qui innervent les organes internes, les vaisseaux sanguins et les glandes.

Le système nerveux autonome lui-même se compose de deux parties : le système nerveux sympathique et le système nerveux parasympathique.

Certains auteurs incluent également des neurones sensoriels dont les corps cellulaires se situent à la périphérie (pour des sens tels que l'ouïe) dans le cadre du SNP ; d'autres, cependant, les omettent.

Le système nerveux des vertébrés peut également être divisé en zones appelées matière grise et matière blanche.

La matière grise (qui n'est grise que dans les tissus préservés et est mieux décrite comme rose ou brun clair dans les tissus vivants) contient une forte proportion de corps cellulaires de neurones.

La substance blanche est composée principalement d'axones myélinisés et tire sa couleur de la myéline.

La matière blanche comprend tous les nerfs et une grande partie de l'intérieur du cerveau et de la moelle épinière.

La matière grise se trouve dans les amas de neurones du cerveau et de la moelle épinière, et dans les couches corticales qui tapissent leurs surfaces.

Il existe une convention anatomique selon laquelle un groupe de neurones dans le cerveau ou la moelle épinière s'appelle un noyau, tandis qu'un groupe de neurones à la périphérie s'appelle un ganglion.

Il existe cependant quelques exceptions à cette règle, dont notamment la partie du cerveau antérieur appelée ganglions de la base.


=== Anatomie comparée et évolution ===

==== Précurseurs neuronaux dans les éponges ====

Les éponges n'ont pas de cellules reliées entre elles par des jonctions synaptiques, c'est-à-dire pas de neurones, et donc pas de système nerveux.

Ils ont cependant des homologues de nombreux gènes qui jouent un rôle clé dans la fonction synaptique.

Des études récentes ont montré que les cellules spongieuses expriment un groupe de protéines qui se regroupent pour former une structure ressemblant à une densité post-synaptique (la partie réceptrice de signal d'une synapse).

Cependant, la fonction de cette structure est actuellement incertaine.

Bien que les cellules spongieuses ne présentent pas de transmission synaptique, elles communiquent entre elles via des ondes de calcium et d'autres impulsions, qui interviennent dans certaines actions simples telles que la contraction du corps entier.


==== Radiata ====

Les méduses, les gelées en peigne et les animaux apparentés ont des réseaux nerveux diffus plutôt qu'un système nerveux central.

Chez la plupart des méduses, le filet nerveux est réparti plus ou moins uniformément sur tout le corps; dans les gelées en peigne, il est concentré près de la bouche.

Les réseaux nerveux sont constitués de neurones sensoriels, qui captent les signaux chimiques, tactiles et visuels ; les motoneurones, qui peuvent activer les contractions de la paroi corporelle ; et les neurones intermédiaires, qui détectent les schémas d'activité dans les neurones sensoriels et, en réponse, envoient des signaux à des groupes de motoneurones.

Dans certains cas, des groupes de neurones intermédiaires sont regroupés en ganglions discrets.

Le développement du système nerveux chez radiata est relativement peu structuré.

Contrairement aux bilatériens, les radiata n'ont que deux couches cellulaires primordiales, l'endoderme et l'ectoderme.

Les neurones sont générés à partir d'un ensemble spécial de cellules précurseurs ectodermiques, qui servent également de précurseurs pour tous les autres types de cellules ectodermiques.


==== Bilatérie ====

La grande majorité des animaux existants sont des bilatériens, c'est-à-dire des animaux dont les côtés gauche et droit sont des images miroir approximatives l'un de l'autre.

On pense que toutes les bilateria descendent d'un ancêtre commun semblable à un ver qui est apparu à l'époque édiacarienne, il y a 550 à 600 millions d'années.

La forme fondamentale du corps bilatéral est un tube avec une cavité intestinale creuse allant de la bouche à l'anus, et un cordon nerveux avec un élargissement (un "ganglion") pour chaque segment du corps, avec un ganglion particulièrement grand à l'avant, appelé le "cerveau". ".

Même les mammifères, y compris les humains, présentent le plan corporel bilatéral segmenté au niveau du système nerveux.

La moelle épinière contient une série de ganglions segmentaires, chacun donnant naissance à des nerfs moteurs et sensoriels qui innervent une partie de la surface du corps et de la musculature sous-jacente.

Sur les membres, la disposition du schéma d'innervation est complexe, mais sur le tronc, elle donne lieu à une série de bandes étroites.

Les trois premiers segments appartiennent au cerveau, donnant naissance au cerveau antérieur, au cerveau moyen et au cerveau postérieur.

Les Bilatériens peuvent être divisés, sur la base d'événements qui se produisent très tôt dans le développement embryonnaire, en deux groupes (superphyla) appelés protostomes et deutérostomes.

Les deutérostomes comprennent les vertébrés ainsi que les échinodermes, les hémichordés (principalement les vers à glands) et les Xenoturbellidans.

Les protostomes, le groupe le plus diversifié, comprennent les arthropodes, les mollusques et de nombreux types de vers.

Il existe une différence fondamentale entre les deux groupes dans le placement du système nerveux dans le corps :
les protostomes possèdent un cordon nerveux sur le côté ventral (généralement en bas) du corps, tandis que chez les deutérostomes, le cordon nerveux se trouve sur le côté dorsal (généralement en haut).

En fait, de nombreux aspects du corps sont inversés entre les deux groupes, y compris les modèles d'expression de plusieurs gènes qui montrent des gradients dorso-ventraux.

La plupart des anatomistes considèrent désormais que les corps des protostomiens et des deutérostomiens sont "retournés" les uns par rapport aux autres, une hypothèse qui a d'abord été proposée par Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire pour les insectes par rapport aux vertébrés.

Ainsi, les insectes, par exemple, ont des cordons nerveux qui courent le long de la ligne médiane ventrale du corps, tandis que tous les vertébrés ont des moelles épinières qui courent le long de la ligne médiane dorsale.


==== Vers ====

Les vers sont les animaux bilatéraux les plus simples et révèlent la structure de base du système nerveux bilatéral de la manière la plus directe.

Par exemple, les vers de terre ont des cordons nerveux doubles qui s'étendent sur toute la longueur du corps et se rejoignent au niveau de la queue et de la bouche.

Ces cordons nerveux sont reliés par des nerfs transversaux comme les barreaux d'une échelle.

Ces nerfs transversaux aident à coordonner les deux côtés de l'animal.

Deux ganglions à la tête ("l'anneau nerveux") terminent une fonction similaire à un cerveau simple.

Les photorécepteurs sur les taches oculaires de l'animal fournissent des informations sensorielles sur la lumière et l'obscurité.

Le système nerveux d'un très petit ver rond, le nématode Caenorhabditis elegans, a été entièrement cartographié dans un connectome, y compris ses synapses.

Chaque neurone et sa lignée cellulaire ont été enregistrés et la plupart, sinon la totalité, des connexions neuronales sont connues.

Chez cette espèce, le système nerveux est sexuellement dimorphe ; les systèmes nerveux des deux sexes, mâles et femelles hermaphrodites, ont des nombres différents de neurones et de groupes de neurones qui remplissent des fonctions spécifiques au sexe.

Chez C. elegans, les mâles ont exactement 383 neurones, tandis que les hermaphrodites ont exactement 302 neurones.


==== Arthropodes ====

Les arthropodes, tels que les insectes et les crustacés, ont un système nerveux composé d'une série de ganglions, reliés par un cordon nerveux ventral composé de deux connectifs parallèles s'étendant le long du ventre.

En règle générale, chaque segment du corps a un ganglion de chaque côté, bien que certains ganglions soient fusionnés pour former le cerveau et d'autres gros ganglions.

Le segment de la tête contient le cerveau, également connu sous le nom de ganglion supra-œsophagien.

Dans le système nerveux des insectes, le cerveau est anatomiquement divisé en protocerebrum, deutocerebrum et tritocerebrum.

Immédiatement derrière le cerveau se trouve le ganglion sous-œsophagien, composé de trois paires de ganglions fusionnés.

Il contrôle les pièces buccales, les glandes salivaires et certains muscles.

De nombreux arthropodes ont des organes sensoriels bien développés, y compris des yeux composés pour la vision et des antennes pour l'olfaction et la sensation de phéromone.

Les informations sensorielles de ces organes sont traitées par le cerveau.

Chez les insectes, de nombreux neurones ont des corps cellulaires qui sont positionnés à la périphérie du cerveau et qui sont électriquement passifs - les corps cellulaires ne servent qu'à fournir un soutien métabolique et ne participent pas à la signalisation.

Une fibre protoplasmique part du corps cellulaire et se ramifie abondamment, certaines parties transmettant des signaux et d'autres recevant des signaux.

Ainsi, la plupart des parties du cerveau des insectes ont des corps cellulaires passifs disposés autour de la périphérie, tandis que le traitement du signal neuronal a lieu dans un enchevêtrement de fibres protoplasmiques appelées neuropiles, à l'intérieur.


==== Neurones "identifiés" ====

Un neurone est dit identifié s'il possède des propriétés qui le distinguent de tous les autres neurones du même animal - des propriétés telles que l'emplacement, le neurotransmetteur, le modèle d'expression génique et la connectivité - et si chaque organisme individuel appartenant à la même espèce en possède un et un seul. neurone avec le même ensemble de propriétés.

Dans les systèmes nerveux des vertébrés, très peu de neurones sont «identifiés» dans ce sens - chez l'homme, on pense qu'il n'y en a pas - mais dans les systèmes nerveux plus simples, certains ou tous les neurones peuvent être ainsi uniques.

Chez le ver rond C. elegans, dont le système nerveux est le mieux décrit de tous les animaux, chaque neurone du corps est identifiable de manière unique, avec le même emplacement et les mêmes connexions dans chaque ver individuel.

Une conséquence notable de ce fait est que la forme du système nerveux de C. elegans est complètement spécifiée par le génome, sans plasticité dépendante de l'expérience. Le cerveau de nombreux mollusques et insectes contient également un nombre substantiel de neurones identifiés.

Chez les vertébrés, les neurones identifiés les plus connus sont les gigantesques cellules de Mauthner des poissons.

Chaque poisson a deux cellules de Mauthner, dans la partie inférieure du tronc cérébral, une à gauche et une à droite.

Chaque cellule de Mauthner a un axone qui se croise, innervant les neurones au même niveau cérébral, puis voyageant à travers la moelle épinière, établissant de nombreuses connexions au fur et à mesure.

Les synapses générées par une cellule de Mauthner sont si puissantes qu'un seul potentiel d'action donne lieu à une réponse comportementale majeure :
en quelques millisecondes, le poisson courbe son corps en forme de C, puis se redresse, se propulsant ainsi rapidement vers l'avant.

Fonctionnellement, il s'agit d'une réponse d'échappement rapide, déclenchée plus facilement par une forte onde sonore ou une onde de pression frappant l'organe de la ligne latérale du poisson.

Les cellules de Mauthner ne sont pas les seuls neurones identifiés chez les poissons - il existe environ 20 autres types, y compris des paires d '«analogues de cellules de Mauthner» dans chaque noyau segmentaire de la colonne vertébrale.

Bien qu'une cellule de Mauthner soit capable de provoquer une réponse d'échappement individuellement, dans le contexte d'un comportement ordinaire, d'autres types de cellules contribuent généralement à façonner l'amplitude et la direction de la réponse.

Les cellules de Mauthner ont été décrites comme des neurones de commande.

Un neurone de commande est un type particulier de neurone identifié, défini comme un neurone capable de piloter individuellement un comportement spécifique.

Ces neurones apparaissent le plus souvent dans les systèmes d'échappement rapide de diverses espèces - l' axone géant du calmar et la synapse géante du calmar , utilisés pour des expériences pionnières en neurophysiologie en raison de leur taille énorme, participent tous deux au circuit d'échappement rapide du calmar.

Le concept de neurone de commande est cependant devenu controversé, en raison d'études montrant que certains neurones qui semblaient initialement correspondre à la description n'étaient en réalité capables d'évoquer une réponse que dans un ensemble limité de circonstances.


== Fonction ==

Au niveau le plus élémentaire, la fonction du système nerveux est d'envoyer des signaux d'une cellule à d'autres, ou d'une partie du corps à d'autres.

Une cellule peut envoyer des signaux à d'autres cellules de plusieurs façons.

L'une consiste à libérer des substances chimiques appelées hormones dans la circulation interne, afin qu'elles puissent se diffuser vers des sites distants.

Contrairement à ce mode de signalisation «diffusion», le système nerveux fournit des signaux «point à point» - les neurones projettent leurs axones vers des zones cibles spécifiques et établissent des connexions synaptiques avec des cellules cibles spécifiques.

Ainsi, la signalisation neuronale est capable d'un niveau de spécificité beaucoup plus élevé que la signalisation hormonale.

Il est également beaucoup plus rapide : les signaux nerveux les plus rapides voyagent à des vitesses supérieures à 100 mètres par seconde.
À un niveau plus intégratif, la fonction principale du système nerveux est de contrôler le corps.

Pour ce faire, il extrait des informations de l'environnement à l'aide de récepteurs sensoriels, envoie des signaux qui codent ces informations dans le système nerveux central, traite les informations pour déterminer une réponse appropriée et envoie des signaux de sortie aux muscles ou aux glandes pour activer la réponse.

L'évolution d'un système nerveux complexe a permis à diverses espèces animales d'avoir des capacités de perception avancées telles que la vision, des interactions sociales complexes, une coordination rapide des systèmes d'organes et un traitement intégré des signaux simultanés.

Chez l'homme, la sophistication du système nerveux permet d'avoir le langage, la représentation abstraite des concepts, la transmission de la culture et de nombreuses autres caractéristiques de la société humaine qui n'existeraient pas sans le cerveau humain.


=== Neurones et synapses ===

La plupart des neurones envoient des signaux via leurs axones, bien que certains types soient capables de communiquer de dendrite à dendrite.

(En fait, les types de neurones appelés cellules amacrines n'ont pas d'axones et ne communiquent que via leurs dendrites.)

Les signaux neuronaux se propagent le long d'un axone sous la forme d'ondes électrochimiques appelées potentiels d'action, qui produisent des signaux de cellule à cellule aux points où les terminaux axonaux établissent un contact synaptique avec d'autres cellules. Les synapses peuvent être électriques ou chimiques.

Les synapses électriques établissent des connexions électriques directes entre les neurones, mais les synapses chimiques sont beaucoup plus courantes et ont des fonctions beaucoup plus diverses.

Au niveau d'une synapse chimique, la cellule qui envoie des signaux est appelée présynaptique et la cellule qui reçoit des signaux est appelée postsynaptique.

Les zones présynaptiques et postsynaptiques sont pleines de machinerie moléculaire qui exécute le processus de signalisation.

La zone présynaptique contient un grand nombre de minuscules vaisseaux sphériques appelés vésicules synaptiques, remplis de produits chimiques neurotransmetteurs.

Lorsque le terminal présynaptique est stimulé électriquement, un réseau de molécules intégrées dans la membrane est activé et provoque la libération du contenu des vésicules dans l'espace étroit entre les membranes présynaptique et post-synaptique, appelée fente synaptique.

Le neurotransmetteur se lie ensuite aux récepteurs intégrés dans la membrane postsynaptique, les faisant entrer dans un état activé.

Selon le type de récepteur, l'effet résultant sur la cellule postsynaptique peut être excitateur, inhibiteur ou modulateur de manière plus complexe.

Par exemple, la libération du neurotransmetteur acétylcholine lors d'un contact synaptique entre un motoneurone et une cellule musculaire induit une contraction rapide de la cellule musculaire.

L'ensemble du processus de transmission synaptique ne prend qu'une fraction de milliseconde, bien que les effets sur la cellule postsynaptique puissent durer beaucoup plus longtemps (voire indéfiniment, dans les cas où le signal synaptique conduit à la formation d'une trace mnésique).

Il existe littéralement des centaines de types de synapses différents.

En fait, il existe plus d'une centaine de neurotransmetteurs connus, et nombre d'entre eux ont plusieurs types de récepteurs.

De nombreuses synapses utilisent plus d'un neurotransmetteur - un arrangement courant consiste pour une synapse à utiliser un neurotransmetteur à petite molécule à action rapide tel que le glutamate ou le GABA, ainsi qu'un ou plusieurs neurotransmetteurs peptidiques qui jouent des rôles modulateurs à action plus lente.

Les neuroscientifiques moléculaires divisent généralement les récepteurs en deux grands groupes :
canaux ioniques chimiquement activés et systèmes de second messager.

Lorsqu'un canal ionique activé chimiquement est activé, il forme un passage qui permet à des types spécifiques d'ions de traverser la membrane.

Selon le type d'ion, l'effet sur la cellule cible peut être excitateur ou inhibiteur.

Lorsqu'un deuxième système messager est activé, il déclenche une cascade d'interactions moléculaires à l'intérieur de la cellule cible, ce qui peut finalement produire une grande variété d'effets complexes, tels que l'augmentation ou la diminution de la sensibilité de la cellule aux stimuli, voire la modification de la transcription des gènes.

Selon une règle appelée principe de Dale, qui n'a que quelques exceptions connues, un neurone libère les mêmes neurotransmetteurs à toutes ses synapses.

Cela ne signifie pas pour autant qu'un neurone exerce le même effet sur toutes ses cibles, car l'effet d'une synapse ne dépend pas du neurotransmetteur, mais des récepteurs qu'il active.

Étant donné que différentes cibles peuvent (et utilisent fréquemment) différents types de récepteurs, il est possible qu'un neurone ait des effets excitateurs sur un ensemble de cellules cibles, des effets inhibiteurs sur d'autres et des effets modulateurs complexes sur d'autres encore.

Néanmoins, il se trouve que les deux neurotransmetteurs les plus utilisés, le glutamate et le GABA, ont chacun des effets largement cohérents.

Le glutamate a plusieurs types de récepteurs largement répandus, mais tous sont excitateurs ou modulateurs.

De même, le GABA possède plusieurs types de récepteurs largement répandus, mais tous sont inhibiteurs.

En raison de cette cohérence, les cellules glutamatergiques sont fréquemment appelées "neurones excitateurs" et les cellules GABAergiques "neurones inhibiteurs".

Strictement parlant, il s'agit d'un abus de terminologie - ce sont les récepteurs qui sont excitateurs et inhibiteurs, pas les neurones - mais on le voit couramment même dans les publications savantes.

Un sous-ensemble très important de synapses est capable de former des traces de mémoire au moyen de changements de longue durée dépendant de l'activité dans la force synaptique.

La forme la plus connue de mémoire neurale est un processus appelé potentialisation à long terme (en abrégé LTP), qui opère au niveau des synapses qui utilisent le neurotransmetteur glutamate agissant sur un type spécial de récepteur connu sous le nom de récepteur NMDA.

Le récepteur NMDA a une propriété « associative » : si les deux cellules impliquées dans la synapse sont toutes les deux activées à peu près en même temps, un canal s'ouvre qui permet au calcium de s'écouler dans la cellule cible.

L'entrée de calcium initie une deuxième cascade de messagers qui conduit finalement à une augmentation du nombre de récepteurs du glutamate dans la cellule cible, augmentant ainsi la force effective de la synapse.

Ce changement de force peut durer des semaines ou plus.

Depuis la découverte de la LTP en 1973, de nombreux autres types de traces de mémoire synaptique ont été trouvés, impliquant des augmentations ou des diminutions de la force synaptique qui sont induites par des conditions variables et durent pendant des périodes de temps variables.

Le système de récompense, qui renforce le comportement souhaité par exemple, dépend d'une forme variante de LTP qui est conditionnée par une entrée supplémentaire provenant d'une voie de signalisation de récompense qui utilise la dopamine comme neurotransmetteur.

Toutes ces formes de modifiabilité synaptique, prises collectivement, donnent lieu à une plasticité neuronale, c'est-à-dire à une capacité du système nerveux à s'adapter aux variations de l'environnement.


=== Circuits et systèmes neuronaux ===

La fonction neuronale de base consistant à envoyer des signaux à d'autres cellules comprend la capacité des neurones à échanger des signaux entre eux.

Les réseaux formés par des groupes de neurones interconnectés sont capables d'une grande variété de fonctions, y compris la détection de caractéristiques, la génération de modèles et la synchronisation, et il existe d'innombrables types de traitement de l'information possibles.

Warren McCulloch et Walter Pitts ont montré en 1943 que même les réseaux de neurones artificiels formés à partir d'une abstraction mathématique très simplifiée d'un neurone sont capables de calcul universel.

Historiquement, pendant de nombreuses années, la vision prédominante de la fonction du système nerveux était en tant qu'associateur stimulus-réponse.

Dans cette conception, le traitement neuronal commence par des stimuli qui activent les neurones sensoriels, produisant des signaux qui se propagent à travers des chaînes de connexions dans la moelle épinière et le cerveau, donnant éventuellement lieu à l'activation des motoneurones et ainsi à la contraction musculaire, c'est-à-dire à des réponses manifestes.

Descartes croyait que tous les comportements des animaux, et la plupart des comportements des humains, pouvaient être expliqués en termes de circuits stimulus-réponse, bien qu'il croyait également que les fonctions cognitives supérieures telles que le langage ne pouvaient pas être expliquées de manière mécaniste.

Charles Sherrington, dans son livre influent de 1906 "L'action intégrative du système nerveux", a développé le concept de mécanismes de stimulus-réponse de manière beaucoup plus détaillée, et le comportementalisme, l'école de pensée qui a dominé la psychologie jusqu'au milieu du 20e siècle, a tenté pour expliquer chaque aspect du comportement humain en termes de stimulus-réponse.

Cependant, des études expérimentales d'électrophysiologie, commençant au début du XXe siècle et atteignant une productivité élevée dans les années 1940, ont montré que le système nerveux contient de nombreux mécanismes pour maintenir l'excitabilité cellulaire et générer des modèles d'activité intrinsèquement, sans nécessiter de stimulus externe.

Les neurones se sont avérés capables de produire des séquences régulières de potentiels d'action, ou des séquences de bouffées, même dans un isolement complet.

Lorsque des neurones intrinsèquement actifs sont connectés les uns aux autres dans des circuits complexes, les possibilités de générer des modèles temporels complexes deviennent beaucoup plus étendues.

Une conception moderne considère la fonction du système nerveux en partie en termes de chaînes de stimulus-réponse, et en partie en termes de modèles d'activité générés intrinsèquement - les deux types d'activité interagissent pour générer le répertoire complet du comportement.


==== Réflexes et autres circuits stimulus-réponse ====

Le type le plus simple de circuit neuronal est un arc réflexe, qui commence par une entrée sensorielle et se termine par une sortie motrice, passant par une séquence de neurones connectés en série.

Cela peut être montré dans le «réflexe de retrait» qui fait reculer une main après avoir touché un poêle chaud.

Le circuit commence par des récepteurs sensoriels dans la peau qui sont activés par des niveaux de chaleur nocifs :
un type spécial de structure moléculaire intégré dans la membrane provoque la chaleur pour modifier le champ électrique à travers la membrane.

Si le changement de potentiel électrique est suffisamment important pour dépasser le seuil donné, il évoque un potentiel d'action, qui est transmis le long de l'axone de la cellule réceptrice, dans la moelle épinière.

Là, l'axone établit des contacts synaptiques excitateurs avec d'autres cellules, dont certaines se projettent (envoient une sortie axonale) vers la même région de la moelle épinière, d'autres se projetant dans le cerveau.

L'une des cibles est un ensemble d'interneurones spinaux qui se projettent sur les motoneurones contrôlant les muscles du bras.

Les interneurones excitent les motoneurones, et si l'excitation est suffisamment forte, certains des motoneurones génèrent des potentiels d'action, qui voyagent le long de leurs axones jusqu'au point où ils établissent des contacts synaptiques excitateurs avec les cellules musculaires.

Les signaux excitateurs induisent une contraction des cellules musculaires, ce qui entraîne une modification des angles articulaires du bras, éloignant le bras.

En réalité, ce schéma simple est sujet à de nombreuses complications.

Bien que pour les réflexes les plus simples, il existe de courts chemins neuronaux allant du neurone sensoriel au motoneurone, il existe également d'autres neurones à proximité qui participent au circuit et modulent la réponse.

De plus, il existe des projections du cerveau à la moelle épinière qui sont capables d'améliorer ou d'inhiber le réflexe.

Bien que les réflexes les plus simples puissent être médiés par des circuits situés entièrement dans la moelle épinière, des réponses plus complexes reposent sur le traitement du signal dans le cerveau.

Par exemple, lorsqu'un objet à la périphérie du champ visuel se déplace et qu'une personne regarde vers lui, de nombreuses étapes de traitement du signal sont initiées.

La réponse sensorielle initiale, dans la rétine de l'œil, et la réponse motrice finale, dans les noyaux oculomoteurs du tronc cérébral, ne sont pas si différentes de celles d'un réflexe simple, mais les étapes intermédiaires sont complètement différentes.

Au lieu d'une chaîne de traitement en une ou deux étapes, les signaux visuels traversent peut-être une douzaine d'étapes d'intégration, impliquant le thalamus, le cortex cérébral, les ganglions de la base, le colliculus supérieur, le cervelet et plusieurs noyaux du tronc cérébral.

Ces zones exécutent des fonctions de traitement du signal qui incluent la détection des caractéristiques, l'analyse perceptive, le rappel de la mémoire, la prise de décision et la planification motrice.

La détection de caractéristiques est la capacité d'extraire des informations biologiquement pertinentes à partir de combinaisons de signaux sensoriels.

Dans le système visuel, par exemple, les récepteurs sensoriels de la rétine de l'œil ne sont capables de détecter individuellement que des "points de lumière" dans le monde extérieur.

Les neurones visuels de second niveau reçoivent l'entrée de groupes de récepteurs primaires, les neurones de niveau supérieur reçoivent l'entrée de groupes de neurones de second niveau, et ainsi de suite, formant une hiérarchie d'étapes de traitement.

A chaque étape, les informations importantes sont extraites de l'ensemble de signaux et les informations sans importance sont rejetées.

À la fin du processus, les signaux d'entrée représentant des "points de lumière" ont été transformés en une représentation neuronale des objets du monde environnant et de leurs propriétés.

Le traitement sensoriel le plus sophistiqué se produit à l'intérieur du cerveau, mais l'extraction de caractéristiques complexes a également lieu dans la moelle épinière et dans les organes sensoriels périphériques tels que la rétine.


==== Génération de motifs intrinsèques ====
Bien que les mécanismes de stimulus-réponse soient les plus faciles à comprendre, le système nerveux est également capable de contrôler le corps d'une manière qui ne nécessite pas de stimulus externe, au moyen de rythmes d'activité générés en interne.

En raison de la variété de canaux ioniques sensibles à la tension qui peuvent être intégrés dans la membrane d'un neurone, de nombreux types de neurones sont capables, même isolément, de générer des séquences rythmiques de potentiels d'action, ou des alternances rythmiques entre éclatement à haut débit et quiescence. .

Lorsque des neurones intrinsèquement rythmiques sont connectés les uns aux autres par des synapses excitatrices ou inhibitrices, les réseaux résultants sont capables d'une grande variété de comportements dynamiques, y compris la dynamique des attracteurs, la périodicité et même le chaos.

Un réseau de neurones qui utilise sa structure interne pour générer une sortie structurée dans le temps, sans nécessiter de stimulus structuré dans le temps correspondant, est appelé générateur de motif central.

La génération de modèles internes fonctionne sur une large gamme d'échelles de temps, des millisecondes aux heures ou plus.

L'un des types les plus importants de modèle temporel est la rythmicité circadienne, c'est-à-dire la rythmicité avec une période d'environ 24 heures.

Tous les animaux qui ont été étudiés présentent des fluctuations circadiennes de l'activité neuronale, qui contrôlent les alternances circadiennes de comportement telles que le cycle veille-sommeil.

Des études expérimentales datant des années 1990 ont montré que les rythmes circadiens sont générés par une "horloge génétique" constituée d'un ensemble particulier de gènes dont le niveau d'expression augmente et diminue au cours de la journée.

Des animaux aussi divers que les insectes et les vertébrés partagent un système d'horloge génétique similaire.

L'horloge circadienne est influencée par la lumière mais continue de fonctionner même lorsque les niveaux de lumière sont maintenus constants et qu'aucun autre signal d'heure externe n'est disponible.

Les gènes de l'horloge sont exprimés dans de nombreuses parties du système nerveux ainsi que dans de nombreux organes périphériques, mais chez les mammifères, toutes ces "horloges tissulaires" sont maintenues en synchronisation par des signaux qui émanent d'un maître chronométreur dans une minuscule partie du cerveau appelée le noyau suprachiasmatique.


=== Neurones miroirs ===

Un neurone miroir est un neurone qui se déclenche à la fois lorsqu'un animal agit et lorsque l'animal observe la même action effectuée par un autre.

Ainsi, le neurone « reflète » le comportement de l'autre, comme si l'observateur agissait lui-même.

De tels neurones ont été directement observés chez des espèces de primates.

Il a été démontré que les oiseaux ont des comportements de résonance imitatifs et des preuves neurologiques suggèrent la présence d'une certaine forme de système de miroir.

Chez l'homme, une activité cérébrale compatible avec celle des neurones miroirs a été trouvée dans le cortex prémoteur, l'aire motrice supplémentaire, le cortex somatosensoriel primaire et le cortex pariétal inférieur.

La fonction du système de miroir fait l'objet de nombreuses spéculations.

De nombreux chercheurs en neurosciences cognitives et en psychologie cognitive considèrent que ce système fournit le mécanisme physiologique du couplage perception/action (voir la théorie commune du codage).

Ils soutiennent que les neurones miroirs peuvent être importants pour comprendre les actions des autres et pour apprendre de nouvelles compétences par imitation.

Certains chercheurs spéculent également que les systèmes miroirs peuvent simuler des actions observées et contribuer ainsi à la théorie des compétences de l'esprit, tandis que d'autres associent les neurones miroirs aux capacités linguistiques.

Cependant, à ce jour, aucun modèle neuronal ou informatique largement accepté n'a été proposé pour décrire comment l'activité des neurones miroirs soutient les fonctions cognitives telles que l'imitation.

Certains neuroscientifiques préviennent que les affirmations concernant le rôle des neurones miroirs ne sont pas étayées par des recherches adéquates.


== Développement ==

Chez les vertébrés, les repères du développement neural embryonnaire comprennent la naissance et la différenciation des neurones à partir des précurseurs des cellules souches, la migration des neurones immatures de leur lieu de naissance dans l'embryon vers leur position finale, la croissance des axones des neurones et le guidage du cône de croissance mobile à travers le l'embryon vers les partenaires postsynaptiques, la génération de synapses entre ces axones et leurs partenaires postsynaptiques, et enfin les changements tout au long de la vie dans les synapses qui sont censés sous-tendre l'apprentissage et la mémoire.

Tous les animaux bilatéraux à un stade précoce de développement forment une gastrula, qui est polarisée, avec une extrémité appelée pôle animal et l'autre pôle végétal.

La gastrula a la forme d'un disque avec trois couches de cellules, une couche interne appelée l'endoderme, qui donne naissance à la muqueuse de la plupart des organes internes, une couche intermédiaire appelée le mésoderme, qui donne naissance aux os et aux muscles, et une couche externe appelée ectoderme, qui donne naissance à la peau et au système nerveux.

Chez les vertébrés, le premier signe du système nerveux est l'apparition d'une fine bande de cellules le long du centre du dos, appelée plaque neurale.

La partie interne de la plaque neurale (le long de la ligne médiane) est destinée à devenir le système nerveux central (SNC), la partie externe le système nerveux périphérique (SNP).

Au fur et à mesure du développement, un pli appelé sillon neural apparaît le long de la ligne médiane.

Ce pli s'approfondit, puis se referme en haut.

À ce stade, le futur SNC apparaît comme une structure cylindrique appelée tube neural, tandis que le futur SNP apparaît comme deux bandes de tissu appelées crête neurale, s'étendant dans le sens de la longueur au-dessus du tube neural.

La séquence d'étapes de la plaque neurale au tube neural et à la crête neurale est connue sous le nom de neurulation.

Au début du XXe siècle, une série d'expériences célèbres de Hans Spemann et Hilde Mangold a montré que la formation de tissu nerveux est "induite" par des signaux provenant d'un groupe de cellules mésodermiques appelées région organisatrice.

Pendant des décennies, cependant, la nature de l'induction neurale a vaincu toutes les tentatives pour la comprendre, jusqu'à ce qu'elle soit finalement résolue par des approches génétiques dans les années 1990.

L'induction du tissu neural nécessite l'inhibition du gène d'une protéine dite morphogénétique osseuse, ou BMP.

Plus précisément, la protéine BMP4 semble être impliquée.

Deux protéines appelées Noggin et Chordin, toutes deux sécrétées par le mésoderme, sont capables d'inhiber BMP4 et d'induire ainsi l'ectoderme à se transformer en tissu neural.

Il semble qu'un mécanisme moléculaire similaire soit impliqué pour des types d'animaux très disparates, y compris les arthropodes ainsi que les vertébrés.

Chez certains animaux, cependant, un autre type de molécule appelé facteur de croissance des fibroblastes ou FGF peut également jouer un rôle important dans l'induction.

L'induction des tissus nerveux provoque la formation de cellules précurseurs neurales, appelées neuroblastes.

Chez la drosophile, les neuroblastes se divisent de manière asymétrique, de sorte qu'un produit est une "cellule mère ganglionnaire" (GMC) et l'autre est un neuroblaste.

Un GMC se divise une fois pour donner naissance soit à une paire de neurones, soit à une paire de cellules gliales.

Au total, un neuroblaste est capable de générer un nombre indéfini de neurones ou cellules gliales.

Comme le montre une étude de 2008, un facteur commun à tous les organismes bilatéraux (y compris les humains) est une famille de molécules de signalisation sécrétées appelées neurotrophines qui régulent la croissance et la survie des neurones.

Zhu et al. identifié DNT1, la première neurotrophine trouvée chez les mouches.

DNT1 partage une similitude structurelle avec toutes les neurotrophines connues et est un facteur clé dans le sort des neurones chez la drosophile.

Étant donné que les neurotrophines ont maintenant été identifiées à la fois chez les vertébrés et les invertébrés, ces preuves suggèrent que les neurotrophines étaient présentes chez un ancêtre commun aux organismes bilatéraux et peuvent représenter un mécanisme commun pour la formation du système nerveux.


== Pathologie ==

Le système nerveux central est protégé par d'importantes barrières physiques et chimiques.

Physiquement, le cerveau et la moelle épinière sont entourés de membranes méningées résistantes et enfermés dans les os du crâne et de la colonne vertébrale, qui se combinent pour former un solide bouclier physique.

Chimiquement, le cerveau et la moelle épinière sont isolés par la barrière hémato-encéphalique, qui empêche la plupart des types de produits chimiques de passer de la circulation sanguine à l'intérieur du SNC.

Ces protections rendent le SNC moins vulnérable à bien des égards que le SNP ; le revers de la médaille, cependant, est que les dommages au SNC ont tendance à avoir des conséquences plus graves.

Bien que les nerfs aient tendance à se trouver profondément sous la peau, sauf à quelques endroits comme le nerf cubital près de l'articulation du coude, ils sont encore relativement exposés aux dommages physiques, qui peuvent provoquer des douleurs, une perte de sensation ou une perte de contrôle musculaire.

Les dommages aux nerfs peuvent également être causés par un gonflement ou des ecchymoses aux endroits où un nerf traverse un canal osseux serré, comme cela se produit dans le syndrome du canal carpien.

Si un nerf est complètement sectionné, il se régénérera souvent, mais pour les nerfs longs, ce processus peut prendre des mois.

En plus des dommages physiques, la neuropathie périphérique peut être causée par de nombreux autres problèmes médicaux, y compris des conditions génétiques, des conditions métaboliques telles que le diabète, des conditions inflammatoires telles que le syndrome de Guillain-Barré, une carence en vitamines, des maladies infectieuses telles que la lèpre ou le zona, ou un empoisonnement par toxines telles que les métaux lourds.

De nombreux cas n'ont pas de cause identifiable et sont qualifiés d'idiopathiques.

Il est également possible que les nerfs perdent temporairement leur fonction, entraînant un engourdissement sous forme de raideur - les causes courantes incluent la pression mécanique, une chute de température ou des interactions chimiques avec des anesthésiques locaux tels que la lidocaïne.

Les dommages physiques à la moelle épinière peuvent entraîner une perte de sensation ou de mouvement.

Si une blessure à la colonne vertébrale ne produit rien de pire qu'un gonflement, les symptômes peuvent être transitoires, mais si les fibres nerveuses de la colonne vertébrale sont réellement détruites, la perte de fonction est généralement permanente.

Des études expérimentales ont montré que les fibres nerveuses spinales tentent de repousser de la même manière que les fibres nerveuses, mais dans la moelle épinière, la destruction des tissus produit généralement des tissus cicatriciels qui ne peuvent pas être pénétrés par les nerfs qui repoussent.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nervous_system
