

OCCLUSION (DENTISTRY)


Occlusion, in a dental context, means simply the contact between teeth. 

More technically, it is the relationship between the maxillary (upper) and mandibular (lower) teeth when they approach each other, as occurs during chewing or at rest.
Static occlusion refers to contact between teeth when the jaw is closed and stationary, while dynamic occlusion refers to occlusal contacts made when the jaw is moving.The masticatory system also involves the periodontium, the TMJ (and other skeletal components) and the neuromusculature, therefore the tooth contacts should not be looked at in isolation, but in relation to the overall masticatory system..


== Anatomy of Masticatory System ==


One cannot fully understand occlusion without an in depth understanding of the anatomy including that of the teeth, TMJ, musculature surrounding this and the skeletal components.
The Dentition and Surrounding Structures
The human dentition consists of 32 permanent teeth and these are distributed between the alveolar bone of the maxillary and mandibular arch. 

Teeth consist of two parts: the crown, which is visible in the mouth and lies above the gingival soft tissue and the roots, which are below the level of the gingiva and in the alveolar bone.
The periodontal ligament unites the cementum on the outside of the root and the alveolar bone. 

This bundle of connective tissue fibres is vital in dissipating forces that are applied to the underlying bone during the contact of teeth in function.The teeth are highly specialised and different teeth are involved in specific functions. 

The masticatory system is largely influenced by these intra and inter-arch relationships and a wider understanding of the anatomy can greatly benefit those who want to understand occlusion.Skeletal Components
The maxilla forms a crucial aspect of the upper facial skeleton. 

Two irregularly shaped bones fuse at the intermaxillary suture during development forming the upper jaw. 

This forms the palate of the oral cavity and also supports the alveolar ridges that hold the upper teeth in place. 

The lower facial skeleton on the other hand, is formed of the mandible, a U shaped bone, which supports the lower teeth and also forms part of the TMJ. 

The mandibular condyle and the squamous portion of the temporal bone, at the base of the cranium articulate with one another.TMJ
The TMJ is formed from the temporal bone of the cranium, specifically the glenoid fossa and articular tubercle and the condyle of the mandible, with a fibrocartilaginous disc lying in between. 

It is classified as a ginglymoarthrodial joint and can perform a range of gliding and hinge type movements. 

The disc, which lies in between is composed of dense fibrous tissue and is predominantly avascular and lacking nerves.Muscles
There are various muscles that contribute to occlusion of the teeth including the muscles of mastication and other accessory muscles. 

The temporalis, masseter, medial and lateral pterygoids are the muscles of mastication and these contribute to the elevation, depression, protrusion and retraction of the mandible. 

The anterior and posterior belly of the digastric are also involved in the depression of the mandible and elevation of the hyoid bone and are therefore relevant to the masticatory system.Ligaments
There are various ligaments associated with the TMJ and these limit and restrict border movements by acting as passive restraining devices. 

They do not contribute to joint function, rather exert a protective role. 

The key ligaments relevant to the TMJ are:

The temporomandibular ligament
The medial and lateral discal ligaments
The sphenomandibular ligament
The stylomandibular ligament


== Development of occlusion ==


As the primary (baby) teeth begin to erupt at 6 months of age, the maxillary and mandibular teeth aim to occlude with one another. 

The erupting teeth are moulded into position by the tongue, the cheeks and lips during development. 

Upper and lower primary teeth should be correctly occluding and aligned after 2 years whilst they are continuing to develop, with full root development complete at 3 years of age.
Around a year after development of the teeth is complete, the jaws continue to grow which results in spacing between some of the teeth (diastema). 

This effect is greatest in the anterior (front) teeth and can be seen from around age 4 – 5 years. 

This spacing is important as it allows space for the permanent (adult) teeth to erupt into the correct occlusion, and without this spacing there is likely to be crowding of the permanent dentition.
In order to fully understand the development of occlusion and malocclusion, it is important to understand the premolar dynamics in the mixed dentition stage. 

The mixed dentition stage is when both primary and permanent teeth are present. 

The permanent premolars erupt ~9–12 years of age, replacing the primary molars. 

The erupting premolars are smaller than the teeth they are replacing and this difference in space between the primary molars and their successors (1.5mm for maxillary, 2.5mm for mandibular), termed Leeway Space. 

This allows the permanent molars to drift mesially into the spaces and develop a Class I occlusion.


== Incisor and molar classification ==

Classification of occlusion and malocclusion plays an important role in diagnosis and treatment planning in orthodontics. 

In order to describe the relationship of the maxillary molars to the mandibular molars, the Angle’s classification of malocclusion has commonly been used for many years. 

This system has also been adapted in an attempt to classify the relationship between the incisors of the two arches.Incisor Relationship
When describing the relationship between maxillary and mandibular incisors, the following categories make up Angle's incisal relationship classification:

Class I: Mandibular incisors contact the maxillary incisors in the middle third or on the cingulum of the palatal surface
Class II: Mandibular incisors contact the maxillary incisors on the palatal surface, in the gingival third or posterior to the cingulum. 

This class may be further subdivided into division I and division II:
Division I includes maxillary incisors which are proclined (90%) and these individuals have a greater horizontal overlap - this is termed overjet
Division II includes those with retroclined (10%) incisors, which leads to an increase in vertical overlap - this is termed overbite
Class III: Mandibular incisors occlude with the maxillary incisors on the palatal surface, in the incisal third specifically or anterior to the cingulum
In some cases the overjet is reversed (<0mm) and the mandibular incisors lie anterior to the maxillary incisorsMolar Relationship

When discussing the occlusion of the posterior teeth, the classification refers to the first molars and may be divided into three categories:

Class I: The mandibular first molar occludes mesially to the maxillary first molar, with the mesiobuccal cusp of maxillary first molar occluding in the buccal groove of mandibular first molar
Class II: The mesiobuccal cusp of the maxillary first molar occludes anterior to the buccal groove of the mandibular first molar
Class III: If the mesiobuccal cusp of the maxillary first molar occludes posterior to the buccal groove of the mandibular first molarAny deviation from the normal relation of teeth (Class I) is considered a malocclusion.
Class I relationships are thought to be “ideal”, however this classification does not take into consideration the positions of the two TMJ’s . 

Class II and III molar and incisor relationships are thought to be forms of malocclusion, however not all of these are severe enough to require orthodontic treatment. 

The Index of Orthodontic Treatment Need is a system that attempts to rank malocclusions in terms of significance of various occlusal traits and perceived aesthetic impairment. 

The index identifies those who would benefit most from orthodontic treatment and onward referral to an orthodontist.


== Occlusal terminology ==


Intercuspal Position (ICP), also known as Habitual Bite, Habitual Position or Bite of Convenience , is defined at the position where the maxillary and mandibular teeth fit together in maximum interdigitation. 

This position is usually the most easily recorded and is almost always the occlusion the patient closes into when they are asked to 'bite together'. 

This is the occlusion that the patient is accustomed to, hence sometimes termed the Habitual Bite.Centric relation (CR) describes a reproducible jaw relationship (between the mandible and maxilla) and is independent of tooth contact. 

This is the position in which the mandibular condyles are located in the fossae in an antero-superior position against the posterior slope of the articular eminence. 

It is said that in CR, the muscles are in their most relaxed and least stressed state. 

This position is not influenced by muscle memory, but rather by the ligament which suspend the condyles within the fossa. 

Therefore it is the position that dentists use to create new occlusal relationships as for example, while making maxillary and mandibular complete dentures.
When the mandible is in this retruded position, it opens and closes on an arc of curvature around an imaginary axis drawn through the centre of the head of both condyles. 

This imaginary axis is termed the terminal hinge axis. 

The first tooth contact that occurs when the mandible closes in the terminal hinge axis position, is termed Retruded Contact Position (RCP). 

RCP can be reproduced within 0.08mm of accuracy due to the non-elastic TMJ capsule and restriction by the capsular ligaments, thus it can be considered a ‘border movement’ in Posselt’s envelope.

Centric Occlusion (CO) is a confusing term, and is often incorrectly used synonymously with RCP. 

Both terms are used to define a position where the condyles are in CR, however RCP describes the initial tooth contact on closure, however this may be an interference contact. 

On the other hand, CO refers to the occlusion where the teeth are in maximum intercuspation in CR. 

Posselt (1952) determined that only in 10% of natural tooth and jaw relationships does ICP = CO (maximum intercuspation in CR) and so the term RCP is more appropriate when discussing the occlusion that occurs when the condyles are in their retruded position. 

CO is a term that is more relevant to complete denture application or where multiple fixed unit prosthodontics are provided, where the occlusion is arranged so that when the mandible is in CR, the teeth are interdigitating.


=== Posselt's Envelope of Border Movements ===

Posselt’s Envelope of Border Movement (often referred to as the 'border movements of the mandible') is a schematic diagram of the maximum jaw movement in three planes (sagittal, horizontal and frontal). 

This encompasses all movements away from RCP, and includes:

Protrusive movements: When the mandible moves forward from centric relation, this is considered as protrusion. 

In Class I occlusion, the predominant contacts occur on the incisal and labial surfaces of the mandibular incisors and the incisal edges and palatal fossa areas of the maxillary incisors.
Lateral movements: When the mandible moves to the left or right, the mandibular posterior teeth move laterally across the opposing teeth. 

For example, when the mandible moves to the right, the right mandibular teeth move laterally across their opponents and this is termed the working side of the mandible (the side towards which the mandible is moving). 

In contrast, the left mandibular teeth move medially, downwards and anteriorly across their opposing posteriors and this is called the non-working side (the side to which the mandible is moving away from).
Retrusive movements: This is when the mandible moves posteriorly from ICP. 

Compared with protrusive and lateral movements, retrusive movements are generally considerably smaller with a range of movement around 1 or 2 mm due to restriction by the ligamentous structures.


== Guidance, natural teeth and function ==


Mandibular movements are guided by two different systems; the ‘posterior’ guidance system and the ‘anterior’ guidance system


=== Posterior guidance system ===

Posterior guidance refers to TMJ articulations and associated structures . 

It is the condyles within the fossa and the associated muscles and ligaments together with its neuromuscular link that determines mandibular movements. 

Lateral, protrusive and repressive excursions of the mandible are guided by the posterior system.
Lateral excursions
It is important to define the movement of the condyles in lateral excursions:
- Working condyle: This is the condyle closest to the side which the mandible is moving (e.g. if the mandible moves laterally to the right, the right condyle is the working side condyle)
- Non-working condyle: This is the side to which the mandible is moving away from (e.g. if the mandible moves laterally to the right, the left condyle is the non-working side condyle)

The maximum lateral movement of the mandible to the left or right side is approximately 10-12mm
The primary movement in lateral excursions occurs on the non-working side (NWS) condyle (also called the balancing or orbiting condyle). 

The NWS condylar head moves in a downward, forward and medial direction. 

This movement is defined against two separate planes, the vertical and horizontal plane
Bennet Angle : the angle of medial movement on NWS condyle relative to the vertical plane
Condylar Angle : the angle of downwards movement of the NWS condyle relative to the horizontal plane
The working side (WS) condyle (also called the rotating condyle) undergoes an immediate, non-progressive lateral shift. 

This movement is called the Bennet movement (however this may be confused with the Bennet Angle), so this is more commonly referred to as an Immediate Side Shift. 

The condyle is seen to rotate with a slight lateral shift in the direction of movementProtrusive movements

The condylar heads predominantly translate forwards and downwards along the distal face of the articular face in the glenoid fossa. 

Protrusive movements are restricted by the ligamentous structures to a maximum of ~8-11mm (depending on skull morphology and size of subject)Retrusive movements

As for protrusion, this movement is restricted by the ligamentous structures and the maximum retrusive limit is usually ~1mm however 2-3mm is rarely seen in some patients.We can not influence the posterior guidance system through dental restorative treatment.


=== Anterior guidance system ===

Anterior guidance refers to the influence of contacting teeth on the paths of mandibular movements. 

The tooth contacts may be anterior, posterior tooth contacts or both - however termed anterior guidance as these contacts are still anterior to the TMJ. 

This can be further classified into:

Canine Guidance

Dynamic occlusion that occurs on the canines (on the working side) during lateral excursions of the mandible.
These teeth are best suited to accept horizontal forces in eccentric movements due to their long roots and good crown/root ratio
It is easy for the dental technicians during wax up and construction of restoration to provide thisGroup Function

Multiple contacts between the maxillary and mandibular teeth in lateral movements on the WS whereby simultaneous contact of several teeth acts as a group to distribute occlusal forces.
It is preferable for this guidance to be as anterior as possible e.g. premolars rather than molars, as there is increased force applied when the contacts are closer to the TMJ.Incisal Guidance

The influence of the contacting surfaces of the mandibular and maxillary incisors on mandibular movements is characterised by the overbite and overjet of the maxillary incisors.In restorative treatment, it is possible to manipulate and design anterior guidance systems that is in harmony with the masticatory system.


=== Clinical relevance of guidance ===

Tooth contact involved in guidance is particularly important as these occlude a vast number of times per day and so need to be able to resist both heavy and non-axial occlusal loads. 

When restoring the anterior guidance system should be compatible with the posterior guidance system. 

This means that excessive strain should not be applied on the posterior guidance system which is limited by the ligamemtous structures.
Upon restoration of the occlusal surfaces of teeth, it is likely to change the occlusion and therefore guidance systems. 

It is unlikely the TMJ will adapt to these changes in occlusion, but rather the teeth adapt to the new occlusion through tooth wear, tooth movement or fracture. 

For this reason, it is important to consider these guidance concepts when providing restorations. 

Guidance should also be considered before restorations as it should not be expected for a heavily restored tooth to provide guidance alone as this leaves the tooth vulnerable to fracture during function.


== Organisation of the occlusion ==

The arrangement of teeth in function is important and over the years three recognised concepts have been developed to describe how teeth should and should not contact:

Bilateral balanced occlusion
Unilateral balanced occlusion
Mutually protected occlusion


=== Bilateral balanced occlusion ===

This concept is based on the curve of Spee and curve of Wilson and is becoming outdated for the restored natural dentition. 

However, it still finds application in removable prosthodontics. 

This scheme involves contacts on as many teeth as possible (both on the working and non-working side) in all excursive movements of the mandible. 

This is especially important in the case of complete denture provision as contacting teeth on the NWS help stabilise the denture bases in mandibular movement. 

It was believed in the 1930s that this arrangement was ideal for the natural dentition when providing full occlusal reconstruction in order to distribute the stresses. 

However, it was found that the lateral forces placed on the restored posterior teeth produced damaging effects on the restorations.


=== Unilateral balanced occlusion ===

On the other hand, unilateral balanced occlusion is a widely used tooth arrangement that is used in current dentistry and is commonly known as group function. 

This concept is based on the observation that NWS contacts were destructive and therefore the teeth on the NWS should be free of any eccentric contacts, and instead the contacts should be distributed on the WS thus sharing the occlusal load. 

Group function is used when canine guidance cannot be achieved and also in the Pankey-Mann Schuyler (PMS) approach where it was deemed better than canine guidance as it distributed the loading on the WS better.


=== Mutually protected occlusion ===


The Journal of Prosthetic Dentistry (2017) defines mutually protected occlusion as ‘an occlusal scheme in which the posterior teeth prevent excessive contact of the anterior teeth in maximal intercuspal position, and the anterior teeth disengage the posterior teeth in all mandibular excursive movements’In eccentric movements, damaging forces are applied to the posterior teeth and the anteriors are best suited to receiving these. 

Therefore during protrusive movements, the contact or guidance of the anteriors should be adequate to disocclude and protect the posterior teeth.
In contrast, the posterior teeth are more suited to accept the forces that are applied during closure of the mandible. 

This is because the posteriors are positioned so the forces are applied directly along the long axis of the tooth and are able to dissipate them efficiently whereas the anteriors cannot accept these heavy forces as well due to their labial positioning and angulation. 

It is therefore accepted that the posterior teeth should have heavier contacts than the anteriors in ICP and act as a stop for vertical closure.
Additionally, in lateral excursions either canine or group function should act to disclude the posterior teeth on the WS because, as described above, the anterior teeth are best suited to dissipate damaging horizontal forces, as well as the contact being further away from the TMJ, so the forces created are decreased in strength. 

Group function or canine guidance should also provide disocclusion of the teeth on the NWS as the amount and direction of force applied to the TMJ and teeth can be destructive due to an increase in muscle activity. 

An absence of NWS contacts also allows smooth movement of the working side condyle as a contact may disengage the guidance of the condyle and therefore cause an unstable mandibular relationship.


== Deflective contacts and interferences ==

A deflective contact is a contact that diverts the mandible from its intended movement. 

An example of this is when the mandible is deflected into ICP by the RCP-ICP slide, which path is determined by the deflective tooth contacts. 

This is often involved in function (e.g. chewing), however in some cases these deflective contacts can be damaging and may lead to pain around the tooth (often associated with bruxism). 

However, some patients may be totally unaware of similar deflective contacts suggesting that it is the patient's adaptability rather than the contact that may influence the patient's presentation.
An occlusal interference is any tooth contact that prevents, or hinders harmonious mandibular movement (an undesirable tooth contact).

The occlusal interferences may be classified as follows:
Working Side Interference: When there is a heavy or early tooth between the maxillary and mandibular teeth on the side that the mandible is moving towards, and this contact may or may not discludes the anteriors.
Non-Working Side Interference: An occlusal contact on the side the mandible is moving away from that prevents harmonious movement of the mandible. 

These have the potential to be more destructive in comparison to WS interferences due to the obliquely directed forces.
Protrusive Interference: Contacts that occur between the distal aspects of the maxillary posterior teeth and the mesial aspect of the mandibular posterior teeth. 

These interferences are potentially very damaging and may even cause an inability to incise properly due to the close proximity of the interference to the muscle.When the dentist is providing restorations, it is important that these do not create an interference, otherwise the restoration will receive increased loading. 

As for deflective contacts, interferences may also be associated with parafunction such as bruxism (although evidence is weak) and may adversely affect the distribution of heavy occlusal forces. 

Interferences may also cause pain in the masticatory muscles due to altering their activity, however there is large controversy and debate as to whether there is a relationship between occlusion and temporomandibular disorders. 

Almost all dentate individuals have occlusal interferences, and therefore they are not seen to be an etiology of all TMDs. 

When there is an acute change or significant instability in the occlusal condition and subsequently represents an etiological factor for a TMD, occlusal treatment is required.
Occlusal adjustment (removal of occlusal interferences) may be carried out in order to obtain a stable occlusal relationship and is achieved by selectively grinding the occlusal interferences or through wear of a hard occlusal splint to ensure true retruded relationship is established.


== 'Ideal' occlusion ==

When there is an absence of symptoms and the masticatory system is functioning efficiently, the occlusion is considered normal or physiological. 

It is understood that no such ‘ideal’ occlusion exists for everyone, but rather each individual has their own 'ideal occlusion'. 

This is not focused on any specific occlusal configuration but rather occurs when the person’s occlusion is in harmony with the rest of the stomatognathic system (TMJ, teeth and supporting structures, and the neuromuscular elements).
However, an optimal functional occlusion is important to consider when providing restorations as this helps to understand what is trying to be achieved. 

It is defined in established texts as:
1. 

Centric occlusion and centric relation being in harmony (CO=CR)

There should be even and simultaneous contacts of all posterior teeth when the mouth is closed and the condyles are lying in their most superior and anterior position, resting against the posterior slope of the articular eminence (CR)
Note that the anterior teeth should also be occluding, but the contact should be lighter than the posterior contacts2. 

Freedom in CO

This means the mandible is still able to move slightly in the sagittal and horizontal plane in centric occlusion
This is also part of the PMS theory of occlusion mentioned earlier in organisation of occlusion.3. 

Immediate and lasting posterior disocclusion upon mandibular movement

During lateral excursive movements, the working side contacts act to disclude the non-working side immediately
During protrusive movements, the anterior tooth contact and guidance acts to disclude the posterior teeth immediately4. 

Canine guidance is considered the best anterior guidance system

This is due to their ability to accept horizontal forces as they have the longest and largest roots as well as a desirable crown/root ratio
They are also surrounded by dense compact bone unlike the posterior teeth which makes them more suited to tolerate horizontal forces
Canine guidance is also easier to manage restoratively than group function
However, if the patient’s canines are not positioned correctly for canine guidance, group function (involving the canines and premolars) is the most favourable alternativeIt is necessary to understand the concepts that influence the function and health of the masticatory system in order to prevent, minimise or eliminate any breakdown or trauma to the TMJs or teeth.


== Patient adaptability ==

There are various factors that play a role in the adaptive capability of a patient with regards to changes in occlusion. 

Factors such as the central nervous system and the mechanoreceptors in the periodontium, mucosa and dentition are all of importance here. 

It is in fact, the somatosensory input from these sources that determines whether an individual is able to adapt to changes in the occlusion, opposed to the occlusal scheme itself. 

Failure of adaptation to minor changes in the occlusion can occur, although rare. 

It is thought that patients who are increasingly vigilant to any changes in the oral environment are less likely to adapt to any occlusal changes. 

Psychological and emotional stress can also contribute to the patient's ability to adapt as these factors have an impact on the central nervous system.


== Occlusal examination ==

In individuals with unexplained pain, fracture, drifting, mobility and tooth wear, a full occlusal examination is vital. 

Similarly when complex restorative work is planned it is also essential to identify whether any occlusal changes are required prior to the provision of definitive restoration In some people even minor discrepancies in the occlusion can lead to symptoms involving the TMJ or acute orofacial pain so it is important to identify and eradicate this cause.

Instruments Required

Miller’s forceps
Articulating paper
Shimstock
Mosquito forceps
Mirror
Dental probe
Willis gaugeThe examination should be carried out using a systematic approach whilst assessing the following:

Facial appearance
Musculature
TMJ
Each arch individually
Intercuspal Position (ICP)
Retruded Contact Position (RCP)
RCP-ICP slide
Lateral excursions
Protrusion
OVD


=== Extra-oral examination ===

1) Facial AppearanceThe facial symmetry of the patient should be observed.
The skeletal relationship of the patient should then be identified and noted.

Class I: The maxilla and mandible are in harmony and coincide
Class II: The maxilla lies anterior to the mandible and is retrognathic
Class III: The maxilla lies posterior to the mandible and is prognathicThe facial height of the patient should be considered and it should be noted where there may have been a loss.
2) Muscles
Begin by simply palpating the muscles concerned with the occlusion of the teeth. 

These muscles include the muscles of mastication and other muscles within the head and neck area, such as the supra-hyoid muscles. 

It is best to palpate the muscles simultaneously and bilaterally. 

The temporalis, masseter, medial and lateral pterygoids, geniohyoid, mylohyoid and digastric muscles alongside the trapezius, posterior cervical muscles, occipitalis muscle and the sternocleidomastoid should all be checked for any signs of wasting or tenderness. 

Temporomandibular dysfunction commonly presents with muscular tenderness, but pain or palpable soreness associated with the muscles can also be linked to parafunctional activity.
3) TMJ
TMJ disorders can be detected through occlusal examination. 

Ask the patient to open and close whilst placing two fingers over the space of the TMJ. 

Opening of less than 35mm in the mandible is considered to be restricted and such restriction may be associated with intra-capsular changes within the joint. 

Following this, ask the patient to move their jaw to the right and following this, to the left. 

Note any clicking, crepitus, pain or deviation.


=== Intra-oral examination ===

4) Maxillary / Mandibular Arch
Assess each arch and identify whether there are any signs of occlusal disharmony, overloading, tooth migration, wear, craze lines, cracking or mobility (not due to periodontal causes). 

Abfraction, faceting and possible vertical enamel fracture lesions should also be noted if present.5) Contacts in ICP
Begin by assessing the incisor and molar relationship as described above. 

Similarly examine the overbite and overjet. 

An overbite of 3-5mm and an overjet of 2-3mms are considered to be within the range of normal.To look at the ICP, articulating paper should be placed on the occlusal surface and the patient asked to bite together, which will mark their occlusal contacts. 

It is best to check these whilst the teeth are dry.

During ICP, most opposing teeth should be contacting
Close examination of these contacts marked by the articulating paper help to identify the nature of the tooth contacts
Good stable contacts often appear as small and not very prominent markings when articulating paper is used and there are multiple contacts on each tooth
Broad and rubbing contacts identified in ICP may be associated with disturbances in function and may indicate occlusal instability
These contacts can be verified using Shimstock (a 12.5μm thick mylar strip) and the stability of the contacts can be checked
The operator should pull the Shimstock through the teeth, whilst the patient is biting together
This should be carried out for each set of teeth and will highlight if there is adequate contact to hold the Shimstock
This material is appropriate as it is thinner and will eliminate any false contacts that may occur with even thin articulating papers that are roughly 20μm thick
One is also able to pull shim stock through when patients are biting together unlike other articulating paper, which will tear6) RCP
The patient may be guided into CR using one of the follow methods;

Bimanual manipulation- manipulating the patient's condyles so they are in CR
The operator should lightly rest their fingers along the inferior border of the mandible and their thumbs should lie lightly on the anterior aspect of the chin
When the patient is relaxed place light downward pressure on the chin and light upward pressure under the angle of the mandible
Deprogramme the jaw by guiding the opening and closing of the jaw and once the patient is relaxed asked them to close gently and stop when they feel teeth first contacting
Chin point guidance- one hand is used to apply pressure to the chin guiding the chin posteriorly with some forceIn some patients it may be difficult to guide the mandible into CR, for example in those with muscle tension, muscle splinting, occlusal disharmony or parafunctional habit. 

For these patients a Lucia Jig or deprogramming appliance can be constructed at chair-side.
Mark RCP tooth contacts using articulating paper, note the teeth which are contacting and identify whether this RCP position is causing problems related to the occlusion. 

For example if there is a heavy contact or interference in RCP this may be the cause of occlusal disturbance. 

It is important to be able to guide the patient into RCP, as a registration may need to be taken in this position particularly if the occlusion is being reorganised, the OVD is being changed or even just for diagnostic and treatment planning purposes.
7) RCP-ICP Slide
The patient should be supine and relaxed. 

They should be placed into RCP by the operator and then asked to bite together “normally”, this is moving them from RCP into their position of maximum intercuspation (ICP). 

Ask the patient to feel the slide and identify whether this is small or large. 

The slide should be smooth and the direction should be recorded. 

The operator should evaluate from both the side of the patient and the front of the patient, how far the mandible travels both forward and laterally (however this is difficult and it may be easier to observe by mounting casts onto an articulator). 

This can be done by observing the maxillary and mandibular incisors during the slide. 

The RCP-ICP slide for most dentate patients tends to be roughly 1–2 mm in an anterior and upward direction. 

A deflective RCP-ICP slide, can have some relation to an anterior thrust. 

An anterior thrust, which is likely to be associated with the anterior teeth or other teeth involved in guidance such as canine teeth, often causes the teeth to exhibit fremitus.
8) Protrusive Movements
The patient is asked to move their mandible forward from ICP. 

This is commonly around a distance of 8-10mm and would normally be until the lower incisors slide anterior to the incisal edges of the maxillary anteriors. 

Observe the contacts during this movement. 

Mark the contacts using coloured articulating paper alongside the ICP contacts, which should be in a different colour - any teeth providing guidance and any interferences should be noted.9) Lateral Excursions
The patient is also asked to move their lower jaw to one side. 

Lateral movements should be measured and measurements of 12mm are thought to be normal. 

Both working side and non-working side should be observed during this movement. 

Record any teeth that are providing guidance during this movement and any interferences that are present (and the location of these). 

Smooth and unbroken contacts should be identified when these excursive movements are recorded10) OVD
If occlusal wear can be seen, a Willis gauge is used to measure the occlusal-vertical dimension and the resting vertical dimension of an individual.
Take a measurement by placing two reference points on the patients face, one under the nose (usually the columella) and one under the chin. 

Take one measurement whilst the patient is resting (teeth should not be contacting) and one with the patient biting together i.e. in ICP and take this measurement away from the resting measurement to give the freeway space. 

The normal freeway space is usually 2-4mm.Patients with considerable tooth wear may have lost occlusal vertical dimension (OVD). 

When restoring the dentition, it is important to be aware of the exact OVD the patient has and by how much you may be increasing this. 

Patient’s may not be able to adapt to a large increase in OVD and therefore this may have to be done in phases.


=== Summary ===



== Clinical applications of occlusion ==

Occlusion is a fundamental concept in dentistry yet it commonly overlooked as it perceived as being not important or too difficult to teach and understand. 

Clinicians should have a sound understanding of the principles regarding occlusal harmony in order to be able to recognise and treat common problems associated with occlusal disharmony. 

Some of the advantages associated with a working knowledge of these include:
Improved patient comfort: for example, some people experience pain or sensitivity after the placement of a new restoration due to occlusal overload or an interference which possibly could be avoided should the practitioner consider these at time of placement
Increased occlusal stability: teeth are less likely to drift , occlusal contacts are likely to be maintained etc.
Increased success of restorations: excessive wear, fractures, cracks are less commonly observed where there is an ideal occlusion
Better aesthetics: when the anterior teeth conform to ideal occlusal function and stability, the best aesthetic result is achieved


=== Simple occlusal adjustment ===

Involves simply grinding down involved cusps or restorations and may be indicated after careful examination when:

Overloading of occlusal forces has resulted in pain, tooth fracture or mobility
Interocclusal space is required for restoration provision (e.g. in the case of an overerupted tooth where occlusal plane corrections required)


=== Complex occlusal adjustment or reorganisation ===

May be required in more severe circumstances and some examples of these include:

Elimination of an anterior thrust causing pain, wear, drifting or mobility
To provide space for anterior restorations
Management of bruxism (however, uncommon)
The elimination of a temporomandibular joint disorder (however, as previously mentioned, occlusion is rarely an aetiological factor for TMD so there should be significant evidence to support this before alteration of the occlusion is pursued)Achieving a satisfactory occlusal reorganisation involves choosing a desired jaw relationship (either conforming to existing ICP or producing a new ICP coincident with CR), deciding on the intercuspal contacts (removing deflective contacts and adjusting shapes/inclines of teeth), adjusting excursive contacts (removing interferences) and aiming for a mutually protected occlusion. 

This is an extremely complex process and entails a clinical occlusal examination as described above, along with detailed examination of mounted study casts and diagnostic wax-ups.


=== Mounted study casts ===

It is common practice to mount mandibular and maxillary casts (impressions are made of the teeth and poured in dental stone) in an articulator in ICP when constructing restorations that conform to the patient's existing occlusion. 

Casts mounted on an articulator in ICP are useful for diagnostic purposes or simple restorations, but where more extensive treatment is planned it is necessary to consider occlusal contacts relative to CR e.g. 

RCP -> ICP slide. 

Other situations a CR registration may be more appropriate than ICP include where there are plans to reorganise or adjust the existing occlusion (including changes to the occlusal vertical dimension). 

In these circumstances, in order to accurately stimulate mandibular movement around CR (particularly opening and closing of the mouth), using a facebow transfer, the maxillary cast should be mounted in a semi-adjustable articulator and then the mandibular cast should be mounted using a CR registration. 

The patients new occlusion is then arranged so that the new ICP occurs when patient is in CR.


=== Diagnostic wax-ups ===

Wax-ups are indicated where changes to the occlusion or aesthetics are planned. 

Diagnostic wax-ups are when changes are made to the shapes of the teeth by methodically adding wax to the articulated stone casts representing the patient's teeth. 

This can be done in order to demonstrate to the patient what the planned restorations will look like, but can also be invaluable when simulating different occlusal schemes, studying the functional occlusion as well as providing temporary coverage whilst the restoration is being constructed by the lab through use of a matrix. 

Once an established plan has been constructed using the wax-ups, these can be used as a tool to guide the desired outcome in the mouth and provide a useful communication tool with both the dental laboratory and the patient.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Occlusion_(dentistry)
;;;ES;;;



OCLUSIÓN (ODONTOLOGÍA)


La oclusión, en un contexto dental, significa simplemente el contacto entre los dientes.

Más técnicamente, es la relación entre los dientes maxilares (superiores) y mandibulares (inferiores) cuando se acercan entre sí, como ocurre durante la masticación o en reposo.
La oclusión estática se refiere al contacto entre los dientes cuando la mandíbula está cerrada y estacionaria, mientras que la oclusión dinámica se refiere a los contactos oclusales realizados cuando la mandíbula está en movimiento. El sistema masticatorio también involucra el periodonto, la ATM (y otros componentes esqueléticos) y la neuromusculatura, por lo tanto los contactos de los dientes no deben verse de forma aislada, sino en relación con el sistema masticatorio en general.


== Anatomía del Sistema Masticatorio ==


Uno no puede comprender completamente la oclusión sin una comprensión profunda de la anatomía, incluida la de los dientes, la ATM, la musculatura que la rodea y los componentes esqueléticos.
La dentición y las estructuras circundantes
La dentición humana consta de 32 dientes permanentes y estos se distribuyen entre el hueso alveolar del arco maxilar y mandibular.

Los dientes constan de dos partes: la corona, que es visible en la boca y se encuentra por encima del tejido blando gingival y las raíces, que están por debajo del nivel de la encía y en el hueso alveolar.
El ligamento periodontal une el cemento en el exterior de la raíz y el hueso alveolar.

Este haz de fibras de tejido conectivo es vital para disipar las fuerzas que se aplican al hueso subyacente durante el contacto de los dientes en función. Los dientes están altamente especializados y diferentes dientes están involucrados en funciones específicas.

El sistema masticatorio está influenciado en gran medida por estas relaciones intra e inter arcadas y una comprensión más amplia de la anatomía puede beneficiar enormemente a aquellos que desean comprender la oclusión. Componentes esqueléticos
El maxilar forma un aspecto crucial del esqueleto facial superior.

Dos huesos de forma irregular se fusionan en la sutura intermaxilar durante el desarrollo formando la mandíbula superior.

Esto forma el paladar de la cavidad bucal y también sostiene las crestas alveolares que mantienen los dientes superiores en su lugar.

El esqueleto facial inferior, por otro lado, está formado por la mandíbula, un hueso en forma de U, que sostiene los dientes inferiores y también forma parte de la ATM.

El cóndilo mandibular y la porción escamosa del hueso temporal, en la base del cráneo, se articulan entre sí. ATM
La ATM está formada por el hueso temporal del cráneo, específicamente la fosa glenoidea y el tubérculo articular y el cóndilo de la mandíbula, con un disco fibrocartilaginoso en el medio.

Se clasifica como una articulación ginglimoartrodial y puede realizar una variedad de movimientos de deslizamiento y tipo bisagra.

El disco, que se encuentra en el medio, está compuesto de tejido fibroso denso y es predominantemente avascular y carece de nervios. Músculos
Hay varios músculos que contribuyen a la oclusión de los dientes, incluidos los músculos de la masticación y otros músculos accesorios.

Los pterigoideos temporal, masetero, medial y lateral son los músculos de la masticación y contribuyen a la elevación, depresión, protrusión y retracción de la mandíbula.

Los vientres anterior y posterior del digástrico también están involucrados en la depresión de la mandíbula y la elevación del hueso hioides y, por lo tanto, son relevantes para el sistema masticatorio. Ligamentos
Hay varios ligamentos asociados con la ATM y estos limitan y restringen los movimientos del borde al actuar como dispositivos de restricción pasivos.

No contribuyen a la función articular, sino que ejercen un papel protector.

Los ligamentos clave relevantes para la ATM son:

El ligamento temporomandibular
Los ligamentos discales medial y lateral
El ligamento esfenomandibular
El ligamento estilomandibular


== Desarrollo de la oclusión ==


A medida que los dientes primarios (de leche) comienzan a salir a los 6 meses de edad, los dientes maxilares y mandibulares tienen como objetivo ocluirse entre sí.

Los dientes en erupción son moldeados en su posición por la lengua, las mejillas y los labios durante el desarrollo.

Los dientes primarios superiores e inferiores deben ocluir y alinear correctamente después de 2 años mientras continúan desarrollándose, con un desarrollo completo de la raíz completo a los 3 años de edad.
Alrededor de un año después de que se complete el desarrollo de los dientes, las mandíbulas continúan creciendo, lo que da como resultado un espacio entre algunos de los dientes (diastema).

Este efecto es mayor en los dientes anteriores (frontales) y se puede observar alrededor de los 4 o 5 años de edad.

Este espacio es importante ya que deja espacio para que los dientes permanentes (adultos) erupcionen en la oclusión correcta y, sin este espacio, es probable que se produzca apiñamiento en la dentición permanente.
Para comprender completamente el desarrollo de la oclusión y la maloclusión, es importante comprender la dinámica de los premolares en la etapa de dentición mixta.

La etapa de dentición mixta es cuando están presentes tanto los dientes primarios como los permanentes.

Los premolares permanentes erupcionan entre los 9 y los 12 años de edad y reemplazan a los molares primarios.

Los premolares en erupción son más pequeños que los dientes que reemplazan y esta diferencia de espacio entre los molares primarios y sus sucesores (1,5 mm para el maxilar, 2,5 mm para el mandibular), se denomina espacio de deriva.

Esto permite que los molares permanentes se desplacen mesialmente hacia los espacios y desarrollen una oclusión de Clase I.


== Clasificación de incisivos y molares ==

La clasificación de la oclusión y la maloclusión juega un papel importante en el diagnóstico y la planificación del tratamiento en ortodoncia.

Para describir la relación de los molares maxilares con los molares mandibulares, la clasificación de maloclusión de Angle se ha utilizado comúnmente durante muchos años.

Este sistema también se ha adaptado en un intento de clasificar la relación entre los incisivos de los dos arcos.Relación de los incisivos
Al describir la relación entre los incisivos maxilares y mandibulares, las siguientes categorías conforman la clasificación de relaciones incisales de Angle:

Clase I: Los incisivos mandibulares contactan con los incisivos maxilares en el tercio medio o en el cíngulo de la superficie palatina.
Clase II: Los incisivos mandibulares contactan con los incisivos maxilares en la superficie palatina, en el tercio gingival o posterior al cíngulo.

Esta clase puede subdividirse en división I y división II:
La división I incluye los incisivos superiores que están proinclinados (90 %) y estos individuos tienen una mayor superposición horizontal, lo que se denomina resalte.
La división II incluye aquellos con incisivos retroinclinados (10 %), lo que conduce a un aumento de la superposición vertical, lo que se denomina sobremordida.
Clase III: Los incisivos mandibulares ocluyen con los incisivos maxilares en la superficie palatina, en el tercio incisal específicamente o anterior al cíngulo
En algunos casos, el resalte se invierte (<0 mm) y los incisivos mandibulares se encuentran anteriores a los incisivos maxilares. Relación molar

Cuando se habla de la oclusión de los dientes posteriores, la clasificación se refiere a los primeros molares y puede dividirse en tres categorías:

Clase I: el primer molar mandibular ocluye mesialmente al primer molar maxilar, con la cúspide mesiovestibular del primer molar maxilar ocluyendo en el surco bucal del primer molar mandibular
Clase II: La cúspide mesiovestibular del primer molar maxilar ocluye anterior al surco bucal del primer molar mandibular.
Clase III: Si la cúspide mesiobucal del primer molar maxilar ocluye posterior al surco bucal del primer molar mandibular Cualquier desviación de la relación normal de los dientes (Clase I) se considera una maloclusión.
Se cree que las relaciones de Clase I son "ideales", sin embargo, esta clasificación no tiene en cuenta las posiciones de los dos TMJ.

Se cree que las relaciones molares e incisivos de clase II y III son formas de maloclusión, sin embargo, no todas son lo suficientemente graves como para requerir tratamiento de ortodoncia.

El Índice de Necesidad de Tratamiento de Ortodoncia es un sistema que intenta clasificar las maloclusiones en términos de importancia de varios rasgos oclusales y deterioro estético percibido.

El índice identifica a aquellos que se beneficiarían más del tratamiento de ortodoncia y la derivación posterior a un ortodoncista.


== Terminología oclusal ==


La Posición Intercuspal (ICP), también conocida como Mordida Habitual, Posición Habitual o Mordida de Conveniencia, se define en la posición donde los dientes maxilares y mandibulares encajan en máxima interdigitación.

Esta posición suele ser la más fácil de registrar y casi siempre es la oclusión en la que se cierra el paciente cuando se le pide que "muerda juntos".

Esta es la oclusión a la que el paciente está acostumbrado, por lo que a veces se denomina mordida habitual. La relación céntrica (CR) describe una relación mandibular reproducible (entre la mandíbula y el maxilar) y es independiente del contacto dental.

Esta es la posición en la que los cóndilos mandibulares se ubican en las fosas en una posición anterosuperior contra la vertiente posterior de la eminencia articular.

Se dice que en CR, los músculos están en su estado más relajado y menos estresado.

Esta posición no está influenciada por la memoria muscular, sino por el ligamento que suspende los cóndilos dentro de la fosa.

Por lo tanto, es la posición que utilizan los dentistas para crear nuevas relaciones oclusales, como por ejemplo, al hacer prótesis completas maxilares y mandibulares.
Cuando la mandíbula está en esta posición retruida, se abre y se cierra en un arco de curvatura alrededor de un eje imaginario que pasa por el centro de la cabeza de ambos cóndilos.

Este eje imaginario se denomina eje de bisagra terminal.

El primer contacto dentario que se produce cuando la mandíbula se cierra en la posición del eje de bisagra terminal se denomina posición de contacto retruido (RCP).

El RCP se puede reproducir con una precisión de 0,08 mm debido a la cápsula TMJ no elástica y la restricción de los ligamentos capsulares, por lo que se puede considerar un "movimiento de borde" en el sobre de Posselt.

La oclusión céntrica (CO) es un término confuso y, a menudo, se usa incorrectamente como sinónimo de RCP.

Ambos términos se utilizan para definir una posición en la que los cóndilos están en RC; sin embargo, RCP describe el contacto inicial de los dientes al cerrar, aunque puede tratarse de un contacto de interferencia.

Por otro lado, CO se refiere a la oclusión donde los dientes están en máxima intercuspidación en RC.

Posselt (1952) determinó que solo en el 10% de las relaciones entre dientes naturales y maxilar la ICP = CO (intercuspidación máxima en CR) y, por lo tanto, el término RCP es más apropiado cuando se habla de la oclusión que ocurre cuando los cóndilos están en su posición retruida.

CO es un término que es más relevante para la aplicación de dentaduras postizas completas o donde se proporcionan prótesis de unidades fijas múltiples, donde la oclusión se organiza de modo que cuando la mandíbula está en RC, los dientes se interdigitan.


=== Sobre de movimientos fronterizos de Posselt ===

La envolvente de movimiento del borde de Posselt (a menudo denominada "movimientos del borde de la mandíbula") es un diagrama esquemático del movimiento máximo de la mandíbula en tres planos (sagital, horizontal y frontal).

Esto abarca todos los movimientos que se alejan de RCP e incluye:

Movimientos protrusivos: cuando la mandíbula se mueve hacia adelante desde la relación céntrica, esto se considera protrusión.

En la oclusión de clase I, los contactos predominantes ocurren en las superficies incisales y labiales de los incisivos mandibulares y los bordes incisales y las áreas de la fosa palatina de los incisivos superiores.
Movimientos laterales: cuando la mandíbula se mueve hacia la izquierda o hacia la derecha, los dientes posteriores mandibulares se mueven lateralmente a través de los dientes opuestos.

Por ejemplo, cuando la mandíbula se mueve hacia la derecha, los dientes mandibulares derechos se mueven lateralmente a través de sus oponentes y esto se denomina lado de trabajo de la mandíbula (el lado hacia el que se mueve la mandíbula).

Por el contrario, los dientes mandibulares izquierdos se mueven medialmente, hacia abajo y hacia delante a través de sus opuestos posteriores y esto se denomina lado de no trabajo (el lado hacia el que se aleja la mandíbula).
Movimientos retrusivos: esto es cuando la mandíbula se mueve hacia atrás desde la PIC.

En comparación con los movimientos protrusivos y laterales, los movimientos retrusivos son generalmente considerablemente más pequeños con un rango de movimiento de alrededor de 1 o 2 mm debido a la restricción de las estructuras ligamentosas.


== Orientación, dientes naturales y función ==


Los movimientos mandibulares están guiados por dos sistemas diferentes; el sistema de guía 'posterior' y el sistema de guía 'anterior'


=== Sistema de guiado posterior ===

La guía posterior se refiere a las articulaciones de la ATM y las estructuras asociadas.

Son los cóndilos dentro de la fosa y los músculos y ligamentos asociados junto con su vínculo neuromuscular los que determinan los movimientos mandibulares.

Las excursiones laterales, protrusivas y represivas de la mandíbula están guiadas por el sistema posterior.
excursiones laterales
Es importante definir el movimiento de los cóndilos en excursiones laterales:
- Cóndilo de trabajo: este es el cóndilo más cercano al lado en el que se mueve la mandíbula (por ejemplo, si la mandíbula se mueve lateralmente hacia la derecha, el cóndilo derecho es el cóndilo del lado de trabajo)
- Cóndilo que no trabaja: este es el lado del que se aleja la mandíbula (por ejemplo, si la mandíbula se mueve lateralmente hacia la derecha, el cóndilo izquierdo es el cóndilo del lado que no trabaja)

El movimiento lateral máximo de la mandíbula hacia el lado izquierdo o derecho es de aproximadamente 10-12 mm.
El movimiento principal en las excursiones laterales ocurre en el cóndilo del lado que no trabaja (NWS) (también llamado cóndilo de equilibrio u órbita).

La cabeza condilar del NWS se mueve en dirección hacia abajo, hacia adelante y medial.

Este movimiento se define contra dos planos separados, el plano vertical y el horizontal.
Ángulo de Bennet: el ángulo de movimiento medial en el cóndilo NWS en relación con el plano vertical
Ángulo condilar: el ángulo de movimiento hacia abajo del cóndilo NWS en relación con el plano horizontal
El cóndilo del lado de trabajo (WS) (también llamado cóndilo giratorio) experimenta un desplazamiento lateral inmediato y no progresivo.

Este movimiento se denomina movimiento de Bennet (sin embargo, esto puede confundirse con el ángulo de Bennet), por lo que se conoce más comúnmente como un cambio lateral inmediato.

Se observa que el cóndilo gira con un ligero desplazamiento lateral en la dirección del movimientoMovimientos de protrusión

Las cabezas condilares se trasladan predominantemente hacia adelante y hacia abajo a lo largo de la cara distal de la cara articular en la fosa glenoidea.

Los movimientos protrusivos están restringidos por las estructuras ligamentosas a un máximo de ~8-11 mm (según la morfología del cráneo y el tamaño del sujeto)Movimientos retrusivos

En cuanto a la protrusión, este movimiento está restringido por las estructuras ligamentosas y el límite máximo de retrusión suele ser de ~1 mm; sin embargo, rara vez se observan 2-3 mm en algunos pacientes. No podemos influir en el sistema de guía posterior a través del tratamiento de restauración dental.


=== Sistema de guía anterior ===

La guía anterior se refiere a la influencia de los dientes en contacto en las trayectorias de los movimientos mandibulares.

Los contactos de los dientes pueden ser contactos de los dientes anteriores, posteriores o ambos; sin embargo, se denomina guía anterior ya que estos contactos aún son anteriores a la ATM.

Esto se puede clasificar además en:

Orientación Canina

Oclusión dinámica que ocurre en los caninos (en el lado de trabajo) durante las excursiones laterales de la mandíbula.
Estos dientes son los más adecuados para aceptar fuerzas horizontales en movimientos excéntricos debido a sus raíces largas y su buena relación corona/raíz.
Es fácil para los protésicos dentales realizar esta función de grupo durante el encerado y la construcción de la restauración.

Múltiples contactos entre los dientes maxilares y mandibulares en movimientos laterales en el WS donde el contacto simultáneo de varios dientes actúa como un grupo para distribuir las fuerzas oclusales.
Es preferible que esta guía sea lo más anterior posible, por ejemplo, premolares en lugar de molares, ya que se aplica una mayor fuerza cuando los contactos están más cerca de la ATM. Guía incisal

La influencia de las superficies de contacto de los incisivos mandibulares y maxilares en los movimientos mandibulares se caracteriza por la sobremordida y la sobremordida horizontal de los incisivos maxilares. En el tratamiento restaurador, es posible manipular y diseñar sistemas de guía anteriores que estén en armonía con el sistema masticatorio.


=== Relevancia clínica de la orientación ===

El contacto dentario involucrado en la guía es particularmente importante ya que estos ocluyen una gran cantidad de veces al día y, por lo tanto, deben poder resistir cargas oclusales pesadas y no axiales.

Al restaurar, el sistema de guía anterior debe ser compatible con el sistema de guía posterior.

Esto significa que no se debe aplicar una tensión excesiva en el sistema de guía posterior que está limitado por las estructuras ligamentosas.
Tras la restauración de las superficies oclusales de los dientes, es probable que cambie la oclusión y, por lo tanto, los sistemas de guía.

Es poco probable que la ATM se adapte a estos cambios en la oclusión, sino que los dientes se adaptan a la nueva oclusión a través del desgaste de los dientes, el movimiento de los dientes o la fractura.

Por esta razón, es importante tener en cuenta estos conceptos de orientación al proporcionar restauraciones.

También se debe considerar la orientación antes de las restauraciones, ya que no se debe esperar que un diente muy restaurado brinde solo orientación, ya que esto deja al diente vulnerable a la fractura durante la función.


== Organización de la oclusión ==

La disposición de los dientes en función es importante y, a lo largo de los años, se han desarrollado tres conceptos reconocidos para describir cómo los dientes deben y no deben contactar:

Oclusión balanceada bilateral
Oclusión balanceada unilateral
Oclusión mutuamente protegida


=== Oclusión balanceada bilateral ===

Este concepto se basa en la curva de Spee y la curva de Wilson y se está volviendo obsoleto para la dentición natural restaurada.

Sin embargo, todavía encuentra aplicación en prótesis removibles.

Este esquema involucra contactos en tantos dientes como sea posible (tanto en el lado de trabajo como en el de no trabajo) en todos los movimientos excursivos de la mandíbula.

Esto es especialmente importante en el caso de la provisión de dentaduras completas, ya que los dientes en contacto con el NWS ayudan a estabilizar las bases de la dentadura en el movimiento mandibular.

En la década de 1930 se creía que esta disposición era ideal para la dentición natural al proporcionar una reconstrucción oclusal completa para distribuir las tensiones.

Sin embargo, se encontró que las fuerzas laterales ejercidas sobre los dientes posteriores restaurados produjeron efectos dañinos en las restauraciones.


=== Oclusión balanceada unilateral ===

Por otro lado, la oclusión balanceada unilateral es una disposición dentaria muy utilizada en la odontología actual y se conoce comúnmente como función de grupo.

Este concepto se basa en la observación de que los contactos NWS eran destructivos y, por lo tanto, los dientes del NWS deberían estar libres de cualquier contacto excéntrico y, en cambio, los contactos deberían distribuirse en el WS, compartiendo así la carga oclusal.

La función de grupo se usa cuando no se puede lograr la guía canina y también en el enfoque de Pankey-Mann Schuyler (PMS), donde se consideró mejor que la guía canina, ya que distribuyó mejor la carga en el WS.


=== Oclusión mutuamente protegida ===


The Journal of Prosthetic Dentistry (2017) define la oclusión mutuamente protegida como "un esquema oclusal en el que los dientes posteriores evitan el contacto excesivo de los dientes anteriores en la posición intercuspídea máxima, y ​​los dientes anteriores desacoplan los dientes posteriores en todos los movimientos excursivos mandibulares". movimientos, las fuerzas dañinas se aplican a los dientes posteriores y los dientes anteriores son los más adecuados para recibirlos.

Por lo tanto, durante los movimientos de protrusión, el contacto o guía de los dientes anteriores debe ser adecuado para desocluir y proteger los dientes posteriores.
Por el contrario, los dientes posteriores son más adecuados para aceptar las fuerzas que se aplican durante el cierre de la mandíbula.

Esto se debe a que los dientes posteriores están colocados de manera que las fuerzas se aplican directamente a lo largo del eje longitudinal del diente y pueden disiparlas de manera eficiente, mientras que los dientes anteriores tampoco pueden aceptar estas fuerzas pesadas debido a su posicionamiento y angulación labial.

Por lo tanto, se acepta que los dientes posteriores deben tener contactos más fuertes que los anteriores en ICP y actuar como un tope para el cierre vertical.
Además, en las excursiones laterales, la función canina o grupal debe actuar para excluir los dientes posteriores en la WS porque, como se describió anteriormente, los dientes anteriores son los más adecuados para disipar las fuerzas horizontales dañinas, además de que el contacto está más alejado de la ATM. por lo que las fuerzas creadas disminuyen en fuerza.

La función de grupo o la guía canina también deben proporcionar la desoclusión de los dientes en el NWS, ya que la cantidad y la dirección de la fuerza aplicada a la ATM y los dientes pueden ser destructivas debido a un aumento en la actividad muscular.

La ausencia de contactos NWS también permite un movimiento suave del cóndilo del lado de trabajo, ya que un contacto puede desconectar la guía del cóndilo y, por lo tanto, causar una relación mandibular inestable.


== Contactos defectuosos e interferencias ==

Un contacto desviado es un contacto que desvía la mandíbula de su movimiento previsto.

Un ejemplo de esto es cuando la mandíbula es desviada hacia ICP por la corredera RCP-ICP, cuyo camino está determinado por los contactos de deflexión de los dientes.

Esto a menudo está relacionado con la función (p. ej., masticar); sin embargo, en algunos casos, estos contactos desviados pueden ser dañinos y pueden provocar dolor alrededor del diente (a menudo asociado con el bruxismo).

Sin embargo, algunos pacientes pueden no ser conscientes de los contactos deflectores similares, lo que sugiere que es la adaptabilidad del paciente más que el contacto lo que puede influir en la presentación del paciente.
Una interferencia oclusal es cualquier contacto dentario que impide o dificulta el movimiento mandibular armonioso (un contacto dentario indeseable).

Las interferencias oclusales se pueden clasificar de la siguiente manera:
Interferencia del lado de trabajo: cuando hay un diente pesado o temprano entre los dientes maxilares y mandibulares en el lado hacia el que se mueve la mandíbula, y este contacto puede o no excluir los dientes anteriores.
Interferencia del lado no funcional: un contacto oclusal en el lado del que se aleja la mandíbula que impide el movimiento armonioso de la mandíbula.

Estos tienen el potencial de ser más destructivos en comparación con las interferencias WS debido a las fuerzas dirigidas oblicuamente.
Interferencia Protrusiva: Contactos que ocurren entre las caras distales de los dientes posteriores maxilares y la cara mesial de los dientes posteriores mandibulares.

Estas interferencias son potencialmente muy dañinas e incluso pueden causar una incapacidad para incidir adecuadamente debido a la proximidad de la interferencia al músculo. Cuando el dentista proporciona restauraciones, es importante que estas no creen una interferencia, de lo contrario, la restauración recibirá mayor carga.

En cuanto a los contactos desviados, las interferencias también pueden estar asociadas con parafunciones como el bruxismo (aunque la evidencia es débil) y pueden afectar adversamente la distribución de las fuerzas oclusales intensas.

Las interferencias también pueden causar dolor en los músculos masticatorios por alterar su actividad, sin embargo existe gran controversia y debate en cuanto a si existe una relación entre la oclusión y los trastornos temporomandibulares.

Casi todas las personas dentadas tienen interferencias oclusales y, por lo tanto, no se considera que sean una etiología de todos los TTM.

Cuando hay un cambio agudo o una inestabilidad significativa en la condición oclusal y posteriormente representa un factor etiológico para un DTM, se requiere tratamiento oclusal.
El ajuste oclusal (eliminación de las interferencias oclusales) se puede realizar para obtener una relación oclusal estable y se logra mediante el pulido selectivo de las interferencias oclusales o mediante el uso de una férula oclusal dura para garantizar que se establezca una verdadera relación retruida.


== Oclusión 'ideal' ==

Cuando hay ausencia de síntomas y el sistema masticatorio funciona de manera eficiente, la oclusión se considera normal o fisiológica.

Se entiende que no existe tal oclusión 'ideal' para todos, sino que cada individuo tiene su propia 'oclusión ideal'.

Esto no se enfoca en ninguna configuración oclusal específica sino que ocurre cuando la oclusión de la persona está en armonía con el resto del sistema estomatognático (ATM, dientes y estructuras de soporte, y los elementos neuromusculares).
Sin embargo, es importante tener en cuenta una oclusión funcional óptima al proporcionar restauraciones, ya que esto ayuda a comprender lo que se intenta lograr.

Se define en los textos establecidos como:
1.

Oclusión céntrica y relación céntrica en armonía (CO=CR)

Debe haber contactos uniformes y simultáneos de todos los dientes posteriores cuando la boca está cerrada y los cóndilos descansan en su posición más superior y anterior, descansando contra la vertiente posterior de la eminencia articular (CR)
Tenga en cuenta que los dientes anteriores también deben ocluir, pero el contacto debe ser más claro que los contactos posteriores2.

Libertad en CO

Esto significa que la mandíbula aún puede moverse ligeramente en el plano sagital y horizontal en oclusión céntrica.
Esto también es parte de la teoría de la oclusión del PMS mencionada anteriormente en la organización de la oclusión.3.

Desoclusión posterior inmediata y duradera al movimiento mandibular

Durante los movimientos de excursión lateral, los contactos del lado de trabajo actúan para excluir el lado de no trabajo inmediatamente.
Durante los movimientos de protrusión, el contacto y la guía de los dientes anteriores actúan para desollar inmediatamente los dientes posteriores4.

La guía canina se considera el mejor sistema de guía anterior

Esto se debe a su capacidad para aceptar fuerzas horizontales, ya que tienen las raíces más largas y grandes, así como una relación corona/raíz deseable.
También están rodeados de hueso denso y compacto, a diferencia de los dientes posteriores, lo que los hace más adecuados para tolerar fuerzas horizontales.
La guía canina también es más fácil de manejar de manera restaurativa que la función grupal
Sin embargo, si los caninos del paciente no están posicionados correctamente para la guía canina, la función grupal (que involucra a los caninos y premolares) es la alternativa más favorable. Es necesario comprender los conceptos que influyen en la función y la salud del sistema masticatorio para prevenir, minimizar o eliminar cualquier rotura o traumatismo en la ATM o los dientes.


== Adaptabilidad del paciente ==

Hay varios factores que juegan un papel en la capacidad de adaptación de un paciente con respecto a los cambios en la oclusión.

Factores como el sistema nervioso central y los mecanorreceptores en el periodonto, la mucosa y la dentición son todos de importancia aquí.

De hecho, es la entrada somatosensorial de estas fuentes la que determina si un individuo es capaz de adaptarse a los cambios en la oclusión, a diferencia del propio esquema oclusal.

Puede ocurrir una falla de adaptación a cambios menores en la oclusión, aunque es raro.

Se cree que los pacientes que están cada vez más atentos a cualquier cambio en el entorno oral tienen menos probabilidades de adaptarse a cualquier cambio oclusal.

El estrés psicológico y emocional también puede contribuir a la capacidad de adaptación del paciente, ya que estos factores tienen un impacto en el sistema nervioso central.


== Examen oclusal ==

En individuos con dolor inexplicable, fractura, deriva, movilidad y desgaste dental, es vital un examen oclusal completo.

De manera similar, cuando se planifica un trabajo de restauración complejo, también es esencial identificar si se requieren cambios oclusales antes de la provisión de una restauración definitiva. identificar y erradicar esta causa.

Instrumentos necesarios

fórceps de Miller
papel de articular
Shimstock
fórceps de mosquitos
Espejo
sonda dental
Calibre Willis El examen debe llevarse a cabo usando un enfoque sistemático mientras se evalúa lo siguiente:

Apariencia facial
Musculatura
ATM
Cada arco individualmente
Posición intercuspídea (PIC)
Posición de contacto retruida (RCP)
Portaobjetos RCP-ICP
excursiones laterales
Saliente
DVO


=== Examen extraoral ===

1) Apariencia facial Debe observarse la simetría facial del paciente.
A continuación, debe identificarse y anotarse la relación esquelética del paciente.

Clase I: El maxilar y la mandíbula están en armonía y coinciden
Clase II: el maxilar se encuentra anterior a la mandíbula y es retrognático.
Clase III: el maxilar se encuentra posterior a la mandíbula y es prognático. Se debe considerar la altura facial del paciente y se debe anotar dónde puede haber una pérdida.
2) músculos
Comience simplemente palpando los músculos relacionados con la oclusión de los dientes.

Estos músculos incluyen los músculos de la masticación y otros músculos dentro del área de la cabeza y el cuello, como los músculos suprahioides.

Lo mejor es palpar los músculos de forma simultánea y bilateral.

Se deben revisar los músculos temporal, masetero, pterigoideo medial y lateral, geniohioideo, milohioideo y digástrico junto con el trapecio, los músculos cervicales posteriores, el músculo occipital y el esternocleidomastoideo para detectar signos de emaciación o sensibilidad.

La disfunción temporomandibular comúnmente se presenta con sensibilidad muscular, pero el dolor o el dolor palpable asociado con los músculos también puede estar relacionado con la actividad parafuncional.
3) ATM
Los trastornos de la ATM se pueden detectar mediante un examen oclusal.

Pida al paciente que abra y cierre mientras coloca dos dedos sobre el espacio de la ATM.

La apertura de menos de 35 mm en la mandíbula se considera restringida y dicha restricción puede estar asociada con cambios intracapsulares dentro de la articulación.

A continuación, pida al paciente que mueva la mandíbula hacia la derecha y, a continuación, hacia la izquierda.

Tenga en cuenta cualquier chasquido, crepitación, dolor o desviación.


=== Examen intraoral ===

4) Arco Maxilar / Mandibular
Evalúe cada arco e identifique si hay signos de desarmonía oclusal, sobrecarga, migración de dientes, desgaste, grietas o movilidad (que no se deba a causas periodontales).

También deben tenerse en cuenta las lesiones de abfracción, facetas y posibles fracturas verticales del esmalte, si están presentes. 5) Contactos en ICP
Comience evaluando la relación entre incisivos y molares como se describe anteriormente.

De manera similar, examine la sobremordida horizontal y vertical.

Una sobremordida de 3 a 5 mm y una sobremordida horizontal de 2 a 3 mm se consideran dentro del rango normal. contactos oclusales.

Es mejor revisarlos mientras los dientes están secos.

Durante la PIC, la mayoría de los dientes antagonistas deben estar en contacto
Un examen minucioso de estos contactos marcados por el papel de articular ayuda a identificar la naturaleza de los contactos dentarios.
Los buenos contactos estables a menudo aparecen como marcas pequeñas y no muy prominentes cuando se usa papel de articular y hay múltiples contactos en cada diente.
Los contactos amplios y de fricción identificados en la PIC pueden estar asociados con alteraciones en la función y pueden indicar inestabilidad oclusal.
Estos contactos se pueden verificar usando Shimstock (una tira de mylar de 12,5 μm de espesor) y se puede verificar la estabilidad de los contactos
El operador debe pasar el Shimstock a través de los dientes, mientras el paciente muerde.
Esto debe llevarse a cabo para cada juego de dientes y resaltará si hay un contacto adecuado para sostener el Shimstock.
Este material es apropiado ya que es más delgado y eliminará cualquier contacto falso que pueda ocurrir incluso con papeles de articular delgados que tienen un grosor de aproximadamente 20 μm.
Uno también puede sacar el material de la cuña cuando los pacientes muerden entre sí, a diferencia de otros papeles articulados, que se rasgarán6) RCP
El paciente puede ser guiado a CR utilizando uno de los siguientes métodos;

Manipulación bimanual: manipulación de los cóndilos del paciente para que estén en RC
El operador debe apoyar ligeramente los dedos a lo largo del borde inferior de la mandíbula y los pulgares deben descansar ligeramente sobre la cara anterior del mentón.
Cuando el paciente esté relajado, ejerza una ligera presión hacia abajo sobre el mentón y una ligera presión hacia arriba bajo el ángulo de la mandíbula.
Desprogramar la mandíbula guiando la apertura y el cierre de la mandíbula y una vez que el paciente esté relajado pídale que cierre suavemente y se detenga cuando sienta que los dientes hacen contacto por primera vez.
Guía del punto del mentón: se utiliza una mano para aplicar presión sobre el mentón guiándolo hacia atrás con algo de fuerza. .

Para estos pacientes, se puede construir una plantilla Lucia Jig o un dispositivo de desprogramación al lado del sillón.
Marque los contactos de los dientes RCP con papel de articular, observe los dientes que están en contacto e identifique si esta posición de RCP está causando problemas relacionados con la oclusión.

Por ejemplo, si hay un contacto fuerte o una interferencia en RCP, esto puede ser la causa de una alteración oclusal.

Es importante poder guiar al paciente hacia la RCP, ya que es posible que sea necesario realizar un registro en esta posición, especialmente si se está reorganizando la oclusión, se está cambiando el OVD o incluso solo con fines de diagnóstico y planificación del tratamiento.
7) Diapositiva RCP-ICP
El paciente debe estar en decúbito supino y relajado.

El operador debe colocarlos en RCP y luego pedirles que muerdan juntos "normalmente", esto los mueve de RCP a su posición de máxima intercuspidación (ICP).

Pida al paciente que toque el portaobjetos e identifique si es pequeño o grande.

El deslizamiento debe ser suave y se debe registrar la dirección.

El operador debe evaluar tanto desde el costado del paciente como desde el frente del paciente, cuánto se desplaza la mandíbula tanto hacia adelante como hacia los lados (sin embargo, esto es difícil y puede ser más fácil de observar montando modelos en un articulador).

Esto se puede hacer observando los incisivos maxilares y mandibulares durante el deslizamiento.

El portaobjetos RCP-ICP para la mayoría de los pacientes dentados tiende a ser de aproximadamente 1 a 2 mm en dirección anterior y hacia arriba.

Un deslizamiento RCP-ICP desviado puede tener alguna relación con un empuje anterior.

Un empuje anterior, que probablemente esté asociado con los dientes anteriores u otros dientes involucrados en la guía, como los dientes caninos, a menudo hace que los dientes muestren fremitus.
8) Movimientos Protrusivos
Se le pide al paciente que mueva la mandíbula hacia adelante desde la PIC.

Esto suele ser alrededor de una distancia de 8-10 mm y normalmente sería hasta que los incisivos inferiores se deslicen por delante de los bordes incisales de los maxilares anteriores.

Observe los contactos durante este movimiento.

Marque los contactos con papel de articular de color junto a los contactos ICP, que deben ser de un color diferente; se debe anotar cualquier diente que sirva de guía y cualquier interferencia. 9) Excursiones laterales
También se le pide al paciente que mueva la mandíbula inferior hacia un lado.

Deben medirse los movimientos laterales y se cree que las medidas de 12 mm son normales.

Tanto el lado de trabajo como el lado de no trabajo deben observarse durante este movimiento.

Registre cualquier diente que sirva de guía durante este movimiento y cualquier interferencia que esté presente (y la ubicación de estas).

Los contactos suaves e ininterrumpidos deben identificarse cuando se registran estos movimientos excursivos10) OVD
Si se puede ver desgaste oclusal, se usa un calibre Willis para medir la dimensión oclusal-vertical y la dimensión vertical en reposo de un individuo.
Realice una medición colocando dos puntos de referencia en la cara del paciente, uno debajo de la nariz (generalmente la columela) y otro debajo del mentón.

Tome una medida mientras el paciente está en reposo (los dientes no deben estar en contacto) y otra con el paciente mordiendo juntos, es decir, en PIC y aleje esta medida de la medida en reposo para dejar espacio libre.

El espacio libre normal suele ser de 2 a 4 mm. Los pacientes con un desgaste dental considerable pueden haber perdido la dimensión vertical oclusal (OVD).

Al restaurar la dentición, es importante tener en cuenta el OVD exacto que tiene el paciente y cuánto puede aumentarlo.

Es posible que el paciente no pueda adaptarse a un gran aumento de OVD y, por lo tanto, es posible que esto deba hacerse en fases.


=== Resumen ===



== Aplicaciones clínicas de la oclusión ==

La oclusión es un concepto fundamental en odontología, sin embargo, comúnmente se pasa por alto porque se percibe como poco importante o demasiado difícil de enseñar y comprender.

Los médicos deben tener una sólida comprensión de los principios relacionados con la armonía oclusal para poder reconocer y tratar los problemas comunes asociados con la falta de armonía oclusal.

Algunas de las ventajas asociadas con un conocimiento práctico de estos incluyen:
Mayor comodidad para el paciente: por ejemplo, algunas personas experimentan dolor o sensibilidad después de la colocación de una nueva restauración debido a una sobrecarga oclusal o una interferencia que posiblemente podría evitarse si el médico los considerara en el momento de la colocación.
Mayor estabilidad oclusal: es menos probable que los dientes se desplacen, es probable que se mantengan los contactos oclusales, etc.
Mayor éxito de las restauraciones: el desgaste excesivo, las fracturas y las grietas se observan con menos frecuencia donde existe una oclusión ideal
Mejor estética: cuando los dientes anteriores se ajustan a la función y estabilidad oclusal ideal, se logra el mejor resultado estético


=== Ajuste oclusal simple ===

Se trata simplemente de tallar las cúspides o restauraciones afectadas y puede estar indicado después de un examen cuidadoso cuando:

La sobrecarga de las fuerzas oclusales ha resultado en dolor, fractura de dientes o movilidad.
Se requiere espacio interoclusal para la provisión de restauración (por ejemplo, en el caso de un diente sobreerupcionado donde se requieren correcciones del plano oclusal)


=== Ajuste o reorganización oclusal compleja ===

Puede ser necesario en circunstancias más graves y algunos ejemplos de estos incluyen:

Eliminación de un empuje anterior que causa dolor, desgaste, deriva o movilidad
Para proporcionar espacio para restauraciones anteriores.
Manejo del bruxismo (sin embargo, poco común)
La eliminación de un trastorno de la articulación temporomandibular (sin embargo, como se mencionó anteriormente, la oclusión rara vez es un factor etiológico de TTM, por lo que debe haber evidencia significativa para respaldar esto antes de buscar la alteración de la oclusión) Lograr una reorganización oclusal satisfactoria implica elegir una relación mandibular deseada (ya sea conforme al ICP existente o produciendo un nuevo ICP que coincida con CR), decidir sobre los contactos intercuspídeos (eliminar los contactos desviados y ajustar las formas/inclinaciones de los dientes), ajustar los contactos excursivos (eliminar las interferencias) y apuntar a una oclusión mutuamente protegida.

Este es un proceso extremadamente complejo e implica un examen oclusal clínico como se describió anteriormente, junto con un examen detallado de modelos de estudio montados y encerados de diagnóstico.


=== Modelos de estudio montados ===

Es una práctica común montar modelos mandibulares y maxilares (se toman impresiones de los dientes y se vierten en yeso dental) en un articulador en ICP cuando se construyen restauraciones que se ajustan a la oclusión existente del paciente.

Los modelos montados en un articulador en ICP son útiles para fines de diagnóstico o restauraciones simples, pero cuando se planea un tratamiento más extenso, es necesario considerar los contactos oclusales en relación con CR, por ejemplo.

RCP -> diapositiva ICP.

Otras situaciones en las que un registro CR puede ser más apropiado que ICP incluyen cuando hay planes para reorganizar o ajustar la oclusión existente (incluidos los cambios en la dimensión vertical oclusal).

En estas circunstancias, para estimular con precisión el movimiento mandibular alrededor de RC (particularmente la apertura y el cierre de la boca), utilizando una transferencia con arco facial, el modelo maxilar debe montarse en un articulador semiajustable y luego el modelo mandibular debe montarse utilizando un Registro RC.

A continuación, se organiza la nueva oclusión del paciente para que la nueva PIC se produzca cuando el paciente está en CR.


=== Encerados de diagnóstico ===

Los encerados están indicados donde se planean cambios en la oclusión o la estética.

Los encerados de diagnóstico son cuando se realizan cambios en las formas de los dientes mediante la adición metódica de cera a los modelos de piedra articulados que representan los dientes del paciente.

Esto se puede hacer para demostrarle al paciente cómo se verán las restauraciones planificadas, pero también puede ser invaluable cuando se simulan diferentes esquemas oclusales, se estudia la oclusión funcional y se proporciona una cobertura temporal mientras el laboratorio construye la restauración a través de uso de una matriz.

Una vez que se ha construido un plan establecido utilizando los encerados, estos pueden usarse como una herramienta para guiar el resultado deseado en la boca y proporcionar una herramienta de comunicación útil tanto con el laboratorio dental como con el paciente.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Occlusion_(odontología)

;;;PT;;;



OCLUSÃO (ODONTOLOGIA)


Oclusão, no contexto odontológico, significa simplesmente o contato entre os dentes.

Mais tecnicamente, é a relação entre os dentes maxilares (superiores) e mandibulares (inferiores) quando se aproximam, como ocorre durante a mastigação ou em repouso.
A oclusão estática refere-se ao contato entre os dentes quando a mandíbula está fechada e estacionária, enquanto a oclusão dinâmica refere-se aos contatos oclusais feitos quando a mandíbula está em movimento. os contatos dentários não devem ser vistos isoladamente, mas em relação ao sistema mastigatório geral.


== Anatomia do Sistema Mastigatório ==


Não se pode entender completamente a oclusão sem uma compreensão profunda da anatomia, incluindo a dos dentes, ATM, musculatura que a envolve e os componentes esqueléticos.
A dentição e as estruturas circundantes
A dentição humana é composta por 32 dentes permanentes e estes estão distribuídos entre o osso alveolar do arco maxilar e mandibular.

Os dentes consistem em duas partes: a coroa, que é visível na boca e fica acima do tecido mole gengival e as raízes, que estão abaixo do nível da gengiva e no osso alveolar.
O ligamento periodontal une o cemento na parte externa da raiz e o osso alveolar.

Este feixe de fibras de tecido conjuntivo é vital para dissipar as forças que são aplicadas ao osso subjacente durante o contato dos dentes em função. Os dentes são altamente especializados e diferentes dentes estão envolvidos em funções específicas.

O sistema mastigatório é amplamente influenciado por essas relações intra e inter-arco e uma compreensão mais ampla da anatomia pode beneficiar muito aqueles que desejam entender a oclusão.
A maxila forma um aspecto crucial do esqueleto facial superior.

Dois ossos de formato irregular se fundem na sutura intermaxilar durante o desenvolvimento formando o maxilar superior.

Isso forma o palato da cavidade oral e também suporta as cristas alveolares que mantêm os dentes superiores no lugar.

O esqueleto facial inferior, por outro lado, é formado pela mandíbula, um osso em forma de U, que sustenta os dentes inferiores e também faz parte da ATM.

O côndilo mandibular e a porção escamosa do osso temporal, na base do crânio, articulam-se entre si.ATM
A ATM é formada a partir do osso temporal do crânio, especificamente da fossa glenóide e tubérculo articular e do côndilo da mandíbula, com um disco fibrocartilaginoso entre eles.

É classificada como uma articulação ginglimoartrodial e pode realizar uma série de movimentos do tipo deslizamento e dobradiça.

O disco, que fica no meio, é composto de tecido fibroso denso e é predominantemente avascular e sem nervos.
Existem vários músculos que contribuem para a oclusão dos dentes, incluindo os músculos da mastigação e outros músculos acessórios.

O temporal, masseter, pterigóideo medial e lateral são os músculos da mastigação e estes contribuem para a elevação, depressão, protrusão e retração da mandíbula.

Os ventres anterior e posterior do digástrico também estão envolvidos na depressão da mandíbula e elevação do osso hióide e, portanto, são relevantes para o sistema mastigatório.
Existem vários ligamentos associados à ATM e estes limitam e restringem os movimentos bordejantes, atuando como dispositivos de contenção passiva.

Eles não contribuem para a função articular, mas exercem um papel protetor.

Os principais ligamentos relevantes para a ATM são:

O ligamento temporomandibular
Os ligamentos discais medial e lateral
O ligamento esfenomandibular
O ligamento estilomandibular


== Desenvolvimento da oclusão ==


À medida que os dentes decíduos (de leite) começam a erupcionar aos 6 meses de idade, os dentes maxilares e mandibulares visam ocluir um com o outro.

Os dentes em erupção são moldados na posição pela língua, bochechas e lábios durante o desenvolvimento.

Os dentes decíduos superiores e inferiores devem estar ocluindo e alinhados corretamente após 2 anos, enquanto continuam a se desenvolver, com o desenvolvimento radicular completo aos 3 anos de idade.
Cerca de um ano após o desenvolvimento dos dentes, os maxilares continuam a crescer, o que resulta no espaçamento entre alguns dentes (diastema).

Este efeito é maior nos dentes anteriores (frontais) e pode ser visto por volta dos 4 – 5 anos de idade.

Esse espaçamento é importante, pois permite espaço para os dentes permanentes (adultos) irromperem na oclusão correta e, sem esse espaçamento, é provável que haja apinhamento da dentição permanente.
Para entender completamente o desenvolvimento da oclusão e da má oclusão, é importante entender a dinâmica dos pré-molares na fase de dentição mista.

A fase de dentição mista é quando os dentes decíduos e permanentes estão presentes.

Os pré-molares permanentes erupcionam ~ 9-12 anos de idade, substituindo os molares decíduos.

Os pré-molares em erupção são menores que os dentes que estão substituindo e essa diferença de espaço entre os molares decíduos e seus sucessores (1,5mm para maxilares, 2,5mm para mandibulares), denominado Leeway Space.

Isso permite que os molares permanentes se desloquem mesialmente para os espaços e desenvolvam uma oclusão de Classe I.


== Classificação de incisivos e molares ==

A classificação da oclusão e da má oclusão desempenha um papel importante no diagnóstico e planejamento do tratamento em ortodontia.

Para descrever a relação dos molares superiores com os molares inferiores, a classificação de maloclusão de Angle tem sido comumente utilizada há muitos anos.

Este sistema também foi adaptado na tentativa de classificar a relação entre os incisivos das duas arcadas.
Ao descrever a relação entre os incisivos superiores e inferiores, as seguintes categorias compõem a classificação da relação incisal de Angle:

Classe I: os incisivos inferiores entram em contato com os incisivos superiores no terço médio ou no cíngulo da superfície palatina
Classe II: Os incisivos inferiores entram em contato com os incisivos superiores na face palatina, no terço gengival ou posterior ao cíngulo.

Esta classe pode ser subdividida em divisão I e divisão II:
A divisão I inclui os incisivos superiores que são proclinados (90%) e esses indivíduos têm uma sobreposição horizontal maior - isso é chamado de sobressaliência
A divisão II inclui aqueles com incisivos retroinclinados (10%), o que leva a um aumento da sobreposição vertical - isso é chamado de sobremordida
Classe III: incisivos inferiores ocluem com os incisivos superiores na face palatina, no terço incisal especificamente ou anterior ao cíngulo
Em alguns casos a sobressaliência é revertida (<0mm) e os incisivos inferiores ficam anteriores aos incisivos superiores Relação molar

Ao discutir a oclusão dos dentes posteriores, a classificação refere-se aos primeiros molares e pode ser dividida em três categorias:

Classe I: O primeiro molar inferior oclui mesialmente ao primeiro molar superior, com a cúspide mesiovestibular do primeiro molar superior ocluindo no sulco vestibular do primeiro molar inferior
Classe II: A cúspide mésio-vestibular do primeiro molar superior oclui anteriormente ao sulco vestibular do primeiro molar inferior
Classe III: Se a cúspide mesiovestibular do primeiro molar superior ocluir posteriormente ao sulco vestibular do primeiro molar inferior Qualquer desvio da relação normal dos dentes (Classe I) é considerado uma má oclusão.
As relações de classe I são consideradas “ideais”, porém essa classificação não leva em consideração as posições das duas ATMs .

As relações molares e incisivos de Classe II e III são consideradas formas de má oclusão, no entanto, nem todas são graves o suficiente para exigir tratamento ortodôntico.

O Índice de Necessidade de Tratamento Ortodôntico é um sistema que tenta classificar as más oclusões em termos de significância de vários traços oclusais e prejuízo estético percebido.

O índice identifica aqueles que mais se beneficiariam do tratamento ortodôntico e encaminhamento para um ortodontista.


== Terminologia oclusal ==


A Posição Intercuspídea (PIC), também conhecida como Mordida Habitual, Posição Habitual ou Mordida de Conveniência, é definida na posição em que os dentes maxilares e mandibulares se encaixam em máxima interdigitação.

Essa posição é geralmente a mais facilmente registrada e quase sempre é a oclusão em que o paciente se fecha quando é solicitado a 'morder juntos'.

Esta é a oclusão à qual o paciente está acostumado, por isso às vezes chamada de Mordida Habitual. Relação Centrada (RC) descreve uma relação reprodutível da mandíbula (entre a mandíbula e a maxila) e é independente do contato do dente.

Esta é a posição em que os côndilos mandibulares estão localizados nas fossas em posição ântero-superior contra a inclinação posterior da eminência articular.

Diz-se que na RC, os músculos estão em seu estado mais relaxado e menos estressado.

Esta posição não é influenciada pela memória muscular, mas sim pelo ligamento que suspende os côndilos dentro da fossa.

Portanto, é a posição que os dentistas usam para criar novas relações oclusais como, por exemplo, ao fazer próteses totais maxilares e mandibulares.
Quando a mandíbula está nesta posição retruída, ela abre e fecha em um arco de curvatura em torno de um eixo imaginário traçado pelo centro da cabeça de ambos os côndilos.

Este eixo imaginário é denominado eixo de articulação terminal.

O primeiro contato do dente que ocorre quando a mandíbula se fecha na posição do eixo da dobradiça terminal é denominado Posição de Contato Retruído (RCP).

O RCP pode ser reproduzido com precisão de 0,08mm devido à cápsula não elástica da ATM e restrição pelos ligamentos capsulares, portanto, pode ser considerado um 'movimento de borda' no envelope de Posselt.

Oclusão Cêntrica (CO) é um termo confuso e muitas vezes usado incorretamente como sinônimo de RCP.

Ambos os termos são usados ​​para definir uma posição onde os côndilos estão em RC, entretanto RCP descreve o contato inicial do dente no fechamento, porém este pode ser um contato de interferência.

Por outro lado, CO refere-se à oclusão onde os dentes estão em máxima intercuspidação no RC.

Posselt (1952) determinou que apenas em 10% das relações dente natural e mandíbula há PIC = CO (máxima intercuspidação em RC) e, portanto, o termo RCP é mais apropriado quando se discute a oclusão que ocorre quando os côndilos estão em sua posição retruída.

CO é um termo que é mais relevante para a aplicação de próteses totais ou onde são fornecidas próteses fixas múltiplas, onde a oclusão é disposta de forma que quando a mandíbula está em RC, os dentes são interdigitados.


=== Envelope de Movimentos de Fronteira de Posselt ===

O Envelope do Movimento Fronteiriço de Posselt (muitas vezes referido como os 'movimentos fronteiriços da mandíbula') é um diagrama esquemático do movimento máximo da mandíbula em três planos (sagital, horizontal e frontal).

Isso abrange todos os movimentos fora do RCP e inclui:

Movimentos protrusivos: Quando a mandíbula se move para frente a partir da relação cêntrica, isso é considerado como protrusão.

Na oclusão de Classe I, os contatos predominantes ocorrem nas superfícies incisal e labial dos incisivos inferiores e nas bordas incisais e áreas da fossa palatina dos incisivos superiores.
Movimentos laterais: Quando a mandíbula se move para a esquerda ou direita, os dentes posteriores inferiores se movem lateralmente através dos dentes opostos.

Por exemplo, quando a mandíbula se move para a direita, os dentes mandibulares direitos se movem lateralmente em seus oponentes e isso é chamado de lado de trabalho da mandíbula (o lado para o qual a mandíbula está se movendo).

Em contraste, os dentes mandibulares esquerdos movem-se medialmente, para baixo e anteriormente através de seus posteriores opostos e isso é chamado de lado de não trabalho (o lado para o qual a mandíbula está se afastando).
Movimentos retrusivos: é quando a mandíbula se move posteriormente do ICP.

Comparados aos movimentos protrusivos e laterais, os movimentos retrusivos geralmente são consideravelmente menores, com amplitude de movimento em torno de 1 ou 2 mm devido à restrição das estruturas ligamentares.


== Orientação, dentes naturais e função ==


Os movimentos mandibulares são guiados por dois sistemas diferentes; o sistema de orientação 'posterior' e o sistema de orientação 'anterior'


=== Sistema de orientação posterior ===

A orientação posterior refere-se às articulações da ATM e estruturas associadas.

São os côndilos dentro da fossa e os músculos e ligamentos associados, juntamente com sua ligação neuromuscular, que determinam os movimentos mandibulares.

As excursões laterais, protrusivas e repressivas da mandíbula são guiadas pelo sistema posterior.
Excursões laterais
É importante definir o movimento dos côndilos nas excursões laterais:
- Côndilo de trabalho: Este é o côndilo mais próximo do lado em que a mandíbula está se movendo (por exemplo, se a mandíbula se move lateralmente para a direita, o côndilo direito é o côndilo do lado de trabalho)
- Côndilo que não trabalha: Este é o lado para o qual a mandíbula está se afastando (por exemplo, se a mandíbula se move lateralmente para a direita, o côndilo esquerdo é o côndilo do lado que não trabalha)

O movimento lateral máximo da mandíbula para o lado esquerdo ou direito é de aproximadamente 10-12mm
O movimento primário nas excursões laterais ocorre no côndilo do lado de não trabalho (NWS) (também chamado de côndilo de equilíbrio ou orbital).

A cabeça condilar do NWS move-se em direção descendente, anterior e medial.

Este movimento é definido contra dois planos separados, o plano vertical e horizontal
Ângulo de Bennet: o ângulo do movimento medial no côndilo NWS em relação ao plano vertical
Ângulo condilar: o ângulo do movimento descendente do côndilo NWS em relação ao plano horizontal
O côndilo do lado de trabalho (WS) (também chamado de côndilo rotativo) sofre um deslocamento lateral imediato e não progressivo.

Este movimento é chamado de movimento Bennet (no entanto, isso pode ser confundido com o ângulo Bennet), então isso é mais comumente referido como um deslocamento lateral imediato.

O côndilo é visto girando com um leve deslocamento lateral na direção do movimento Movimentos protrusivos

As cabeças condilares transladam predominantemente para frente e para baixo ao longo da face distal da face articular na fossa glenóide.

Movimentos protrusivos são restritos pelas estruturas ligamentares a um máximo de ~ 8-11 mm (dependendo da morfologia do crânio e tamanho do sujeito) Movimentos retrusivos

Quanto à protrusão, este movimento é restringido pelas estruturas ligamentares e o limite máximo de retrusão costuma ser ~1mm, porém 2-3mm raramente é visto em alguns pacientes. Não podemos influenciar o sistema de orientação posterior através do tratamento restaurador dentário.


=== Sistema de orientação anterior ===

A orientação anterior refere-se à influência do contato dos dentes nas trajetórias dos movimentos mandibulares.

Os contatos dentários podem ser contatos anteriores, posteriores ou ambos - porém denominados de guia anterior, pois esses contatos ainda são anteriores à ATM.

Isso pode ser ainda classificado em:

Orientação Canina

Oclusão dinâmica que ocorre nos caninos (no lado de trabalho) durante as excursões laterais da mandíbula.
Esses dentes são mais adequados para aceitar forças horizontais em movimentos excêntricos devido às suas raízes longas e boa relação coroa/raiz
É fácil para os técnicos de prótese dentária durante o enceramento e construção da restauração fornecer esta Função de Grupo

Múltiplos contatos entre os dentes maxilares e mandibulares em movimentos laterais no WS, em que o contato simultâneo de vários dentes atua como um grupo para distribuir as forças oclusais.
É preferível que esta orientação seja o mais anterior possível, por exemplo, pré-molares em vez de molares, pois há maior força aplicada quando os contatos estão mais próximos da ATM. Orientação Incisal

A influência das superfícies de contato dos incisivos inferiores e superiores nos movimentos mandibulares é caracterizada pela sobremordida e sobressaliência dos incisivos superiores.


=== Relevância clínica da orientação ===

O contato dentário envolvido na orientação é particularmente importante, pois eles ocluem um grande número de vezes por dia e, portanto, precisam resistir a cargas oclusais pesadas e não axiais.

Ao restaurar o sistema de orientação anterior deve ser compatível com o sistema de orientação posterior.

Isto significa que não deve ser aplicada tensão excessiva no sistema de guia posterior que é limitado pelas estruturas ligamentares.
Após a restauração das superfícies oclusais dos dentes, é provável que se altere a oclusão e, portanto, os sistemas de orientação.

É improvável que a ATM se adapte a essas mudanças na oclusão, mas os dentes se adaptam à nova oclusão através do desgaste dentário, movimentação dentária ou fratura.

Por esse motivo, é importante considerar esses conceitos de orientação ao fornecer restaurações.

A orientação também deve ser considerada antes das restaurações, pois não se deve esperar que um dente fortemente restaurado forneça orientação sozinho, pois isso deixa o dente vulnerável a fraturas durante a função.


== Organização da oclusão ==

A disposição dos dentes em função é importante e, ao longo dos anos, três conceitos reconhecidos foram desenvolvidos para descrever como os dentes devem e não devem entrar em contato:

Oclusão equilibrada bilateral
Oclusão equilibrada unilateral
Oclusão mutuamente protegida


=== Oclusão balanceada bilateral ===

Este conceito é baseado na curva de Spee e na curva de Wilson e está se tornando ultrapassado para a dentição natural restaurada.

No entanto, ainda encontra aplicação em próteses removíveis.

Este esquema envolve contatos no maior número possível de dentes (tanto do lado de trabalho quanto do lado de não trabalho) em todos os movimentos excursivos da mandíbula.

Isto é especialmente importante no caso do fornecimento de prótese total, pois o contato dos dentes no NWS ajuda a estabilizar as bases da prótese no movimento mandibular.

Acreditava-se na década de 1930 que esse arranjo era ideal para a dentição natural ao proporcionar reconstrução oclusal total para distribuir as tensões.

No entanto, verificou-se que as forças laterais aplicadas nos dentes posteriores restaurados produziram efeitos danosos nas restaurações.


=== Oclusão balanceada unilateral ===

Por outro lado, a oclusão balanceada unilateral é um arranjo dentário amplamente utilizado na odontologia atual e é comumente conhecido como função de grupo.

Este conceito é baseado na observação de que os contatos do NWS eram destrutivos e, portanto, os dentes do NWS deveriam estar livres de quaisquer contatos excêntricos e, em vez disso, os contatos deveriam ser distribuídos no WS compartilhando assim a carga oclusal.

A função de grupo é usada quando a orientação canina não pode ser alcançada e também na abordagem Pankey-Mann Schuyler (PMS), onde foi considerada melhor do que a orientação canina, pois distribuiu melhor a carga no WS.


=== Oclusão mutuamente protegida ===


O Journal of Prosthetic Dentistry (2017) define a oclusão mutuamente protegida como “um esquema oclusal em que os dentes posteriores evitam o contato excessivo dos dentes anteriores na posição máxima de intercuspidação, e os dentes anteriores desengatam os dentes posteriores em todos os movimentos excursivos mandibulares”. movimentos, forças danosas são aplicadas aos dentes posteriores e os anteriores são mais adequados para recebê-los.

Portanto, durante os movimentos de protrusão, o contato ou orientação dos dentes anteriores deve ser adequado para desocluir e proteger os dentes posteriores.
Em contraste, os dentes posteriores são mais adequados para aceitar as forças que são aplicadas durante o fechamento da mandíbula.

Isso ocorre porque os posteriores são posicionados de modo que as forças sejam aplicadas diretamente ao longo do longo eixo do dente e sejam capazes de dissipá-las de forma eficiente, enquanto os anteriores não podem aceitar essas forças pesadas devido ao seu posicionamento e angulação labial.

Aceita-se, portanto, que os dentes posteriores devam ter contatos mais pesados ​​do que os anteriores no ICP e atuar como um batente para o fechamento vertical.
Além disso, nas excursões laterais, a função canina ou de grupo deve atuar para desobstruir os dentes posteriores no WS porque, como descrito acima, os dentes anteriores são mais adequados para dissipar as forças horizontais prejudiciais, bem como o contato estar mais distante da ATM, então as forças criadas são diminuídas em força.

A função do grupo ou a orientação dos caninos também devem fornecer a desoclusão dos dentes no NWS, pois a quantidade e a direção da força aplicada à ATM e aos dentes podem ser destrutivas devido ao aumento da atividade muscular.

A ausência de contatos NWS também permite o movimento suave do côndilo do lado de trabalho, pois um contato pode desengatar a orientação do côndilo e, portanto, causar uma relação mandibular instável.


== Contatos defletivos e interferências ==

Um contato defletivo é um contato que desvia a mandíbula de seu movimento pretendido.

Um exemplo disso é quando a mandíbula é defletida em ICP pelo deslizamento RCP-ICP, cujo trajeto é determinado pelos contatos de deflexão dos dentes.

Isso geralmente está envolvido na função (por exemplo, mastigação), no entanto, em alguns casos, esses contatos defletores podem ser prejudiciais e podem levar à dor ao redor do dente (geralmente associada ao bruxismo).

No entanto, alguns pacientes podem estar totalmente inconscientes de contatos defletivos semelhantes, sugerindo que é a adaptabilidade do paciente e não o contato que pode influenciar a apresentação do paciente.
Uma interferência oclusal é qualquer contato dentário que impeça ou dificulte o movimento mandibular harmonioso (um contato dentário indesejável).

As interferências oclusais podem ser classificadas da seguinte forma:
Interferência do Lado de Trabalho: Quando há um dente pesado ou precoce entre os dentes maxilares e mandibulares do lado para o qual a mandíbula está se movendo, e esse contato pode ou não descolar os anteriores.
Interferência do lado de não trabalho: Um contato oclusal no lado em que a mandíbula está se afastando impede o movimento harmonioso da mandíbula.

Estes têm o potencial de serem mais destrutivos em comparação com as interferências WS devido às forças direcionadas obliquamente.
Interferência Protrusiva: Contatos que ocorrem entre as faces distais dos dentes posteriores superiores e a face mesial dos dentes posteriores inferiores.

Essas interferências são potencialmente muito prejudiciais e podem até causar uma incapacidade de incisar adequadamente devido à proximidade da interferência com o músculo. carregamento aumentado.

Quanto aos contatos defletivos, as interferências também podem estar associadas à parafunção, como o bruxismo (embora as evidências sejam fracas) e podem afetar adversamente a distribuição de forças oclusais pesadas.

As interferências também podem causar dor nos músculos mastigatórios devido à alteração de sua atividade, porém há grande controvérsia e debate se existe relação entre oclusão e disfunção temporomandibular.

Quase todos os indivíduos dentados apresentam interferências oclusais e, portanto, não são consideradas a etiologia de todas as DTMs.

Quando há uma alteração aguda ou instabilidade significativa na condição oclusal e, posteriormente, representa um fator etiológico para uma DTM, o tratamento oclusal é necessário.
O ajuste oclusal (remoção de interferências oclusais) pode ser realizado para obter uma relação oclusal estável e é obtido por trituração seletiva das interferências oclusais ou pelo uso de uma placa oclusal rígida para garantir que uma verdadeira relação retruída seja estabelecida.


== Oclusão 'Ideal' ==

Quando há ausência de sintomas e o sistema mastigatório está funcionando de forma eficiente, a oclusão é considerada normal ou fisiológica.

Entende-se que não existe essa oclusão 'ideal' para todos, mas sim que cada indivíduo tem sua própria 'oclusão ideal'.

Isso não se concentra em nenhuma configuração oclusal específica, mas ocorre quando a oclusão da pessoa está em harmonia com o restante do sistema estomatognático (ATM, dentes e estruturas de suporte e os elementos neuromusculares).
No entanto, é importante considerar uma oclusão funcional ideal ao fornecer restaurações, pois isso ajuda a entender o que está tentando ser alcançado.

É definido em textos estabelecidos como:
1.

Oclusão cêntrica e relação cêntrica estando em harmonia (CO=CR)

Deve haver contatos uniformes e simultâneos de todos os dentes posteriores quando a boca está fechada e os côndilos estão em sua posição mais superior e anterior, apoiados contra a inclinação posterior da eminência articular (RC)
Observe que os dentes anteriores também devem estar ocluindo, mas o contato deve ser mais leve que os contatos posteriores2.

Liberdade em CO

Isso significa que a mandíbula ainda é capaz de se mover levemente no plano sagital e horizontal em oclusão cêntrica
Isso também faz parte da teoria da oclusão PMS mencionada anteriormente na organização da oclusão.3.

Desoclusão posterior imediata e duradoura no movimento mandibular

Durante os movimentos laterais excursivos, os contatos do lado de trabalho agem para excluir o lado não de trabalho imediatamente
Durante os movimentos de protrusão, o contato e a orientação dos dentes anteriores atuam para desocluir os dentes posteriores imediatamente4.

A orientação canina é considerada o melhor sistema de orientação anterior

Isso se deve à sua capacidade de aceitar forças horizontais, pois têm as raízes mais longas e maiores, bem como uma proporção coroa/raiz desejável.
Eles também são cercados por osso compacto denso, ao contrário dos dentes posteriores, o que os torna mais adequados para tolerar forças horizontais
A orientação canina também é mais fácil de gerenciar restaurativamente do que a função de grupo
No entanto, se os caninos do paciente não estiverem posicionados corretamente para a orientação dos caninos, a função em grupo (envolvendo os caninos e pré-molares) é a alternativa mais favorável. ou eliminar qualquer avaria ou trauma nas ATMs ou dentes.


== Adaptabilidade do paciente ==

Existem vários fatores que desempenham um papel na capacidade adaptativa de um paciente em relação às alterações na oclusão.

Fatores como o sistema nervoso central e os mecanorreceptores no periodonto, mucosa e dentição são importantes aqui.

Na verdade, é a entrada somatossensorial dessas fontes que determina se um indivíduo é capaz de se adaptar às mudanças na oclusão, em oposição ao próprio esquema oclusal.

A falha de adaptação a pequenas alterações na oclusão pode ocorrer, embora rara.

Acredita-se que os pacientes que estão cada vez mais atentos a qualquer mudança no ambiente oral são menos propensos a se adaptar a qualquer alteração oclusal.

O estresse psicológico e emocional também pode contribuir para a capacidade de adaptação do paciente, pois esses fatores têm impacto no sistema nervoso central.


== Exame oclusal ==

Em indivíduos com dor inexplicável, fratura, deriva, mobilidade e desgaste dentário, um exame oclusal completo é vital.

Da mesma forma, quando um trabalho restaurador complexo é planejado, também é essencial identificar se alguma alteração oclusal é necessária antes da restauração definitiva Em algumas pessoas, mesmo pequenas discrepâncias na oclusão podem levar a sintomas envolvendo a ATM ou dor orofacial aguda, por isso é importante identificar e erradicar esta causa.

Instrumentos Necessários

fórceps de Miller
Papel articulado
Calço
Pinças de mosquito
Espelho
Sonda odontológica
Willis gaugeO exame deve ser realizado usando uma abordagem sistemática, avaliando o seguinte:

Aparência facial
Musculatura
ATM
Cada arco individualmente
Posição de intercuspidação (PIC)
Posição de contato retruído (RCP)
Diapositivo RCP-ICP
Excursões laterais
Saliência
OVD


=== Exame extra-oral ===

1) Aparência Facial Deve ser observada a simetria facial do paciente.
A relação esquelética do paciente deve então ser identificada e anotada.

Classe I: A maxila e a mandíbula estão em harmonia e coincidem
Classe II: A maxila situa-se anterior à mandíbula e é retrognática
Classe III: A maxila situa-se posterior à mandíbula e é prognata. A altura facial do paciente deve ser considerada e deve-se observar onde pode ter havido perda.
2) Músculos
Comece simplesmente palpando os músculos relacionados com a oclusão dos dentes.

Esses músculos incluem os músculos da mastigação e outros músculos da região da cabeça e pescoço, como os músculos supra-hióideos.

É melhor palpar os músculos simultaneamente e bilateralmente.

Os músculos temporal, masseter, pterigóideo medial e lateral, gênio-hióideo, milo-hióideo e digástrico ao lado do trapézio, músculos cervicais posteriores, músculo occipital e esternocleidomastóideo devem ser verificados quanto a sinais de atrofia ou sensibilidade.

A disfunção temporomandibular comumente se apresenta com sensibilidade muscular, mas a dor ou dor palpável associada aos músculos também pode estar ligada à atividade parafuncional.
3) ATM
Distúrbios da ATM podem ser detectados através do exame oclusal.

Peça ao paciente para abrir e fechar enquanto coloca dois dedos sobre o espaço da ATM.

A abertura inferior a 35mm na mandíbula é considerada restrita e tal restrição pode estar associada a alterações intracapsulares dentro da articulação.

Em seguida, peça ao paciente que mova a mandíbula para a direita e, em seguida, para a esquerda.

Observe qualquer clique, crepitação, dor ou desvio.


=== Exame intra-oral ===

4) Arco Maxilar / Mandibular
Avalie cada arco e identifique se há sinais de desarmonia oclusal, sobrecarga, migração dentária, desgaste, linhas de fissura, trincas ou mobilidade (não devido a causas periodontais).

Abfração, lapidação e possíveis lesões de fratura vertical do esmalte também devem ser anotadas, se presentes.5) Contatos na PIC
Comece avaliando a relação incisivo e molar conforme descrito acima.

Da mesma forma, examine a sobremordida e sobressaliência.

Uma sobremordida de 3-5mm e uma sobressaliência de 2-3mm são consideradas dentro da faixa de normalidade. contatos oclusais.

É melhor verificar isso enquanto os dentes estão secos.

Durante a PIC, a maioria dos dentes opostos deve estar em contato
O exame minucioso desses contatos marcados pelo papel articulado ajuda a identificar a natureza dos contatos dentários
Bons contatos estáveis ​​geralmente aparecem como marcas pequenas e não muito proeminentes quando o papel de articulação é usado e há vários contatos em cada dente
Contatos largos e de atrito identificados na PIC podem estar associados a distúrbios na função e podem indicar instabilidade oclusal
Esses contatos podem ser verificados usando Shimstock (uma tira de mylar de 12,5 μm de espessura) e a estabilidade dos contatos pode ser verificada
O operador deve puxar o calço através dos dentes, enquanto o paciente está mordendo
Isso deve ser realizado para cada conjunto de dentes e destacará se há contato adequado para segurar o calço
Este material é apropriado por ser mais fino e eliminará quaisquer falsos contatos que possam ocorrer mesmo com papéis articulados finos com aproximadamente 20μm de espessura
Também é possível puxar o calço quando os pacientes estão mordendo ao contrário de outros papéis articulados, que rasgam 6) RCP
O paciente pode ser guiado para RC usando um dos seguintes métodos;

Manipulação bimanual - manipular os côndilos do paciente para que fiquem em RC
O operador deve repousar levemente os dedos ao longo da borda inferior da mandíbula e os polegares devem repousar levemente na face anterior do queixo
Quando o paciente estiver relaxado, aplique uma leve pressão para baixo no queixo e uma leve pressão para cima sob o ângulo da mandíbula
Desprograme a mandíbula orientando a abertura e o fechamento da mandíbula e, uma vez que o paciente esteja relaxado, peça que feche suavemente e pare quando sentir o primeiro contato dos dentes
Orientação do ponto do queixo - uma mão é usada para aplicar pressão no queixo guiando o queixo posteriormente com alguma força .

Para esses pacientes, um Lucia Jig ou aparelho de desprogramação pode ser construído ao lado da cadeira.
Marque os contatos dos dentes do RCP usando papel articulado, observe os dentes que estão em contato e identifique se esta posição do RCP está causando problemas relacionados à oclusão.

Por exemplo, se houver um forte contato ou interferência no RCP, isso pode ser a causa do distúrbio oclusal.

É importante ser capaz de orientar o paciente para o RCP, pois pode ser necessário fazer um registro nessa posição, principalmente se a oclusão estiver sendo reorganizada, o OVD estiver sendo alterado ou mesmo apenas para fins de diagnóstico e planejamento de tratamento.
7) Slide RCP-ICP
O paciente deve estar em decúbito dorsal e relaxado.

Eles devem ser colocados no RCP pelo operador e, em seguida, solicitados a morder juntos “normalmente”, isso está movendo-os do RCP para sua posição de máxima intercuspidação (ICP).

Peça ao paciente para sentir o slide e identificar se é pequeno ou grande.

O deslizamento deve ser suave e a direção deve ser registrada.

O operador deve avaliar tanto do lado do paciente quanto da frente do paciente, a distância que a mandíbula percorre para frente e lateralmente (no entanto, isso é difícil e pode ser mais fácil de observar montando moldes em um articulador).

Isso pode ser feito observando os incisivos superiores e inferiores durante o deslizamento.

A lâmina RCP-ICP para a maioria dos pacientes dentados tende a ser de aproximadamente 1 a 2 mm na direção anterior e ascendente.

Uma corrediça RCP-ICP deflectiva pode ter alguma relação com um impulso anterior.

Um impulso anterior, que provavelmente está associado aos dentes anteriores ou outros dentes envolvidos na orientação, como os caninos, geralmente faz com que os dentes exibam frêmito.
8) Movimentos Protrusivos
O paciente é solicitado a mover a mandíbula para frente da PIC.

Isto é comumente em torno de uma distância de 8-10mm e normalmente seria até que os incisivos inferiores deslizassem anteriormente às bordas incisais dos anteriores superiores.

Observe os contatos durante este movimento.

Marque os contatos usando papel articulado colorido ao lado dos contatos ICP, que devem ser de uma cor diferente - quaisquer dentes que forneçam orientação e quaisquer interferências devem ser anotados.9) Excursões Laterais
O paciente também é solicitado a mover a mandíbula inferior para um lado.

Movimentos laterais devem ser medidos e medidas de 12 mm são consideradas normais.

Tanto o lado de trabalho quanto o lado de não trabalho devem ser observados durante este movimento.

Registre todos os dentes que estão fornecendo orientação durante esse movimento e quaisquer interferências que estejam presentes (e a localização delas).

Contatos suaves e ininterruptos devem ser identificados quando esses movimentos excursivos são registrados10) OVD
Se o desgaste oclusal pode ser visto, um medidor de Willis é usado para medir a dimensão oclusal-vertical e a dimensão vertical de repouso de um indivíduo.
Faça uma medição colocando dois pontos de referência no rosto do paciente, um sob o nariz (geralmente a columela) e outro sob o queixo.

Faça uma medição enquanto o paciente está em repouso (os dentes não devem estar em contato) e outra com o paciente mordendo juntos, ou seja, na PIC e tire essa medição da medição em repouso para dar espaço à via expressa.

O espaço normal da via livre é geralmente de 2-4 mm. Pacientes com desgaste dentário considerável podem ter perdido a dimensão vertical oclusal (OVD).

Ao restaurar a dentição, é importante estar ciente do OVD exato que o paciente possui e em quanto você pode estar aumentando isso.

O paciente pode não ser capaz de se adaptar a um grande aumento no OVD e, portanto, isso pode ter que ser feito em fases.


=== Resumo ===



== Aplicações clínicas da oclusão ==

A oclusão é um conceito fundamental na odontologia, mas comumente negligenciada, pois é percebida como não sendo importante ou muito difícil de ensinar e entender.

Os clínicos devem ter uma boa compreensão dos princípios relativos à harmonia oclusal para serem capazes de reconhecer e tratar problemas comuns associados à desarmonia oclusal.

Algumas das vantagens associadas a um conhecimento prático destes incluem:
Melhor conforto do paciente: por exemplo, algumas pessoas sentem dor ou sensibilidade após a colocação de uma nova restauração devido à sobrecarga oclusal ou a uma interferência que possivelmente poderia ser evitada se o profissional considerar isso no momento da colocação
Maior estabilidade oclusal: os dentes são menos propensos a derivar, os contatos oclusais provavelmente serão mantidos, etc.
Maior sucesso das restaurações: desgaste excessivo, fraturas, trincas são menos comumente observados onde há uma oclusão ideal
Melhor estética: quando os dentes anteriores estão em conformidade com a função e estabilidade oclusais ideais, o melhor resultado estético é alcançado


=== Ajuste oclusal simples ===

Envolve simplesmente triturar cúspides ou restaurações envolvidas e pode ser indicada após exame cuidadoso quando:

A sobrecarga de forças oclusais resultou em dor, fratura dentária ou mobilidade
O espaço interoclusal é necessário para o fornecimento de restauração (por exemplo, no caso de um dente supererupcionado onde são necessárias correções do plano oclusal)


=== Ajuste ou reorganização oclusal complexa ===

Pode ser necessário em circunstâncias mais graves e alguns exemplos incluem:

Eliminação de um impulso anterior causando dor, desgaste, deriva ou mobilidade
Para fornecer espaço para restaurações anteriores
Manejo do bruxismo (no entanto, incomum)
A eliminação de um distúrbio da articulação temporomandibular (no entanto, como mencionado anteriormente, a oclusão raramente é um fator etiológico para DTM, portanto, deve haver evidências significativas para apoiar isso antes que a alteração da oclusão seja buscada) Alcançar uma reorganização oclusal satisfatória envolve a escolha de uma relação mandibular desejada (seja conforme a PIC existente ou produzindo uma nova PIC coincidente com a RC), decidindo sobre os contatos intercuspais (removendo contatos defletores e ajustando formas/inclinações dos dentes), ajustando contatos excursivos (removendo interferências) e visando uma oclusão mutuamente protegida.

Este é um processo extremamente complexo e envolve um exame clínico oclusal conforme descrito acima, juntamente com um exame detalhado de modelos de estudo montados e enceramento diagnóstico.


=== Modelos de estudo montados ===

É prática comum montar modelos mandibulares e maxilares (impressões são feitas dos dentes e vazadas em gesso) em um articulador em ICP ao construir restaurações que estejam de acordo com a oclusão existente do paciente.

Modelos montados em articulador em ICP são úteis para fins de diagnóstico ou restaurações simples, mas onde um tratamento mais extenso é planejado, é necessário considerar os contatos oclusais em relação ao RC, por exemplo

RCP -> slide ICP.

Outras situações em que um registro de RC pode ser mais apropriado do que ICP incluem quando há planos para reorganizar ou ajustar a oclusão existente (incluindo alterações na dimensão vertical oclusal).

Nestas circunstâncias, a fim de estimular com precisão o movimento mandibular em torno do RC (particularmente abertura e fechamento da boca), usando uma transferência de arco facial, o gesso maxilar deve ser montado em um articulador semi-ajustável e, em seguida, o gesso mandibular deve ser montado usando um Cadastro de CR.

A nova oclusão do paciente é então arranjada para que a nova PIC ocorra quando o paciente estiver em RC.


=== Enceramento diagnóstico ===

Os enceramentos são indicados onde são planejadas alterações na oclusão ou estética.

Os enceramentos diagnósticos são quando são feitas alterações nas formas dos dentes, adicionando cera metodicamente aos moldes de pedra articulados que representam os dentes do paciente.

Isso pode ser feito para demonstrar ao paciente como serão as restaurações planejadas, mas também pode ser inestimável ao simular diferentes esquemas oclusais, estudar a oclusão funcional e fornecer cobertura temporária enquanto a restauração está sendo construída pelo laboratório através de uso de uma matriz.

Uma vez que um plano estabelecido foi construído usando os enceramentos, eles podem ser usados ​​como uma ferramenta para orientar o resultado desejado na boca e fornecer uma ferramenta útil de comunicação com o laboratório dentário e o paciente.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Occlusion_(odontologia)

;;;FR;;;



OCCLUSION (DENTISTERIE)


L'occlusion, dans un contexte dentaire, signifie simplement le contact entre les dents.

Plus techniquement, c'est la relation entre les dents maxillaires (supérieures) et mandibulaires (inférieures) lorsqu'elles se rapprochent, comme cela se produit lors de la mastication ou au repos.
L'occlusion statique fait référence au contact entre les dents lorsque la mâchoire est fermée et immobile, tandis que l'occlusion dynamique fait référence aux contacts occlusaux établis lorsque la mâchoire est en mouvement. Le système masticatoire implique également le parodonte, l'ATM (et d'autres composants squelettiques) et la neuromusculature, donc les contacts dentaires ne doivent pas être considérés isolément, mais en relation avec l'ensemble du système masticatoire.


== Anatomie du système masticatoire ==


On ne peut pas comprendre pleinement l'occlusion sans une compréhension approfondie de l'anatomie, y compris celle des dents, de l'ATM, de la musculature qui l'entoure et des composants squelettiques.
La dentition et les structures environnantes
La dentition humaine se compose de 32 dents permanentes et celles-ci sont réparties entre l'os alvéolaire de l'arcade maxillaire et mandibulaire.

Les dents sont constituées de deux parties : la couronne, qui est visible dans la bouche et se situe au-dessus des tissus mous gingivaux et les racines, qui se trouvent sous le niveau de la gencive et dans l'os alvéolaire.
Le ligament parodontal unit le cément à l'extérieur de la racine et l'os alvéolaire.

Ce faisceau de fibres du tissu conjonctif est essentiel pour dissiper les forces qui s'appliquent à l'os sous-jacent lors du contact des dents en fonction. Les dents sont hautement spécialisées et différentes dents sont impliquées dans des fonctions spécifiques.

Le système masticatoire est largement influencé par ces relations intra et inter-arcades et une compréhension plus large de l'anatomie peut grandement profiter à ceux qui veulent comprendre l'occlusion. Composants squelettiques
Le maxillaire forme un aspect crucial du squelette facial supérieur.

Deux os de forme irrégulière fusionnent au niveau de la suture intermaxillaire au cours du développement formant la mâchoire supérieure.

Cela forme le palais de la cavité buccale et soutient également les crêtes alvéolaires qui maintiennent les dents supérieures en place.

Le squelette facial inférieur, quant à lui, est formé de la mandibule, un os en forme de U, qui supporte les dents inférieures et fait également partie de l'ATM.

Le condyle mandibulaire et la partie squameuse de l'os temporal, à la base du crâne, s'articulent l'un avec l'autre.ATM
L'ATM est formé à partir de l'os temporal du crâne, en particulier la fosse glénoïde et le tubercule articulaire et le condyle de la mandibule, avec un disque fibrocartilagineux situé entre les deux.

Il est classé comme une articulation ginglymoarthrodiale et peut effectuer une gamme de mouvements de type glissement et charnière.

Le disque, qui se trouve entre les deux, est composé de tissu fibreux dense et est principalement avasculaire et dépourvu de nerfs.Muscles
Il existe divers muscles qui contribuent à l'occlusion des dents, notamment les muscles de la mastication et d'autres muscles accessoires.

Les temporaux, le masséter, les ptérygoïdes médial et latéral sont les muscles de la mastication et ceux-ci contribuent à l'élévation, à la dépression, à la protrusion et à la rétraction de la mandibule.

Le ventre antérieur et postérieur du digastrique sont également impliqués dans la dépression de la mandibule et l'élévation de l'os hyoïde et sont donc pertinents pour le système masticatoire. Ligaments
Il existe divers ligaments associés à l'ATM et ceux-ci limitent et restreignent les mouvements des frontières en agissant comme des dispositifs de contention passifs.

Ils ne contribuent pas à la fonction articulaire, mais exercent plutôt un rôle protecteur.

Les ligaments clés pertinents pour l'ATM sont :

Le ligament temporo-mandibulaire
Les ligaments discaux médial et latéral
Le ligament sphéno-mandibulaire
Le ligament stylomandibulaire


== Développement de l'occlusion ==


Alors que les dents primaires (de lait) commencent à pousser à l'âge de 6 mois, les dents maxillaires et mandibulaires visent à s'occlure les unes avec les autres.

Les dents en éruption sont moulées en position par la langue, les joues et les lèvres au cours du développement.

Les dents primaires supérieures et inférieures doivent être correctement occluses et alignées après 2 ans pendant qu'elles continuent à se développer, avec un développement radiculaire complet à 3 ans.
Environ un an après la fin du développement des dents, les mâchoires continuent de croître, ce qui entraîne un espacement entre certaines dents (diastème).

Cet effet est le plus important sur les dents antérieures (de devant) et peut être observé à partir de 4 à 5 ans environ.

Cet espacement est important car il laisse de l'espace pour que les dents permanentes (adultes) éclatent dans l'occlusion correcte, et sans cet espacement, il y aura probablement un encombrement de la dentition permanente.
Afin de bien comprendre le développement de l'occlusion et de la malocclusion, il est important de comprendre la dynamique des prémolaires au stade de la dentition mixte.

Le stade de la dentition mixte correspond à la présence des dents primaires et permanentes.

Les prémolaires permanentes éclatent à environ 9–12 ans, remplaçant les molaires primaires.

Les prémolaires en éruption sont plus petites que les dents qu'elles remplacent et cette différence d'espace entre les molaires primaires et leurs successeurs (1,5 mm pour les maxillaires, 2,5 mm pour les mandibulaires) est appelée espace de marge.

Cela permet aux molaires permanentes de dériver mésialement dans les espaces et de développer une occlusion de Classe I.


== Classification incisive et molaire ==

La classification de l'occlusion et de la malocclusion joue un rôle important dans le diagnostic et la planification du traitement en orthodontie.

Afin de décrire la relation entre les molaires maxillaires et les molaires mandibulaires, la classification de la malocclusion d'Angle est couramment utilisée depuis de nombreuses années.

Ce système a également été adapté pour tenter de classer la relation entre les incisives des deux arcades. Relation incisive
Lors de la description de la relation entre les incisives maxillaires et mandibulaires, les catégories suivantes constituent la classification des relations incisives d'Angle :

Classe I : Les incisives mandibulaires sont en contact avec les incisives maxillaires dans le tiers moyen ou sur le cingulum de la surface palatine
Classe II : Les incisives mandibulaires sont en contact avec les incisives maxillaires sur la face palatine, dans le tiers gingival ou en arrière du cingulum.

Cette classe peut être subdivisée en division I et division II :
La division I comprend les incisives maxillaires qui sont proclinées (90 %) et ces individus ont un chevauchement horizontal plus important - c'est ce qu'on appelle le surplomb
La division II comprend ceux dont les incisives sont rétroclinées (10 %), ce qui entraîne une augmentation du chevauchement vertical - c'est ce qu'on appelle la supraclusion
Classe III : les incisives mandibulaires s'occultent avec les incisives maxillaires sur la surface palatine, dans le tiers incisif spécifiquement ou en avant du cingulum
Dans certains cas, l'overjet est inversé (<0 mm) et les incisives mandibulaires se trouvent en avant des incisives maxillaires Relation molaire

Lors de l'examen de l'occlusion des dents postérieures, la classification se réfère aux premières molaires et peut être divisée en trois catégories :

Classe I : La première molaire mandibulaire s'occlusion mésialement à la première molaire maxillaire, la cuspide mésiobuccale de la première molaire maxillaire s'occlusant dans le sillon buccal de la première molaire mandibulaire.
Classe II : La cuspide mésiobuccale de la première molaire maxillaire s'obstrue en avant du sillon vestibulaire de la première molaire mandibulaire.
Classe III : Si la cuspide mésiobuccale de la première molaire maxillaire s'obstrue en arrière du sillon vestibulaire de la première molaire mandibulaire, toute déviation par rapport à la relation normale des dents (classe I) est considérée comme une malocclusion.
Les relations de classe I sont considérées comme « idéales », mais cette classification ne prend pas en considération les positions des deux ATM.

On pense que les relations molaires et incisives de classe II et III sont des formes de malocclusion, mais elles ne sont pas toutes suffisamment graves pour nécessiter un traitement orthodontique.

L'indice des besoins en traitement orthodontique est un système qui tente de classer les malocclusions en termes d'importance de divers traits occlusaux et de déficience esthétique perçue.

L'indice identifie ceux qui bénéficieraient le plus d'un traitement orthodontique et d'une référence ultérieure à un orthodontiste.


== Terminologie occlusale ==


La position intercuspidienne (ICP), également connue sous le nom de morsure habituelle, position habituelle ou morsure de convenance, est définie à la position où les dents maxillaires et mandibulaires s'emboîtent dans une interdigitation maximale.

Cette position est généralement la plus facile à enregistrer et correspond presque toujours à l'occlusion dans laquelle le patient se referme lorsqu'on lui demande de "mordre ensemble".

Il s'agit de l'occlusion à laquelle le patient est habitué, d'où l'appellation parfois d'occlusion habituelle. La relation centrée (CR) décrit une relation reproductible de la mâchoire (entre la mandibule et le maxillaire) et est indépendante du contact dentaire.

C'est la position dans laquelle les condyles mandibulaires sont situés dans les fosses en position antéro-supérieure contre la pente postérieure de l'éminence articulaire.

On dit qu'en RC, les muscles sont dans leur état le plus détendu et le moins stressé.

Cette position n'est pas influencée par la mémoire musculaire, mais plutôt par le ligament qui suspend les condyles à l'intérieur de la fosse.

C'est donc la position que les dentistes utilisent pour créer de nouvelles relations occlusales comme par exemple, lors de la réalisation de prothèses complètes maxillaire et mandibulaire.
Lorsque la mandibule est dans cette position rétractée, elle s'ouvre et se ferme sur un arc de courbure autour d'un axe imaginaire passant par le centre de la tête des deux condyles.

Cet axe imaginaire est appelé axe d'articulation terminal.

Le premier contact dentaire qui se produit lorsque la mandibule se ferme dans la position terminale de l'axe de la charnière est appelé position de contact rétrudé (RCP).

Le RCP peut être reproduit avec une précision de 0,08 mm en raison de la capsule non élastique de l'ATM et de la restriction par les ligaments capsulaires, il peut donc être considéré comme un «mouvement de bordure» dans l'enveloppe de Posselt.

L'occlusion centrée (CO) est un terme déroutant et est souvent utilisé à tort comme synonyme de RCP.

Les deux termes sont utilisés pour définir une position où les condyles sont en CR, cependant RCP décrit le contact dentaire initial lors de la fermeture, mais cela peut être un contact d'interférence.

D'autre part, CO fait référence à l'occlusion où les dents sont en intercuspidation maximale en CR.

Posselt (1952) a déterminé que seulement dans 10 % des relations naturelles entre les dents et la mâchoire, ICP = CO (intercuspidation maximale en CR) et donc le terme RCP est plus approprié pour discuter de l'occlusion qui se produit lorsque les condyles sont dans leur position rétrudée.

CO est un terme plus pertinent pour l'application complète d'une prothèse ou lorsqu'une prothèse à unités fixes multiples est fournie, où l'occlusion est disposée de sorte que lorsque la mandibule est en CR, les dents s'interdigitent.


=== Enveloppe de Posselt des mouvements frontaliers ===

L'enveloppe du mouvement des frontières de Posselt (souvent appelée « mouvements des frontières de la mandibule ») est un diagramme schématique du mouvement maximal de la mâchoire dans trois plans (sagittal, horizontal et frontal).

Cela englobe tous les mouvements loin du RCP et comprend :

Mouvements protrusifs : Lorsque la mandibule avance à partir d'une relation centrée, cela est considéré comme une protrusion.

En occlusion de classe I, les contacts prédominants se produisent sur les surfaces incisives et labiales des incisives mandibulaires et sur les bords incisifs et les zones de la fosse palatine des incisives maxillaires.
Mouvements latéraux : Lorsque la mandibule se déplace vers la gauche ou vers la droite, les dents postérieures mandibulaires se déplacent latéralement sur les dents opposées.

Par exemple, lorsque la mandibule se déplace vers la droite, les dents mandibulaires droites se déplacent latéralement à travers leurs adversaires et cela s'appelle le côté travaillant de la mandibule (le côté vers lequel la mandibule se déplace).

En revanche, les dents mandibulaires gauches se déplacent médialement, vers le bas et vers l'avant à travers leurs parties postérieures opposées et c'est ce qu'on appelle le côté non travaillant (le côté duquel la mandibule s'éloigne).
Mouvements rétrusifs : c'est lorsque la mandibule se déplace vers l'arrière à partir de l'ICP.

Par rapport aux mouvements protrusifs et latéraux, les mouvements rétrusifs sont généralement considérablement plus petits avec une amplitude de mouvement d'environ 1 ou 2 mm en raison de la restriction par les structures ligamentaires.


== Orientation, dents naturelles et fonction ==


Les mouvements mandibulaires sont guidés par deux systèmes différents ; le système de guidage 'postérieur' et le système de guidage 'antérieur'


=== Système de guidage postérieur ===

Le guidage postérieur fait référence aux articulations de l'ATM et aux structures associées.

Ce sont les condyles dans la fosse et les muscles et ligaments associés ainsi que son lien neuromusculaire qui déterminent les mouvements mandibulaires.

Les excursions latérales, protrusives et répressives de la mandibule sont guidées par le système postérieur.
Excursions latérales
Il est important de définir le mouvement des condyles dans les excursions latérales :
- Condyle de travail : C'est le condyle le plus proche du côté où la mandibule se déplace (par exemple si la mandibule se déplace latéralement vers la droite, le condyle droit est le condyle du côté de travail)
- Condyle non travaillant : C'est le côté vers lequel la mandibule s'éloigne (par exemple si la mandibule se déplace latéralement vers la droite, le condyle gauche est le condyle du côté non travaillant)

Le mouvement latéral maximal de la mandibule vers le côté gauche ou droit est d'environ 10-12 mm
Le mouvement principal dans les excursions latérales se produit sur le condyle du côté non travaillant (NWS) (également appelé condyle en équilibre ou en orbite).

La tête condylienne NWS se déplace vers le bas, vers l'avant et médialement.

Ce mouvement est défini par rapport à deux plans distincts, le plan vertical et horizontal
Angle de Bennet : l'angle de mouvement médial sur le condyle NWS par rapport au plan vertical
Angle condylien : l'angle de mouvement vers le bas du condyle NWS par rapport au plan horizontal
Le condyle côté travail (WS) (également appelé condyle rotatif) subit un déplacement latéral immédiat et non progressif.

Ce mouvement est appelé le mouvement de Bennet (mais cela peut être confondu avec l'angle de Bennet), il est donc plus communément appelé un décalage latéral immédiat.

On voit le condyle tourner avec un léger décalage latéral dans la direction du mouvementMouvements protrusifs

Les têtes condyliennes se translatent principalement vers l'avant et vers le bas le long de la face distale de la face articulaire dans la fosse glénoïdienne.

Les mouvements protrusifs sont limités par les structures ligamentaires à un maximum de ~ 8-11 mm (selon la morphologie du crâne et la taille du sujet) Mouvements rétrusifs

En ce qui concerne la protrusion, ce mouvement est limité par les structures ligamentaires et la limite rétrusive maximale est généralement d'environ 1 mm, mais 2 à 3 mm sont rarement observés chez certains patients. Nous ne pouvons pas influencer le système de guidage postérieur par un traitement de restauration dentaire.


=== Système de guidage antérieur ===

Le guidage antérieur fait référence à l'influence des dents en contact sur les trajectoires des mouvements mandibulaires.

Les contacts dentaires peuvent être des contacts dentaires antérieurs, postérieurs ou les deux - cependant appelés guidage antérieur car ces contacts sont toujours antérieurs à l'ATM.

Cela peut être encore classé en:

Guidage canin

Occlusion dynamique qui se produit sur les canines (côté travail) lors des excursions latérales de la mandibule.
Ces dents sont les mieux adaptées pour accepter les forces horizontales dans les mouvements excentriques en raison de leurs longues racines et de leur bon rapport couronne/racine
Il est facile pour les prothésistes dentaires pendant le wax-up et la construction de la restauration de fournir cette fonction de groupe

Contacts multiples entre les dents maxillaires et mandibulaires dans les mouvements latéraux sur le WS où le contact simultané de plusieurs dents agit comme un groupe pour répartir les forces occlusales.
Il est préférable que ce guidage soit aussi antérieur que possible, par exemple les prémolaires plutôt que les molaires, car il y a une force accrue appliquée lorsque les contacts sont plus proches de l'ATM. Guidage incisal

L'influence des surfaces en contact des incisives mandibulaires et maxillaires sur les mouvements mandibulaires est caractérisée par la surocclusion et le surplomb des incisives maxillaires. En traitement restaurateur, il est possible de manipuler et de concevoir des systèmes de guidage antérieur en harmonie avec le système masticatoire.


=== Pertinence clinique des conseils ===

Le contact dentaire impliqué dans le guidage est particulièrement important car ceux-ci obstruent un grand nombre de fois par jour et doivent donc être capables de résister à des charges occlusales lourdes et non axiales.

Lors de la restauration, le système de guidage antérieur doit être compatible avec le système de guidage postérieur.

Cela signifie qu'il ne faut pas exercer de contraintes excessives sur le système de guidage postérieur qui est limité par les structures ligamentaires.
Lors de la restauration des surfaces occlusales des dents, il est susceptible de modifier l'occlusion et donc les systèmes de guidage.

Il est peu probable que l'ATM s'adapte à ces changements d'occlusion, mais plutôt les dents s'adaptent à la nouvelle occlusion par l'usure, le mouvement ou la fracture des dents.

Pour cette raison, il est important de tenir compte de ces concepts de guidage lors de la réalisation de restaurations.

Des conseils doivent également être pris en compte avant les restaurations car il ne faut pas s'attendre à ce qu'une dent fortement restaurée fournisse des conseils seuls, car cela laisse la dent vulnérable à la fracture pendant la fonction.


== Organisation de l'occlusion ==

La disposition des dents en fonction est importante et au fil des ans, trois concepts reconnus ont été développés pour décrire comment les dents doivent et ne doivent pas entrer en contact :

Occlusion équilibrée bilatérale
Occlusion équilibrée unilatérale
Occlusion mutuellement protégée


=== Occlusion équilibrée bilatérale ===

Ce concept est basé sur la courbe de Spee et la courbe de Wilson et devient obsolète pour la dentition naturelle restaurée.

Cependant, il trouve toujours une application en prothèse amovible.

Ce schéma implique des contacts sur autant de dents que possible (à la fois du côté travaillant et du côté non travaillant) dans tous les mouvements excursifs de la mandibule.

Ceci est particulièrement important dans le cas d'une prothèse complète, car les dents en contact sur le NWS aident à stabiliser les bases de la prothèse dans le mouvement mandibulaire.

On croyait dans les années 1930 que cette disposition était idéale pour la dentition naturelle lors de la reconstruction occlusale complète afin de répartir les contraintes.

Cependant, il a été constaté que les forces latérales exercées sur les dents postérieures restaurées produisaient des effets néfastes sur les restaurations.


=== Occlusion équilibrée unilatérale ===

D'autre part, l'occlusion équilibrée unilatérale est une disposition dentaire largement utilisée dans la dentisterie actuelle et communément appelée fonction de groupe.

Ce concept est basé sur l'observation que les contacts NWS étaient destructeurs et donc les dents sur le NWS devraient être exemptes de tout contact excentrique, et à la place les contacts devraient être répartis sur le WS partageant ainsi la charge occlusale.

La fonction de groupe est utilisée lorsque le guidage canin ne peut pas être réalisé et également dans l'approche Pankey-Mann Schuyler (PMS) où elle a été jugée meilleure que le guidage canin car elle répartissait mieux la charge sur le WS.


=== Occlusion mutuellement protégée ===


Le Journal of Prosthetic Dentistry (2017) définit l'occlusion mutuellement protégée comme « un schéma occlusal dans lequel les dents postérieures empêchent un contact excessif des dents antérieures en position intercuspidienne maximale, et les dents antérieures désengagent les dents postérieures dans tous les mouvements excursifs mandibulaires ». mouvements, des forces dommageables sont appliquées sur les dents postérieures et les dents antérieures sont les mieux adaptées pour les recevoir.

Par conséquent, lors des mouvements protrusifs, le contact ou le guidage des dents antérieures doit être suffisant pour désocculter et protéger les dents postérieures.
En revanche, les dents postérieures sont plus adaptées pour accepter les forces qui sont appliquées lors de la fermeture de la mandibule.

En effet, les postérieurs sont positionnés de manière à ce que les forces soient appliquées directement le long de l'axe longitudinal de la dent et sont capables de les dissiper efficacement, tandis que les antérieurs ne peuvent pas non plus accepter ces forces lourdes en raison de leur positionnement labial et de leur angulation.

Il est donc admis que les dents postérieures doivent avoir des contacts plus lourds que les dents antérieures en ICP et agir comme une butée pour la fermeture verticale.
De plus, dans les excursions latérales, la fonction canine ou de groupe doit agir pour exclure les dents postérieures sur le WS car, comme décrit ci-dessus, les dents antérieures sont les mieux adaptées pour dissiper les forces horizontales dommageables, ainsi que le contact étant plus éloigné de l'ATM, ainsi les forces créées sont diminuées en force.

La fonction de groupe ou le guidage canin doivent également permettre la désocclusion des dents sur le NWS car la quantité et la direction de la force appliquée à l'ATM et aux dents peuvent être destructrices en raison d'une augmentation de l'activité musculaire.

Une absence de contacts NWS permet également un mouvement fluide du condyle côté travail car un contact peut désengager le guidage du condyle et donc provoquer une relation mandibulaire instable.


== Contacts déviants et interférences ==

Un contact dévié est un contact qui détourne la mandibule de son mouvement prévu.

Un exemple de ceci est lorsque la mandibule est déviée en ICP par la glissière RCP-ICP, dont le chemin est déterminé par les contacts dentaires déviants.

Ceci est souvent impliqué dans la fonction (par exemple, la mastication), mais dans certains cas, ces contacts déviants peuvent être dommageables et entraîner des douleurs autour de la dent (souvent associées au bruxisme).

Cependant, certains patients peuvent être totalement inconscients de contacts déviants similaires, ce qui suggère que c'est l'adaptabilité du patient plutôt que le contact qui peut influencer la présentation du patient.
Une interférence occlusale est tout contact dentaire qui empêche ou entrave un mouvement mandibulaire harmonieux (un contact dentaire indésirable).

Les interférences occlusales peuvent être classées comme suit :
Interférence du côté de travail : Lorsqu'il y a une dent lourde ou précoce entre les dents maxillaires et mandibulaires du côté vers lequel la mandibule se dirige, et ce contact peut ou non exclure les dents antérieures.
Interférence du côté non travaillant : Un contact occlusal sur le côté dont la mandibule s'éloigne et qui empêche un mouvement harmonieux de la mandibule.

Celles-ci ont le potentiel d'être plus destructrices par rapport aux interférences WS en raison des forces dirigées obliquement.
Interférence protrusive : Contacts qui se produisent entre les faces distales des dents postérieures maxillaires et la face mésiale des dents postérieures mandibulaires.

Ces interférences sont potentiellement très dommageables et peuvent même entraîner une incapacité à inciser correctement en raison de la proximité de l'interférence avec le muscle. Lorsque le dentiste fournit des restaurations, il est important que celles-ci ne créent pas d'interférence, sinon la restauration recevra chargement accru.

En ce qui concerne les contacts déflectifs, les interférences peuvent également être associées à des parafonctions telles que le bruxisme (bien que les preuves soient faibles) et peuvent affecter négativement la distribution des forces occlusales lourdes.

Les interférences peuvent également provoquer des douleurs dans les muscles masticateurs en raison de la modification de leur activité, mais il existe une grande controverse et un débat quant à savoir s'il existe une relation entre l'occlusion et les troubles temporo-mandibulaires.

Presque tous les individus dentés ont des interférences occlusales et ne sont donc pas considérés comme une étiologie de tous les TMD.

Lorsqu'il existe une modification aiguë ou une instabilité importante de l'état occlusal et représente par la suite un facteur étiologique d'un TMD, un traitement occlusal est nécessaire.
Un ajustement occlusal (suppression des interférences occlusales) peut être effectué afin d'obtenir une relation occlusale stable et est obtenu en meulant sélectivement les interférences occlusales ou en portant une attelle occlusale dure pour garantir l'établissement d'une véritable relation rétrudée.


== Occlusion 'idéale' ==

Lorsqu'il n'y a pas de symptômes et que le système masticatoire fonctionne efficacement, l'occlusion est considérée comme normale ou physiologique.

Il est entendu qu'une telle occlusion "idéale" n'existe pas pour tout le monde, mais plutôt que chaque individu a sa propre "occlusion idéale".

Ceci n'est pas focalisé sur une configuration occlusale spécifique mais se produit plutôt lorsque l'occlusion de la personne est en harmonie avec le reste du système stomatognathique (ATM, dents et structures de soutien, et les éléments neuromusculaires).
Cependant, une occlusion fonctionnelle optimale est importante à prendre en compte lors de la réalisation de restaurations, car cela aide à comprendre ce que l'on essaie d'obtenir.

Elle est définie dans les textes établis comme :
1.

Occlusion centrée et relation centrée en harmonie (CO=CR)

Il devrait y avoir des contacts réguliers et simultanés de toutes les dents postérieures lorsque la bouche est fermée et que les condyles sont couchés dans leur position la plus supérieure et la plus antérieure, en appui contre la pente postérieure de l'éminence articulaire (CR)
Notez que les dents antérieures doivent également être occluses, mais le contact doit être plus léger que les contacts postérieurs2.

Liberté en CO

Cela signifie que la mandibule est encore capable de se déplacer légèrement dans le plan sagittal et horizontal en occlusion centrée
Cela fait également partie de la théorie PMS de l'occlusion mentionnée précédemment dans l'organisation de l'occlusion.3.

Désocclusion postérieure immédiate et durable au mouvement mandibulaire

Pendant les mouvements excursifs latéraux, les contacts du côté travail agissent pour exclure immédiatement le côté non travail
Lors des mouvements protrusifs, le contact et le guidage des dents antérieures agissent pour dégager immédiatement les dents postérieures4.

Le guidage canin est considéré comme le meilleur système de guidage antérieur

Cela est dû à leur capacité à accepter les forces horizontales car ils ont les racines les plus longues et les plus grandes ainsi qu'un rapport couronne/racine souhaitable.
Elles sont également entourées d'un os dense et compact contrairement aux dents postérieures, ce qui les rend plus aptes à tolérer les forces horizontales
Le guidage canin est également plus facile à gérer de manière réparatrice que la fonction de groupe
Cependant, si les canines du patient ne sont pas positionnées correctement pour le guidage canin, la fonction de groupe (impliquant les canines et les prémolaires) est l'alternative la plus favorable. Il est nécessaire de comprendre les concepts qui influencent la fonction et la santé du système masticatoire afin de prévenir, minimiser ou éliminer toute panne ou traumatisme des ATM ou des dents.


== Adaptabilité du patient ==

Il existe divers facteurs qui jouent un rôle dans la capacité d'adaptation d'un patient en ce qui concerne les changements d'occlusion.

Des facteurs tels que le système nerveux central et les mécanorécepteurs du parodonte, de la muqueuse et de la dentition sont tous importants ici.

C'est en fait l'apport somatosensoriel de ces sources qui détermine si un individu est capable de s'adapter aux changements d'occlusion, contrairement au schéma occlusal lui-même.

Un défaut d'adaptation à des modifications mineures de l'occlusion peut survenir, bien que rare.

On pense que les patients qui sont de plus en plus vigilants à tout changement de l'environnement buccal sont moins susceptibles de s'adapter à tout changement occlusal.

Le stress psychologique et émotionnel peut également contribuer à la capacité d'adaptation du patient car ces facteurs ont un impact sur le système nerveux central.


== Examen occlusal ==

Chez les personnes souffrant de douleur inexpliquée, de fracture, de dérive, de mobilité et d'usure dentaire, un examen occlusal complet est essentiel.

De même, lorsqu'un travail de restauration complexe est prévu, il est également essentiel d'identifier si des modifications occlusales sont nécessaires avant la fourniture d'une restauration définitive Chez certaines personnes, même des écarts mineurs dans l'occlusion peuvent entraîner des symptômes impliquant l'ATM ou une douleur orofaciale aiguë, il est donc important pour identifier et éradiquer cette cause.

Instruments requis

Pince de Miller
Papier à articuler
Cale
Pince à moustiques
Miroir
Sonde dentaire
Jauge de WillisL'examen doit être effectué en utilisant une approche systématique tout en évaluant les éléments suivants :

Aspect facial
Musculature
ATM
Chaque arc individuellement
Position intercuspidienne (ICP)
Position de contact rétrudé (RCP)
Diapositive RCP-ICP
Excursions latérales
Saillie
DVO


=== Examen extra-oral ===

1) Apparence faciale La symétrie faciale du patient doit être observée.
La relation squelettique du patient doit alors être identifiée et notée.

Classe I : Le maxillaire et la mandibule sont en harmonie et coïncident
Classe II: Le maxillaire est antérieur à la mandibule et est rétrognathique
Classe III : Le maxillaire est situé en arrière de la mandibule et est prognathique. La hauteur faciale du patient doit être prise en compte et il convient de noter où il peut y avoir eu une perte.
2) Muscles
Commencez par simplement palper les muscles concernés par l'occlusion des dents.

Ces muscles comprennent les muscles de la mastication et d'autres muscles de la tête et du cou, tels que les muscles supra-hyoïdes.

Il est préférable de palper les muscles simultanément et bilatéralement.

Les muscles temporal, masséter, ptérygoïdiens médial et latéral, géniohyoïdien, mylohyoïdien et digastrique ainsi que le trapèze, les muscles cervicaux postérieurs, le muscle occipital et le sternocléidomastoïdien doivent tous être vérifiés pour détecter tout signe d'émaciation ou de sensibilité.

La dysfonction temporo-mandibulaire se présente généralement avec une sensibilité musculaire, mais la douleur ou la douleur palpable associée aux muscles peut également être liée à une activité parafonctionnelle.
3) ATM
Les troubles de l'ATM peuvent être détectés par un examen occlusal.

Demandez au patient d'ouvrir et de fermer tout en plaçant deux doigts sur l'espace de l'ATM.

Une ouverture de moins de 35 mm dans la mandibule est considérée comme restreinte et une telle restriction peut être associée à des changements intra-capsulaires au sein de l'articulation.

Ensuite, demandez au patient de déplacer sa mâchoire vers la droite et ensuite vers la gauche.

Notez tout clic, crépitement, douleur ou déviation.


=== Examen intra-oral ===

4) Arc maxillaire / mandibulaire
Évaluez chaque arcade et identifiez s'il y a des signes de disharmonie occlusale, de surcharge, de migration dentaire, d'usure, de lignes de craquelure, de fissures ou de mobilité (non dues à des causes parodontales).

Les lésions d'abfraction, de facettage et d'éventuelles fractures verticales de l'émail doivent également être notées si elles sont présentes.5) Contacts en ICP
Commencez par évaluer la relation entre l'incisive et la molaire comme décrit ci-dessus.

De même, examinez la surocclusion et l'overjet.

Une surocclusion de 3 à 5 mm et un surplomb de 2 à 3 mm sont considérés comme étant dans la plage de la normale. contacts occlusaux.

Il est préférable de les vérifier pendant que les dents sont sèches.

Pendant l'ICP, la plupart des dents opposées doivent être en contact
Un examen attentif de ces contacts marqués par le papier articulé permet d'identifier la nature des contacts dentaires
De bons contacts stables apparaissent souvent sous la forme de marques petites et peu proéminentes lorsque du papier à articuler est utilisé et qu'il y a plusieurs contacts sur chaque dent
Les contacts larges et frottants identifiés dans la PIC peuvent être associés à des troubles de la fonction et peuvent indiquer une instabilité occlusale
Ces contacts peuvent être vérifiés à l'aide de Shimstock (une bande de mylar de 12,5 μm d'épaisseur) et la stabilité des contacts peut être vérifiée
L'opérateur doit tirer le Shimstock à travers les dents, tandis que le patient mord ensemble
Ceci doit être effectué pour chaque jeu de dents et mettra en évidence s'il y a un contact adéquat pour maintenir le Shimstock
Ce matériau est approprié car il est plus fin et éliminera tout faux contact pouvant se produire même avec des papiers articulés fins d'environ 20 μm d'épaisseur.
On est également capable de tirer le stock de cales à travers lorsque les patients mordent ensemble, contrairement à d'autres papiers articulés, qui se déchireront6) RCP
Le patient peut être guidé vers la RC en utilisant l'une des méthodes suivantes ;

Manipulation bimanuelle - manipulation des condyles du patient pour qu'ils soient en CR
L'opérateur doit reposer légèrement ses doigts le long du bord inférieur de la mandibule et ses pouces doivent reposer légèrement sur la face antérieure du menton
Lorsque le patient est détendu, exercez une légère pression vers le bas sur le menton et une légère pression vers le haut sous l'angle de la mandibule
Déprogrammez la mâchoire en guidant l'ouverture et la fermeture de la mâchoire et une fois que le patient est détendu, demandez-lui de se fermer doucement et de s'arrêter lorsqu'il sent les dents entrer en contact pour la première fois
Guidage du point du menton - une main est utilisée pour appliquer une pression sur le menton en guidant le menton vers l'arrière avec une certaine forceChez certains patients, il peut être difficile de guider la mandibule dans la RC, par exemple chez ceux souffrant de tension musculaire, d'attelle musculaire, de disharmonie occlusale ou d'habitude parafonctionnelle .

Pour ces patients, un Lucia Jig ou un appareil de déprogrammation peut être construit à côté du fauteuil.
Marquez les contacts dentaires RCP à l'aide de papier à articuler, notez les dents qui sont en contact et identifiez si cette position RCP cause des problèmes liés à l'occlusion.

Par exemple, s'il y a un contact important ou une interférence dans le RCP, cela peut être la cause d'une perturbation occlusale.

Il est important de pouvoir guider le patient vers la RCP, car un enregistrement peut être nécessaire dans cette position, en particulier si l'occlusion est en cours de réorganisation, l'OVD est en cours de modification ou même simplement à des fins de diagnostic et de planification de traitement.
7) Diapositive RCP-ICP
Le patient doit être allongé et détendu.

Ils doivent être placés dans le RCP par l'opérateur, puis invités à mordre ensemble "normalement", cela les déplace du RCP dans leur position d'intercuspidation maximale (ICP).

Demandez au patient de sentir la lame et d'identifier si elle est petite ou grande.

La diapositive doit être lisse et la direction doit être enregistrée.

L'opérateur doit évaluer à la fois du côté du patient et de l'avant du patient, la distance parcourue par la mandibule à la fois vers l'avant et latéralement (cependant, cela est difficile et il peut être plus facile à observer en montant des moulages sur un articulateur).

Cela peut être fait en observant les incisives maxillaires et mandibulaires pendant le glissement.

La glissière RCP-ICP pour la plupart des patients dentés a tendance à être d'environ 1 à 2 mm dans une direction antérieure et vers le haut.

Une glissière RCP-ICP déflectrice peut avoir une certaine relation avec une poussée antérieure.

Une poussée antérieure, qui est susceptible d'être associée aux dents antérieures ou à d'autres dents impliquées dans le guidage telles que les canines, provoque souvent un frémitus des dents.
8) Mouvements protrusifs
Le patient est invité à déplacer sa mandibule vers l'avant à partir de l'ICP.

C'est généralement autour d'une distance de 8 à 10 mm et ce serait normalement jusqu'à ce que les incisives inférieures glissent en avant des bords incisifs des antérieurs maxillaires.

Observez les contacts pendant ce mouvement.

Marquez les contacts à l'aide de papier à articuler de couleur à côté des contacts ICP, qui doivent être d'une couleur différente - toutes les dents fournissant des conseils et toutes les interférences doivent être notées.9) Excursions latérales
Le patient est également invité à déplacer sa mâchoire inférieure d'un côté.

Les mouvements latéraux doivent être mesurés et des mesures de 12 mm sont considérées comme normales.

Le côté travail et le côté non travail doivent être observés pendant ce mouvement.

Enregistrez toutes les dents qui fournissent des conseils pendant ce mouvement et toutes les interférences qui sont présentes (et l'emplacement de celles-ci).

Les contacts lisses et ininterrompus doivent être identifiés lorsque ces mouvements excursifs sont enregistrés10) OVD
Si une usure occlusale est visible, une jauge Willis est utilisée pour mesurer la dimension occlusale-verticale et la dimension verticale au repos d'un individu.
Prenez une mesure en plaçant deux points de référence sur le visage du patient, un sous le nez (généralement la columelle) et un sous le menton.

Prenez une mesure pendant que le patient se repose (les dents ne doivent pas être en contact) et une avec le patient mordant ensemble, c'est-à-dire en ICP et retirez cette mesure de la mesure au repos pour donner l'espace d'autoroute.

L'espace d'autoroute normal est généralement de 2 à 4 mm. Les patients présentant une usure dentaire considérable peuvent avoir perdu la dimension verticale occlusale (OVD).

Lors de la restauration de la dentition, il est important de connaître l'OVD exact du patient et de combien vous pouvez l'augmenter.

Le patient peut ne pas être en mesure de s'adapter à une forte augmentation de l'OVD et, par conséquent, cela peut devoir être fait par phases.


=== Résumé ===



== Applications cliniques de l'occlusion ==

L'occlusion est un concept fondamental en dentisterie, mais il est souvent négligé car il est perçu comme n'étant pas important ou trop difficile à enseigner et à comprendre.

Les cliniciens doivent avoir une bonne compréhension des principes concernant l'harmonie occlusale afin d'être en mesure de reconnaître et de traiter les problèmes courants associés à la dysharmonie occlusale.

Certains des avantages associés à une connaissance pratique de ceux-ci comprennent :
Amélioration du confort du patient : par exemple, certaines personnes ressentent une douleur ou une sensibilité après la mise en place d'une nouvelle restauration en raison d'une surcharge occlusale ou d'une interférence qui pourrait éventuellement être évitée si le praticien en tenait compte au moment de la mise en place
Stabilité occlusale accrue : les dents sont moins susceptibles de dériver, les contacts occlusaux sont susceptibles d'être maintenus, etc.
Succès accru des restaurations : usure excessive, fractures, fissures sont moins fréquemment observées là où il y a une occlusion idéale
Meilleure esthétique : lorsque les dents antérieures se conforment à une fonction et une stabilité occlusales idéales, le meilleur résultat esthétique est obtenu


=== Ajustement occlusal simple ===

Implique simplement le meulage des cuspides ou des restaurations impliquées et peut être indiqué après un examen minutieux lorsque :

La surcharge des forces occlusales a entraîné des douleurs, une fracture dentaire ou une mobilité
Un espace interocclusal est nécessaire pour la restauration (par exemple, dans le cas d'une dent en suréruption où des corrections du plan occlusal sont nécessaires)


=== Ajustement ou réorganisation occlusale complexe ===

Peut être nécessaire dans des circonstances plus graves et en voici quelques exemples :

Suppression d'une poussée antérieure provoquant douleur, usure, dérive ou mobilité
Pour fournir de l'espace pour les restaurations antérieures
Prise en charge du bruxisme (cependant, peu fréquent)
L'élimination d'un trouble de l'articulation temporo-mandibulaire (cependant, comme mentionné précédemment, l'occlusion est rarement un facteur étiologique de TMD, il devrait donc y avoir des preuves significatives à l'appui avant que la modification de l'occlusion ne soit poursuivie) La réalisation d'une réorganisation occlusale satisfaisante implique le choix d'une relation de mâchoire souhaitée (soit en se conformant à l'ICP existant, soit en produisant un nouvel ICP coïncidant avec la RC), en décidant des contacts intercuspidiens (en supprimant les contacts déviants et en ajustant les formes/inclinaisons des dents), en ajustant les contacts excursifs (en supprimant les interférences) et en visant une occlusion mutuellement protégée.

Il s'agit d'un processus extrêmement complexe qui implique un examen occlusal clinique tel que décrit ci-dessus, ainsi qu'un examen détaillé des modèles d'étude montés et des wax-ups diagnostiques.


=== Moulages d'étude montés ===

Il est courant de monter des moulages mandibulaires et maxillaires (des empreintes sont faites des dents et coulées dans du plâtre dentaire) dans un articulateur en ICP lors de la construction de restaurations conformes à l'occlusion existante du patient.

Les moulages montés sur un articulateur en ICP sont utiles à des fins de diagnostic ou de restaurations simples, mais lorsqu'un traitement plus étendu est prévu, il est nécessaire d'envisager des contacts occlusaux par rapport à la RC, par exemple

Diapositive RCP -> ICP.

D'autres situations où un enregistrement CR peut être plus approprié que l'ICP incluent les cas où il est prévu de réorganiser ou d'ajuster l'occlusion existante (y compris les modifications de la dimension verticale occlusale).

Dans ces circonstances, afin de stimuler avec précision le mouvement mandibulaire autour de la RC (en particulier l'ouverture et la fermeture de la bouche), à ​​l'aide d'un transfert d'arc facial, le modèle maxillaire doit être monté dans un articulateur semi-ajustable, puis le modèle mandibulaire doit être monté à l'aide d'un Enregistrement CR.

La nouvelle occlusion du patient est alors organisée de manière à ce que la nouvelle PIC se produise lorsque le patient est en RC.


=== Wax-up diagnostiques ===

Les wax-ups sont indiqués lorsque des modifications de l'occlusion ou de l'esthétique sont prévues.

Les wax-ups diagnostiques consistent à modifier la forme des dents en ajoutant méthodiquement de la cire aux moulages en pierre articulés représentant les dents du patient.

Cela peut être fait afin de montrer au patient à quoi ressembleront les restaurations prévues, mais peut également être inestimable lors de la simulation de différents schémas occlusaux, de l'étude de l'occlusion fonctionnelle et de la couverture temporaire pendant la construction de la restauration par le laboratoire. utilisation d'une matrice.

Une fois qu'un plan établi a été construit à l'aide des wax-ups, ceux-ci peuvent être utilisés comme un outil pour guider le résultat souhaité dans la bouche et fournir un outil de communication utile avec le laboratoire dentaire et le patient.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Occlusion_(dentisterie)
