

PROSTATE


The prostate is both an accessory gland of the male reproductive system and a muscle-driven mechanical switch between urination and ejaculation. 

It is found only in some mammals. 

It differs between species anatomically, chemically, and physiologically. 

Anatomically, the prostate is found below the bladder, with the urethra passing through it. 

It is described in gross anatomy as consisting of lobes and in microanatomy by zone. 

It is surrounded by an elastic, fibromuscular capsule and contains glandular tissue as well as connective tissue.
The prostate glands produce and contain fluid that forms part of semen, the substance that is emitted during ejaculation as part of the male sexual response. 

This prostatic fluid is slightly alkaline, milky or white in appearance. 

The alkalinity of semen helps neutralize the acidity of the vaginal tract, prolonging the lifespan of sperm. 

The prostatic fluid is expelled in the first part of ejaculate, together with most of the sperm, because of the action of smooth muscle tissue within the prostate. 

In comparison with the few spermatozoa expelled together with mainly seminal vesicular fluid, those in prostatic fluid have better motility, longer survival, and better protection of genetic material.
Disorders of the prostate include enlargement, inflammation, infection, and cancer. 

The word prostate comes from Ancient Greek προστάτης, prostátēs, meaning "one who stands before", "protector", "guardian", with the term originally used to describe the seminal vesicles.


== Structure ==

The prostate is a gland of the male reproductive system. 

In adults, it is about the size of a walnut, and has an average weight of about 11 grams, usually ranging between 7 and 16 grams. 

The prostate is located in the pelvis. 

It sits below the urinary bladder and surrounds the urethra. 

The part of the urethra passing through it is called the prostatic urethra, which joins with the two ejaculatory ducts. 

The prostate is covered in a surface called the prostatic capsule or prostatic fascia.The internal structure of the prostate has been described using both lobes and zones. 

Because of the variation in descriptions and definitions of lobes, the zone classification is used more predominantly.The prostate has been described as consisting of three or four zones. 

Zones are more typically able to be seen on histology, or in medical imaging, such as ultrasound or MRI. 

The zones are:

The "lobe" classification describes lobes that, while originally defined in the fetus, are also visible in gross anatomy, including dissection and when viewed endoscopically. 

The five lobes are the anterior lobe or isthmus, the posterior lobe, the right and left lateral lobes, and the middle or median lobe.
		
Inside of the prostate, adjacent and parallel to the prostatic urethra, there are two longitudinal muscle systems. 

On the front side (ventrally) runs the urethral dilator (musculus dilatator urethrae), on the backside (dorsally) runs the muscle switching the urethra into the ejaculatory state (musculus ejaculatorius).


=== Blood and lymphatic vessels ===

The prostate receives blood through the inferior vesical artery, internal pudendal artery, and middle rectal arteries. 

These vessels enter the prostate on its outer posterior surface where it meets the bladder, and travel forward to the apex of the prostate. 

Both the inferior vesical and the middle rectal arteries often arise together directly from the internal iliac arteries. 

On entering the bladder, the inferior vesical artery splits into a urethral branch, supplying the urethral prostate; and a capsular branch, which travels around the capsule and has smaller branches which perforate into the prostate.The veins of the prostate form a network – the prostatic venous plexus, primarily around its front and outer surface. 

This network also receives blood from the deep dorsal vein of the penis, and is connected via branches to the vesical plexus and internal pudendal veins. 

Veins drain into the vesical and then internal iliac veins.The lymphatic drainage of the prostate depends on the positioning of the area. 

Vessels surrounding the vas deferens, some of the vessels in the seminal vesicle, and a vessel from the posterior surface of the prostate drain into the external iliac lymph nodes. 

Some of the seminal vesicle vessels, prostatic vessels, and vessels from the anterior prostate drain into internal iliac lymph nodes. 

Vessels of the prostate itself also drain into the obturator and sacral lymph nodes.

		


=== Microanatomy ===


The prostate consists of glandular and connective tissue. 

Tall column-shaped cells form the lining (the epithelium) of the glands. 

These form one layer or may be pseudostratified. 

The epithelium is highly variable and areas of low cuboidal or flat cells can also be present, with transitional epithelium in the outer regions of the longer ducts. 

The glands are formed as many follicles, which in drain into canals and subsequently 12–20 main ducts, These in turn drain into the urethra as it passes through the prostate. 

There are also a small amount of flat cells, which sit next to the basement membranes of glands, and act as stem cells.The connective tissue of the prostate is made up of fibrous tissue and smooth muscle. 

The fibrous tissue separates the gland into lobules. 

It also sits between the glands and is composed of randomly orientated smooth-muscle bundles that are continuous with the bladder.Over time, thickened secretions called corpora amylacea accumulate in the gland.


=== Gene and protein expression ===


About 20,000 protein coding genes are expressed in human cells and almost 75% of these genes are expressed in the normal prostate. 

About 150 of these genes are more specifically expressed in the prostate, with about 20 genes being highly prostate specific. 

The corresponding specific proteins are expressed in the glandular and secretory cells of the prostatic gland and have functions that are important for the characteristics of semen, including prostate-specific proteins, such as the prostate specific antigen (PSA), and the Prostatic acid phosphatase.


=== Development ===


In the developing embryo, at the hind end lies an inpouching called the cloaca. 

This, over the fourth to the seventh week, divides into a urogenital sinus and the beginnings of the anal canal, with a wall forming between these two inpouchings called the urorectal septum. 

The urogenital sinus divides into three parts, with the middle part forming the urethra; the upper part is largest and becomes the urinary bladder, and the lower part then changes depending on the biological sex of the embryo.The prostatic part of the urethra develops from the middle, pelvic, part of the urogenital sinus, which is of endodermal origin. 

Around the end of the third month of embryonic life, outgrowths arise from the prostatic part of the urethra and grow into the surrounding mesenchyme. 

The cells lining this part of the urethra differentiate into the glandular epithelium of the prostate. 

The associated mesenchyme differentiates into the dense connective tissue and the smooth muscle of the prostate.Condensation of mesenchyme, urethra, and Wolffian ducts gives rise to the adult prostate gland, a composite organ made up of several tightly fused glandular and non-glandular components. 

To function properly, the prostate needs male hormones (androgens), which are responsible for male sex characteristics. 

The main male hormone is testosterone, which is produced mainly by the testicles. 

It is dihydrotestosterone (DHT), a metabolite of testosterone, that predominantly regulates the prostate. 

The prostate gland enlarges over time, until the fourth decade of life.


== Function ==

The prostate secretes fluid which becomes part of semen. 

Semen is the fluid emitted (ejaculated) by males during the sexual response. 

When sperm is emitted, it is transmitted from the vas deferens into the male urethra via the ejaculatory ducts, which lie within the prostate gland. 

Ejaculation is the expulsion of semen from the urethra. 

Semen is moved into the urethra following contractions of the smooth muscle of the vas deferens and seminal vesicles, following stimulation, primarily of the glans penis. 

Stimulation sends nerve signals via the internal pudendal nerves to the upper lumbar spine; the nerve signals causing contraction act via the hypogastric nerves. 

After traveling into the urethra, the seminal fluid is ejaculated by contraction of the bulbocavernosus muscle. 

The secretions of the prostate include proteolytic enzymes, prostatic acid phosphatase, fibrinolysin, zinc, and prostate-specific antigen. 

Together with the secretions from the seminal vesicles, these form the major fluid part of semen.It is possible for some men to achieve orgasm solely through stimulation of the prostate gland, such as via prostate massage or anal intercourse. 

This has led to the area of the rectal wall adjacent to the prostate to be popularly (yet inaccurately) referred to as the "male G-spot".The prostate's changes of shape, which facilitate the mechanical switch between urination and ejaculation, are mainly driven by the two longitudinal muscle systems running along the prostatic urethra. 

These are the urethral dilator (musculus dilatator urethrae) on the urethra's front side, which contracts during urination and thereby shortens and tilts the prostate in its vertical dimension thus widening the prostatic section of the urethral tube, and the muscle switching the urethra into the ejaculatory state (musculus ejaculatorius) on its backside.In case of an operation, e.g. because of benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH), damaging or sparing of these two muscle systems varies considerably depending on the choice of operation type and details of the procedure of the chosen technique. 

The effects on postoperational urination and ejaculation vary correspondingly. (See also: Surgery for benign prostatic hyperplasia).


== Clinical significance ==



=== Inflammation ===


Prostatitis is inflammation of the prostate gland. 

It can be caused by infection with bacteria, or other noninfective causes. 

Inflammation of the prostate can cause painful urination or ejaculation, groin pain, difficulty passing urine, or constitutional symptoms such as fever or tiredness. 

When inflamed, the prostate becomes enlarged and is tender when touched during digital rectal examination. 

A culprit bacteria may grow in a urine culture.Acute prostatitis and chronic bacterial prostatitis are treated with antibiotics. 

Chronic non-bacterial prostatitis, or male chronic pelvic pain syndrome is treated by a large variety of modalities including the medications alpha blockers, nonsteroidal antiinflammatories and amitriptyline, antihistamines, and other anxiolytics. 

Other treatments that are not medications may include physical therapy, psychotherapy, nerve modulators, and surgery. 

More recently, a combination of trigger point and psychological therapy has proved effective for category III prostatitis as well.


=== Enlarged prostate ===


An enlarged prostate is called prostatomegaly, with benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) being the most common cause. 

BPH refers to an enlargement of the prostate due to an increase in the number of cells that make up the prostate (hyperplasia) from a cause that is not a malignancy. 

It is very common in older men. 

It is often diagnosed when the prostate has enlarged to the point where urination becomes difficult. 

Symptoms include needing to urinate often (urinary frequency) or taking a while to get started (urinary hesitancy). 

If the prostate grows too large, it may constrict the urethra and impede the flow of urine, making urination painful and difficult, or in extreme cases completely impossible, causing urinary retention. 

Over time, chronic retention may cause the bladder to become larger and cause a backflow of urine into the kidneys (hydronephrosis).BPH can be treated with medication, a minimally invasive procedure or, in extreme cases, surgery that removes the prostate. 

In general, treatment often begins with an alpha-1 adrenergic receptor antagonist medication such as tamsulosin, which reduces the tone of the smooth muscle found in the urethra that passes through the prostate, making it easier for urine to pass through. 

For people with persistent symptoms, procedures may be considered. 

The surgery most often used in such cases is transurethral resection of the prostate, in which an instrument is inserted through the urethra to remove prostate tissue that is pressing against the upper part of the urethra and restricting the flow of urine. 

Minimally invasive procedures include transurethral needle ablation of the prostate and transurethral microwave thermotherapy. 

These outpatient procedures may be followed by the insertion of a temporary stent, to allow normal voluntary urination, without exacerbating irritative symptoms.


=== Cancer ===


Prostate cancer is one of the most common cancers affecting older men in the UK, US, Northern Europe and Australia, and a significant cause of death for elderly men worldwide. 

Often, a person does not have symptoms; when they do occur, symptoms may include urinary frequency, urgency, hesitation and other symptoms associated with BPH. 

Uncommonly, such cancers may cause weight loss, retention of urine, or symptoms such as back pain due to metastatic lesions that have spread outside of the prostate.A digital rectal examination and the measurement of a prostate-specific antigen (PSA) level are usually the first investigations done to check for prostate cancer. 

PSA values are difficult to interpret, because a high value might be present in a person without cancer, and a low value can be present in someone with cancer. 

The next form of testing is often the taking of a biopsy to assess for tumour activity and invasiveness. 

Because of the significant risk of overdiagnosis with widespread screening in the general population, prostate cancer screening is controversial. 

If a tumour is confirmed, medical imaging such as an MRI or bone scan may be done to check for the presence of tumour metastases in other parts of the body.Prostate cancer that is only present in the prostate is often treated with either surgical removal of the prostate or with radiotherapy or by the insertion of small radioactive particles of iodine-125 or palladium-103, called brachytherapy. 

Cancer that has spread to other parts of the body is usually treated also with hormone therapy, to deprive a tumour of sex hormones (androgens) that stimulate proliferation. 

This is often done through the use of GnRH analogues or agents that block the receptors that androgens act at, such as bicalutamide; occasionally, surgical removal of the testes may be done instead. 

Cancer that does not respond to hormonal treatment, or that progresses after treatment, might be treated with chemotherapy such as docetaxel. 

Radiotherapy may also be used to help with pain associated with bony lesions.Sometimes, the decision may be made not to treat prostate cancer. 

If a cancer is small and localised, the decision may be made to monitor for cancer activity at intervals ("active surveillance") and defer treatment. 

If a person, because of frailty or other medical conditions or reasons, has a life expectancy less than ten years, then the impacts of treatment may outweigh any perceived benefits.


=== Surgery ===


Surgery to remove the prostate is called prostatectomy, and is usually done as a treatment for cancer limited to the prostate, or prostatic enlargement. 

When it is done, it may be done as open surgery or as laparoscopic (keyhole) surgery. 

These are done under general anaesthetic. 

Usually the procedure for cancer is a radical prostatectomy, which means that the seminal vesicles are removed and vas deferens is also tied off. 

Part of the prostate can also be removed from within the urethra, called transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP). 

Open surgery may involve a cut that is made in the perineum, or via an approach that involves a cut down the midline from the belly button to the pubic bone. 

Open surgery may be preferred if there is a suspicion that lymph nodes are involved and they need to be removed or biopsied during a procedure. 

A perineal approach will not involve lymph node removal and may result in less pain and a faster recovery following an operation. 

A TURP procedure uses a tube inserted into the urethra via the penis and some form of heat, electricity or laser to remove prostate tissue.The whole prostate can be removed. 

Complications that might develop because of surgery include urinary incontinence. 

Erectile dysfunction because of damage to nerves during the operation, particularly if a cancer is very close to nerves. 

Ejaculation of semen will not occur during orgasm if the vas deferens are tied off and seminal vesicles removed, such as during a radial prosatectomy. 

This will mean a man becomes infertile. 

Sometimes, orgasm may not be able to occur or may be painful. 

The penis length may change if the part of the urethra within the prostate is also removed. 

General complications due to surgery can also develop, such as infections, bleeding, inadvertent damage to nearby organs or within the abdomen, and the formation of blood clots.


== History ==

The prostate was first formally identified by Venetian anatomist Niccolò Massa in Anatomiae libri introductorius (Introduction to Anatomy) 1536 and illustrated by Flemish anatomist Andreas Vesalius in Tabulae anatomicae sex (six anatomical tables) in 1538. 

Massa described it as a "glandular flesh upon which rests the neck of the bladder," and Vesalius as a "glandular body". 

The first time a word similar to 'prostate' was used to describe the gland is credited to André du Laurens in 1600, who described it as a term already in use by anatomists at the time. 

The term was however used at least as early as 1549 by French surgeon Ambroise Pare.At the time, Du Laurens was describing what was considered to be a pair of organs (not the single two-lobed organ), and the Latin term prostatae that was used was a mistranslation of the term for the Ancient Greek word used to describe the seminal vesicles, parastatai; although it has been argued that surgeons in Ancient Greece and Rome must have at least seen the prostate as an anatomical entity. 

The term prostatae was taken rather than the grammatically correct prostator (singular) and prostatores (plural) because the gender of the Ancient Greek term was taken as female, when it was in fact male.The fact that the prostate was one and not two organs was an idea popularised throughout the early 18th century, as was the English language term used to describe the organ, prostate, attributed to William Cheselden. 

A monograph, "Practical observations on the treatment of the diseases of the prostate gland" by Everard Home in 1811, was important in the history of the prostate by describing and naming anatomical parts of the prostate, including the median lobe. 

The idea of the five lobes of the prostate was popularized following anatomical studies conducted by American urologist Oswald Lowsley in 1912. 

John E. 

McNeal first proposed the idea of "zones" in 1968; McNeal found that the relatively homogeneous cut surface of an adult prostate in no way resembled "lobes" and thus led to the description of "zones".Prostate cancer was first described in a speech to the Medical and Chiurgical Society of London in 1853 by surgeon John Adams and increasingly described by the late 19th century. 

Prostate cancer was initially considered a rare disease, probably because of shorter life expectancies and poorer detection methods in the 19th century. 

The first treatments of prostate cancer were surgeries to relieve urinary obstruction. 

Samuel David Gross has been credited with the first mention of a prostatectomy, as "too absurd to be seriously entertained" The first removal for prostate cancer (radical perineal prostatectomy) was first performed in 1904 by Hugh H. 

Young at Johns Hopkins Hospital; partial removal of the gland was conducted by Theodore Billroth in 1867.Transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP) replaced radical prostatectomy for symptomatic relief of obstruction in the middle of the 20th century because it could better preserve penile erectile function. 

Radical retropubic prostatectomy was developed in 1983 by Patrick Walsh. 

In 1941, Charles B. 

Huggins published studies in which he used estrogen to oppose testosterone production in men with metastatic prostate cancer. 

This discovery of "chemical castration" won Huggins the 1966 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine.The role of the gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) in reproduction was determined by Andrzej W. 

Schally and Roger Guillemin, who both won the 1977 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for this work. 

GnRH receptor agonists, such as leuprorelin and goserelin, were subsequently developed and used to treat prostate cancer. 

Radiation therapy for prostate cancer was first developed in the early 20th century and initially consisted of intraprostatic radium implants. 

External beam radiotherapy became more popular as stronger X-ray radiation sources became available in the middle of the 20th century. 

Brachytherapy with implanted seeds (for prostate cancer) was first described in 1983. 

Systemic chemotherapy for prostate cancer was first studied in the 1970s. 

The initial regimen of cyclophosphamide and 5-fluorouracil was quickly joined by multiple regimens using a host of other systemic chemotherapy drugs.


== Other animals ==

The prostate is found only in mammals. 

The prostate glands of male marsupials are proportionally larger than those of placental mammals. 

The presence of a functional prostate in monotremes is controversial, and if monotremes do possess functional prostates, they may not make the same contribution to semen as in other mammals.The structure of the prostate varies, ranging from tubuloalveolar (as in humans) to branched tubular. 

The gland is particularly well developed in dogs, foxes and boars, though in other mammals, such as bulls, it can be small and inconspicuous. 

In other animals, such as marsupials and small ruminants, the prostate is disseminate, meaning not specifically localisable as a distinct tissue, but present throughout the relevant part of the urethra; in other animals, such as red deer and American elk, it may be present as a specific organ and in a disseminate form. 

In some marsupial species, the size of the prostate gland changes seasonally. 

The prostate is the only accessory gland that occurs in male dogs. 

Dogs can produce in one hour as much prostatic fluid as a human can in a day. 

They excrete this fluid along with their urine to mark their territory. 

Additionally, dogs are the only species apart from humans seen to have a significant incidence of prostate cancer. 

In cetaceans (whales, dolphins, porpoises) the prostate is composed of diffuse urethral glands and is surrounded by a very powerful compressor muscle.The prostate gland originates with tissues in the urethral wall. 

This means the urethra, a compressible tube used for urination, runs through the middle of the prostate. 

This leads to an evolutionary design fault for some mammals, including human males. 

The prostate is prone to infection and enlargement later in life, constricting the urethra so urinating becomes slow and painful.Prostatic secretions vary among species. 

They are generally composed of simple sugars and are often slightly alkaline.


== Skene's gland ==

Because the Skene's gland and the male prostate act similarly by secreting prostate-specific antigen (PSA), which is an ejaculate protein produced in males, and of prostate-specific acid phosphatase, the Skene's glands is sometimes referred to as the "female prostate". 

Although it is homologous to the male prostate (developed from the same embryological tissues), various aspects of its development in relation to the male prostate are widely unknown and a matter of research.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prostate
;;;ES;;;



PRÓSTATA


La próstata es tanto una glándula accesoria del sistema reproductivo masculino como un interruptor mecánico impulsado por los músculos entre la micción y la eyaculación.

Se encuentra sólo en algunos mamíferos.

Se diferencia entre las especies anatómica, química y fisiológicamente.

Anatómicamente, la próstata se encuentra debajo de la vejiga, atravesándola la uretra.

Se describe en anatomía macroscópica como consistente en lóbulos y en microanatomía por zona.

Está rodeado por una cápsula fibromuscular elástica y contiene tejido glandular y tejido conjuntivo.
Las glándulas prostáticas producen y contienen líquido que forma parte del semen, la sustancia que se emite durante la eyaculación como parte de la respuesta sexual masculina.

Este fluido prostático es ligeramente alcalino, lechoso o de apariencia blanca.

La alcalinidad del semen ayuda a neutralizar la acidez del tracto vaginal, prolongando la vida útil de los espermatozoides.

El fluido prostático es expulsado en la primera parte de la eyaculación, junto con la mayor parte de los espermatozoides, debido a la acción del tejido muscular liso dentro de la próstata.

En comparación con los pocos espermatozoides expulsados ​​junto con líquido vesicular principalmente seminal, los del líquido prostático tienen mejor motilidad, mayor supervivencia y mejor protección del material genético.
Los trastornos de la próstata incluyen agrandamiento, inflamación, infección y cáncer.

La palabra próstata proviene del griego antiguo προστάτης, prostátēs, que significa "el que está delante", "protector", "guardián", con el término utilizado originalmente para describir las vesículas seminales.


== Estructura ==

La próstata es una glándula del sistema reproductor masculino.

En los adultos, tiene el tamaño aproximado de una nuez, y tiene un peso medio de unos 11 gramos, oscilando normalmente entre los 7 y los 16 gramos.

La próstata se encuentra en la pelvis.

Se encuentra debajo de la vejiga urinaria y rodea la uretra.

La parte de la uretra que lo atraviesa se denomina uretra prostática y se une a los dos conductos eyaculadores.

La próstata está cubierta por una superficie llamada cápsula prostática o fascia prostática. La estructura interna de la próstata se ha descrito utilizando tanto lóbulos como zonas.

Debido a la variación en las descripciones y definiciones de los lóbulos, la clasificación por zonas se utiliza de forma más predominante. Se ha descrito que la próstata consta de tres o cuatro zonas.

Por lo general, las zonas se pueden ver en histología o en imágenes médicas, como ultrasonido o resonancia magnética.

Las zonas son:

La clasificación de "lóbulo" describe lóbulos que, si bien se definieron originalmente en el feto, también son visibles en la anatomía macroscópica, incluida la disección y cuando se observan endoscópicamente.

Los cinco lóbulos son el lóbulo anterior o istmo, el lóbulo posterior, los lóbulos laterales derecho e izquierdo y el lóbulo medio o mediano.
 
En el interior de la próstata, adyacentes y paralelas a la uretra prostática, existen dos sistemas de músculos longitudinales.

En la parte frontal (ventralmente) corre el dilatador uretral (musculus dilatator urethrae), en la parte trasera (dorsalmente) corre el músculo que cambia la uretra al estado eyaculatorio (musculus ejaculatorius).


=== Vasos sanguíneos y linfáticos ===

La próstata recibe sangre a través de la arteria vesical inferior, la arteria pudenda interna y las arterias rectales medias.

Estos vasos ingresan a la próstata en su superficie posterior externa donde se encuentra con la vejiga y viajan hacia el vértice de la próstata.

Tanto la arteria vesical inferior como la rectal media a menudo surgen juntas directamente de las arterias ilíacas internas.

Al entrar en la vejiga, la arteria vesical inferior se divide en una rama uretral que irriga la próstata uretral; y una rama capsular, que viaja alrededor de la cápsula y tiene ramas más pequeñas que perforan la próstata. Las venas de la próstata forman una red: el plexo venoso prostático, principalmente alrededor de su superficie frontal y externa.

Esta red también recibe sangre de la vena dorsal profunda del pene y está conectada a través de ramas con el plexo vesical y las venas pudendas internas.

Las venas drenan en las venas vesicales y luego en las venas ilíacas internas. El drenaje linfático de la próstata depende de la posición del área.

Los vasos que rodean el conducto deferente, algunos de los vasos de la vesícula seminal y un vaso de la superficie posterior de la próstata drenan hacia los ganglios linfáticos ilíacos externos.

Algunos de los vasos de las vesículas seminales, los vasos prostáticos y los vasos de la próstata anterior drenan en los ganglios linfáticos ilíacos internos.

Los vasos de la próstata misma también drenan en el obturador y en los ganglios linfáticos sacros.

 


=== Microanatomía ===


La próstata consiste en tejido glandular y conectivo.

Células altas en forma de columna forman el revestimiento (el epitelio) de las glándulas.

Estos forman una capa o pueden estar pseudoestratificados.

El epitelio es muy variable y también pueden estar presentes áreas de células cúbicas bajas o planas, con epitelio de transición en las regiones externas de los conductos más largos.

Las glándulas se forman como muchos folículos, que drenan en los canales y, posteriormente, en 12 a 20 conductos principales. Estos, a su vez, drenan en la uretra a su paso por la próstata.

También hay una pequeña cantidad de células planas, que se asientan junto a las membranas basales de las glándulas y actúan como células madre. El tejido conectivo de la próstata está formado por tejido fibroso y músculo liso.

El tejido fibroso separa la glándula en lóbulos.

También se asienta entre las glándulas y se compone de haces de músculo liso orientados al azar que se continúan con la vejiga. Con el tiempo, se acumulan en la glándula secreciones espesas llamadas cuerpos amiláceos.


=== Expresión de genes y proteínas ===


Alrededor de 20.000 genes que codifican proteínas se expresan en células humanas y casi el 75% de estos genes se expresan en la próstata normal.

Alrededor de 150 de estos genes se expresan más específicamente en la próstata, y alrededor de 20 genes son muy específicos de la próstata.

Las proteínas específicas correspondientes se expresan en las células glandulares y secretoras de la glándula prostática y tienen funciones que son importantes para las características del semen, incluidas las proteínas específicas de la próstata, como el antígeno prostático específico (PSA) y la fosfatasa ácida prostática.


=== Desarrollo ===


En el embrión en desarrollo, en el extremo posterior se encuentra una bolsa llamada cloaca.

Esto, durante la cuarta a la séptima semana, se divide en un seno urogenital y los comienzos del canal anal, con una pared que se forma entre estas dos bolsas llamadas tabique urorrectal.

El seno urogenital se divide en tres partes, con la parte media formando la uretra; la parte superior es más grande y se convierte en la vejiga urinaria, y la parte inferior cambia dependiendo del sexo biológico del embrión. La parte prostática de la uretra se desarrolla a partir de la parte media pélvica del seno urogenital, que es de origen endodérmico. .

Alrededor del final del tercer mes de vida embrionaria, surgen excrecencias de la parte prostática de la uretra y crecen hacia el mesénquima circundante.

Las células que recubren esta parte de la uretra se diferencian en el epitelio glandular de la próstata.

El mesénquima asociado se diferencia en el tejido conjuntivo denso y el músculo liso de la próstata. La condensación del mesénquima, la uretra y los conductos de Wolff dan origen a la glándula prostática adulta, un órgano compuesto formado por varios componentes glandulares y no glandulares fuertemente fusionados.

Para funcionar correctamente, la próstata necesita hormonas masculinas (andrógenos), que son las responsables de las características sexuales masculinas.

La principal hormona masculina es la testosterona, que es producida principalmente por los testículos.

Es la dihidrotestosterona (DHT), un metabolito de la testosterona, que regula predominantemente la próstata.

La próstata crece con el tiempo, hasta la cuarta década de la vida.


== Función ==

La próstata secreta líquido que se convierte en parte del semen.

El semen es el fluido emitido (eyaculado) por los machos durante la respuesta sexual.

Cuando se emite esperma, se transmite desde los conductos deferentes hacia la uretra masculina a través de los conductos eyaculadores, que se encuentran dentro de la glándula prostática.

La eyaculación es la expulsión del semen por la uretra.

El semen se mueve hacia la uretra luego de las contracciones del músculo liso de los conductos deferentes y las vesículas seminales, luego de la estimulación, principalmente del glande del pene.

La estimulación envía señales nerviosas a través de los nervios pudendos internos a la columna lumbar superior; las señales nerviosas que provocan la contracción actúan a través de los nervios hipogástricos.

Después de viajar a la uretra, el líquido seminal es eyaculado por la contracción del músculo bulbocavernoso.

Las secreciones de la próstata incluyen enzimas proteolíticas, fosfatasa ácida prostática, fibrinolisina, zinc y antígeno prostático específico.

Junto con las secreciones de las vesículas seminales, estas forman la mayor parte líquida del semen. Es posible que algunos hombres alcancen el orgasmo únicamente a través de la estimulación de la glándula prostática, como por ejemplo a través del masaje prostático o el coito anal.

Esto ha llevado a que el área de la pared rectal adyacente a la próstata se denomine popularmente (aunque de manera inexacta) como el "punto G masculino". Los cambios de forma de la próstata, que facilitan el cambio mecánico entre la micción y la eyaculación, son principalmente impulsada por los dos sistemas musculares longitudinales que corren a lo largo de la uretra prostática.

Estos son el dilatador uretral (musculus dilatator urethrae) en el lado frontal de la uretra, que se contrae durante la micción y, por lo tanto, acorta e inclina la próstata en su dimensión vertical, ensanchando así la sección prostática del tubo uretral y el músculo que cambia la uretra al eyaculador. estado (músculo eyaculador) en su parte posterior. En caso de una operación, por ejemplo, debido a hiperplasia prostática benigna (HPB), el daño o la conservación de estos dos sistemas musculares varía considerablemente según la elección del tipo de operación y los detalles del procedimiento elegido. técnica.

Los efectos sobre la micción y la eyaculación posoperatorias varían en consecuencia. (Ver también: Cirugía para la hiperplasia prostática benigna).


== Importancia clínica ==



=== Inflamación ===


La prostatitis es la inflamación de la glándula prostática.

Puede ser causada por una infección con bacterias u otras causas no infecciosas.

La inflamación de la próstata puede causar dolor al orinar o eyacular, dolor en la ingle, dificultad para orinar o síntomas constitucionales como fiebre o cansancio.

Cuando está inflamada, la próstata se agranda y está sensible al tacto durante el tacto rectal.

Una bacteria culpable puede crecer en un cultivo de orina. La prostatitis aguda y la prostatitis bacteriana crónica se tratan con antibióticos.

La prostatitis crónica no bacteriana, o síndrome de dolor pélvico crónico masculino, se trata con una gran variedad de modalidades, incluidos los bloqueadores alfa, los antiinflamatorios no esteroideos y la amitriptilina, los antihistamínicos y otros ansiolíticos.

Otros tratamientos que no son medicamentos pueden incluir fisioterapia, psicoterapia, moduladores nerviosos y cirugía.

Más recientemente, una combinación de punto gatillo y terapia psicológica también ha demostrado ser eficaz para la prostatitis de categoría III.


=== Próstata agrandada ===


Una próstata agrandada se llama prostatomegalia, siendo la hiperplasia prostática benigna (HPB) la causa más común.

La BPH se refiere a un agrandamiento de la próstata debido a un aumento en la cantidad de células que componen la próstata (hiperplasia) por una causa que no es una neoplasia maligna.

Es muy común en hombres mayores.

A menudo se diagnostica cuando la próstata se ha agrandado hasta el punto de dificultar la micción.

Los síntomas incluyen la necesidad de orinar con frecuencia (frecuencia urinaria) o tomar un tiempo para empezar (vacilación urinaria).

Si la próstata crece demasiado, puede contraer la uretra e impedir el flujo de orina, lo que hace que la micción sea dolorosa y difícil o, en casos extremos, completamente imposible, lo que provoca retención urinaria.

Con el tiempo, la retención crónica puede hacer que la vejiga se agrande y provoque un reflujo de orina hacia los riñones (hidronefrosis). La BPH se puede tratar con medicamentos, un procedimiento mínimamente invasivo o, en casos extremos, cirugía que extirpa la próstata.

En general, el tratamiento a menudo comienza con un medicamento antagonista de los receptores adrenérgicos alfa-1, como la tamsulosina, que reduce el tono del músculo liso que se encuentra en la uretra que pasa a través de la próstata, facilitando el paso de la orina.

Para las personas con síntomas persistentes, se pueden considerar los procedimientos.

La cirugía que se usa con más frecuencia en estos casos es la resección transuretral de la próstata, en la que se inserta un instrumento a través de la uretra para extirpar el tejido prostático que presiona contra la parte superior de la uretra y restringe el flujo de orina.

Los procedimientos mínimamente invasivos incluyen la ablación transuretral con aguja de la próstata y la termoterapia transuretral con microondas.

Estos procedimientos ambulatorios pueden ir seguidos de la inserción de un stent temporal, para permitir la micción voluntaria normal, sin exacerbar los síntomas irritativos.


=== Cáncer ===


El cáncer de próstata es uno de los cánceres más comunes que afectan a los hombres mayores en el Reino Unido, EE. UU., el norte de Europa y Australia, y una causa importante de muerte entre los hombres mayores en todo el mundo.

A menudo, una persona no tiene síntomas; cuando ocurren, los síntomas pueden incluir polaquiuria, urgencia, vacilación y otros síntomas asociados con la HPB.

Con poca frecuencia, estos tipos de cáncer pueden causar pérdida de peso, retención de orina o síntomas como dolor de espalda debido a lesiones metastásicas que se han diseminado fuera de la próstata. Por lo general, se recomienda un examen rectal digital y la medición del nivel de antígeno prostático específico (PSA). las primeras investigaciones realizadas para comprobar si hay cáncer de próstata.

Los valores de PSA son difíciles de interpretar, porque un valor alto puede estar presente en una persona sin cáncer y un valor bajo puede estar presente en alguien con cáncer.

La siguiente forma de prueba es a menudo la toma de una biopsia para evaluar la actividad y la invasividad del tumor.

Debido al riesgo significativo de sobrediagnóstico con la detección generalizada en la población general, la detección del cáncer de próstata es controvertida.

Si se confirma un tumor, se pueden realizar imágenes médicas, como una resonancia magnética o una gammagrafía ósea, para verificar la presencia de metástasis tumorales en otras partes del cuerpo. El cáncer de próstata que solo está presente en la próstata a menudo se trata con la extirpación quirúrgica de la próstata o con radioterapia o mediante la inserción de pequeñas partículas radiactivas de yodo-125 o paladio-103, denominada braquiterapia.

El cáncer que se ha diseminado a otras partes del cuerpo generalmente también se trata con terapia hormonal, para privar al tumor de hormonas sexuales (andrógenos) que estimulan la proliferación.

Esto a menudo se hace mediante el uso de análogos de GnRH o agentes que bloquean los receptores en los que actúan los andrógenos, como la bicalutamida; en ocasiones, en su lugar, se puede realizar la extirpación quirúrgica de los testículos.

El cáncer que no responde al tratamiento hormonal o que progresa después del tratamiento puede tratarse con quimioterapia, como docetaxel.

La radioterapia también se puede usar para ayudar con el dolor asociado con lesiones óseas. A veces, se puede tomar la decisión de no tratar el cáncer de próstata.

Si un cáncer es pequeño y está localizado, se puede tomar la decisión de monitorear la actividad del cáncer a intervalos ("vigilancia activa") y diferir el tratamiento.

Si una persona, debido a su fragilidad u otras condiciones o razones médicas, tiene una expectativa de vida de menos de diez años, entonces los impactos del tratamiento pueden superar cualquier beneficio percibido.


=== Cirugía ===


La cirugía para extirpar la próstata se denomina prostatectomía y, por lo general, se realiza como un tratamiento para el cáncer limitado a la próstata o el agrandamiento de la próstata.

Cuando se hace, se puede hacer como cirugía abierta o como cirugía laparoscópica (ojo de cerradura).

Estos se realizan bajo anestesia general.

Por lo general, el procedimiento para el cáncer es una prostatectomía radical, lo que significa que se extirpan las vesículas seminales y también se ligan los conductos deferentes.

También se puede extirpar parte de la próstata desde el interior de la uretra, lo que se denomina resección transuretral de la próstata (RTUP).

La cirugía abierta puede implicar un corte que se hace en el perineo, o a través de un enfoque que implica un corte en la línea media desde el ombligo hasta el hueso púbico.

Se puede preferir la cirugía abierta si existe la sospecha de que los ganglios linfáticos están involucrados y es necesario extirparlos o hacerles una biopsia durante un procedimiento.

Un abordaje perineal no implicará la extirpación de los ganglios linfáticos y puede provocar menos dolor y una recuperación más rápida después de una operación.

Un procedimiento de TURP utiliza un tubo que se inserta en la uretra a través del pene y alguna forma de calor, electricidad o láser para extirpar el tejido de la próstata. Se puede extirpar toda la próstata.

Las complicaciones que pueden desarrollarse debido a la cirugía incluyen incontinencia urinaria.

Disfunción eréctil debido al daño a los nervios durante la operación, particularmente si el cáncer está muy cerca de los nervios.

La eyaculación de semen no ocurrirá durante el orgasmo si se atan los conductos deferentes y se extraen las vesículas seminales, como durante una prosatectomía radial.

Esto significará que un hombre se vuelve infértil.

A veces, el orgasmo puede no ocurrir o puede ser doloroso.

La longitud del pene puede cambiar si también se extrae la parte de la uretra dentro de la próstata.

También pueden desarrollarse complicaciones generales debido a la cirugía, como infecciones, sangrado, daño involuntario a los órganos cercanos o dentro del abdomen y la formación de coágulos de sangre.


== Historia ==

La próstata fue identificada formalmente por primera vez por el anatomista veneciano Niccolò Massa en Anatomiae libri introductorius (Introducción a la anatomía) de 1536 e ilustrada por el anatomista flamenco Andreas Vesalius en Tabulae anatomicae sex (seis tablas anatómicas) en 1538.

Massa lo describió como una "carne glandular sobre la que descansa el cuello de la vejiga" y Vesalius como un "cuerpo glandular".

La primera vez que se usó una palabra similar a 'próstata' para describir la glándula se atribuye a André du Laurens en 1600, quien lo describió como un término que ya usaban los anatomistas en ese momento.

Sin embargo, el término fue utilizado al menos ya en 1549 por el cirujano francés Ambroise Pare. En ese momento, Du Laurens describía lo que se consideraba un par de órganos (no el único órgano de dos lóbulos), y el término latino prostatae que se utilizó fue una mala traducción del término de la palabra griega antigua utilizada para describir las vesículas seminales, parastatai; aunque se ha argumentado que los cirujanos de la Antigua Grecia y Roma debieron ver al menos la próstata como una entidad anatómica.

Se tomó el término prostatae en lugar de prostator (singular) y prostatores (plural) gramaticalmente correctos porque el género del término griego antiguo se tomaba como femenino, cuando en realidad era masculino. El hecho de que la próstata era uno y no dos órganos fue una idea popularizada a principios del siglo XVIII, al igual que el término en inglés utilizado para describir el órgano, la próstata, atribuido a William Cheselden.

Una monografía, "Observaciones prácticas sobre el tratamiento de las enfermedades de la glándula prostática" de Everard Home en 1811, fue importante en la historia de la próstata al describir y nombrar partes anatómicas de la próstata, incluido el lóbulo medio.

La idea de los cinco lóbulos de la próstata se popularizó a raíz de los estudios anatómicos realizados por el urólogo estadounidense Oswald Lowsley en 1912.

juan e

McNeal propuso por primera vez la idea de "zonas" en 1968; McNeal descubrió que la superficie de corte relativamente homogénea de una próstata adulta de ninguna manera se parecía a "lóbulos" y, por lo tanto, llevó a la descripción de "zonas". El cáncer de próstata fue descrito por primera vez en un discurso ante la Sociedad Médica y Quirúrgica de Londres en 1853 por el cirujano John Adams y cada vez más descrito a finales del siglo XIX.

El cáncer de próstata se consideró inicialmente una enfermedad rara, probablemente debido a la esperanza de vida más corta y los métodos de detección más deficientes en el siglo XIX.

Los primeros tratamientos del cáncer de próstata fueron cirugías para aliviar la obstrucción urinaria.

A Samuel David Gross se le atribuye la primera mención de una prostatectomía, como "demasiado absurda para considerarla seriamente". La primera extirpación por cáncer de próstata (prostatectomía radical perineal) fue realizada por primera vez en 1904 por Hugh H.

Young en el Hospital Johns Hopkins; La extirpación parcial de la glándula fue realizada por Theodore Billroth en 1867. La resección transuretral de la próstata (RTUP) reemplazó a la prostatectomía radical para el alivio sintomático de la obstrucción a mediados del siglo XX porque podía preservar mejor la función eréctil del pene.

La prostatectomía retropúbica radical fue desarrollada en 1983 por Patrick Walsh.

En 1941, Carlos B.

Huggins publicó estudios en los que usó estrógeno para oponerse a la producción de testosterona en hombres con cáncer de próstata metastásico.

Este descubrimiento de la "castración química" le valió a Huggins el Premio Nobel de Fisiología o Medicina en 1966. El papel de la hormona liberadora de gonadotropina (GnRH) en la reproducción fue determinado por Andrzej W.

Schally y Roger Guillemin, quienes ganaron el Premio Nobel de Fisiología o Medicina en 1977 por este trabajo.

Los agonistas de los receptores de GnRH, como la leuprorelina y la goserelina, se desarrollaron y utilizaron posteriormente para tratar el cáncer de próstata.

La radioterapia para el cáncer de próstata se desarrolló por primera vez a principios del siglo XX e inicialmente consistía en implantes de radio intraprostática.

La radioterapia de haz externo se hizo más popular a medida que se disponía de fuentes de radiación de rayos X más potentes a mediados del siglo XX.

La braquiterapia con semillas implantadas (para el cáncer de próstata) se describió por primera vez en 1983.

La quimioterapia sistémica para el cáncer de próstata se estudió por primera vez en la década de 1970.

Al régimen inicial de ciclofosfamida y 5-fluorouracilo se unieron rápidamente varios regímenes que utilizaban una serie de otros fármacos quimioterápicos sistémicos.


== Otros animales ==

La próstata se encuentra sólo en los mamíferos.

Las glándulas prostáticas de los marsupiales machos son proporcionalmente más grandes que las de los mamíferos placentarios.

La presencia de una próstata funcional en monotremas es controvertida, y si los monotremas poseen próstatas funcionales, es posible que no hagan la misma contribución al semen que en otros mamíferos. La estructura de la próstata varía, desde tubuloalveolar (como en los humanos) hasta ramificada. tubular.

La glándula está particularmente bien desarrollada en perros, zorros y jabalíes, aunque en otros mamíferos, como los toros, puede ser pequeña y discreta.

En otros animales, como los marsupiales y los pequeños rumiantes, la próstata está diseminada, lo que significa que no es específicamente localizable como un tejido distinto, pero está presente en toda la parte relevante de la uretra; en otros animales, como el ciervo rojo y el alce americano, puede estar presente como un órgano específico y en forma diseminada.

En algunas especies de marsupiales, el tamaño de la próstata cambia según la estación.

La próstata es la única glándula accesoria que se presenta en los perros machos.

Los perros pueden producir en una hora tanto líquido prostático como un humano en un día.

Excretan este líquido junto con su orina para marcar su territorio.

Además, los perros son las únicas especies aparte de los humanos que tienen una incidencia significativa de cáncer de próstata.

En los cetáceos (ballenas, delfines, marsopas) la próstata está compuesta por glándulas uretrales difusas y está rodeada por un músculo compresor muy potente. La glándula prostática se origina en los tejidos de la pared uretral.

Esto significa que la uretra, un tubo comprimible que se usa para orinar, pasa por el medio de la próstata.

Esto conduce a una falla en el diseño evolutivo de algunos mamíferos, incluidos los machos humanos.

La próstata es propensa a infecciones y agrandamiento más adelante en la vida, lo que contrae la uretra, por lo que orinar se vuelve lento y doloroso. Las secreciones prostáticas varían entre especies.

Por lo general, están compuestos de azúcares simples y, a menudo, son ligeramente alcalinos.


== Glándula de Skene ==

Debido a que la glándula de Skene y la próstata masculina actúan de manera similar al secretar antígeno prostático específico (PSA), que es una proteína del eyaculado producida en los hombres, y de fosfatasa ácida específica de la próstata, las glándulas de Skene a veces se denominan "próstata femenina". .

Aunque es homólogo a la próstata masculina (desarrollado a partir de los mismos tejidos embriológicos), varios aspectos de su desarrollo en relación con la próstata masculina son ampliamente desconocidos y objeto de investigación.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Próstata

;;;PT;;;



PRÓSTATA


A próstata é tanto uma glândula acessória do sistema reprodutor masculino quanto um interruptor mecânico acionado por músculos entre a micção e a ejaculação.

É encontrado apenas em alguns mamíferos.

Ele difere entre as espécies anatomicamente, quimicamente e fisiologicamente.

Anatomicamente, a próstata encontra-se abaixo da bexiga, com a uretra passando por ela.

É descrito na anatomia macroscópica como consistindo de lobos e na microanatomia por zona.

É circundado por uma cápsula fibromuscular elástica e contém tecido glandular e tecido conjuntivo.
As glândulas da próstata produzem e contêm fluido que faz parte do sêmen, a substância que é emitida durante a ejaculação como parte da resposta sexual masculina.

Este fluido prostático é ligeiramente alcalino, leitoso ou branco na aparência.

A alcalinidade do sêmen ajuda a neutralizar a acidez do trato vaginal, prolongando a vida útil do esperma.

O fluido prostático é expelido na primeira parte da ejaculação, juntamente com a maior parte do esperma, devido à ação do tecido muscular liso dentro da próstata.

Em comparação com os poucos espermatozóides expelidos juntamente com principalmente o líquido vesicular seminal, aqueles no líquido prostático têm melhor motilidade, maior sobrevivência e melhor proteção do material genético.
Distúrbios da próstata incluem aumento, inflamação, infecção e câncer.

A palavra próstata vem do grego antigo προστάτης, prostátēs, que significa "aquele que está diante", "protetor", "guardião", com o termo originalmente usado para descrever as vesículas seminais.


== Estrutura ==

A próstata é uma glândula do sistema reprodutor masculino.

Em adultos, é do tamanho de uma noz e tem um peso médio de cerca de 11 gramas, geralmente variando entre 7 e 16 gramas.

A próstata está localizada na pelve.

Situa-se abaixo da bexiga urinária e envolve a uretra.

A parte da uretra que passa por ela é chamada de uretra prostática, que se une aos dois ductos ejaculatórios.

A próstata é coberta por uma superfície chamada cápsula prostática ou fáscia prostática. A estrutura interna da próstata foi descrita usando lobos e zonas.

Devido à variação nas descrições e definições de lobos, a classificação por zona é usada mais predominantemente. A próstata tem sido descrita como consistindo de três ou quatro zonas.

As zonas geralmente podem ser vistas na histologia ou em imagens médicas, como ultrassonografia ou ressonância magnética.

As zonas são:

A classificação "lobo" descreve lobos que, embora originalmente definidos no feto, também são visíveis na anatomia macroscópica, incluindo dissecção e quando visualizados endoscopicamente.

Os cinco lobos são o lobo anterior ou istmo, o lobo posterior, os lobos laterais direito e esquerdo e o lobo médio ou mediano.
 
Dentro da próstata, adjacente e paralelamente à uretra prostática, existem dois sistemas musculares longitudinais.

Na parte da frente (ventralmente) corre o dilatador uretral (musculus dilatator urethrae), na parte de trás (dorsalmente) corre o músculo que muda a uretra para o estado ejaculatório (musculus ejaculatorius).


=== Sangue e vasos linfáticos ===

A próstata recebe sangue através da artéria vesical inferior, artéria pudenda interna e artérias retais médias.

Esses vasos entram na próstata em sua superfície posterior externa, onde se encontram com a bexiga, e viajam para frente até o ápice da próstata.

As artérias vesical inferior e retal média geralmente surgem juntas diretamente das artérias ilíacas internas.

Ao entrar na bexiga, a artéria vesical inferior se divide em um ramo uretral, suprindo a próstata uretral; e um ramo capsular, que percorre a cápsula e tem ramos menores que perfuram a próstata. As veias da próstata formam uma rede – o plexo venoso prostático, principalmente em torno de sua superfície frontal e externa.

Essa rede também recebe sangue da veia dorsal profunda do pênis e está conectada por meio de ramos ao plexo vesical e às veias pudendas internas.

As veias drenam para as veias vesicais e depois para as veias ilíacas internas. A drenagem linfática da próstata depende do posicionamento da área.

Os vasos que circundam o vaso deferente, alguns vasos da vesícula seminal e um vaso da superfície posterior da próstata drenam para os linfonodos ilíacos externos.

Alguns dos vasos da vesícula seminal, vasos prostáticos e vasos da próstata anterior drenam para os linfonodos ilíacos internos.

Os vasos da própria próstata também drenam para os linfonodos obturadores e sacrais.

 


=== Microanatomia ===


A próstata é composta por tecido glandular e conjuntivo.

Células altas em forma de coluna formam o revestimento (o epitélio) das glândulas.

Estes formam uma camada ou podem ser pseudoestratificados.

O epitélio é altamente variável e áreas de células cúbicas baixas ou planas também podem estar presentes, com epitélio de transição nas regiões externas dos ductos mais longos.

As glândulas são formadas como muitos folículos, que drenam para os canais e, posteriormente, 12 a 20 ductos principais, que por sua vez drenam para a uretra à medida que passa pela próstata.

Há também uma pequena quantidade de células planas, que ficam próximas às membranas basais das glândulas e atuam como células-tronco. O tecido conjuntivo da próstata é composto de tecido fibroso e músculo liso.

O tecido fibroso separa a glândula em lóbulos.

Ele também fica entre as glândulas e é composto de feixes de músculos lisos orientados aleatoriamente que são contínuos com a bexiga. Com o tempo, secreções espessas chamadas corpos amiláceos se acumulam na glândula.


=== Expressão de genes e proteínas ===


Cerca de 20.000 genes codificadores de proteínas são expressos em células humanas e quase 75% desses genes são expressos na próstata normal.

Cerca de 150 desses genes são expressos mais especificamente na próstata, com cerca de 20 genes sendo altamente específicos da próstata.

As proteínas específicas correspondentes são expressas nas células glandulares e secretoras da glândula prostática e têm funções importantes para as características do sêmen, incluindo proteínas específicas da próstata, como o antígeno prostático específico (PSA) e a fosfatase ácida prostática.


=== Desenvolvimento ===


No embrião em desenvolvimento, na extremidade posterior encontra-se uma bolsa chamada cloaca.

Este, ao longo da quarta à sétima semana, divide-se em um seio urogenital e no início do canal anal, com uma parede se formando entre essas duas bolsas denominada septo urorretal.

O seio urogenital divide-se em três partes, com a parte média formando a uretra; a parte superior é maior e torna-se a bexiga urinária, e a parte inferior então muda dependendo do sexo biológico do embrião. .

Por volta do final do terceiro mês de vida embrionária, surgem excrescências da parte prostática da uretra e crescem no mesênquima circundante.

As células que revestem esta parte da uretra diferenciam-se no epitélio glandular da próstata.

O mesênquima associado diferencia-se no tecido conjuntivo denso e no músculo liso da próstata. A condensação do mesênquima, da uretra e dos ductos de Wolff dá origem à próstata adulta, um órgão composto de vários componentes glandulares e não glandulares fortemente fundidos.

Para funcionar adequadamente, a próstata precisa de hormônios masculinos (andrógenos), que são responsáveis ​​pelas características sexuais masculinas.

O principal hormônio masculino é a testosterona, que é produzida principalmente pelos testículos.

É a diidrotestosterona (DHT), um metabólito da testosterona, que regula predominantemente a próstata.

A próstata aumenta com o tempo, até a quarta década de vida.


== Função ==

A próstata secreta fluido que se torna parte do sêmen.

O sêmen é o fluido emitido (ejaculado) pelos machos durante a resposta sexual.

Quando o esperma é emitido, ele é transmitido do ducto deferente para a uretra masculina através dos ductos ejaculatórios, que ficam dentro da próstata.

A ejaculação é a expulsão do sêmen da uretra.

O sêmen é movido para a uretra após contrações do músculo liso dos vasos deferentes e vesículas seminais, após estimulação, principalmente da glande do pênis.

A estimulação envia sinais nervosos através dos nervos pudendos internos para a coluna lombar superior; os sinais nervosos que causam a contração agem através dos nervos hipogástricos.

Depois de viajar para a uretra, o fluido seminal é ejaculado pela contração do músculo bulbocavernoso.

As secreções da próstata incluem enzimas proteolíticas, fosfatase ácida prostática, fibrinolisina, zinco e antígeno específico da próstata.

Juntamente com as secreções das vesículas seminais, elas formam a maior parte do fluido do sêmen. Alguns homens podem atingir o orgasmo apenas através da estimulação da próstata, como por meio de massagem na próstata ou sexo anal.

Isso fez com que a área da parede retal adjacente à próstata fosse popularmente (ainda que imprecisa) chamada de "ponto G masculino". impulsionado pelos dois sistemas musculares longitudinais que correm ao longo da uretra prostática.

Estes são o dilatador uretral (musculus dilatator urethrae) na parte frontal da uretra, que se contrai durante a micção e, assim, encurta e inclina a próstata em sua dimensão vertical, ampliando assim a seção prostática do tubo uretral e o músculo que muda a uretra para o ejaculatório. No caso de uma operação, por exemplo, por causa de hiperplasia prostática benigna (HBP), danificar ou poupar esses dois sistemas musculares varia consideravelmente dependendo da escolha do tipo de operação e detalhes do procedimento do escolhido técnica.

Os efeitos na micção pós-operatória e na ejaculação variam de forma correspondente. (Veja também: Cirurgia para hiperplasia prostática benigna).


== Significado clínico ==



=== Inflamação ===


A prostatite é a inflamação da próstata.

Pode ser causada por infecção por bactérias ou outras causas não infecciosas.

A inflamação da próstata pode causar dor ao urinar ou ejaculação, dor na virilha, dificuldade em urinar ou sintomas constitucionais, como febre ou cansaço.

Quando inflamada, a próstata aumenta de tamanho e fica sensível ao toque durante o toque retal.

Uma bactéria culpada pode crescer em uma cultura de urina. A prostatite aguda e a prostatite bacteriana crônica são tratadas com antibióticos.

A prostatite crônica não bacteriana, ou síndrome da dor pélvica crônica masculina, é tratada por uma grande variedade de modalidades, incluindo os medicamentos alfabloqueadores, antiinflamatórios não esteróides e amitriptilina, anti-histamínicos e outros ansiolíticos.

Outros tratamentos que não são medicamentos podem incluir fisioterapia, psicoterapia, moduladores nervosos e cirurgia.

Mais recentemente, uma combinação de ponto-gatilho e terapia psicológica provou ser eficaz também para prostatite de categoria III.


=== Próstata aumentada ===


O aumento da próstata é chamado de prostatomegalia, sendo a hiperplasia prostática benigna (HPB) a causa mais comum.

BPH refere-se a um aumento da próstata devido a um aumento no número de células que compõem a próstata (hiperplasia) de uma causa que não é uma malignidade.

É muito comum em homens mais velhos.

Muitas vezes, é diagnosticado quando a próstata aumenta a ponto de tornar a micção difícil.

Os sintomas incluem a necessidade de urinar com frequência (frequência urinária) ou demorar um pouco para começar (hesitação urinária).

Se a próstata crescer muito, pode contrair a uretra e impedir o fluxo de urina, tornando a micção dolorosa e difícil ou, em casos extremos, completamente impossível, causando retenção urinária.

Com o tempo, a retenção crônica pode fazer com que a bexiga fique maior e cause um refluxo de urina para os rins (hidronefrose). A HPB pode ser tratada com medicamentos, um procedimento minimamente invasivo ou, em casos extremos, cirurgia que remove a próstata.

Em geral, o tratamento geralmente começa com um medicamento antagonista do receptor alfa-1 adrenérgico, como a tansulosina, que reduz o tônus ​​do músculo liso encontrado na uretra que passa pela próstata, facilitando a passagem da urina.

Para pessoas com sintomas persistentes, os procedimentos podem ser considerados.

A cirurgia mais utilizada nesses casos é a ressecção transuretral da próstata, na qual um instrumento é inserido através da uretra para remover o tecido prostático que está pressionando a parte superior da uretra e restringindo o fluxo de urina.

Procedimentos minimamente invasivos incluem ablação transuretral por agulha da próstata e termoterapia transuretral por micro-ondas.

Esses procedimentos ambulatoriais podem ser seguidos pela inserção de um stent temporário, para permitir a micção voluntária normal, sem exacerbar os sintomas irritativos.


=== Câncer ===


O câncer de próstata é um dos cânceres mais comuns que afetam homens mais velhos no Reino Unido, Estados Unidos, norte da Europa e Austrália, e uma causa significativa de morte para homens idosos em todo o mundo.

Muitas vezes, uma pessoa não apresenta sintomas; quando ocorrem, os sintomas podem incluir frequência urinária, urgência, hesitação e outros sintomas associados à HBP.

Raramente, esses cânceres podem causar perda de peso, retenção de urina ou sintomas como dor nas costas devido a lesões metastáticas que se espalharam para fora da próstata. as primeiras investigações feitas para verificar se há câncer de próstata.

Os valores de PSA são difíceis de interpretar, porque um valor alto pode estar presente em uma pessoa sem câncer e um valor baixo pode estar presente em alguém com câncer.

A próxima forma de teste é geralmente a realização de uma biópsia para avaliar a atividade e a invasividade do tumor.

Devido ao risco significativo de sobrediagnóstico com rastreamento generalizado na população em geral, o rastreamento do câncer de próstata é controverso.

Se um tumor for confirmado, imagens médicas, como ressonância magnética ou cintilografia óssea, podem ser feitas para verificar a presença de metástases tumorais em outras partes do corpo. próstata ou com radioterapia ou pela inserção de pequenas partículas radioativas de iodo-125 ou paládio-103, denominada braquiterapia.

O câncer que se espalhou para outras partes do corpo é geralmente tratado também com terapia hormonal, para privar o tumor de hormônios sexuais (andrógenos) que estimulam a proliferação.

Isso geralmente é feito com o uso de análogos de GnRH ou agentes que bloqueiam os receptores nos quais os andrógenos atuam, como a bicalutamida; ocasionalmente, a remoção cirúrgica dos testículos pode ser feita.

O câncer que não responde ao tratamento hormonal, ou que progride após o tratamento, pode ser tratado com quimioterapia, como o docetaxel.

A radioterapia também pode ser usada para ajudar na dor associada a lesões ósseas. Às vezes, pode-se decidir não tratar o câncer de próstata.

Se um câncer for pequeno e localizado, pode-se tomar a decisão de monitorar a atividade do câncer em intervalos ("vigilância ativa") e adiar o tratamento.

Se uma pessoa, devido à fragilidade ou outras condições médicas ou razões, tem uma expectativa de vida inferior a dez anos, os impactos do tratamento podem superar quaisquer benefícios percebidos.


=== Cirurgia ===


A cirurgia para remover a próstata é chamada de prostatectomia e geralmente é feita como tratamento para câncer limitado à próstata ou aumento prostático.

Quando é feito, pode ser feito como cirurgia aberta ou como cirurgia laparoscópica (buraco de fechadura).

Estes são feitos sob anestesia geral.

Normalmente, o procedimento para o câncer é uma prostatectomia radical, o que significa que as vesículas seminais são removidas e o ducto deferente também é amarrado.

Parte da próstata também pode ser removida de dentro da uretra, chamada de ressecção transuretral da próstata (RTU).

A cirurgia aberta pode envolver um corte feito no períneo ou através de uma abordagem que envolve um corte na linha média do umbigo até o osso púbico.

A cirurgia aberta pode ser preferida se houver suspeita de envolvimento de linfonodos e eles precisarem ser removidos ou biopsiados durante um procedimento.

Uma abordagem perineal não envolve a remoção de linfonodos e pode resultar em menos dor e uma recuperação mais rápida após uma operação.

Um procedimento TURP usa um tubo inserido na uretra através do pênis e alguma forma de calor, eletricidade ou laser para remover o tecido da próstata. A próstata inteira pode ser removida.

As complicações que podem se desenvolver por causa da cirurgia incluem incontinência urinária.

Disfunção erétil devido a danos nos nervos durante a operação, principalmente se o câncer estiver muito próximo aos nervos.

A ejaculação do sêmen não ocorrerá durante o orgasmo se os vasos deferentes forem amarrados e as vesículas seminais removidas, como durante uma prosatectomia radial.

Isso significa que um homem se torna infértil.

Às vezes, o orgasmo pode não ocorrer ou pode ser doloroso.

O comprimento do pênis pode mudar se a parte da uretra dentro da próstata também for removida.

Complicações gerais devido à cirurgia também podem se desenvolver, como infecções, sangramento, danos inadvertidos a órgãos próximos ou dentro do abdômen e a formação de coágulos sanguíneos.


== História ==

A próstata foi formalmente identificada pela primeira vez pelo anatomista veneziano Niccolò Massa em Anatomiae libri introductorius (Introdução à Anatomia) 1536 e ilustrada pelo anatomista flamengo Andreas Vesalius em Tabulae anatomicae sex (seis tabelas anatômicas) em 1538.

Massa descreveu-o como uma "carne glandular sobre a qual repousa o colo da bexiga" e Vesalius como um "corpo glandular".

A primeira vez que uma palavra semelhante a 'próstata' foi usada para descrever a glândula é creditada a André du Laurens em 1600, que a descreveu como um termo já em uso pelos anatomistas da época.

O termo, no entanto, foi usado pelo menos já em 1549 pelo cirurgião francês Ambroise Pare. foi usada uma tradução incorreta do termo para a palavra grega antiga usada para descrever as vesículas seminais, parastatai; embora tenha sido argumentado que os cirurgiões da Grécia e Roma antigas devem ter visto pelo menos a próstata como uma entidade anatômica.

O termo prostatae foi tomado em vez do gramaticalmente correto prostator (singular) e prostatores (plural) porque o gênero do termo grego antigo foi tomado como feminino, quando na verdade era masculino. foi uma ideia popularizada ao longo do início do século 18, assim como o termo da língua inglesa usado para descrever o órgão, próstata, atribuído a William Cheselden.

Uma monografia, "Observações práticas sobre o tratamento das doenças da próstata" por Everard Home em 1811, foi importante na história da próstata, descrevendo e nomeando partes anatômicas da próstata, incluindo o lobo mediano.

A ideia dos cinco lobos da próstata foi popularizada após estudos anatômicos conduzidos pelo urologista americano Oswald Lowsley em 1912.

John E.

McNeal propôs pela primeira vez a ideia de "zonas" em 1968; McNeal descobriu que a superfície de corte relativamente homogênea de uma próstata adulta em nada se assemelhava a "lóbulos" e, portanto, levou à descrição de "zonas". John Adams e cada vez mais descrito no final do século 19.

O câncer de próstata foi inicialmente considerado uma doença rara, provavelmente devido à expectativa de vida mais curta e métodos de detecção mais pobres no século XIX.

Os primeiros tratamentos do câncer de próstata foram cirurgias para aliviar a obstrução urinária.

Samuel David Gross foi creditado com a primeira menção de uma prostatectomia, como "absurda demais para ser seriamente considerada" A primeira remoção para câncer de próstata (prostatectomia perineal radical) foi realizada pela primeira vez em 1904 por Hugh H.

Young no Hospital Johns Hopkins; a remoção parcial da glândula foi realizada por Theodore Billroth em 1867. A ressecção transuretral da próstata (RTUP) substituiu a prostatectomia radical para alívio sintomático da obstrução em meados do século 20 porque poderia preservar melhor a função erétil peniana.

A prostatectomia retropúbica radical foi desenvolvida em 1983 por Patrick Walsh.

Em 1941, Carlos B.

Huggins publicou estudos nos quais usou estrogênio para se opor à produção de testosterona em homens com câncer de próstata metastático.

Essa descoberta da "castração química" rendeu a Huggins o Prêmio Nobel de Fisiologia ou Medicina de 1966. O papel do hormônio liberador de gonadotrofina (GnRH) na reprodução foi determinado por Andrzej W.

Schally e Roger Guillemin, que ganharam o Prêmio Nobel de Fisiologia ou Medicina de 1977 por este trabalho.

Agonistas do receptor de GnRH, como leuprorrelina e goserelina, foram posteriormente desenvolvidos e usados ​​para tratar o câncer de próstata.

A radioterapia para câncer de próstata foi desenvolvida pela primeira vez no início do século 20 e inicialmente consistia em implantes de rádio intraprostático.

A radioterapia de feixe externo tornou-se mais popular à medida que fontes de radiação de raios X mais fortes se tornaram disponíveis em meados do século XX.

A braquiterapia com sementes implantadas (para câncer de próstata) foi descrita pela primeira vez em 1983.

A quimioterapia sistêmica para câncer de próstata foi estudada pela primeira vez na década de 1970.

O regime inicial de ciclofosfamida e 5-fluorouracil foi rapidamente acompanhado por vários regimes usando uma série de outros medicamentos quimioterápicos sistêmicos.


== Outros animais ==

A próstata é encontrada apenas em mamíferos.

As glândulas prostáticas dos marsupiais machos são proporcionalmente maiores do que as dos mamíferos placentários.

A presença de uma próstata funcional em monotremados é controversa, e se os monotremados possuem próstatas funcionais, eles podem não dar a mesma contribuição para o sêmen que em outros mamíferos. tubular.

A glândula é particularmente bem desenvolvida em cães, raposas e javalis, embora em outros mamíferos, como touros, possa ser pequena e imperceptível.

Em outros animais, como marsupiais e pequenos ruminantes, a próstata é disseminada, ou seja, não localizável especificamente como um tecido distinto, mas presente em toda a parte relevante da uretra; em outros animais, como veados e alces americanos, pode estar presente como órgão específico e de forma disseminada.

Em algumas espécies de marsupiais, o tamanho da próstata muda sazonalmente.

A próstata é a única glândula acessória que ocorre em cães machos.

Os cães podem produzir em uma hora tanto fluido prostático quanto um humano pode produzir em um dia.

Eles excretam esse fluido junto com a urina para marcar seu território.

Além disso, os cães são as únicas espécies além dos humanos que apresentam uma incidência significativa de câncer de próstata.

Nos cetáceos (baleias, golfinhos, botos) a próstata é composta por glândulas uretrais difusas e é circundada por um músculo compressor muito potente. A próstata origina-se dos tecidos da parede uretral.

Isso significa que a uretra, um tubo compressível usado para urinar, passa pelo meio da próstata.

Isso leva a uma falha de design evolutivo para alguns mamíferos, incluindo machos humanos.

A próstata é propensa a infecções e aumento mais tarde na vida, constringindo a uretra, de modo que a micção torna-se lenta e dolorosa. As secreções prostáticas variam entre as espécies.

Eles são geralmente compostos de açúcares simples e geralmente são ligeiramente alcalinos.


== Glândula de Skene ==

Como a glândula de Skene e a próstata masculina agem de maneira semelhante, secretando o antígeno específico da próstata (PSA), que é uma proteína ejaculada produzida nos homens, e da fosfatase ácida específica da próstata, as glândulas de Skene são às vezes chamadas de "próstata feminina". .

Embora seja homóloga à próstata masculina (desenvolvida a partir dos mesmos tecidos embriológicos), vários aspectos de seu desenvolvimento em relação à próstata masculina são amplamente desconhecidos e objeto de pesquisa.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prostate

;;;FR;;;



PROSTATE


La prostate est à la fois une glande accessoire du système reproducteur masculin et un interrupteur mécanique actionné par les muscles entre la miction et l'éjaculation.

On ne le trouve que chez certains mammifères.

Il diffère entre les espèces anatomiquement, chimiquement et physiologiquement.

Anatomiquement, la prostate se trouve sous la vessie, traversée par l'urètre.

Il est décrit en anatomie macroscopique comme constitué de lobes et en microanatomie par zone.

Il est entouré d'une capsule fibromusculaire élastique et contient du tissu glandulaire ainsi que du tissu conjonctif.
Les glandes de la prostate produisent et contiennent du liquide qui fait partie du sperme, la substance qui est émise lors de l'éjaculation dans le cadre de la réponse sexuelle masculine.

Ce liquide prostatique est légèrement alcalin, d'aspect laiteux ou blanc.

L'alcalinité du sperme aide à neutraliser l'acidité du tractus vaginal, prolongeant ainsi la durée de vie des spermatozoïdes.

Le liquide prostatique est expulsé dans la première partie de l'éjaculat, avec la plupart des spermatozoïdes, en raison de l'action du tissu musculaire lisse à l'intérieur de la prostate.

En comparaison avec les quelques spermatozoïdes expulsés avec principalement du liquide vésiculaire séminal, ceux du liquide prostatique ont une meilleure motilité, une survie plus longue et une meilleure protection du matériel génétique.
Les troubles de la prostate comprennent l'hypertrophie, l'inflammation, l'infection et le cancer.

Le mot prostate vient du grec ancien προστάτης, prostátēs, signifiant "celui qui se tient devant", "protecteur", "gardien", avec le terme utilisé à l'origine pour décrire les vésicules séminales.


== Structure ==

La prostate est une glande du système reproducteur masculin.

Chez l'adulte, il a à peu près la taille d'une noix et a un poids moyen d'environ 11 grammes, généralement compris entre 7 et 16 grammes.

La prostate est située dans le bassin.

Il se trouve sous la vessie et entoure l'urètre.

La partie de l'urètre qui le traverse s'appelle l'urètre prostatique, qui rejoint les deux canaux éjaculateurs.

La prostate est recouverte d'une surface appelée capsule prostatique ou fascia prostatique. La structure interne de la prostate a été décrite en utilisant à la fois des lobes et des zones.

En raison de la variation des descriptions et des définitions des lobes, la classification des zones est utilisée de manière plus prédominante. La prostate a été décrite comme étant composée de trois ou quatre zones.

Les zones sont plus généralement visibles en histologie ou en imagerie médicale, comme l'échographie ou l'IRM.

Les zones sont :

La classification «lobe» décrit les lobes qui, bien que définis à l'origine chez le fœtus, sont également visibles dans l'anatomie générale, y compris la dissection et lorsqu'ils sont observés par endoscopie.

Les cinq lobes sont le lobe antérieur ou isthme, le lobe postérieur, les lobes latéraux droit et gauche et le lobe moyen ou médian.
 
À l'intérieur de la prostate, adjacente et parallèle à l'urètre prostatique, il existe deux systèmes musculaires longitudinaux.

Sur la face avant (ventralement) passe le dilatateur urétral (musculus dilatator urethrae), sur la face arrière (dorsale) passe le muscle qui fait passer l'urètre à l'état éjaculatoire (musculus ejaulatorius).


=== Vaisseaux sanguins et lymphatiques ===

La prostate reçoit le sang par l'artère vésicale inférieure, l'artère pudendale interne et les artères rectales moyennes.

Ces vaisseaux pénètrent dans la prostate sur sa surface postérieure externe où il rencontre la vessie et se déplacent vers l'apex de la prostate.

Les artères vésicales inférieures et rectales moyennes naissent souvent ensemble directement des artères iliaques internes.

En entrant dans la vessie, l'artère vésicale inférieure se divise en une branche urétrale, irriguant la prostate urétrale ; et une branche capsulaire, qui se déplace autour de la capsule et a des branches plus petites qui pénètrent dans la prostate. Les veines de la prostate forment un réseau - le plexus veineux prostatique, principalement autour de sa surface avant et externe.

Ce réseau reçoit également le sang de la veine dorsale profonde du pénis et est relié par des branches au plexus vésical et aux veines pudendales internes.

Les veines se drainent dans les veines vésicales puis iliaques internes. Le drainage lymphatique de la prostate dépend du positionnement de la zone.

Les vaisseaux entourant le canal déférent, certains des vaisseaux de la vésicule séminale et un vaisseau de la surface postérieure de la prostate se drainent dans les ganglions lymphatiques iliaques externes.

Certains des vaisseaux des vésicules séminales, des vaisseaux prostatiques et des vaisseaux de la prostate antérieure se drainent dans les ganglions lymphatiques iliaques internes.

Les vaisseaux de la prostate elle-même se drainent également dans les ganglions lymphatiques obturateurs et sacrés.

 


=== Microanatomie ===


La prostate est constituée de tissu glandulaire et conjonctif.

De hautes cellules en forme de colonne forment la muqueuse (l'épithélium) des glandes.

Ceux-ci forment une couche ou peuvent être pseudostratifiés.

L'épithélium est très variable et des zones de cellules basses cuboïdes ou plates peuvent également être présentes, avec un épithélium de transition dans les régions externes des conduits plus longs.

Les glandes sont formées d'autant de follicules, qui s'écoulent dans les canaux, puis dans 12 à 20 conduits principaux. Ceux-ci se déversent à leur tour dans l'urètre lors de son passage dans la prostate.

Il existe également une petite quantité de cellules plates, qui se trouvent à côté des membranes basales des glandes et agissent comme des cellules souches. Le tissu conjonctif de la prostate est composé de tissu fibreux et de muscle lisse.

Le tissu fibreux sépare la glande en lobules.

Il se trouve également entre les glandes et est composé de faisceaux de muscles lisses orientés au hasard qui sont continus avec la vessie. Au fil du temps, des sécrétions épaissies appelées corps amylacés s'accumulent dans la glande.


=== Expression génique et protéique ===


Environ 20 000 gènes codant pour des protéines sont exprimés dans les cellules humaines et près de 75 % de ces gènes sont exprimés dans la prostate normale.

Environ 150 de ces gènes sont plus spécifiquement exprimés dans la prostate, une vingtaine de gènes étant hautement spécifiques de la prostate.

Les protéines spécifiques correspondantes sont exprimées dans les cellules glandulaires et sécrétoires de la glande prostatique et ont des fonctions importantes pour les caractéristiques du sperme, y compris les protéines spécifiques de la prostate, telles que l'antigène spécifique de la prostate (PSA) et la phosphatase acide prostatique.


=== Développement ===


Dans l'embryon en développement, à l'extrémité postérieure se trouve un inpouching appelé le cloaque.

Celui-ci, au cours de la quatrième à la septième semaine, se divise en un sinus urogénital et les débuts du canal anal, avec une paroi se formant entre ces deux inpouchings appelée septum urorectal.

Le sinus urogénital se divise en trois parties, la partie médiane formant l'urètre ; la partie supérieure est la plus grande et devient la vessie, et la partie inférieure change ensuite en fonction du sexe biologique de l'embryon. La partie prostatique de l'urètre se développe à partir de la partie médiane, pelvienne, du sinus urogénital, qui est d'origine endodermique .

Vers la fin du troisième mois de la vie embryonnaire, des excroissances naissent de la partie prostatique de l'urètre et se développent dans le mésenchyme environnant.

Les cellules tapissant cette partie de l'urètre se différencient en épithélium glandulaire de la prostate.

Le mésenchyme associé se différencie en tissu conjonctif dense et en muscle lisse de la prostate. La condensation du mésenchyme, de l'urètre et des canaux de Wolff donne naissance à la prostate adulte, un organe composite composé de plusieurs composants glandulaires et non glandulaires étroitement fusionnés.

Pour fonctionner correctement, la prostate a besoin d'hormones mâles (androgènes), qui sont responsables des caractéristiques sexuelles masculines.

La principale hormone masculine est la testostérone, qui est produite principalement par les testicules.

C'est la dihydrotestostérone (DHT), un métabolite de la testostérone, qui régule principalement la prostate.

La prostate grossit avec le temps, jusqu'à la quatrième décennie de la vie.


== Fonction ==

La prostate sécrète un liquide qui fait partie du sperme.

Le sperme est le liquide émis (éjaculé) par les hommes lors de la réponse sexuelle.

Lorsque le sperme est émis, il est transmis du canal déférent à l'urètre masculin via les canaux éjaculateurs, qui se trouvent dans la prostate.

L'éjaculation est l'expulsion du sperme de l'urètre.

Le sperme est déplacé dans l'urètre suite à des contractions du muscle lisse du canal déférent et des vésicules séminales, suite à une stimulation, principalement du gland du pénis.

La stimulation envoie des signaux nerveux via les nerfs honteux internes à la colonne lombaire supérieure ; les signaux nerveux provoquant la contraction agissent via les nerfs hypogastriques.

Après avoir voyagé dans l'urètre, le liquide séminal est éjaculé par contraction du muscle bulbocavernosus.

Les sécrétions de la prostate comprennent les enzymes protéolytiques, la phosphatase acide prostatique, la fibrinolysine, le zinc et l'antigène spécifique de la prostate.

Avec les sécrétions des vésicules séminales, celles-ci forment la majeure partie fluide du sperme. Il est possible pour certains hommes d'atteindre l'orgasme uniquement par la stimulation de la prostate, par exemple via un massage de la prostate ou des rapports anaux.

Cela a conduit à ce que la zone de la paroi rectale adjacente à la prostate soit communément (mais à tort) appelée le "point G masculin". Les changements de forme de la prostate, qui facilitent le passage mécanique entre la miction et l'éjaculation, sont principalement entraîné par les deux systèmes musculaires longitudinaux longeant l'urètre prostatique.

Ce sont le dilatateur urétral (musculus dilatator urethrae) sur la face avant de l'urètre, qui se contracte pendant la miction et ainsi raccourcit et incline la prostate dans sa dimension verticale élargissant ainsi la section prostatique du tube urétral, et le muscle commutant l'urètre dans l'éjaculateur état (musculus ejaculatorius) sur son dos. En cas d'opération, par exemple en raison d'une hyperplasie bénigne de la prostate (HBP), l'endommagement ou l'épargne de ces deux systèmes musculaires varie considérablement selon le choix du type d'opération et les détails de la procédure de l'opéré choisi technique.

Les effets sur la miction et l'éjaculation postopératoires varient en conséquence. (Voir aussi : Chirurgie de l'hyperplasie bénigne de la prostate).


== Signification clinique ==



=== Inflammations ===


La prostatite est une inflammation de la prostate.

Elle peut être causée par une infection bactérienne ou par d'autres causes non infectieuses.

L'inflammation de la prostate peut provoquer une miction ou une éjaculation douloureuse, des douleurs à l'aine, des difficultés à uriner ou des symptômes constitutionnels tels que de la fièvre ou de la fatigue.

Lorsqu'elle est enflammée, la prostate grossit et est sensible au toucher lors du toucher rectal.

Une bactérie coupable peut se développer dans une culture d'urine. La prostatite aiguë et la prostatite bactérienne chronique sont traitées avec des antibiotiques.

La prostatite chronique non bactérienne, ou syndrome de douleur pelvienne chronique masculine, est traitée par une grande variété de modalités, notamment les médicaments alpha-bloquants, les anti-inflammatoires non stéroïdiens et l'amitriptyline, les antihistaminiques et d'autres anxiolytiques.

D'autres traitements qui ne sont pas des médicaments peuvent inclure la physiothérapie, la psychothérapie, les modulateurs nerveux et la chirurgie.

Plus récemment, une combinaison de point gâchette et de thérapie psychologique s'est également avérée efficace pour la prostatite de catégorie III.


=== Hypertrophie de la prostate ===


Une hypertrophie de la prostate est appelée prostatomégalie, l'hyperplasie bénigne de la prostate (HBP) étant la cause la plus fréquente.

L'HBP fait référence à un élargissement de la prostate dû à une augmentation du nombre de cellules qui composent la prostate (hyperplasie) d'une cause qui n'est pas une tumeur maligne.

Il est très fréquent chez les hommes âgés.

Il est souvent diagnostiqué lorsque la prostate s'est agrandie au point où la miction devient difficile.

Les symptômes comprennent le besoin d'uriner souvent (fréquence urinaire) ou de prendre un certain temps pour commencer (hésitation urinaire).

Si la prostate grossit trop, elle peut resserrer l'urètre et entraver l'écoulement de l'urine, rendant la miction douloureuse et difficile, ou dans les cas extrêmes complètement impossible, provoquant une rétention urinaire.

Au fil du temps, la rétention chronique peut faire grossir la vessie et provoquer un reflux d'urine dans les reins (hydronéphrose). L'HBP peut être traitée avec des médicaments, une procédure peu invasive ou, dans les cas extrêmes, une intervention chirurgicale qui enlève la prostate.

En général, le traitement commence souvent par un médicament antagoniste des récepteurs alpha-1 adrénergiques tel que la tamsulosine, qui réduit le tonus du muscle lisse présent dans l'urètre qui traverse la prostate, facilitant ainsi le passage de l'urine.

Pour les personnes présentant des symptômes persistants, des procédures peuvent être envisagées.

La chirurgie la plus souvent utilisée dans de tels cas est la résection transurétrale de la prostate, dans laquelle un instrument est inséré dans l'urètre pour retirer le tissu prostatique qui appuie contre la partie supérieure de l'urètre et limite le flux d'urine.

Les procédures mini-invasives comprennent l'ablation transurétrale de la prostate à l'aiguille et la thermothérapie transurétrale par micro-ondes.

Ces procédures ambulatoires peuvent être suivies de l'insertion d'un stent temporaire, pour permettre une miction volontaire normale, sans exacerber les symptômes irritatifs.


=== Cancer ===


Le cancer de la prostate est l'un des cancers les plus courants chez les hommes âgés au Royaume-Uni, aux États-Unis, en Europe du Nord et en Australie, et une cause importante de décès chez les hommes âgés dans le monde.

Souvent, une personne n'a pas de symptômes; lorsqu'ils surviennent, les symptômes peuvent inclure la fréquence urinaire, l'urgence, l'hésitation et d'autres symptômes associés à l'HBP.

De manière peu fréquente, ces cancers peuvent entraîner une perte de poids, une rétention d'urine ou des symptômes tels que des maux de dos dus à des lésions métastatiques qui se sont propagées à l'extérieur de la prostate. Un toucher rectal et la mesure d'un taux d'antigène prostatique spécifique (APS) sont généralement les premières investigations effectuées pour vérifier le cancer de la prostate.

Les valeurs de PSA sont difficiles à interpréter, car une valeur élevée peut être présente chez une personne sans cancer et une valeur faible peut être présente chez une personne atteinte de cancer.

La prochaine forme de test est souvent la prise d'une biopsie pour évaluer l'activité et le caractère invasif de la tumeur.

En raison du risque important de surdiagnostic avec un dépistage généralisé dans la population générale, le dépistage du cancer de la prostate est controversé.

Si une tumeur est confirmée, une imagerie médicale telle qu'une IRM ou une scintigraphie osseuse peut être effectuée pour vérifier la présence de métastases tumorales dans d'autres parties du corps. Le cancer de la prostate qui n'est présent que dans la prostate est souvent traité soit par l'ablation chirurgicale de la prostate ou par radiothérapie ou par l'insertion de petites particules radioactives d'iode-125 ou de palladium-103, appelée curiethérapie.

Le cancer qui s'est propagé à d'autres parties du corps est généralement traité également par hormonothérapie, pour priver une tumeur d'hormones sexuelles (androgènes) qui stimulent la prolifération.

Cela se fait souvent par l'utilisation d'analogues de la GnRH ou d'agents qui bloquent les récepteurs sur lesquels agissent les androgènes, comme le bicalutamide ; occasionnellement, l'ablation chirurgicale des testicules peut être effectuée à la place.

Le cancer qui ne répond pas au traitement hormonal ou qui progresse après le traitement peut être traité par une chimiothérapie telle que le docétaxel.

La radiothérapie peut également être utilisée pour soulager la douleur associée aux lésions osseuses. Parfois, la décision peut être prise de ne pas traiter le cancer de la prostate.

Si un cancer est petit et localisé, la décision peut être prise de surveiller l'activité du cancer à intervalles ("surveillance active") et de différer le traitement.

Si une personne, en raison de sa fragilité ou d'autres conditions ou raisons médicales, a une espérance de vie inférieure à dix ans, les effets du traitement peuvent alors l'emporter sur les avantages perçus.


=== Chirurgie ===


La chirurgie pour enlever la prostate est appelée prostatectomie et est généralement pratiquée comme traitement du cancer limité à la prostate ou de l'élargissement de la prostate.

Quand cela est fait, cela peut être fait en chirurgie ouverte ou en chirurgie laparoscopique (trou de serrure).

Celles-ci se font sous anesthésie générale.

Habituellement, la procédure pour le cancer est une prostatectomie radicale, ce qui signifie que les vésicules séminales sont retirées et que le canal déférent est également lié.

Une partie de la prostate peut également être retirée de l'intérieur de l'urètre, appelée résection transurétrale de la prostate (TURP).

La chirurgie ouverte peut impliquer une incision pratiquée dans le périnée ou via une approche qui implique une incision sur la ligne médiane du nombril à l'os pubien.

La chirurgie ouverte peut être préférée si l'on soupçonne que des ganglions lymphatiques sont impliqués et qu'ils doivent être retirés ou biopsiés au cours d'une procédure.

Une approche périnéale n'impliquera pas l'ablation des ganglions lymphatiques et peut entraîner moins de douleur et une récupération plus rapide après une opération.

Une procédure TURP utilise un tube inséré dans l'urètre via le pénis et une certaine forme de chaleur, d'électricité ou de laser pour retirer le tissu prostatique. Toute la prostate peut être retirée.

Les complications qui pourraient se développer en raison de la chirurgie comprennent l'incontinence urinaire.

Dysfonction érectile en raison de dommages aux nerfs pendant l'opération, en particulier si un cancer est très proche des nerfs.

L'éjaculation du sperme ne se produira pas pendant l'orgasme si les canaux déférents sont attachés et les vésicules séminales retirées, comme lors d'une prosatectomie radiale.

Cela signifie qu'un homme devient stérile.

Parfois, l'orgasme ne peut pas se produire ou peut être douloureux.

La longueur du pénis peut changer si la partie de l'urètre à l'intérieur de la prostate est également retirée.

Des complications générales dues à la chirurgie peuvent également se développer, telles que des infections, des saignements, des dommages accidentels aux organes voisins ou à l'intérieur de l'abdomen et la formation de caillots sanguins.


== Historique ==

La prostate a été formellement identifiée pour la première fois par l'anatomiste vénitien Niccolò Massa dans Anatomiae libri introductorius (Introduction à l'anatomie) 1536 et illustrée par l'anatomiste flamand Andreas Vesalius dans Tabulae anatomicae sex (six tables anatomiques) en 1538.

Massa l'a décrit comme une "chair glandulaire sur laquelle repose le col de la vessie", et Vésale comme un "corps glandulaire".

La première fois qu'un mot similaire à «prostate» a été utilisé pour décrire la glande est attribué à André du Laurens en 1600, qui l'a décrit comme un terme déjà utilisé par les anatomistes à l'époque.

Le terme a cependant été utilisé au moins dès 1549 par le chirurgien français Ambroise Paré. À l'époque, Du Laurens décrivait ce qui était considéré comme une paire d'organes (et non l'organe à deux lobes), et le terme latin prostatae qui a été utilisé était une mauvaise traduction du terme pour le mot grec ancien utilisé pour décrire les vésicules séminales, parastatai ; bien qu'il ait été avancé que les chirurgiens de la Grèce antique et de Rome devaient au moins voir la prostate comme une entité anatomique.

Le terme prostatae a été pris plutôt que le prostator grammaticalement correct (singulier) et prostatores (pluriel) parce que le genre du terme grec ancien était considéré comme féminin, alors qu'il était en fait masculin. Le fait que la prostate était un et non deux organes était une idée popularisée au début du XVIIIe siècle, tout comme le terme anglais utilisé pour décrire l'organe, la prostate, attribué à William Cheselden.

Une monographie, "Observations pratiques sur le traitement des maladies de la prostate" par Everard Home en 1811, a été importante dans l'histoire de la prostate en décrivant et en nommant les parties anatomiques de la prostate, dont le lobe médian.

L'idée des cinq lobes de la prostate a été popularisée à la suite d'études anatomiques menées par l'urologue américain Oswald Lowsley en 1912.

Jean E.

McNeal a proposé pour la première fois l'idée de «zones» en 1968; McNeal a découvert que la surface de coupe relativement homogène d'une prostate adulte ne ressemblait en rien à des "lobes" et a donc conduit à la description de "zones". Le cancer de la prostate a été décrit pour la première fois dans un discours à la Medical and Chiurgical Society de Londres en 1853 par un chirurgien John Adams et de plus en plus décrit à la fin du 19e siècle.

Le cancer de la prostate était initialement considéré comme une maladie rare, probablement en raison d'une espérance de vie plus courte et de méthodes de détection moins performantes au 19e siècle.

Les premiers traitements du cancer de la prostate étaient des interventions chirurgicales pour soulager l'obstruction urinaire.

Samuel David Gross a été crédité de la première mention d'une prostatectomie, comme "trop ​​​​absurde pour être sérieusement divertie" Le premier retrait pour cancer de la prostate (prostatectomie périnéale radicale) a été effectué pour la première fois en 1904 par Hugh H.

Jeune à l'hôpital Johns Hopkins; l'ablation partielle de la glande a été réalisée par Theodore Billroth en 1867. La résection transurétrale de la prostate (TURP) a remplacé la prostatectomie radicale pour le soulagement symptomatique de l'obstruction au milieu du XXe siècle, car elle pouvait mieux préserver la fonction érectile du pénis.

La prostatectomie rétropubienne radicale a été mise au point en 1983 par Patrick Walsh.

En 1941, Charles B.

Huggins a publié des études dans lesquelles il utilisait des œstrogènes pour s'opposer à la production de testostérone chez les hommes atteints d'un cancer de la prostate métastatique.

Cette découverte de la "castration chimique" a valu à Huggins le prix Nobel de physiologie ou médecine en 1966. Le rôle de l'hormone de libération des gonadotrophines (GnRH) dans la reproduction a été déterminé par Andrzej W.

Schally et Roger Guillemin, qui ont tous deux remporté le prix Nobel de physiologie ou médecine en 1977 pour ces travaux.

Des agonistes des récepteurs de la GnRH, tels que la leuproréline et la goséréline, ont ensuite été développés et utilisés pour traiter le cancer de la prostate.

La radiothérapie pour le cancer de la prostate a été développée pour la première fois au début du XXe siècle et consistait initialement en des implants de radium intraprostatiques.

La radiothérapie externe est devenue plus populaire lorsque des sources de rayonnement X plus puissantes sont devenues disponibles au milieu du 20e siècle.

La curiethérapie par grains implantés (pour le cancer de la prostate) a été décrite pour la première fois en 1983.

La chimiothérapie systémique du cancer de la prostate a été étudiée pour la première fois dans les années 1970.

Le régime initial de cyclophosphamide et de 5-fluorouracile a été rapidement rejoint par plusieurs régimes utilisant une foule d'autres médicaments de chimiothérapie systémique.


== Autres animaux ==

La prostate ne se trouve que chez les mammifères.

Les glandes prostatiques des marsupiaux mâles sont proportionnellement plus grosses que celles des mammifères placentaires.

La présence d'une prostate fonctionnelle chez les monotrèmes est controversée, et si les monotrèmes possèdent des prostates fonctionnelles, ils peuvent ne pas apporter la même contribution au sperme que chez les autres mammifères. La structure de la prostate varie, allant de tubuloalvéolaire (comme chez l'homme) à ramifiée tubulaire.

La glande est particulièrement bien développée chez les chiens, les renards et les sangliers, bien que chez d'autres mammifères, comme les taureaux, elle puisse être petite et discrète.

Chez d'autres animaux, tels que les marsupiaux et les petits ruminants, la prostate est disséminée, ce qui signifie qu'elle n'est pas spécifiquement localisable en tant que tissu distinct, mais présente dans toute la partie concernée de l'urètre ; chez d'autres animaux, comme le cerf élaphe et le wapiti d'Amérique, il peut être présent sous la forme d'un organe spécifique et sous une forme disséminée.

Chez certaines espèces de marsupiaux, la taille de la prostate change selon les saisons.

La prostate est la seule glande accessoire présente chez les chiens mâles.

Les chiens peuvent produire en une heure autant de liquide prostatique qu'un humain en une journée.

Ils excrètent ce liquide avec leur urine pour marquer leur territoire.

De plus, les chiens sont la seule espèce, à part les humains, à avoir une incidence significative de cancer de la prostate.

Chez les cétacés (baleines, dauphins, marsouins), la prostate est composée de glandes urétrales diffuses et est entourée d'un muscle compresseur très puissant. La glande prostatique prend naissance dans les tissus de la paroi urétrale.

Cela signifie que l'urètre, un tube compressible utilisé pour uriner, traverse le milieu de la prostate.

Cela conduit à un défaut de conception évolutive pour certains mammifères, y compris les mâles humains.

La prostate est sujette à l'infection et à l'élargissement plus tard dans la vie, resserrant l'urètre, rendant la miction lente et douloureuse. Les sécrétions prostatiques varient selon les espèces.

Ils sont généralement composés de sucres simples et sont souvent légèrement alcalins.


== Glande de Skene ==

Parce que la glande de Skene et la prostate masculine agissent de la même manière en sécrétant l'antigène spécifique de la prostate (PSA), qui est une protéine de l'éjaculat produite chez les hommes, et de la phosphatase acide spécifique de la prostate, les glandes de Skene sont parfois appelées "prostate féminine". .

Bien qu'homologue de la prostate masculine (développée à partir des mêmes tissus embryologiques), divers aspects de son développement par rapport à la prostate masculine sont largement méconnus et font l'objet de recherches.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prostate
