

RESPIRATORY SYSTEM


The respiratory system (also respiratory apparatus, ventilatory system) is a biological system consisting of specific organs and structures used for gas exchange in animals and plants. 

The anatomy and physiology that make this happen varies greatly, depending on the size of the organism, the environment in which it lives and its evolutionary history. 

In land animals the respiratory surface is internalized as linings of the lungs. 

Gas exchange in the lungs occurs in millions of small air sacs; in mammals and reptiles these are called alveoli, and in birds they are known as atria. 

These microscopic air sacs have a very rich blood supply, thus bringing the air into close contact with the blood. 

These air sacs communicate with the external environment via a system of airways, or hollow tubes, of which the largest is the trachea, which branches in the middle of the chest into the two main bronchi. 

These enter the lungs where they branch into progressively narrower secondary and tertiary bronchi that branch into numerous smaller tubes, the bronchioles. 

In birds the bronchioles are termed parabronchi. 

It is the bronchioles, or parabronchi that generally open into the microscopic alveoli in mammals and atria in birds. 

Air has to be pumped from the environment into the alveoli or atria by the process of breathing which involves the muscles of respiration.
In most fish, and a number of other aquatic animals (both vertebrates and invertebrates) the respiratory system consists of gills, which are either partially or completely external organs, bathed in the watery environment. 

This water flows over the gills by a variety of active or passive means. 

Gas exchange takes place in the gills which consist of thin or very flat filaments and lammelae which expose a very large surface area of highly vascularized tissue to the water.
Other animals, such as insects, have respiratory systems with very simple anatomical features, and in amphibians even the skin plays a vital role in gas exchange. 

Plants also have respiratory systems but the directionality of gas exchange can be opposite to that in animals. 

The respiratory system in plants includes anatomical features such as stomata, that are found in various parts of the plant.


== Mammals ==



=== Anatomy ===


In humans and other mammals, the anatomy of a typical respiratory system is the respiratory tract. 

The tract is divided into an upper and a lower respiratory tract. 

The upper tract includes the nose, nasal cavities, sinuses, pharynx and the part of the larynx above the vocal folds. 

The lower tract (Fig. 2.) includes the lower part of the larynx, the trachea, bronchi, bronchioles and the alveoli.
The branching airways of the lower tract are often described as the respiratory tree or tracheobronchial tree (Fig. 2). 

The intervals between successive branch points along the various branches of "tree" are often referred to as branching "generations", of which there are, in the adult human about 23. 

The earlier generations (approximately generations 0–16), consisting of the trachea and the bronchi, as well as the larger bronchioles which simply act as air conduits, bringing air to the respiratory bronchioles, alveolar ducts and alveoli (approximately generations 17–23), where gas exchange takes place. 

Bronchioles are defined as the small airways lacking any cartilagenous support.The first bronchi to branch from the trachea are the right and left main bronchi. 

Second only in diameter to the trachea (1.8 cm), these bronchi (1 -1.4 cm in diameter) enter the lungs at each hilum, where they branch into narrower secondary bronchi known as lobar bronchi, and these branch into narrower tertiary bronchi known as segmental bronchi. 

Further divisions of the segmental bronchi (1 to 6 mm in diameter) are known as 4th order, 5th order, and 6th order segmental bronchi, or grouped together as subsegmental bronchi.Compared to the 23 number (on average) of branchings of the respiratory tree in the adult human, the mouse has only about 13 such branchings.
The alveoli are the dead end terminals of the "tree", meaning that any air that enters them has to exit via the same route. 

A system such as this creates dead space, a volume of air (about 150 ml in the adult human) that fills the airways after exhalation and is breathed back into the alveoli before environmental air reaches them. 

At the end of inhalation the airways are filled with environmental air, which is exhaled without coming in contact with the gas exchanger.


=== Ventilatory volumes ===


The lungs expand and contract during the breathing cycle, drawing air in and out of the lungs. 

The volume of air moved in or out of the lungs under normal resting circumstances (the resting tidal volume of about 500 ml), and volumes moved during maximally forced inhalation and maximally forced exhalation are measured in humans by spirometry. 

A typical adult human spirogram with the names given to the various excursions in volume the lungs can undergo is illustrated below (Fig. 3):

Not all the air in the lungs can be expelled during maximally forced exhalation. 

This is the residual volume of about 1.0-1.5 liters which cannot be measured by spirometry. 

Volumes that include the residual volume (i.e. functional residual capacity of about 2.5-3.0 liters, and total lung capacity of about 6 liters) can therefore also not be measured by spirometry. 

Their measurement requires special techniques.The rates at which air is breathed in or out, either through the mouth or nose, or into or out of the alveoli are tabulated below, together with how they are calculated. 

The number of breath cycles per minute is known as the respiratory rate.


=== Mechanics of breathing ===


In mammals, inhalation at rest is primarily due to the contraction of the diaphragm. 

This is an upwardly domed sheet of muscle that separates the thoracic cavity from the abdominal cavity. 

When it contracts the sheet flattens, (i.e. moves downwards as shown in Fig. 7) increasing the volume of the thoracic cavity. 

The contracting diaphragm pushes the abdominal organs downwards. 

But because the pelvic floor prevents the lowermost abdominal organs moving in that direction, the pliable abdominal contents cause the belly to bulge outwards to the front and sides, because the relaxed abdominal muscles do not resist this movement (Fig. 7). 

This entirely passive bulging (and shrinking during exhalation) of the abdomen during normal breathing is sometimes referred to as "abdominal breathing", although it is, in fact, "diaphragmatic breathing", which is not visible on the outside of the body. 

Mammals only use their abdominal muscles during forceful exhalation (see Fig. 8, and discussion below). 

Never during any form of inhalation.
As the diaphragm contracts, the rib cage is simultaneously enlarged by the ribs being pulled upwards by the intercostal muscles as shown in Fig. 4. 

All the ribs slant downwards from the rear to the front (as shown in Fig. 4); but the lowermost ribs also slant downwards from the midline outwards (Fig. 5). 

Thus the rib cage's transverse diameter can be increased in the same way as the antero-posterior diameter is increase by the so-called pump handle movement shown in Fig. 4.
The enlargement of the thoracic cavity's vertical dimension by the contraction of the diaphragm, and its two horizontal dimensions by the lifting of the front and sides of the ribs, causes the intrathoracic pressure to fall. 

The lungs' interiors are open to the outside air, and being elastic, therefore expand to fill the increased space. 

The inflow of air into the lungs occurs via the respiratory airways (Fig. 2). 

In health, these airways begin with the nose. 

It is possible to begin with the mouth, which is the backup breathing system. 

However, chronic mouth breathing leads to, or is a sign of, illness. 

They end in the microscopic dead-end sacs called alveoli, which are always open, though the diameters of the various sections can be changed by the sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems. 

The alveolar air pressure is therefore always close to atmospheric air pressure (about 100 kPa at sea level) at rest, with the pressure gradients that cause air to move in and out of the lungs during breathing rarely exceeding 2–3 kPa.During exhalation the diaphragm and intercostal muscles relax. 

This returns the chest and abdomen to a position determined by their anatomical elasticity. 

This is the "resting mid-position" of the thorax and abdomen (Fig. 7) when the lungs contain their functional residual capacity of air (the light blue area in the right hand illustration of Fig. 7), which in the adult human has a volume of about 2.5–3.0 liters (Fig. 3). 

Resting exhalation lasts about twice as long as inhalation because the diaphragm relaxes passively more gently than it contracts actively during inhalation.

The volume of air that moves in or out (at the nose or mouth) during a single breathing cycle is called the tidal volume. 

In a resting adult human it is about 500 ml per breath. 

At the end of exhalation the airways contain about 150 ml of alveolar air which is the first air that is breathed back into the alveoli during inhalation. 

This volume air that is breathed out of the alveoli and back in again is known as dead space ventilation, which has the consequence that of the 500 ml breathed into the alveoli with each breath only 350 ml (500 ml - 150 ml = 350 ml) is fresh warm and moistened air. 

Since this 350 ml of fresh air is thoroughly mixed and diluted by the air that remains in the alveoli after normal exhalation (i.e. the functional residual capacity of about 2.5–3.0 liters), it is clear that the composition of the alveolar air changes very little during the breathing cycle (see Fig. 9). 

The oxygen tension (or partial pressure) remains close to 13-14 kPa (about 100 mm Hg), and that of carbon dioxide very close to 5.3 kPa (or 40 mm Hg). 

This contrasts with composition of the dry outside air at sea level, where the partial pressure of oxygen is 21 kPa (or 160 mm Hg) and that of carbon dioxide 0.04 kPa (or 0.3 mmHg).During heavy breathing (hyperpnea), as, for instance, during exercise, inhalation is brought about by a more powerful and greater excursion of the contracting diaphragm than at rest (Fig. 8). 

In addition the "accessory muscles of inhalation" exaggerate the actions of the intercostal muscles (Fig. 8). 

These accessory muscles of inhalation are muscles that extend from the cervical vertebrae and base of the skull to the upper ribs and sternum, sometimes through an intermediary attachment to the clavicles. 

When they contract the rib cage's internal volume is increased to a far greater extent than can be achieved by contraction of the intercostal muscles alone. 

Seen from outside the body the lifting of the clavicles during strenuous or labored inhalation is sometimes called clavicular breathing, seen especially during asthma attacks and in people with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
During heavy breathing, exhalation is caused by relaxation of all the muscles of inhalation. 

But now, the abdominal muscles, instead of remaining relaxed (as they do at rest), contract forcibly pulling the lower edges of the rib cage downwards (front and sides) (Fig. 8). 

This not only drastically decreases the size of the rib cage, but also pushes the abdominal organs upwards against the diaphragm which consequently bulges deeply into the thorax (Fig. 8). 

The end-exhalatory lung volume is now well below the resting mid-position and contains far less air than the resting "functional residual capacity". 

However, in a normal mammal, the lungs cannot be emptied completely. 

In an adult human there is always still at least 1 liter of residual air left in the lungs after maximum exhalation.The automatic rhythmical breathing in and out, can be interrupted by coughing, sneezing (forms of very forceful exhalation), by the expression of a wide range of emotions (laughing, sighing, crying out in pain, exasperated intakes of breath) and by such voluntary acts as speech, singing, whistling and the playing of wind instruments. 

All of these actions rely on the muscles described above, and their effects on the movement of air in and out of the lungs.
Although not a form of breathing, the Valsalva maneuver involves the respiratory muscles. 

It is, in fact, a very forceful exhalatory effort against a tightly closed glottis, so that no air can escape from the lungs. 

Instead abdominal contents are evacuated in the opposite direction, through orifices in the pelvic floor. 

The abdominal muscles contract very powerfully, causing the pressure inside the abdomen and thorax to rise to extremely high levels. 

The Valsalva maneuver can be carried out voluntarily, but is more generally a reflex elicited when attempting to empty the abdomen during, for instance, difficult defecation, or during childbirth. 

Breathing ceases during this maneuver.


=== Gas exchange ===


 

The primary purpose of the respiratory system is the equalizing of the partial pressures of the respiratory gases in the alveolar air with those in the pulmonary capillary blood (Fig. 11). 

This process occurs by simple diffusion, across a very thin membrane (known as the blood–air barrier), which forms the walls of the pulmonary alveoli (Fig. 10). 

It consists of the alveolar epithelial cells, their basement membranes and the endothelial cells of the alveolar capillaries (Fig. 10). 

This blood gas barrier is extremely thin (in humans, on average, 2.2 μm thick). 

It is folded into about 300 million small air sacs called alveoli (each between 75 and 300 µm in diameter) branching off from the respiratory bronchioles in the lungs, thus providing an extremely large surface area (approximately 145 m2) for gas exchange to occur.The air contained within the alveoli has a semi-permanent volume of about 2.5-3.0 liters which completely surrounds the alveolar capillary blood (Fig. 12). 

This ensures that equilibration of the partial pressures of the gases in the two compartments is very efficient and occurs very quickly. 

The blood leaving the alveolar capillaries and is eventually distributed throughout the body therefore has a partial pressure of oxygen of 13-14 kPa (100 mmHg), and a partial pressure of carbon dioxide of 5.3 kPa (40 mmHg) (i.e. the same as the oxygen and carbon dioxide gas tensions as in the alveoli). 

As mentioned in the section above, the corresponding partial pressures of oxygen and carbon dioxide in the ambient (dry) air at sea level are 21 kPa (160 mmHg) and 0.04 kPa (0.3 mmHg) respectively.This marked difference between the composition of the alveolar air and that of the ambient air can be maintained because the functional residual capacity is contained in dead-end sacs connected to the outside air by fairly narrow and relatively long tubes (the airways: nose, pharynx, larynx, trachea, bronchi and their branches down to the bronchioles), through which the air has to be breathed both in and out (i.e. there is no unidirectional through-flow as there is in the bird lung). 

This typical mammalian anatomy combined with the fact that the lungs are not emptied and re-inflated with each breath (leaving a substantial volume of air, of about 2.5-3.0 liters, in the alveoli after exhalation), ensures that the composition of the alveolar air is only minimally disturbed when the 350 ml of fresh air is mixed into it with each inhalation. 

Thus the animal is provided with a very special "portable atmosphere", whose composition differs significantly from the present-day ambient air. 

It is this portable atmosphere (the functional residual capacity) to which the blood and therefore the body tissues are exposed – not to the outside air.
The resulting arterial partial pressures of oxygen and carbon dioxide are homeostatically controlled. 

A rise in the arterial partial pressure of CO2 and, to a lesser extent, a fall in the arterial partial pressure of O2, will reflexly cause deeper and faster breathing till the blood gas tensions in the lungs, and therefore the arterial blood, return to normal. 

The converse happens when the carbon dioxide tension falls, or, again to a lesser extent, the oxygen tension rises: the rate and depth of breathing are reduced till blood gas normality is restored.
Since the blood arriving in the alveolar capillaries has a partial pressure of O2 of, on average, 6 kPa (45 mmHg), while the pressure in the alveolar air is 13-14 kPa (100 mmHg), there will be a net diffusion of oxygen into the capillary blood, changing the composition of the 3 liters of alveolar air slightly. 

Similarly, since the blood arriving in the alveolar capillaries has a partial pressure of CO2 of also about 6 kPa (45 mmHg), whereas that of the alveolar air is 5.3 kPa (40 mmHg), there is a net movement of carbon dioxide out of the capillaries into the alveoli. 

The changes brought about by these net flows of individual gases into and out of the alveolar air necessitate the replacement of about 15% of the alveolar air with ambient air every 5 seconds or so. 

This is very tightly controlled by the monitoring of the arterial blood gases (which accurately reflect composition of the alveolar air) by the aortic and carotid bodies, as well as by the blood gas and pH sensor on the anterior surface of the medulla oblongata in the brain. 

There are also oxygen and carbon dioxide sensors in the lungs, but they primarily determine the diameters of the bronchioles and pulmonary capillaries, and are therefore responsible for directing the flow of air and blood to different parts of the lungs.
It is only as a result of accurately maintaining the composition of the 3 liters of alveolar air that with each breath some carbon dioxide is discharged into the atmosphere and some oxygen is taken up from the outside air. 

If more carbon dioxide than usual has been lost by a short period of hyperventilation, respiration will be slowed down or halted until the alveolar partial pressure of carbon dioxide has returned to 5.3 kPa (40 mmHg). 

It is therefore strictly speaking untrue that the primary function of the respiratory system is to rid the body of carbon dioxide “waste”. 

The carbon dioxide that is breathed out with each breath could probably be more correctly be seen as a byproduct of the body's extracellular fluid carbon dioxide and pH homeostats
If these homeostats are compromised, then a respiratory acidosis, or a respiratory alkalosis will occur. 

In the long run these can be compensated by renal adjustments to the H+ and HCO3− concentrations in the plasma; but since this takes time, the hyperventilation syndrome can, for instance, occur when agitation or anxiety cause a person to breathe fast and deeply thus causing a distressing respiratory alkalosis through the blowing off of too much CO2 from the blood into the outside air.Oxygen has a very low solubility in water, and is therefore carried in the blood loosely combined with hemoglobin. 

The oxygen is held on the hemoglobin by four ferrous iron-containing heme groups per hemoglobin molecule. 

When all the heme groups carry one O2 molecule each the blood is said to be “saturated” with oxygen, and no further increase in the partial pressure of oxygen will meaningfully increase the oxygen concentration of the blood. 

Most of the carbon dioxide in the blood is carried as bicarbonate ions (HCO3−) in the plasma. 

However the conversion of dissolved CO2 into HCO3− (through the addition of water) is too slow for the rate at which the blood circulates through the tissues on the one hand, and through alveolar capillaries on the other. 

The reaction is therefore catalyzed by carbonic anhydrase, an enzyme inside the red blood cells. 

The reaction can go in both directions depending on the prevailing partial pressure of CO2. 

A small amount of carbon dioxide is carried on the protein portion of the hemoglobin molecules as carbamino groups. 

The total concentration of carbon dioxide (in the form of bicarbonate ions, dissolved CO2, and carbamino groups) in arterial blood (i.e. after it has equilibrated with the alveolar air) is about 26 mM (or 58 ml/100 ml), compared to the concentration of oxygen in saturated arterial blood of about 9 mM (or 20 ml/100 ml blood).


=== Control of ventilation ===


Ventilation of the lungs in mammals occurs via the respiratory centers in the medulla oblongata and the pons of the brainstem. 

These areas form a series of neural pathways which receive information about the partial pressures of oxygen and carbon dioxide in the arterial blood. 

This information determines the average rate of ventilation of the alveoli of the lungs, to keep these pressures constant. 

The respiratory center does so via motor nerves which activate the diaphragm and other muscles of respiration.
The breathing rate increases when the partial pressure of carbon dioxide in the blood increases. 

This is detected by central blood gas chemoreceptors on the anterior surface of the medulla oblongata. 

The aortic and carotid bodies, are the peripheral blood gas chemoreceptors which are particularly sensitive to the arterial partial pressure of O2 though they also respond, but less strongly, to the partial pressure of CO2. 

At sea level, under normal circumstances, the breathing rate and depth, is determined primarily by the arterial partial pressure of carbon dioxide rather than by the arterial partial pressure of oxygen, which is allowed to vary within a fairly wide range before the respiratory centers in the medulla oblongata and pons respond to it to change the rate and depth of breathing.Exercise increases the breathing rate due to the extra carbon dioxide produced by the enhanced metabolism of the exercising muscles. 

In addition passive movements of the limbs also reflexively produce an increase in the breathing rate.Information received from stretch receptors in the lungs limits tidal volume (the depth of inhalation and exhalation).


=== Responses to low atmospheric pressures ===

The alveoli are open (via the airways) to the atmosphere, with the result that alveolar air pressure is exactly the same as the ambient air pressure at sea level, at altitude, or in any artificial atmosphere (e.g. a diving chamber, or decompression chamber) in which the individual is breathing freely. 

With expansion of the lungs the alveolar air occupies a larger volume, and its pressure falls proportionally, causing air to flow in through the airways, till the pressure in the alveoli is again at the ambient air pressure. 

The reverse happens during exhalation. 

This process (of inhalation and exhalation) is exactly the same at sea level, as on top of Mt. 

Everest, or in a diving chamber or decompression chamber.

 
However, as one rises above sea level the density of the air decreases exponentially (see Fig. 14), halving approximately with every 5500 m rise in altitude. 

Since the composition of the atmospheric air is almost constant below 80 km, as a result of the continuous mixing effect of the weather, the concentration of oxygen in the air (mmols O2 per liter of ambient air) decreases at the same rate as the fall in air pressure with altitude. 

Therefore, in order to breathe in the same amount of oxygen per minute, the person has to inhale a proportionately greater volume of air per minute at altitude than at sea level. 

This is achieved by breathing deeper and faster (i.e. hyperpnea) than at sea level (see below).

 
There is, however, a complication that increases the volume of air that needs to be inhaled per minute (respiratory minute volume) to provide the same amount of oxygen to the lungs at altitude as at sea level. 

During inhalation the air is warmed and saturated with water vapor during its passage through the nose passages and pharynx. 

Saturated water vapor pressure is dependent only on temperature. 

At a body core temperature of 37 °C it is 6.3 kPa (47.0 mmHg), irrespective of any other influences, including altitude. 

Thus at sea level, where the ambient atmospheric pressure is about 100 kPa, the moistened air that flows into the lungs from the trachea consists of water vapor (6.3 kPa), nitrogen (74.0 kPa), oxygen (19.7 kPa) and trace amounts of carbon dioxide and other gases (a total of 100 kPa). 

In dry air the partial pressure of O2 at sea level is 21.0 kPa (i.e. 21% of 100 kPa), compared to the 19.7 kPa of oxygen entering the alveolar air. (The tracheal partial pressure of oxygen is 21% of [100 kPa – 6.3 kPa] = 19.7 kPa). 

At the summit of Mt. 

Everest (at an altitude of 8,848 m or 29,029 ft) the total atmospheric pressure is 33.7 kPa, of which 7.1 kPa (or 21%) is oxygen. 

The air entering the lungs also has a total pressure of 33.7 kPa, of which 6.3 kPa is, unavoidably, water vapor (as it is at sea level). 

This reduces the partial pressure of oxygen entering the alveoli to 5.8 kPa (or 21% of [33.7 kPa – 6.3 kPa] = 5.8 kPa). 

The reduction in the partial pressure of oxygen in the inhaled air is therefore substantially greater than the reduction of the total atmospheric pressure at altitude would suggest (on Mt Everest: 5.8 kPa vs. 7.1 kPa).
A further minor complication exists at altitude. 

If the volume of the lungs were to be instantaneously doubled at the beginning of inhalation, the air pressure inside the lungs would be halved. 

This happens regardless of altitude. 

Thus, halving of the sea level air pressure (100 kPa) results in an intrapulmonary air pressure of 50 kPa. 

Doing the same at 5500 m, where the atmospheric pressure is only 50 kPa, the intrapulmonary air pressure falls to 25 kPa. 

Therefore, the same change in lung volume at sea level results in a 50 kPa difference in pressure between the ambient air and the intrapulmonary air, whereas it result in a difference of only 25 kPa at 5500 m. 

The driving pressure forcing air into the lungs during inhalation is therefore halved at this altitude. 

The rate of inflow of air into the lungs during inhalation at sea level is therefore twice that which occurs at 5500 m. 

However, in reality, inhalation and exhalation occur far more gently and less abruptly than in the example given. 

The differences between the atmospheric and intrapulmonary pressures, driving air in and out of the lungs during the breathing cycle, are in the region of only 2–3 kPa. 

A doubling or more of these small pressure differences could be achieved only by very major changes in the breathing effort at high altitudes.
All of the above influences of low atmospheric pressures on breathing are accommodated primarily by breathing deeper and faster (hyperpnea). 

The exact degree of hyperpnea is determined by the blood gas homeostat, which regulates the partial pressures of oxygen and carbon dioxide in the arterial blood. 

This homeostat prioritizes the regulation of the arterial partial pressure of carbon dioxide over that of oxygen at sea level. 

That is to say, at sea level the arterial partial pressure of CO2 is maintained at very close to 5.3 kPa (or 40 mmHg) under a wide range of circumstances, at the expense of the arterial partial pressure of O2, which is allowed to vary within a very wide range of values, before eliciting a corrective ventilatory response. 

However, when the atmospheric pressure (and therefore the partial pressure of O2 in the ambient air) falls to below 50-75% of its value at sea level, oxygen homeostasis is given priority over carbon dioxide homeostasis. 

This switch-over occurs at an elevation of about 2500 m (or about 8000 ft). 

If this switch occurs relatively abruptly, the hyperpnea at high altitude will cause a severe fall in the arterial partial pressure of carbon dioxide, with a consequent rise in the pH of the arterial plasma. 

This is one contributor to high altitude sickness. 

On the other hand, if the switch to oxygen homeostasis is incomplete, then hypoxia may complicate the clinical picture with potentially fatal results.
There are oxygen sensors in the smaller bronchi and bronchioles. 

In response to low partial pressures of oxygen in the inhaled air these sensors reflexively cause the pulmonary arterioles to constrict. (This is the exact opposite of the corresponding reflex in the tissues, where low arterial partial pressures of O2 cause arteriolar vasodilation.) At altitude this causes the pulmonary arterial pressure to rise resulting in a much more even distribution of blood flow to the lungs than occurs at sea level. 

At sea level the pulmonary arterial pressure is very low, with the result that the tops of the lungs receive far less blood than the bases, which are relatively over-perfused with blood. 

It is only in the middle of the lungs that the blood and air flow to the alveoli are ideally matched. 

At altitude this variation in the ventilation/perfusion ratio of alveoli from the tops of the lungs to the bottoms is eliminated, with all the alveoli perfused and ventilated in more or less the physiologically ideal manner. 

This is a further important contributor to the acclimatatization to high altitudes and low oxygen pressures.
The kidneys measure the oxygen content (mmol O2/liter blood, rather than the partial pressure of O2) of the arterial blood. 

When the oxygen content of the blood is chronically low, as at high altitude, the oxygen-sensitive kidney cells secrete erythropoietin (EPO) into the blood. 

This hormone stimulates the red bone marrow to increase its rate of red cell production, which leads to an increase in the hematocrit of the blood, and a consequent increase in its oxygen carrying capacity (due to the now high hemoglobin content of the blood). 

In other words, at the same arterial partial pressure of O2, a person with a high hematocrit carries more oxygen per liter of blood than a person with a lower hematocrit does. 

High altitude dwellers therefore have higher hematocrits than sea-level residents.


=== Other functions of the lungs ===



==== Local defenses ====
Irritation of nerve endings within the nasal passages or airways, can induce a cough reflex and sneezing. 

These responses cause air to be expelled forcefully from the trachea or nose, respectively. 

In this manner, irritants caught in the mucus which lines the respiratory tract are expelled or moved to the mouth where they can be swallowed. 

During coughing, contraction of the smooth muscle in the airway walls narrows the trachea by pulling the ends of the cartilage plates together and by pushing soft tissue into the lumen. 

This increases the expired airflow rate to dislodge and remove any irritant particle or mucus.
Respiratory epithelium can secrete a variety of molecules that aid in the defense of the lungs. 

These include secretory immunoglobulins (IgA), collectins, defensins and other peptides and proteases, reactive oxygen species, and reactive nitrogen species. 

These secretions can act directly as antimicrobials to help keep the airway free of infection. 

A variety of chemokines and cytokines are also secreted that recruit the traditional immune cells and others to the site of infections.
Surfactant immune function is primarily attributed to two proteins: SP-A and SP-D. 

These proteins can bind to sugars on the surface of pathogens and thereby opsonize them for uptake by phagocytes. 

It also regulates inflammatory responses and interacts with the adaptive immune response. 

Surfactant degradation or inactivation may contribute to enhanced susceptibility to lung inflammation and infection.Most of the respiratory system is lined with mucous membranes that contain mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue, which produces white blood cells such as lymphocytes.


==== Prevention of alveolar collapse ====

The lungs make a surfactant, a surface-active lipoprotein complex (phospholipoprotein) formed by type II alveolar cells. 

It floats on the surface of the thin watery layer which lines the insides of the alveoli, reducing the water's surface tension.
The surface tension of a watery surface (the water-air interface) tends to make that surface shrink. 

When that surface is curved as it is in the alveoli of the lungs, the shrinkage of the surface decreases the diameter of the alveoli. 

The more acute the curvature of the water-air interface the greater the tendency for the alveolus to collapse. 

This has three effects. 

Firstly the surface tension inside the alveoli resists expansion of the alveoli during inhalation (i.e. it makes the lung stiff, or non-compliant). 

Surfactant reduces the surface tension and therefore makes the lungs more compliant, or less stiff, than if it were not there. 

Secondly, the diameters of the alveoli increase and decrease during the breathing cycle. 

This means that the alveoli have a greater tendency to collapse (i.e. cause atelectasis) at the end of exhalation that at the end of inhalation. 

Since surfactant floats on the watery surface, its molecules are more tightly packed together when the alveoli shrink during exhalation. 

This causes them to have a greater surface tension-lowering effect when the alveoli are small than when they are large (as at the end of inhalation, when the surfactant molecules are more widely spaced). 

The tendency for the alveoli to collapse is therefore almost the same at the end of exhalation as at the end of inhalation. 

Thirdly, the surface tension of the curved watery layer lining the alveoli tends to draw water from the lung tissues into the alveoli. 

Surfactant reduces this danger to negligible levels, and keeps the alveoli dry.Pre-term babies who are unable to manufacture surfactant have lungs that tend to collapse each time they breathe out. 

Unless treated, this condition, called respiratory distress syndrome, is fatal. 

Basic scientific experiments, carried out using cells from chicken lungs, support the potential for using steroids as a means of furthering development of type II alveolar cells. 

In fact, once a premature birth is threatened, every effort is made to delay the birth, and a series of steroid injections is frequently administered to the mother during this delay in an effort to promote lung maturation.


==== Contributions to whole body functions ====
The lung vessels contain a fibrinolytic system that dissolves clots that may have arrived in the pulmonary circulation by embolism, often from the deep veins in the legs. 

They also release a variety of substances that enter the systemic arterial blood, and they remove other substances from the systemic venous blood that reach them via the pulmonary artery. 

Some prostaglandins are removed from the circulation, while others are synthesized in the lungs and released into the blood when lung tissue is stretched.
The lungs activate one hormone. 

The physiologically inactive decapeptide angiotensin I is converted to the aldosterone-releasing octapeptide, angiotensin II, in the pulmonary circulation. 

The reaction occurs in other tissues as well, but it is particularly prominent in the lungs. 

Angiotensin II also has a direct effect on arteriolar walls, causing arteriolar vasoconstriction, and consequently a rise in arterial blood pressure. 

Large amounts of the angiotensin-converting enzyme responsible for this activation are located on the surfaces of the endothelial cells of the alveolar capillaries. 

The converting enzyme also inactivates bradykinin. 

Circulation time through the alveolar capillaries is less than one second, yet 70% of the angiotensin I reaching the lungs is converted to angiotensin II in a single trip through the capillaries. 

Four other peptidases have been identified on the surface of the pulmonary endothelial cells.


==== Vocalization ====
The movement of gas through the larynx, pharynx and mouth allows humans to speak, or phonate. 

Vocalization, or singing, in birds occurs via the syrinx, an organ located at the base of the trachea. 

The vibration of air flowing across the larynx (vocal cords), in humans, and the syrinx, in birds, results in sound. 

Because of this, gas movement is vital for communication purposes.


==== Temperature control ====
Panting in dogs, cats, birds and some other animals provides a means of reducing body temperature, by evaporating saliva in the mouth (instead of evaporating sweat on the skin).


=== Clinical significance ===

Disorders of the respiratory system can be classified into several general groups:

Airway obstructive conditions (e.g., emphysema, bronchitis, asthma)
Pulmonary restrictive conditions (e.g., fibrosis, sarcoidosis, alveolar damage, pleural effusion)
Vascular diseases (e.g., pulmonary edema, pulmonary embolism, pulmonary hypertension)
Infectious, environmental and other "diseases" (e.g., pneumonia, tuberculosis, asbestosis, particulate pollutants)
Primary cancers (e.g. bronchial carcinoma, mesothelioma)
Secondary cancers (e.g. cancers that originated elsewhere in the body, but have seeded themselves in the lungs)
Insufficient surfactant (e.g. respiratory distress syndrome in pre-term babies) .Disorders of the respiratory system are usually treated by a pulmonologist and respiratory therapist.
Where there is an inability to breathe or an insufficiency in breathing a medical ventilator may be used.


== Exceptional mammals ==



=== Horses ===


Horses are obligate nasal breathers which means that they are different from many other mammals because they do not have the option of breathing through their mouths and must take in air through their noses.


=== Elephants ===

The elephant is the only mammal known to have no pleural space. 

Rather, the parietal and visceral pleura are both composed of dense connective tissue and joined to each other via loose connective tissue. 

This lack of a pleural space, along with an unusually thick diaphragm, are thought to be evolutionary adaptations allowing the elephant to remain underwater for long periods of time while breathing through its trunk which emerges as a snorkel.In the elephant the lungs are attached to the diaphragm and breathing relies mainly on the diaphragm rather than the expansion of the ribcage.


== Birds ==


The respiratory system of birds differs significantly from that found in mammals. 

Firstly, they have rigid lungs which do not expand and contract during the breathing cycle. 

Instead an extensive system of air sacs (Fig. 15) distributed throughout their bodies act as the bellows drawing environmental air into the sacs, and expelling the spent air after it has passed through the lungs (Fig. 18). 

Birds also do not have diaphragms or pleural cavities.
Bird lungs are smaller than those in mammals of comparable size, but the air sacs account for 15% of the total body volume, compared to the 7% devoted to the alveoli which act as the bellows in mammals.Inhalation and exhalation are brought about by alternately increasing and decreasing the volume of the entire thoraco-abdominal cavity (or coelom) using both their abdominal and costal muscles. 

During inhalation the muscles attached to the vertebral ribs (Fig. 17) contract angling them forwards and outwards. 

This pushes the sternal ribs, to which they are attached at almost right angles, downwards and forwards, taking the sternum (with its prominent keel) in the same direction (Fig. 17). 

This increases both the vertical and transverse diameters of thoracic portion of the trunk. 

The forward and downward movement of, particularly, the posterior end of the sternum pulls the abdominal wall downwards, increasing the volume of that region of the trunk as well. 

The increase in volume of the entire trunk cavity reduces the air pressure in all the thoraco-abdominal air sacs, causing them to fill with air as described below.
During exhalation the external oblique muscle which is attached to the sternum and vertebral ribs anteriorly, and to the pelvis (pubis and ilium in Fig. 17) posteriorly (forming part of the abdominal wall) reverses the inhalatory movement, while compressing the abdominal contents, thus increasing the pressure in all the air sacs. 

Air is therefore expelled from the respiratory system in the act of exhalation.

During inhalation air enters the trachea via the nostrils and mouth, and continues to just beyond the syrinx at which point the trachea branches into two primary bronchi, going to the two lungs (Fig. 16). 

The primary bronchi enter the lungs to become the intrapulmonary bronchi, which give off a set of parallel branches called ventrobronchi and, a little further on, an equivalent set of dorsobronchi (Fig. 16). 

The ends of the intrapulmonary bronchi discharge air into the posterior air sacs at the caudal end of the bird. 

Each pair of dorso-ventrobronchi is connected by a large number of parallel microscopic air capillaries (or parabronchi) where gas exchange occurs (Fig. 16). 

As the bird inhales, tracheal air flows through the intrapulmonary bronchi into the posterior air sacs, as well as into the dorsobronchi, but not into the ventrobronchi (Fig. 18). 

This is due to the bronchial architecture which directs the inhaled air away from the openings of the ventrobronchi, into the continuation of the intrapulmonary bronchus towards the dorsobronchi and posterior air sacs. 

From the dorsobronchi the inhaled air flows through the parabronchi (and therefore the gas exchanger) to the ventrobronchi from where the air can only escape into the expanding anterior air sacs. 

So, during inhalation, both the posterior and anterior air sacs expand, the posterior air sacs filling with fresh inhaled air, while the anterior air sacs fill with "spent" (oxygen-poor) air that has just passed through the lungs.

During exhalation the pressure in the posterior air sacs (which were filled with fresh air during inhalation) increases due to the contraction of the oblique muscle described above. 

The aerodynamics of the interconnecting openings from the posterior air sacs to the dorsobronchi and intrapulmonary bronchi ensures that the air leaves these sacs in the direction of the lungs (via the dorsobronchi), rather than returning down the intrapulmonary bronchi (Fig. 18). 

From the dorsobronchi the fresh air from the posterior air sacs flows through the parabronchi (in the same direction as occurred during inhalation) into ventrobronchi. 

The air passages connecting the ventrobronchi and anterior air sacs to the intrapulmonary bronchi direct the "spent", oxygen poor air from these two organs to the trachea from where it escapes to the exterior. 

Oxygenated air therefore flows constantly (during the entire breathing cycle) in a single direction through the parabronchi.The blood flow through the bird lung is at right angles to the flow of air through the parabronchi, forming a cross-current flow exchange system (Fig. 19). 

The partial pressure of oxygen in the parabronchi declines along their lengths as O2 diffuses into the blood. 

The blood capillaries leaving the exchanger near the entrance of airflow take up more O2 than do the capillaries leaving near the exit end of the parabronchi. 

When the contents of all capillaries mix, the final partial pressure of oxygen of the mixed pulmonary venous blood is higher than that of the exhaled air, but is nevertheless less than half that of the inhaled air, thus achieving roughly the same systemic arterial blood partial pressure of oxygen as mammals do with their bellows-type lungs.The trachea is an area of dead space: the oxygen-poor air it contains at the end of exhalation is the first air to re-enter the posterior air sacs and lungs. 

In comparison to the mammalian respiratory tract, the dead space volume in a bird is, on average, 4.5 times greater than it is in mammals of the same size. 

Birds with long necks will inevitably have long tracheae, and must therefore take deeper breaths than mammals do to make allowances for their greater dead space volumes. 

In some birds (e.g. the whooper swan, Cygnus cygnus, the white spoonbill, Platalea leucorodia, the whooping crane, Grus americana, and the helmeted curassow, Pauxi pauxi) the trachea, which some cranes can be 1.5 m long, is coiled back and forth within the body, drastically increasing the dead space ventilation. 

The purpose of this extraordinary feature is unknown.


== Reptiles ==


The anatomical structure of the lungs is less complex in reptiles than in mammals, with reptiles lacking the very extensive airway tree structure found in mammalian lungs. 

Gas exchange in reptiles still occurs in alveoli however. 

Reptiles do not possess a diaphragm. 

Thus, breathing occurs via a change in the volume of the body cavity which is controlled by contraction of intercostal muscles in all reptiles except turtles. 

In turtles, contraction of specific pairs of flank muscles governs inhalation and exhalation.


== Amphibians ==


Both the lungs and the skin serve as respiratory organs in amphibians. 

The ventilation of the lungs in amphibians relies on positive pressure ventilation. 

Muscles lower the floor of the oral cavity, enlarging it and drawing in air through the nostrils into the oral cavity. 

With the nostrils and mouth closed, the floor of the oral cavity is then pushed up, which forces air down the trachea into the lungs. 

The skin of these animals is highly vascularized and moist, with moisture maintained via secretion of mucus from specialised cells, and is involved in cutaneous respiration. 

While the lungs are of primary organs for gas exchange between the blood and the environmental air (when out of the water), the skin's unique properties aid rapid gas exchange when amphibians are submerged in oxygen-rich water.
Some amphibians have gills, either in the early stages of their development (e.g. tadpoles of frogs), while others retain them into adulthood (e.g. some salamanders).


== Fish ==


Oxygen is poorly soluble in water. 

Fully aerated fresh water therefore contains only 8–10 ml O2/liter compared to the O2 concentration of 210 ml/liter in the air at sea level. 

Furthermore, the coefficient of diffusion (i.e. the rate at which a substances diffuses from a region of high concentration to one of low concentration, under standard conditions) of the respiratory gases is typically 10,000 faster in air than in water. 

Thus oxygen, for instance, has a diffusion coefficient of 17.6 mm2/s in air, but only 0.0021 mm2/s in water. 

The corresponding values for carbon dioxide are 16 mm2/s in air and 0.0016 mm2/s in water. 

This means that when oxygen is taken up from the water in contact with a gas exchanger, it is replaced considerably more slowly by the oxygen from the oxygen-rich regions small distances away from the exchanger than would have occurred in air. 

Fish have developed gills deal with these problems. 

Gills are specialized organs containing filaments, which further divide into lamellae. 

The lamellae contain a dense thin walled capillary network that exposes a large gas exchange surface area to the very large volumes of water passing over them.Gills use a countercurrent exchange system that increases the efficiency of oxygen-uptake from the water. 

Fresh oxygenated water taken in through the mouth is uninterruptedly "pumped" through the gills in one direction, while the blood in the lamellae flows in the opposite direction, creating the countercurrent blood and water flow (Fig. 22), on which the fish's survival depends.Water is drawn in through the mouth by closing the operculum (gill cover), and enlarging the mouth cavity (Fig. 23). 

Simultaneously the gill chambers enlarge, producing a lower pressure there than in the mouth causing water to flow over the gills. 

The mouth cavity then contracts, inducing the closure of the passive oral valves, thereby preventing the back-flow of water from the mouth (Fig. 23). 

The water in the mouth is, instead, forced over the gills, while the gill chambers contract emptying the water they contain through the opercular openings (Fig. 23). 

Back-flow into the gill chamber during the inhalatory phase is prevented by a membrane along the ventroposterior border of the operculum (diagram on the left in Fig. 23). 

Thus the mouth cavity and gill chambers act alternately as suction pump and pressure pump to maintain a steady flow of water over the gills in one direction. 

Since the blood in the lamellar capillaries flows in the opposite direction to that of the water, the consequent countercurrent flow of blood and water maintains steep concentration gradients for oxygen and carbon dioxide along the entire length of each capillary (lower diagram in Fig. 22). 

Oxygen is, therefore, able to continually diffuse down its gradient into the blood, and the carbon dioxide down its gradient into the water. 

Although countercurrent exchange systems theoretically allow an almost complete transfer of a respiratory gas from one side of the exchanger to the other, in fish less than 80% of the oxygen in the water flowing over the gills is generally transferred to the blood.In certain active pelagic sharks, water passes through the mouth and over the gills while they are moving, in a process known as "ram ventilation". 

While at rest, most sharks pump water over their gills, as most bony fish do, to ensure that oxygenated water continues to flow over their gills. 

But a small number of species have lost the ability to pump water through their gills and must swim without rest. 

These species are obligate ram ventilators and would presumably asphyxiate if unable to move. 

Obligate ram ventilation is also true of some pelagic bony fish species.There are a few fish that can obtain oxygen for brief periods of time from air swallowed from above the surface of the water. 

Thus lungfish possess one or two lungs, and the labyrinth fish have developed a special "labyrinth organ", which characterizes this suborder of fish. 

The labyrinth organ is a much-folded suprabranchial accessory breathing organ. 

It is formed by a vascularized expansion of the epibranchial bone of the first gill arch, and is used for respiration in air. 

This organ allows labyrinth fish to take in oxygen directly from the air, instead of taking it from the water in which they reside through the use of gills. 

The labyrinth organ helps the oxygen in the inhaled air to be absorbed into the bloodstream. 

As a result, labyrinth fish can survive for a short period of time out of water, as they can inhale the air around them, provided they stay moist. 

Labyrinth fish are not born with functional labyrinth organs. 

The development of the organ is gradual and most juvenile labyrinth fish breathe entirely with their gills and develop the labyrinth organs when they grow older.


== Invertebrates ==



=== Arthropods ===


Some species of crab use a respiratory organ called a branchiostegal lung. 

Its gill-like structure increases the surface area for gas exchange which is more suited to taking oxygen from the air than from water. 

Some of the smallest spiders and mites can breathe simply by exchanging gas through the surface of the body. 

Larger spiders, scorpions and other arthropods use a primitive book lung.


==== Insects ====

Most insects breath passively through their spiracles (special openings in the exoskeleton) and the air reaches every part of the body by means of a series of smaller and smaller tubes called 'trachaea' when their diameters are relatively large, and 'tracheoles' when their diameters are very small. 

The tracheoles make contact with individual cells throughout the body. 

They are partially filled with fluid, which can be withdrawn from the individual tracheoles when the tissues, such as muscles, are active and have a high demand for oxygen, bringing the air closer to the active cells. 

This is probably brought about by the buildup of lactic acid in the active muscles causing an osmotic gradient, moving the water out of the tracheoles and into the active cells. 

Diffusion of gases is effective over small distances but not over larger ones, this is one of the reasons insects are all relatively small. 

Insects which do not have spiracles and trachaea, such as some Collembola, breathe directly through their skins, also by diffusion of gases.The number of spiracles an insect has is variable between species, however, they always come in pairs, one on each side of the body, and usually one pair per segment. 

Some of the Diplura have eleven, with four pairs on the thorax, but in most of the ancient forms of insects, such as Dragonflies and Grasshoppers there are two thoracic and eight abdominal spiracles. 

However, in most of the remaining insects, there are fewer. 

It is at the level of the tracheoles that oxygen is delivered to the cells for respiration.
Insects were once believed to exchange gases with the environment continuously by the simple diffusion of gases into the tracheal system. 

More recently, however, large variation in insect ventilatory patterns has been documented and insect respiration appears to be highly variable. 

Some small insects do not demonstrate continuous respiratory movements and may lack muscular control of the spiracles. 

Others, however, utilize muscular contraction of the abdomen along with coordinated spiracle contraction and relaxation to generate cyclical gas exchange patterns and to reduce water loss into the atmosphere. 

The most extreme form of these patterns is termed discontinuous gas exchange cycles.


=== Molluscs ===


Molluscs generally possess gills that allow gas exchange between the aqueous environment and their circulatory systems. 

These animals also possess a heart that pumps blood containing hemocyanin as its oxygen-capturing molecule. 

Hence, this respiratory system is similar to that of vertebrate fish. 

The respiratory system of gastropods can include either gills or a lung.


== Plants ==


Plants use carbon dioxide gas in the process of photosynthesis, and exhale oxygen gas as waste. 

The chemical equation of photosynthesis is 6 CO2 (carbon dioxide) and 6 H2O (water), which in the presence of sunlight makes C6H12O6 (glucose) and 6 O2 (oxygen). 

Photosynthesis uses electrons on the carbon atoms as the repository for the energy obtained from sunlight. 

Respiration is the opposite of photosynthesis. 

It reclaims the energy to power chemical reactions in cells. 

In so doing the carbon atoms and their electrons are combined with oxygen forming CO2 which is easily removed from both the cells and the organism. 

Plants use both processes, photosynthesis to capture the energy and oxidative metabolism to use it.
Plant respiration is limited by the process of diffusion. 

Plants take in carbon dioxide through holes, known as stomata, that can open and close on the undersides of their leaves and sometimes other parts of their anatomy. 

Most plants require some oxygen for catabolic processes (break-down reactions that release energy). 

But the quantity of O2 used per hour is small as they are not involved in activities that require high rates of aerobic metabolism. 

Their requirement for air, however, is very high as they need CO2 for photosynthesis, which constitutes only 0.04% of the environmental air. 

Thus, to make 1 g of glucose requires the removal of all the CO2 from at least 18.7 liters of air at sea level. 

But inefficiencies in the photosynthetic process cause considerably greater volumes of air to be used.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Respiratory_system
;;;ES;;;



SISTEMA RESPIRATORIO


El sistema respiratorio (también aparato respiratorio, sistema ventilatorio) es un sistema biológico que consta de órganos y estructuras específicos que se utilizan para el intercambio de gases en animales y plantas.

La anatomía y fisiología que hacen que esto suceda varía mucho, según el tamaño del organismo, el entorno en el que vive y su historia evolutiva.

En los animales terrestres, la superficie respiratoria se interioriza como revestimiento de los pulmones.

El intercambio de gases en los pulmones ocurre en millones de pequeños sacos de aire; en los mamíferos y reptiles se denominan alvéolos, y en las aves se conocen como aurículas.

Estos sacos de aire microscópicos tienen un suministro de sangre muy rico, lo que hace que el aire entre en estrecho contacto con la sangre.

Estos sacos de aire se comunican con el ambiente externo a través de un sistema de vías respiratorias o tubos huecos, de los cuales el más grande es la tráquea, que se ramifica en el medio del tórax en los dos bronquios principales.

Éstos entran en los pulmones donde se ramifican en bronquios secundarios y terciarios progresivamente más estrechos que se ramifican en numerosos tubos más pequeños, los bronquiolos.

En las aves, los bronquiolos se denominan parabronquios.

Son los bronquiolos o parabronquios los que generalmente se abren hacia los alvéolos microscópicos en los mamíferos y las aurículas en las aves.

El aire tiene que ser bombeado desde el medio ambiente hacia los alvéolos o las aurículas mediante el proceso de respiración que involucra a los músculos de la respiración.
En la mayoría de los peces y en otros animales acuáticos (tanto vertebrados como invertebrados), el sistema respiratorio consta de branquias, que son órganos parcial o completamente externos, bañados en el ambiente acuoso.

Esta agua fluye sobre las branquias por una variedad de medios activos o pasivos.

El intercambio de gases tiene lugar en las branquias, que consisten en filamentos y láminas delgadas o muy planas que exponen al agua una superficie muy grande de tejido altamente vascularizado.
Otros animales, como los insectos, tienen sistemas respiratorios con características anatómicas muy simples, y en los anfibios, incluso la piel juega un papel vital en el intercambio de gases.

Las plantas también tienen sistemas respiratorios, pero la direccionalidad del intercambio de gases puede ser opuesta a la de los animales.

El sistema respiratorio de las plantas incluye características anatómicas como los estomas, que se encuentran en varias partes de la planta.


== Mamíferos ==



=== Anatomía ===


En humanos y otros mamíferos, la anatomía de un sistema respiratorio típico es el tracto respiratorio.

El tracto se divide en un tracto respiratorio superior y otro inferior.

El tracto superior incluye la nariz, las cavidades nasales, los senos paranasales, la faringe y la parte de la laringe por encima de las cuerdas vocales.

El tracto inferior (Fig. 2.) incluye la parte inferior de la laringe, la tráquea, los bronquios, los bronquiolos y los alvéolos.
Las vías respiratorias ramificadas del tracto inferior a menudo se describen como el árbol respiratorio o el árbol traqueobronquial (Fig. 2).

Los intervalos entre puntos de ramificación sucesivos a lo largo de las diversas ramas del "árbol" se denominan a menudo "generaciones" de ramificación, de las cuales hay, en el ser humano adulto, unas 23.

Las generaciones anteriores (aproximadamente las generaciones 0-16), que consisten en la tráquea y los bronquios, así como los bronquiolos más grandes que simplemente actúan como conductos de aire, llevando aire a los bronquiolos respiratorios, los conductos alveolares y los alvéolos (aproximadamente las generaciones 17-23) , donde tiene lugar el intercambio gaseoso.

Los bronquiolos se definen como las vías respiratorias pequeñas que carecen de soporte cartilaginoso. Los primeros bronquios que se ramifican desde la tráquea son los bronquios principales derecho e izquierdo.

En segundo lugar después de la tráquea (1,8 cm), estos bronquios (de 1 a 1,4 cm de diámetro) ingresan a los pulmones en cada hilio, donde se ramifican en bronquios secundarios más estrechos conocidos como bronquios lobares, y estos bronquios se ramifican en bronquios terciarios más estrechos conocidos como bronquios segmentarios.

Otras divisiones de los bronquios segmentarios (de 1 a 6 mm de diámetro) se conocen como bronquios segmentarios de cuarto, quinto y sexto orden, o se agrupan como bronquios subsegmentarios. árbol en el ser humano adulto, el ratón tiene sólo unas 13 ramificaciones de este tipo.
Los alvéolos son los terminales sin salida del "árbol", lo que significa que cualquier aire que entre en ellos tiene que salir por la misma ruta.

Un sistema como este crea un espacio muerto, un volumen de aire (alrededor de 150 ml en el ser humano adulto) que llena las vías respiratorias después de la exhalación y vuelve a los alvéolos antes de que llegue el aire ambiental.

Al final de la inhalación, las vías respiratorias se llenan de aire ambiental, que se exhala sin entrar en contacto con el intercambiador de gases.


=== Volúmenes ventilatorios ===


Los pulmones se expanden y contraen durante el ciclo respiratorio, aspirando aire dentro y fuera de los pulmones.

El volumen de aire que entra o sale de los pulmones en circunstancias normales de reposo (el volumen corriente en reposo de aproximadamente 500 ml) y los volúmenes que se mueven durante la inhalación forzada máxima y la exhalación forzada máxima se miden en humanos mediante espirometría.

A continuación se ilustra un espirograma humano adulto típico con los nombres dados a las diversas excursiones de volumen que pueden sufrir los pulmones (Fig. 3):

No todo el aire de los pulmones se puede expulsar durante la exhalación forzada máxima.

Este es el volumen residual de aproximadamente 1,0-1,5 litros que no se puede medir mediante espirometría.

Los volúmenes que incluyen el volumen residual (es decir, una capacidad residual funcional de unos 2,5-3,0 litros y una capacidad pulmonar total de unos 6 litros), por lo tanto, tampoco pueden medirse mediante espirometría.

Su medición requiere técnicas especiales. Las tasas a las que se inspira o exhala aire, ya sea por la boca o la nariz, o hacia dentro o fuera de los alvéolos, se tabulan a continuación, junto con la forma en que se calculan.

El número de ciclos de respiración por minuto se conoce como frecuencia respiratoria.


=== Mecánica de la respiración ===


En los mamíferos, la inhalación en reposo se debe principalmente a la contracción del diafragma.

Esta es una lámina de músculo abovedada hacia arriba que separa la cavidad torácica de la cavidad abdominal.

Cuando se contrae, la lámina se aplana (es decir, se mueve hacia abajo como se muestra en la Fig. 7) aumentando el volumen de la cavidad torácica.

El diafragma que se contrae empuja los órganos abdominales hacia abajo.

Pero debido a que el suelo pélvico impide que los órganos abdominales inferiores se muevan en esa dirección, el contenido abdominal flexible hace que el vientre se abulte hacia el frente y los lados, porque los músculos abdominales relajados no resisten este movimiento (Fig. 7).

Este abultamiento completamente pasivo (y encogimiento durante la exhalación) del abdomen durante la respiración normal a veces se denomina "respiración abdominal", aunque, de hecho, es "respiración diafragmática", que no es visible en el exterior del cuerpo.

Los mamíferos solo usan sus músculos abdominales durante la exhalación forzada (consulte la Fig. 8 y la discusión a continuación).

Nunca durante ninguna forma de inhalación.
A medida que el diafragma se contrae, la caja torácica se agranda simultáneamente porque los músculos intercostales tiran hacia arriba de las costillas, como se muestra en la figura 4.

Todas las nervaduras se inclinan hacia abajo desde atrás hacia adelante (como se muestra en la Fig. 4); pero las costillas más bajas también se inclinan hacia abajo desde la línea media hacia afuera (Fig. 5).

Por lo tanto, el diámetro transversal de la caja torácica se puede aumentar de la misma manera que se aumenta el diámetro anteroposterior mediante el llamado movimiento de manija de bomba que se muestra en la Fig. 4.
El agrandamiento de la dimensión vertical de la cavidad torácica por la contracción del diafragma, y ​​sus dos dimensiones horizontales por el levantamiento de la parte anterior y lateral de las costillas, hace que la presión intratorácica disminuya.

Los interiores de los pulmones están abiertos al aire exterior y, al ser elásticos, se expanden para llenar el espacio aumentado.

La entrada de aire a los pulmones se produce a través de las vías respiratorias (fig. 2).

En la salud, estas vías respiratorias comienzan con la nariz.

Es posible comenzar con la boca, que es el sistema de respiración de respaldo.

Sin embargo, la respiración bucal crónica provoca o es un signo de enfermedad.

Terminan en los sacos sin salida microscópicos llamados alvéolos, que siempre están abiertos, aunque los sistemas nerviosos simpático y parasimpático pueden cambiar los diámetros de las distintas secciones.

Por lo tanto, la presión del aire alveolar siempre está cerca de la presión del aire atmosférico (alrededor de 100 kPa al nivel del mar) en reposo, y los gradientes de presión que hacen que el aire entre y salga de los pulmones durante la respiración rara vez superan los 2-3 kPa. Durante la exhalación, el el diafragma y los músculos intercostales se relajan.

Esto devuelve el pecho y el abdomen a una posición determinada por su elasticidad anatómica.

Esta es la "posición media de reposo" del tórax y el abdomen (Fig. 7) cuando los pulmones contienen su capacidad residual funcional de aire (el área azul claro en la ilustración de la derecha de la Fig. 7), que en el ser humano adulto tiene un volumen de alrededor de 2,5 a 3,0 litros (Fig. 3).

La exhalación en reposo dura aproximadamente el doble que la inhalación porque el diafragma se relaja pasivamente más suavemente de lo que se contrae activamente durante la inhalación.

El volumen de aire que entra o sale (por la nariz o la boca) durante un solo ciclo de respiración se denomina volumen corriente.

En un ser humano adulto en reposo es de unos 500 ml por respiración.

Al final de la exhalación, las vías respiratorias contienen alrededor de 150 ml de aire alveolar, que es el primer aire que regresa a los alvéolos durante la inhalación.

Este volumen de aire que sale de los alvéolos y vuelve a entrar se conoce como ventilación de espacio muerto, lo que tiene como consecuencia que de los 500 ml que se inspiran en los alvéolos con cada respiración solo 350 ml (500 ml - 150 ml = 350 ml) es aire fresco tibio y humedecido.

Dado que estos 350 ml de aire fresco se mezclan completamente y se diluyen con el aire que permanece en los alvéolos después de la exhalación normal (es decir, la capacidad residual funcional de aproximadamente 2,5 a 3,0 litros), está claro que la composición del aire alveolar cambia muy poco. durante el ciclo respiratorio (ver Fig. 9).

La tensión de oxígeno (o presión parcial) se mantiene cerca de 13-14 kPa (alrededor de 100 mm Hg), y la del dióxido de carbono muy cerca de 5,3 kPa (o 40 mm Hg).

Esto contrasta con la composición del aire exterior seco al nivel del mar, donde la presión parcial de oxígeno es de 21 kPa (o 160 mm Hg) y la del dióxido de carbono de 0,04 kPa (o 0,3 mm Hg). Durante la respiración intensa (hiperpnea), como, por ejemplo, durante el ejercicio, la inhalación es provocada por una excursión mayor y más poderosa del diafragma que se contrae que en reposo (Fig. 8).

Además, los "músculos accesorios de la inhalación" exageran las acciones de los músculos intercostales (Fig. 8).

Estos músculos accesorios de la inhalación son músculos que se extienden desde las vértebras cervicales y la base del cráneo hasta las costillas superiores y el esternón, a veces a través de una inserción intermedia en las clavículas.

Cuando se contraen, el volumen interno de la caja torácica aumenta mucho más de lo que se puede lograr con la contracción de los músculos intercostales solos.

Visto desde el exterior del cuerpo, el levantamiento de las clavículas durante la inhalación extenuante o laboriosa a veces se denomina respiración clavicular, y se observa especialmente durante los ataques de asma y en personas con enfermedad pulmonar obstructiva crónica.
Durante la respiración pesada, la exhalación es causada por la relajación de todos los músculos de la inhalación.

Pero ahora, los músculos abdominales, en lugar de permanecer relajados (como lo hacen en reposo), se contraen con fuerza tirando hacia abajo de los bordes inferiores de la caja torácica (frontal y laterales) (Fig. 8).

Esto no solo reduce drásticamente el tamaño de la caja torácica, sino que también empuja los órganos abdominales hacia arriba contra el diafragma que, en consecuencia, sobresale profundamente en el tórax (Fig. 8).

El volumen pulmonar al final de la exhalación ahora está muy por debajo de la posición media en reposo y contiene mucho menos aire que la "capacidad residual funcional" en reposo.

Sin embargo, en un mamífero normal, los pulmones no se pueden vaciar por completo.

En un ser humano adulto, siempre queda al menos 1 litro de aire residual en los pulmones después de la exhalación máxima. La inhalación y exhalación rítmica automática puede interrumpirse al toser, estornudar (formas de exhalación muy enérgica), por la expresión de una amplia gama de emociones (risas, suspiros, gritos de dolor, tomas de aire exasperadas) y por actos voluntarios tales como hablar, cantar, silbar y tocar instrumentos de viento.

Todas estas acciones se basan en los músculos descritos anteriormente y sus efectos sobre el movimiento del aire dentro y fuera de los pulmones.
Aunque no es una forma de respiración, la maniobra de Valsalva involucra los músculos respiratorios.

Es, de hecho, un esfuerzo espiratorio muy enérgico contra una glotis bien cerrada, de modo que el aire no puede escapar de los pulmones.

En cambio, los contenidos abdominales son evacuados en la dirección opuesta, a través de orificios en el piso pélvico.

Los músculos abdominales se contraen con mucha fuerza, lo que hace que la presión dentro del abdomen y el tórax se eleve a niveles extremadamente altos.

La maniobra de Valsalva se puede realizar de forma voluntaria, pero generalmente es un reflejo provocado al intentar vaciar el abdomen durante, por ejemplo, una defecación difícil o durante el parto.

La respiración cesa durante esta maniobra.


=== Intercambio de gases ===


 

El propósito principal del sistema respiratorio es igualar las presiones parciales de los gases respiratorios en el aire alveolar con las de la sangre capilar pulmonar (Fig. 11).

Este proceso se produce por difusión simple, a través de una membrana muy fina (conocida como barrera hemato-aire), que forma las paredes de los alvéolos pulmonares (fig. 10).

Está formado por las células epiteliales alveolares, sus membranas basales y las células endoteliales de los capilares alveolares (fig. 10).

Esta barrera de gases en sangre es extremadamente delgada (en humanos, en promedio, 2,2 μm de espesor).

Se pliega en alrededor de 300 millones de pequeños sacos de aire llamados alvéolos (cada uno entre 75 y 300 µm de diámetro) que se ramifican desde los bronquiolos respiratorios en los pulmones, proporcionando así un área de superficie extremadamente grande (aproximadamente 145 m2) para que ocurra el intercambio de gases. El aire contenido dentro de los alvéolos tiene un volumen semipermanente de alrededor de 2,5-3,0 litros que rodea completamente la sangre capilar alveolar (Fig. 12).

Esto asegura que el equilibrio de las presiones parciales de los gases en los dos compartimentos sea muy eficiente y ocurra muy rápidamente.

La sangre que sale de los capilares alveolares y finalmente se distribuye por todo el cuerpo tiene una presión parcial de oxígeno de 13-14 kPa (100 mmHg) y una presión parcial de dióxido de carbono de 5,3 kPa (40 mmHg) (es decir, la misma que la tensiones de gas de oxígeno y dióxido de carbono como en los alvéolos).

Como se mencionó en la sección anterior, las presiones parciales correspondientes de oxígeno y dióxido de carbono en el aire ambiente (seco) al nivel del mar son 21 kPa (160 mmHg) y 0,04 kPa (0,3 mmHg) respectivamente. Esta marcada diferencia entre la composición del el aire alveolar y el del aire ambiente pueden mantenerse porque la capacidad residual funcional está contenida en sacos sin salida conectados al aire exterior por conductos bastante estrechos y relativamente largos (las vías respiratorias: nariz, faringe, laringe, tráquea, bronquios y sus vías respiratorias). se ramifica hasta los bronquiolos), a través de los cuales el aire tiene que ser inhalado y exhalado (es decir, no hay un flujo unidireccional como el que hay en el pulmón de las aves).

Esta anatomía típica de los mamíferos, combinada con el hecho de que los pulmones no se vacían ni se vuelven a inflar con cada respiración (dejando un volumen sustancial de aire, de unos 2,5 a 3,0 litros, en los alvéolos después de la exhalación), asegura que la composición de los alveolos el aire se perturba mínimamente cuando los 350 ml de aire fresco se mezclan con cada inhalación.

Así, el animal cuenta con una "atmósfera portátil" muy especial, cuya composición difiere significativamente del aire ambiente actual.

Es a esta atmósfera portátil (la capacidad residual funcional) a la que se exponen la sangre y, por tanto, los tejidos corporales, no al aire exterior.
Las presiones arteriales parciales de oxígeno y dióxido de carbono resultantes se controlan homeostáticamente.

Un aumento de la presión parcial arterial de CO2 y, en menor medida, una caída de la presión parcial arterial de O2, provocarán de forma refleja una respiración más profunda y rápida hasta que la tensión de los gases sanguíneos en los pulmones, y por tanto la sangre arterial, vuelva a ser normal. normal.

Ocurre lo contrario cuando cae la tensión de dióxido de carbono o, nuevamente, en menor medida, aumenta la tensión de oxígeno: la frecuencia y la profundidad de la respiración se reducen hasta que se restablece la normalidad de los gases en sangre.
Dado que la sangre que llega a los capilares alveolares tiene una presión parcial de O2 de, en promedio, 6 kPa (45 mmHg), mientras que la presión en el aire alveolar es de 13-14 kPa (100 mmHg), habrá una difusión neta de oxígeno en la sangre capilar, cambiando ligeramente la composición de los 3 litros de aire alveolar.

De manera similar, dado que la sangre que llega a los capilares alveolares tiene una presión parcial de CO2 de también alrededor de 6 kPa (45 mmHg), mientras que la del aire alveolar es de 5,3 kPa (40 mmHg), hay un movimiento neto de dióxido de carbono fuera los capilares hacia los alvéolos.

Los cambios producidos por estos flujos netos de gases individuales dentro y fuera del aire alveolar requieren el reemplazo de alrededor del 15% del aire alveolar con aire ambiental cada 5 segundos más o menos.

Esto está muy estrictamente controlado por el control de los gases en sangre arterial (que reflejan con precisión la composición del aire alveolar) por los cuerpos aórtico y carotídeo, así como por el sensor de pH y gases en sangre en la superficie anterior del bulbo raquídeo en el cerebro.

También hay sensores de oxígeno y dióxido de carbono en los pulmones, pero principalmente determinan los diámetros de los bronquiolos y los capilares pulmonares y, por lo tanto, son responsables de dirigir el flujo de aire y sangre a diferentes partes de los pulmones.
Solo como resultado de mantener con precisión la composición de los 3 litros de aire alveolar, con cada respiración se libera algo de dióxido de carbono a la atmósfera y se toma algo de oxígeno del aire exterior.

Si se ha perdido más dióxido de carbono de lo habitual por un breve período de hiperventilación, la respiración se ralentizará o se detendrá hasta que la presión alveolar parcial de dióxido de carbono haya vuelto a 5,3 kPa (40 mmHg).

Por lo tanto, estrictamente hablando, es falso que la función principal del sistema respiratorio sea eliminar del cuerpo los "desechos" de dióxido de carbono.

El dióxido de carbono que se exhala con cada respiración probablemente podría verse más correctamente como un subproducto del dióxido de carbono del líquido extracelular del cuerpo y los homeostáticos de pH.
Si estos homeostáticos están comprometidos, se producirá una acidosis respiratoria o una alcalosis respiratoria.

A la larga, estos pueden compensarse mediante ajustes renales en las concentraciones plasmáticas de H+ y HCO3−; pero dado que esto lleva tiempo, el síndrome de hiperventilación puede, por ejemplo, ocurrir cuando la agitación o la ansiedad hacen que una persona respire rápida y profundamente, lo que provoca una alcalosis respiratoria angustiosa a través de la expulsión de demasiado CO2 de la sangre al aire exterior. Oxígeno Tiene una solubilidad muy baja en agua y, por lo tanto, se transporta en la sangre en combinación con la hemoglobina.

El oxígeno se mantiene en la hemoglobina por cuatro grupos hemo que contienen hierro ferroso por molécula de hemoglobina.

Cuando todos los grupos hemo llevan una molécula de O2 cada uno, se dice que la sangre está "saturada" con oxígeno, y ningún aumento adicional en la presión parcial de oxígeno aumentará significativamente la concentración de oxígeno en la sangre.

La mayor parte del dióxido de carbono en la sangre se transporta como iones de bicarbonato (HCO3−) en el plasma.

Sin embargo, la conversión de CO2 disuelto en HCO3− (mediante la adición de agua) es demasiado lenta para la velocidad a la que circula la sangre a través de los tejidos, por un lado, y de los capilares alveolares, por el otro.

Por lo tanto, la reacción es catalizada por la anhidrasa carbónica, una enzima dentro de los glóbulos rojos.

La reacción puede ir en ambas direcciones dependiendo de la presión parcial predominante de CO2.

Una pequeña cantidad de dióxido de carbono se transporta en la porción proteica de las moléculas de hemoglobina como grupos carbamino.

La concentración total de dióxido de carbono (en forma de iones bicarbonato, CO2 disuelto y grupos carbamino) en sangre arterial (es decir, después de que se haya equilibrado con el aire alveolar) es de aproximadamente 26 mM (o 58 ml/100 ml), en comparación con la concentración de oxígeno en sangre arterial saturada de aproximadamente 9 mM (o 20 ml/100 ml de sangre).


=== Control de ventilación ===


La ventilación de los pulmones en los mamíferos ocurre a través de los centros respiratorios en el bulbo raquídeo y la protuberancia del tronco encefálico.

Estas áreas forman una serie de vías neurales que reciben información sobre las presiones parciales de oxígeno y dióxido de carbono en la sangre arterial.

Esta información determina la tasa promedio de ventilación de los alvéolos de los pulmones, para mantener constantes estas presiones.

El centro respiratorio lo hace a través de nervios motores que activan el diafragma y otros músculos de la respiración.
La frecuencia respiratoria aumenta cuando aumenta la presión parcial de dióxido de carbono en la sangre.

Esto es detectado por quimiorreceptores centrales de gases en sangre en la superficie anterior del bulbo raquídeo.

Los cuerpos aórtico y carotídeo son quimiorreceptores de gases en sangre periférica que son particularmente sensibles a la presión parcial arterial de O2 aunque también responden, pero con menor fuerza, a la presión parcial de CO2.

Al nivel del mar, en circunstancias normales, la frecuencia y la profundidad de la respiración están determinadas principalmente por la presión arterial parcial de dióxido de carbono más que por la presión arterial parcial de oxígeno, a la que se permite que varíe dentro de un rango bastante amplio antes de que los centros respiratorios entren en funcionamiento. el bulbo raquídeo y la protuberancia responden a él para cambiar la frecuencia y la profundidad de la respiración. El ejercicio aumenta la frecuencia respiratoria debido al dióxido de carbono adicional producido por el metabolismo mejorado de los músculos que se ejercitan.

Además, los movimientos pasivos de las extremidades también producen de manera refleja un aumento en la frecuencia respiratoria. La información recibida de los receptores de estiramiento en los pulmones limita el volumen corriente (la profundidad de la inhalación y la exhalación).


=== Respuestas a bajas presiones atmosféricas ===

Los alvéolos están abiertos (a través de las vías respiratorias) a la atmósfera, con el resultado de que la presión del aire alveolar es exactamente la misma que la presión del aire ambiental al nivel del mar, en altitud o en cualquier atmósfera artificial (por ejemplo, una cámara de buceo o una cámara de descompresión). ) en el que el individuo está respirando libremente.

Con la expansión de los pulmones, el aire alveolar ocupa un volumen mayor y su presión cae proporcionalmente, lo que hace que el aire fluya a través de las vías respiratorias, hasta que la presión en los alvéolos vuelve a ser la presión del aire ambiente.

Lo contrario sucede durante la exhalación.

Este proceso (de inhalación y exhalación) es exactamente el mismo al nivel del mar que en la cima del monte.

Everest, o en una cámara de buceo o cámara de descompresión.

 
Sin embargo, a medida que uno se eleva sobre el nivel del mar, la densidad del aire disminuye exponencialmente (ver Fig. 14), reduciéndose a la mitad aproximadamente con cada 5500 m de aumento de altitud.

Dado que la composición del aire atmosférico es casi constante por debajo de los 80 km, como resultado del continuo efecto de mezcla del clima, la concentración de oxígeno en el aire (mmols O2 por litro de aire ambiente) disminuye al mismo ritmo que la caída. en la presión del aire con la altitud.

Por lo tanto, para respirar la misma cantidad de oxígeno por minuto, la persona tiene que inhalar un volumen de aire por minuto proporcionalmente mayor en altura que al nivel del mar.

Esto se logra respirando más profunda y rápidamente (es decir, hiperpnea) que al nivel del mar (ver más abajo).

 
Sin embargo, existe una complicación que aumenta el volumen de aire que se necesita inhalar por minuto (volumen minuto respiratorio) para proporcionar la misma cantidad de oxígeno a los pulmones en altura que al nivel del mar.

Durante la inhalación, el aire se calienta y se satura con vapor de agua durante su paso por las fosas nasales y la faringe.

La presión de vapor de agua saturada depende únicamente de la temperatura.

A una temperatura central del cuerpo de 37 °C, es de 6,3 kPa (47,0 mmHg), independientemente de cualquier otra influencia, incluida la altitud.

Así, al nivel del mar, donde la presión atmosférica ambiental es de aproximadamente 100 kPa, el aire húmedo que fluye hacia los pulmones desde la tráquea se compone de vapor de agua (6,3 kPa), nitrógeno (74,0 kPa), oxígeno (19,7 kPa) y trazas de dióxido de carbono y otros gases (un total de 100 kPa).

En aire seco, la presión parcial de O2 al nivel del mar es de 21,0 kPa (es decir, el 21 % de 100 kPa), en comparación con los 19,7 kPa de oxígeno que entran en el aire alveolar. (La presión parcial traqueal de oxígeno es 21% de [100 kPa – 6,3 kPa] = 19,7 kPa).

En la cumbre del monte.

Everest (a una altitud de 8.848 mo 29.029 pies) la presión atmosférica total es de 33,7 kPa, de los cuales 7,1 kPa (o 21%) son oxígeno.

El aire que entra en los pulmones también tiene una presión total de 33,7 kPa, de los cuales 6,3 kPa son, inevitablemente, vapor de agua (como lo es al nivel del mar).

Esto reduce la presión parcial de oxígeno que ingresa a los alvéolos a 5,8 kPa (o 21 % de [33,7 kPa – 6,3 kPa] = 5,8 kPa).

La reducción de la presión parcial de oxígeno en el aire inhalado es, por lo tanto, sustancialmente mayor de lo que sugeriría la reducción de la presión atmosférica total en altitud (en el Monte Everest: 5,8 kPa frente a 7,1 kPa).
Existe otra complicación menor en la altura.

Si el volumen de los pulmones se duplicara instantáneamente al comienzo de la inhalación, la presión del aire dentro de los pulmones se reduciría a la mitad.

Esto sucede independientemente de la altitud.

Por lo tanto, la reducción a la mitad de la presión del aire a nivel del mar (100 kPa) da como resultado una presión de aire intrapulmonar de 50 kPa.

Haciendo lo mismo a 5500 m, donde la presión atmosférica es de solo 50 kPa, la presión del aire intrapulmonar cae a 25 kPa.

Por lo tanto, el mismo cambio en el volumen pulmonar al nivel del mar da como resultado una diferencia de presión de 50 kPa entre el aire ambiente y el aire intrapulmonar, mientras que a 5500 m da como resultado una diferencia de solo 25 kPa.

Por lo tanto, la presión impulsora que fuerza el aire hacia los pulmones durante la inhalación se reduce a la mitad a esta altitud.

La tasa de entrada de aire en los pulmones durante la inhalación al nivel del mar es, por tanto, el doble de la que se produce a 5500 m.

Sin embargo, en realidad, la inhalación y la exhalación ocurren de manera mucho más suave y menos abrupta que en el ejemplo dado.

Las diferencias entre las presiones atmosférica e intrapulmonar, que impulsan el aire dentro y fuera de los pulmones durante el ciclo respiratorio, son del orden de 2 a 3 kPa.

Una duplicación o más de estas pequeñas diferencias de presión solo podría lograrse mediante cambios muy importantes en el esfuerzo respiratorio a grandes altitudes.
Todas las influencias anteriores de las bajas presiones atmosféricas sobre la respiración se acomodan principalmente al respirar más profundo y más rápido (hiperpnea).

El grado exacto de hiperpnea lo determina el homeostato de gases en sangre, que regula las presiones parciales de oxígeno y dióxido de carbono en la sangre arterial.

Este homeostato prioriza la regulación de la presión parcial arterial de dióxido de carbono sobre la de oxígeno a nivel del mar.

Es decir, a nivel del mar la presión parcial arterial de CO2 se mantiene muy próxima a 5,3 kPa (o 40 mmHg) en un amplio abanico de circunstancias, a expensas de la presión parcial arterial de O2, que se deja variar dentro de un rango muy amplio de valores, antes de provocar una respuesta ventilatoria correctiva.

Sin embargo, cuando la presión atmosférica (y por lo tanto la presión parcial de O2 en el aire ambiente) cae por debajo del 50-75% de su valor al nivel del mar, se da prioridad a la homeostasis del oxígeno sobre la homeostasis del dióxido de carbono.

Este cambio se produce a una altura de unos 2500 m (o unos 8000 pies).

Si este cambio se produce de forma relativamente brusca, la hiperpnea a gran altura provocará un descenso importante de la presión parcial arterial de dióxido de carbono, con el consiguiente aumento del pH del plasma arterial.

Este es uno de los contribuyentes al mal de altura.

Por otro lado, si el cambio a la homeostasis del oxígeno es incompleto, la hipoxia puede complicar el cuadro clínico con resultados potencialmente fatales.
Hay sensores de oxígeno en los bronquios y bronquiolos más pequeños.

En respuesta a presiones parciales bajas de oxígeno en el aire inhalado, estos sensores hacen que las arteriolas pulmonares se contraigan de manera refleja. (Esto es exactamente lo contrario del reflejo correspondiente en los tejidos, donde las bajas presiones arteriales parciales de O2 causan vasodilatación arteriolar). ocurre al nivel del mar.

Al nivel del mar, la presión arterial pulmonar es muy baja, con el resultado de que la parte superior de los pulmones recibe mucha menos sangre que las bases, que están relativamente sobreperfundidas con sangre.

Es solo en el medio de los pulmones que el flujo de sangre y aire a los alvéolos se emparejan idealmente.

En altitud, esta variación en la relación ventilación/perfusión de los alvéolos desde la parte superior de los pulmones hasta la parte inferior se elimina, con todos los alvéolos perfundidos y ventilados de una manera más o menos fisiológicamente ideal.

Este es otro contribuyente importante a la aclimatación a grandes altitudes y bajas presiones de oxígeno.
Los riñones miden el contenido de oxígeno (mmol O2/litro de sangre, en lugar de la presión parcial de O2) de la sangre arterial.

Cuando el contenido de oxígeno de la sangre es crónicamente bajo, como ocurre a gran altura, las células renales sensibles al oxígeno secretan eritropoyetina (EPO) en la sangre.

Esta hormona estimula la médula ósea roja para aumentar su tasa de producción de glóbulos rojos, lo que conduce a un aumento en el hematocrito de la sangre y al consiguiente aumento en su capacidad de transporte de oxígeno (debido al ahora alto contenido de hemoglobina de la sangre).

En otras palabras, a la misma presión arterial parcial de O2, una persona con un hematocrito alto transporta más oxígeno por litro de sangre que una persona con un hematocrito más bajo.

Por lo tanto, los habitantes de grandes alturas tienen hematocritos más altos que los residentes del nivel del mar.


=== Otras funciones de los pulmones ===



==== Defensas locales ====
La irritación de las terminaciones nerviosas dentro de las fosas nasales o las vías respiratorias puede inducir un reflejo de tos y estornudos.

Estas respuestas hacen que el aire sea expulsado con fuerza de la tráquea o la nariz, respectivamente.

De esta manera, los irritantes atrapados en la mucosidad que recubre el tracto respiratorio son expulsados ​​o trasladados a la boca donde pueden tragarse.

Durante la tos, la contracción del músculo liso en las paredes de las vías respiratorias estrecha la tráquea al juntar los extremos de las placas de cartílago y al empujar el tejido blando hacia la luz.

Esto aumenta la tasa de flujo de aire espirado para desalojar y eliminar cualquier partícula irritante o mucosidad.
El epitelio respiratorio puede secretar una variedad de moléculas que ayudan en la defensa de los pulmones.

Estos incluyen inmunoglobulinas secretoras (IgA), colectinas, defensinas y otros péptidos y proteasas, especies reactivas de oxígeno y especies reactivas de nitrógeno.

Estas secreciones pueden actuar directamente como antimicrobianos para ayudar a mantener las vías respiratorias libres de infecciones.

También se secreta una variedad de quimiocinas y citocinas que reclutan las células inmunitarias tradicionales y otras hacia el sitio de las infecciones.
La función inmunitaria de los tensioactivos se atribuye principalmente a dos proteínas: SP-A y SP-D.

Estas proteínas pueden unirse a los azúcares en la superficie de los patógenos y, por lo tanto, opsonizarlos para que los fagocitos los absorban.

También regula las respuestas inflamatorias e interactúa con la respuesta inmune adaptativa.

La degradación o inactivación de los surfactantes puede contribuir a una mayor susceptibilidad a la inflamación e infección pulmonar. La mayor parte del sistema respiratorio está revestido con membranas mucosas que contienen tejido linfoide asociado a la mucosa, que produce glóbulos blancos como los linfocitos.


==== Prevención del colapso alveolar ====

Los pulmones producen un surfactante, un complejo de lipoproteínas de superficie activa (fosfolipoproteína) formado por células alveolares de tipo II.

Flota en la superficie de la fina capa acuosa que recubre el interior de los alvéolos, reduciendo la tensión superficial del agua.
La tensión superficial de una superficie acuosa (la interfaz agua-aire) tiende a hacer que esa superficie se encoja.

Cuando esa superficie se curva como en los alvéolos de los pulmones, la contracción de la superficie disminuye el diámetro de los alvéolos.

Cuanto más aguda sea la curvatura de la interfase agua-aire, mayor será la tendencia del colapso del alvéolo.

Esto tiene tres efectos.

En primer lugar, la tensión superficial dentro de los alvéolos resiste la expansión de los alvéolos durante la inhalación (es decir, hace que el pulmón se vuelva rígido o no distendido).

El surfactante reduce la tensión superficial y, por lo tanto, hace que los pulmones sean más flexibles o menos rígidos que si no estuviera allí.

En segundo lugar, los diámetros de los alvéolos aumentan y disminuyen durante el ciclo respiratorio.

Esto significa que los alvéolos tienen una mayor tendencia a colapsarse (es decir, provocar atelectasias) al final de la espiración que al final de la inspiración.

Dado que el surfactante flota en la superficie del agua, sus moléculas están más apretadas cuando los alvéolos se contraen durante la exhalación.

Esto hace que tengan un mayor efecto reductor de la tensión superficial cuando los alvéolos son pequeños que cuando son grandes (como al final de la inhalación, cuando las moléculas de surfactante están más separadas).

Por lo tanto, la tendencia de los alvéolos a colapsar es casi la misma al final de la exhalación que al final de la inhalación.

En tercer lugar, la tensión superficial de la capa acuosa curva que recubre los alvéolos tiende a extraer agua de los tejidos pulmonares hacia los alvéolos.

El surfactante reduce este peligro a niveles insignificantes y mantiene secos los alvéolos. Los bebés prematuros que no pueden fabricar surfactante tienen pulmones que tienden a colapsarse cada vez que exhalan.

A menos que se trate, esta condición, llamada síndrome de dificultad respiratoria, es fatal.

Los experimentos científicos básicos, llevados a cabo con células de pulmones de pollo, respaldan el potencial del uso de esteroides como un medio para promover el desarrollo de células alveolares de tipo II.

De hecho, una vez que existe la amenaza de un parto prematuro, se hacen todos los esfuerzos posibles para retrasar el nacimiento, y con frecuencia se administra a la madre una serie de inyecciones de esteroides durante este retraso en un esfuerzo por promover la maduración pulmonar.


==== Contribuciones a las funciones de todo el cuerpo ====
Los vasos pulmonares contienen un sistema fibrinolítico que disuelve los coágulos que pueden haber llegado a la circulación pulmonar por embolia, a menudo desde las venas profundas de las piernas.

También liberan una variedad de sustancias que ingresan a la sangre arterial sistémica y eliminan otras sustancias de la sangre venosa sistémica que les llegan a través de la arteria pulmonar.

Algunas prostaglandinas se eliminan de la circulación, mientras que otras se sintetizan en los pulmones y se liberan a la sangre cuando se estira el tejido pulmonar.
Los pulmones activan una hormona.

El decapéptido angiotensina I fisiológicamente inactivo se convierte en el octapéptido liberador de aldosterona, angiotensina II, en la circulación pulmonar.

La reacción también ocurre en otros tejidos, pero es particularmente prominente en los pulmones.

La angiotensina II también tiene un efecto directo sobre las paredes arteriolares, provocando vasoconstricción arteriolar y, en consecuencia, un aumento de la presión arterial.

Grandes cantidades de la enzima convertidora de angiotensina responsable de esta activación se localizan en las superficies de las células endoteliales de los capilares alveolares.

La enzima convertidora también inactiva la bradicinina.

El tiempo de circulación a través de los capilares alveolares es inferior a un segundo, pero el 70% de la angiotensina I que llega a los pulmones se convierte en angiotensina II en un solo viaje a través de los capilares.

Se han identificado otras cuatro peptidasas en la superficie de las células endoteliales pulmonares.


==== Vocalización ====
El movimiento del gas a través de la laringe, la faringe y la boca permite que los humanos hablen o fonen.

La vocalización, o canto, en las aves ocurre a través de la siringe, un órgano ubicado en la base de la tráquea.

La vibración del aire que fluye a través de la laringe (cuerdas vocales), en los humanos, y la siringe, en las aves, produce sonido.

Debido a esto, el movimiento del gas es vital para fines de comunicación.


==== Control de temperatura ====
Jadear en perros, gatos, pájaros y algunos otros animales proporciona un medio para reducir la temperatura corporal al evaporar la saliva en la boca (en lugar de evaporar el sudor en la piel).


=== Importancia clínica ===

Los trastornos del sistema respiratorio se pueden clasificar en varios grupos generales:

Afecciones obstructivas de las vías respiratorias (p. ej., enfisema, bronquitis, asma)
Afecciones pulmonares restrictivas (p. ej., fibrosis, sarcoidosis, daño alveolar, derrame pleural)
Enfermedades vasculares (p. ej., edema pulmonar, embolia pulmonar, hipertensión pulmonar)
"Enfermedades" infecciosas, ambientales y de otro tipo (p. ej., neumonía, tuberculosis, asbestosis, partículas contaminantes)
Cánceres primarios (por ejemplo, carcinoma bronquial, mesotelioma)
Cánceres secundarios (p. ej., cánceres que se originaron en otras partes del cuerpo, pero se han sembrado en los pulmones)
Surfactante insuficiente (por ejemplo, síndrome de dificultad respiratoria en bebés prematuros). Los trastornos del sistema respiratorio generalmente son tratados por un neumólogo y un terapeuta respiratorio.
Cuando haya incapacidad para respirar o insuficiencia para respirar, se puede usar un ventilador médico.


== Mamíferos excepcionales ==



=== Caballos ===


Los caballos son respiradores nasales obligados, lo que significa que son diferentes de muchos otros mamíferos porque no tienen la opción de respirar por la boca y deben tomar aire por la nariz.


=== Elefantes ===

El elefante es el único mamífero conocido que no tiene espacio pleural.

Más bien, la pleura parietal y visceral están compuestas de tejido conectivo denso y están unidas entre sí a través de tejido conectivo laxo.

Se cree que esta falta de espacio pleural, junto con un diafragma inusualmente grueso, son adaptaciones evolutivas que permiten al elefante permanecer bajo el agua durante largos períodos de tiempo mientras respira a través de su trompa, que emerge como un tubo respirador. En el elefante, los pulmones están unidos a el diafragma y la respiración se basa principalmente en el diafragma en lugar de la expansión de la caja torácica.


== Aves ==


El sistema respiratorio de las aves difiere significativamente del que se encuentra en los mamíferos.

En primer lugar, tienen pulmones rígidos que no se expanden ni contraen durante el ciclo respiratorio.

En cambio, un extenso sistema de sacos de aire (Fig. 15) distribuidos a lo largo de sus cuerpos actúan como fuelles que atraen el aire ambiental hacia los sacos y expulsan el aire gastado después de que ha pasado por los pulmones (Fig. 18).

Las aves tampoco tienen diafragmas ni cavidades pleurales.
Los pulmones de las aves son más pequeños que los de los mamíferos de tamaño comparable, pero los sacos de aire representan el 15 % del volumen corporal total, en comparación con el 7 % dedicado a los alvéolos, que actúan como fuelles en los mamíferos. La inhalación y la exhalación son provocadas por aumentando y disminuyendo alternativamente el volumen de toda la cavidad toracoabdominal (o celoma) usando tanto sus músculos abdominales como costales.

Durante la inhalación, los músculos unidos a las costillas vertebrales (Fig. 17) se contraen inclinándolos hacia adelante y hacia afuera.

Esto empuja las costillas esternales, a las que están unidas en ángulos casi rectos, hacia abajo y hacia adelante, llevando el esternón (con su quilla prominente) en la misma dirección (Fig. 17).

Esto aumenta tanto el diámetro vertical como el transversal de la porción torácica del tronco.

El movimiento hacia adelante y hacia abajo de, en particular, el extremo posterior del esternón tira de la pared abdominal hacia abajo, aumentando también el volumen de esa región del tronco.

El aumento de volumen de toda la cavidad del tronco reduce la presión del aire en todos los sacos de aire toracoabdominales, lo que hace que se llenen de aire como se describe a continuación.
Durante la exhalación, el músculo oblicuo externo que se une al esternón y las costillas vertebrales anteriormente, y a la pelvis (pubis e ilion en la Fig. 17) posteriormente (formando parte de la pared abdominal) invierte el movimiento de inhalación, mientras comprime el contenido abdominal, aumentando así la presión en todos los sacos de aire.

Por lo tanto, el aire es expulsado del sistema respiratorio en el acto de exhalación.

Durante la inhalación, el aire ingresa a la tráquea a través de las fosas nasales y la boca, y continúa justo más allá de la siringe, en cuyo punto la tráquea se ramifica en dos bronquios primarios, yendo a los dos pulmones (Fig. 16).

Los bronquios primarios entran en los pulmones para convertirse en los bronquios intrapulmonares, de los que se desprenden un conjunto de ramas paralelas denominadas ventrobronquios y, un poco más adelante, un conjunto equivalente de dorsobronquios (fig. 16).

Los extremos de los bronquios intrapulmonares descargan aire en los sacos de aire posteriores en el extremo caudal del ave.

Cada par de dorso-ventrobronquios está conectado por un gran número de capilares de aire microscópicos paralelos (o parabronquios) donde se produce el intercambio de gases (Fig. 16).

A medida que el ave inhala, el aire traqueal fluye a través de los bronquios intrapulmonares hacia los sacos de aire posteriores, así como hacia los dorsobronquios, pero no hacia los ventrobronquios (Fig. 18).

Esto se debe a la arquitectura bronquial que dirige el aire inhalado lejos de las aberturas de los ventrobronquios, hacia la continuación del bronquio intrapulmonar hacia el dorsobronquio y los sacos aéreos posteriores.

Desde los dorsobronquios, el aire inhalado fluye a través de los parabronquios (y, por lo tanto, del intercambiador de gases) hasta los ventrobronquios, desde donde el aire solo puede escapar hacia los sacos de aire anteriores en expansión.

Entonces, durante la inhalación, tanto los sacos de aire posteriores como los anteriores se expanden, los sacos de aire posteriores se llenan de aire fresco inhalado, mientras que los sacos de aire anteriores se llenan de aire "gastado" (pobre en oxígeno) que acaba de pasar por los pulmones.

Durante la exhalación, la presión en los alvéolos posteriores (que se llenaron de aire fresco durante la inhalación) aumenta debido a la contracción del músculo oblicuo descrita anteriormente.

La aerodinámica de las aberturas de interconexión desde los alvéolos posteriores hasta el dorsobronquio y los bronquios intrapulmonares asegura que el aire salga de estos alvéolos en dirección a los pulmones (a través del dorsobronquio), en lugar de regresar por los bronquios intrapulmonares (fig. 18).

Desde los dorsobronquios, el aire fresco de los alvéolos posteriores fluye a través de los parabronquios (en la misma dirección que ocurre durante la inhalación) hacia los ventrobronquios.

Los conductos de aire que conectan los ventrobronquios y los alvéolos anteriores con los bronquios intrapulmonares dirigen el aire "gastado", pobre en oxígeno, de estos dos órganos a la tráquea, desde donde escapa al exterior.

El aire oxigenado, por lo tanto, fluye constantemente (durante todo el ciclo respiratorio) en una sola dirección a través de los parabronquios. . 19).

La presión parcial de oxígeno en los parabronquios disminuye a lo largo de su longitud a medida que el O2 se difunde en la sangre.

Los capilares sanguíneos que salen del intercambiador cerca de la entrada del flujo de aire absorben más O2 que los capilares que salen cerca del extremo de salida de los parabronquios.

Cuando se mezclan los contenidos de todos los capilares, la presión parcial final de oxígeno de la sangre venosa pulmonar mezclada es mayor que la del aire exhalado, pero es menos de la mitad de la del aire inhalado, logrando así aproximadamente la misma presión parcial de sangre arterial sistémica. presión de oxígeno como lo hacen los mamíferos con sus pulmones tipo fuelle. La tráquea es un área de espacio muerto: el aire pobre en oxígeno que contiene al final de la exhalación es el primer aire que vuelve a entrar en los sacos de aire posteriores y los pulmones.

En comparación con el tracto respiratorio de los mamíferos, el volumen del espacio muerto en un ave es, en promedio, 4,5 veces mayor que en los mamíferos del mismo tamaño.

Las aves con cuellos largos inevitablemente tendrán tráqueas largas y, por lo tanto, deben respirar más profundamente que los mamíferos para tener en cuenta sus mayores volúmenes de espacio muerto.

En algunas aves (p. ej., el cisne cantor, Cygnus cygnus, la espátula blanca, Platalea leucorodia, la grulla blanca, Grus americana y el paujil paujil, Pauxi pauxi), la tráquea, que algunas grullas pueden medir 1,5 m de largo, está enrollada hacia atrás y adelante dentro del cuerpo, aumentando drásticamente la ventilación del espacio muerto.

Se desconoce el propósito de esta característica extraordinaria.


== Reptiles ==


La estructura anatómica de los pulmones es menos compleja en los reptiles que en los mamíferos, y los reptiles carecen de la estructura de árbol de vías respiratorias muy extensa que se encuentra en los pulmones de los mamíferos.

Sin embargo, el intercambio de gases en los reptiles todavía ocurre en los alvéolos.

Los reptiles no poseen diafragma.

Por lo tanto, la respiración se produce a través de un cambio en el volumen de la cavidad corporal que está controlado por la contracción de los músculos intercostales en todos los reptiles, excepto en las tortugas.

En las tortugas, la contracción de pares específicos de músculos de los flancos gobierna la inhalación y la exhalación.


== Anfibios ==


Tanto los pulmones como la piel sirven como órganos respiratorios en los anfibios.

La ventilación de los pulmones en los anfibios se basa en la ventilación con presión positiva.

Los músculos bajan el piso de la cavidad bucal, lo agrandan y aspiran aire a través de las fosas nasales hacia la cavidad bucal.

Con las fosas nasales y la boca cerradas, el piso de la cavidad bucal se empuja hacia arriba, lo que empuja el aire hacia abajo por la tráquea hacia los pulmones.

La piel de estos animales está altamente vascularizada y húmeda, con humedad mantenida a través de la secreción de moco de células especializadas, y está involucrada en la respiración cutánea.

Si bien los pulmones son órganos primarios para el intercambio de gases entre la sangre y el aire ambiental (cuando están fuera del agua), las propiedades únicas de la piel ayudan a un rápido intercambio de gases cuando los anfibios están sumergidos en agua rica en oxígeno.
Algunos anfibios tienen branquias, ya sea en las primeras etapas de su desarrollo (por ejemplo, los renacuajos de las ranas), mientras que otros las conservan hasta la edad adulta (por ejemplo, algunas salamandras).


== Pescado ==


El oxígeno es poco soluble en agua.

Por lo tanto, el agua dulce completamente aireada contiene solo de 8 a 10 ml de O2/litro en comparación con la concentración de O2 de 210 ml/litro en el aire al nivel del mar.

Además, el coeficiente de difusión (es decir, la velocidad a la que una sustancia se difunde desde una región de alta concentración a una de baja concentración, en condiciones estándar) de los gases respiratorios suele ser 10.000 veces más rápida en el aire que en el agua.

Así, el oxígeno, por ejemplo, tiene un coeficiente de difusión de 17,6 mm2/s en el aire, pero sólo de 0,0021 mm2/s en el agua.

Los valores correspondientes para el dióxido de carbono son 16 mm2/s en el aire y 0,0016 mm2/s en el agua.

Esto significa que cuando se extrae oxígeno del agua en contacto con un intercambiador de gases, se reemplaza considerablemente más lentamente por el oxígeno de las regiones ricas en oxígeno a pequeñas distancias del intercambiador de lo que habría ocurrido en el aire.

Los peces han desarrollado branquias para hacer frente a estos problemas.

Las branquias son órganos especializados que contienen filamentos, que luego se dividen en láminas.

Las láminas contienen una densa red de capilares de paredes delgadas que exponen una gran superficie de intercambio de gases a los grandes volúmenes de agua que pasan sobre ellas. Las branquias utilizan un sistema de intercambio de contracorriente que aumenta la eficiencia de la absorción de oxígeno del agua.

El agua fresca oxigenada que se ingiere por la boca es "bombeada" ininterrumpidamente a través de las branquias en una dirección, mientras que la sangre de las láminas fluye en la dirección opuesta, creando el flujo de sangre y agua a contracorriente (Fig. 22), en el que se basa la supervivencia de los peces. depende. El agua se extrae a través de la boca cerrando el opérculo (tapa branquial) y agrandando la cavidad bucal (Fig. 23).

Simultáneamente, las cámaras branquiales se agrandan, produciendo allí una presión más baja que en la boca, lo que hace que el agua fluya sobre las branquias.

Luego, la cavidad bucal se contrae, induciendo el cierre de las válvulas orales pasivas, evitando así el reflujo de agua de la boca (Fig. 23).

El agua de la boca, en cambio, es forzada sobre las branquias, mientras que las cámaras branquiales se contraen vaciando el agua que contienen a través de las aberturas operculares (Fig. 23).

El reflujo hacia la cámara branquial durante la fase de inhalación se evita mediante una membrana a lo largo del borde ventroposterior del opérculo (diagrama de la izquierda en la Fig. 23).

Por lo tanto, la cavidad bucal y las branquias actúan alternativamente como bomba de succión y bomba de presión para mantener un flujo constante de agua sobre las branquias en una dirección.

Dado que la sangre en los capilares laminares fluye en dirección opuesta a la del agua, el consiguiente flujo a contracorriente de sangre y agua mantiene fuertes gradientes de concentración de oxígeno y dióxido de carbono a lo largo de cada capilar (diagrama inferior en la Fig. 22) .

El oxígeno es, por lo tanto, capaz de difundirse continuamente por su gradiente hacia la sangre, y el dióxido de carbono por su gradiente hacia el agua.

Aunque los sistemas de intercambio de contracorriente teóricamente permiten una transferencia casi completa de un gas respiratorio de un lado del intercambiador al otro, en los peces menos del 80% del oxígeno en el agua que fluye por las branquias generalmente se transfiere a la sangre. tiburones pelágicos, el agua pasa a través de la boca y sobre las branquias mientras se mueven, en un proceso conocido como "ventilación del ariete".

Mientras descansan, la mayoría de los tiburones bombean agua sobre sus branquias, como lo hacen la mayoría de los peces óseos, para asegurarse de que el agua oxigenada continúe fluyendo sobre sus branquias.

Pero un pequeño número de especies ha perdido la capacidad de bombear agua a través de sus branquias y debe nadar sin descanso.

Estas especies son ventiladores de ariete obligados y presumiblemente se asfixiarían si no pudieran moverse.

La ventilación forzosa también se aplica a algunas especies de peces óseos pelágicos. Hay algunos peces que pueden obtener oxígeno durante breves períodos de tiempo del aire que tragan desde arriba de la superficie del agua.

Así, los peces pulmonados poseen uno o dos pulmones, y los peces laberinto han desarrollado un "órgano laberinto" especial, que caracteriza a este suborden de peces.

El órgano laberinto es un órgano respiratorio accesorio suprabranquial muy plegado.

Está formado por una expansión vascularizada del hueso epibranquial del primer arco branquial y se utiliza para la respiración en el aire.

Este órgano permite que los peces laberinto tomen oxígeno directamente del aire, en lugar de tomarlo del agua en la que residen mediante el uso de branquias.

El órgano laberinto ayuda a que el oxígeno del aire inhalado sea absorbido por el torrente sanguíneo.

Como resultado, los peces laberinto pueden sobrevivir por un corto período de tiempo fuera del agua, ya que pueden inhalar el aire que los rodea, siempre que permanezcan húmedos.

Los peces laberinto no nacen con órganos laberínticos funcionales.

El desarrollo del órgano es gradual y la mayoría de los peces laberínticos juveniles respiran completamente con sus branquias y desarrollan los órganos laberínticos cuando envejecen.


== Invertebrados ==



=== Artrópodos ===


Algunas especies de cangrejos usan un órgano respiratorio llamado pulmón branquiostegal.

Su estructura en forma de branquias aumenta el área de superficie para el intercambio de gases, lo que es más adecuado para tomar oxígeno del aire que del agua.

Algunas de las arañas y ácaros más pequeños pueden respirar simplemente intercambiando gas a través de la superficie del cuerpo.

Las arañas más grandes, los escorpiones y otros artrópodos utilizan un pulmón de libro primitivo.


==== Insectos ====

La mayoría de los insectos respiran pasivamente a través de sus espiráculos (aberturas especiales en el exoesqueleto) y el aire llega a cada parte del cuerpo por medio de una serie de tubos cada vez más pequeños llamados 'tráquea' cuando su diámetro es relativamente grande, y 'traqueolas' cuando su diámetro es relativamente grande. Los diámetros son muy pequeños.

Las traqueolas hacen contacto con células individuales en todo el cuerpo.

Están parcialmente llenos de líquido, que puede extraerse de las traqueolas individuales cuando los tejidos, como los músculos, están activos y tienen una gran demanda de oxígeno, acercando el aire a las células activas.

Esto probablemente se deba a la acumulación de ácido láctico en los músculos activos que provoca un gradiente osmótico, moviendo el agua fuera de las traqueolas hacia las células activas.

La difusión de gases es efectiva en distancias pequeñas pero no en distancias más grandes, esta es una de las razones por las que todos los insectos son relativamente pequeños.

Los insectos que no tienen espiráculos y tráquea, como algunos colémbolos, respiran directamente a través de su piel, también por difusión de gases. El número de espiráculos que tiene un insecto es variable entre especies, sin embargo, siempre vienen en parejas, uno a cada lado. del cuerpo, y generalmente un par por segmento.

Algunos Diplura tienen once, con cuatro pares en el tórax, pero en la mayoría de las formas antiguas de insectos, como las libélulas y los saltamontes, hay dos espiráculos torácicos y ocho abdominales.

Sin embargo, en la mayoría de los insectos restantes, hay menos.

Es a nivel de las traqueolas que se entrega oxígeno a las células para la respiración.
Alguna vez se creyó que los insectos intercambiaban gases con el medio ambiente continuamente por la simple difusión de gases en el sistema traqueal.

Más recientemente, sin embargo, se ha documentado una gran variación en los patrones de ventilación de los insectos y la respiración de los insectos parece ser muy variable.

Algunos insectos pequeños no demuestran movimientos respiratorios continuos y pueden carecer del control muscular de los espiráculos.

Otros, sin embargo, utilizan la contracción muscular del abdomen junto con la contracción y relajación coordinadas del espiráculo para generar patrones cíclicos de intercambio de gases y reducir la pérdida de agua a la atmósfera.

La forma más extrema de estos patrones se denomina ciclos de intercambio de gases discontinuos.


=== Moluscos ===


Los moluscos generalmente poseen branquias que permiten el intercambio de gases entre el ambiente acuoso y sus sistemas circulatorios.

Estos animales también poseen un corazón que bombea sangre que contiene hemocianina como molécula captadora de oxígeno.

Por lo tanto, este sistema respiratorio es similar al de los peces vertebrados.

El sistema respiratorio de los gasterópodos puede incluir branquias o un pulmón.


== Plantas ==


Las plantas usan dióxido de carbono gaseoso en el proceso de fotosíntesis y exhalan oxígeno gaseoso como desecho.

La ecuación química de la fotosíntesis es 6 CO2 (dióxido de carbono) y 6 H2O (agua), que en presencia de la luz solar produce C6H12O6 (glucosa) y 6 O2 (oxígeno).

La fotosíntesis utiliza electrones en los átomos de carbono como depósito de la energía obtenida de la luz solar.

La respiración es lo opuesto a la fotosíntesis.

Recupera la energía para impulsar las reacciones químicas en las células.

Al hacerlo, los átomos de carbono y sus electrones se combinan con oxígeno formando CO2 que se elimina fácilmente tanto de las células como del organismo.

Las plantas utilizan ambos procesos, la fotosíntesis para capturar la energía y el metabolismo oxidativo para utilizarla.
La respiración de las plantas está limitada por el proceso de difusión.

Las plantas toman dióxido de carbono a través de orificios, conocidos como estomas, que pueden abrirse y cerrarse en la parte inferior de sus hojas y, a veces, en otras partes de su anatomía.

La mayoría de las plantas requieren algo de oxígeno para los procesos catabólicos (reacciones de descomposición que liberan energía).

Pero la cantidad de O2 utilizada por hora es pequeña ya que no están involucrados en actividades que requieren altas tasas de metabolismo aeróbico.

Sin embargo, su requerimiento de aire es muy alto ya que necesitan CO2 para la fotosíntesis, que constituye solo el 0,04% del aire ambiental.

Así, para fabricar 1 g de glucosa se requiere eliminar todo el CO2 de al menos 18,7 litros de aire a nivel del mar.

Pero las ineficiencias en el proceso fotosintético hacen que se utilicen volúmenes de aire considerablemente mayores.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Respiratory_system

;;;PT;;;



SISTEMA RESPIRATÓRIO


O sistema respiratório (também aparelho respiratório, sistema ventilatório) é um sistema biológico que consiste em órgãos e estruturas específicas usadas para trocas gasosas em animais e plantas.

A anatomia e a fisiologia que fazem isso acontecer variam muito, dependendo do tamanho do organismo, do ambiente em que vive e de sua história evolutiva.

Nos animais terrestres, a superfície respiratória é internalizada como revestimento dos pulmões.

As trocas gasosas nos pulmões ocorrem em milhões de pequenos sacos aéreos; em mamíferos e répteis são chamados de alvéolos, e em aves são conhecidos como átrios.

Esses sacos de ar microscópicos têm um suprimento sanguíneo muito rico, levando o ar a um contato próximo com o sangue.

Esses sacos aéreos se comunicam com o meio externo por meio de um sistema de vias aéreas, ou tubos ocos, dos quais o maior é a traqueia, que se ramifica no meio do tórax nos dois brônquios principais.

Estes entram nos pulmões onde se ramificam em brônquios secundários e terciários progressivamente mais estreitos que se ramificam em numerosos tubos menores, os bronquíolos.

Nas aves, os bronquíolos são denominados parabrônquios.

São os bronquíolos, ou parabrônquios, que geralmente se abrem nos alvéolos microscópicos dos mamíferos e nos átrios das aves.

O ar deve ser bombeado do ambiente para os alvéolos ou átrios pelo processo de respiração que envolve os músculos da respiração.
Na maioria dos peixes e em vários outros animais aquáticos (vertebrados e invertebrados), o sistema respiratório consiste em brânquias, que são órgãos parcial ou completamente externos, banhados no ambiente aquoso.

Esta água flui sobre as brânquias por uma variedade de meios ativos ou passivos.

As trocas gasosas ocorrem nas brânquias que consistem em filamentos finos ou muito planos e lammelas que expõem uma área de superfície muito grande de tecido altamente vascularizado à água.
Outros animais, como os insetos, possuem sistemas respiratórios com características anatômicas muito simples, e nos anfíbios até a pele desempenha um papel vital nas trocas gasosas.

As plantas também têm sistemas respiratórios, mas a direcionalidade das trocas gasosas pode ser oposta à dos animais.

O sistema respiratório nas plantas inclui características anatômicas como os estômatos, que são encontrados em várias partes da planta.


== Mamíferos ==



=== Anatomia ===


Em humanos e outros mamíferos, a anatomia de um sistema respiratório típico é o trato respiratório.

O trato é dividido em trato respiratório superior e inferior.

O trato superior inclui o nariz, cavidades nasais, seios da face, faringe e a parte da laringe acima das pregas vocais.

O trato inferior (Fig. 2.) inclui a parte inferior da laringe, a traqueia, os brônquios, os bronquíolos e os alvéolos.
As vias aéreas ramificadas do trato inferior são frequentemente descritas como árvore respiratória ou árvore traqueobrônquica (Fig. 2).

Os intervalos entre pontos de ramificação sucessivos ao longo dos vários ramos da "árvore" são muitas vezes referidos como "gerações" de ramificação, das quais existem, no ser humano adulto, cerca de 23.

As gerações anteriores (aproximadamente gerações 0-16), consistindo na traqueia e nos brônquios, bem como os bronquíolos maiores que simplesmente atuam como condutos de ar, levando ar para os bronquíolos respiratórios, ductos alveolares e alvéolos (aproximadamente gerações 17-23) , onde ocorrem as trocas gasosas.

Os bronquíolos são definidos como as pequenas vias aéreas sem qualquer suporte cartilaginoso. Os primeiros brônquios a se ramificar da traqueia são os brônquios principais direito e esquerdo.

Perdendo apenas em diâmetro para a traqueia (1,8 cm), esses brônquios (1 -1,4 cm de diâmetro) entram nos pulmões em cada hilo, onde se ramificam em brônquios secundários mais estreitos conhecidos como brônquios lobares, e estes ramificam-se em brônquios terciários mais estreitos conhecidos como brônquios segmentares.

Outras divisões dos brônquios segmentares (1 a 6 mm de diâmetro) são conhecidas como brônquios segmentares de 4ª, 5ª e 6ª ordem, ou agrupados como brônquios subsegmentares. árvore no ser humano adulto, o camundongo tem apenas cerca de 13 dessas ramificações.
Os alvéolos são os terminais sem saída da "árvore", o que significa que qualquer ar que entre neles deve sair pela mesma rota.

Um sistema como esse cria espaço morto, um volume de ar (cerca de 150 ml no ser humano adulto) que enche as vias aéreas após a expiração e é respirado de volta para os alvéolos antes que o ar ambiente chegue até eles.

Ao final da inspiração as vias aéreas são preenchidas com ar ambiente, que é expirado sem entrar em contato com o trocador de gases.


=== Volumes ventilatórios ===


Os pulmões se expandem e se contraem durante o ciclo respiratório, puxando o ar para dentro e para fora dos pulmões.

O volume de ar movido para dentro ou para fora dos pulmões em circunstâncias normais de repouso (o volume corrente de repouso de cerca de 500 ml), e os volumes movidos durante a inspiração forçada máxima e a expiração forçada máxima são medidos em humanos por espirometria.

Um espirograma humano adulto típico com os nomes dados às várias variações de volume que os pulmões podem sofrer é ilustrado abaixo (Fig. 3):

Nem todo o ar nos pulmões pode ser expelido durante a expiração forçada máxima.

Este é o volume residual de cerca de 1,0-1,5 litros que não pode ser medido por espirometria.

Os volumes que incluem o volume residual (ou seja, capacidade residual funcional de cerca de 2,5-3,0 litros e capacidade pulmonar total de cerca de 6 litros) também não podem ser medidos por espirometria.

Sua medição requer técnicas especiais. As taxas em que o ar é inspirado ou expirado, seja pela boca ou nariz, ou para dentro ou para fora dos alvéolos, são tabuladas abaixo, juntamente com a forma como são calculadas.

O número de ciclos respiratórios por minuto é conhecido como frequência respiratória.


=== Mecânica da respiração ===


Nos mamíferos, a inalação em repouso se deve principalmente à contração do diafragma.

Esta é uma folha de músculo abobadada para cima que separa a cavidade torácica da cavidade abdominal.

Quando se contrai a folha achata, (ou seja, move-se para baixo como mostrado na Fig. 7) aumentando o volume da cavidade torácica.

O diafragma em contração empurra os órgãos abdominais para baixo.

Mas como o assoalho pélvico impede que os órgãos abdominais inferiores se movam nessa direção, o conteúdo abdominal flexível faz com que a barriga inche para a frente e para os lados, porque os músculos abdominais relaxados não resistem a esse movimento (Fig. 7).

Essa protuberância inteiramente passiva (e contração durante a expiração) do abdômen durante a respiração normal às vezes é chamada de "respiração abdominal", embora seja, de fato, "respiração diafragmática", que não é visível do lado de fora do corpo.

Mamíferos só usam seus músculos abdominais durante a expiração forçada (veja a Fig. 8, e discussão abaixo).

Nunca durante qualquer forma de inalação.
À medida que o diafragma se contrai, a caixa torácica é simultaneamente aumentada pelas costelas sendo puxadas para cima pelos músculos intercostais, como mostrado na Fig. 4.

Todas as nervuras inclinam-se para baixo de trás para a frente (como mostrado na Fig. 4); mas as costelas inferiores também se inclinam para baixo da linha média para fora (Fig. 5).

Assim, o diâmetro transversal da caixa torácica pode ser aumentado da mesma forma que o diâmetro ântero-posterior é aumentado pelo chamado movimento da alavanca da bomba mostrado na Fig. 4.
O alargamento da dimensão vertical da cavidade torácica pela contração do diafragma, e suas duas dimensões horizontais pelo levantamento da parte anterior e lateral das costelas, faz com que a pressão intratorácica caia.

Os interiores dos pulmões estão abertos para o ar externo e, sendo elásticos, expandem-se para preencher o espaço aumentado.

A entrada de ar nos pulmões ocorre através das vias respiratórias (Fig. 2).

Na saúde, essas vias aéreas começam com o nariz.

É possível começar pela boca, que é o sistema respiratório de apoio.

No entanto, a respiração bucal crônica leva ou é um sinal de doença.

Eles terminam nos sacos microscópicos sem saída chamados alvéolos, que estão sempre abertos, embora os diâmetros das várias seções possam ser alterados pelos sistemas nervosos simpático e parassimpático.

A pressão do ar alveolar é, portanto, sempre próxima à pressão do ar atmosférico (cerca de 100 kPa ao nível do mar) em repouso, com os gradientes de pressão que fazem com que o ar entre e saia dos pulmões durante a respiração raramente excedendo 2-3 kPa. o diafragma e os músculos intercostais relaxam.

Isso retorna o tórax e o abdome a uma posição determinada por sua elasticidade anatômica.

Esta é a "posição média de repouso" do tórax e do abdome (Fig. 7) quando os pulmões contêm sua capacidade residual funcional de ar (a área azul clara na ilustração à direita da Fig. 7), que no ser humano adulto tem um volume de cerca de 2,5-3,0 litros (Fig. 3).

A expiração em repouso dura cerca de duas vezes mais que a inspiração porque o diafragma relaxa passivamente mais suavemente do que contrai ativamente durante a inspiração.

O volume de ar que entra ou sai (pelo nariz ou boca) durante um único ciclo respiratório é chamado de volume corrente.

Em um humano adulto em repouso é cerca de 500 ml por respiração.

No final da expiração, as vias aéreas contêm cerca de 150 ml de ar alveolar, que é o primeiro ar que é inalado de volta aos alvéolos durante a inspiração.

Este volume de ar que é expirado dos alvéolos e retornado é conhecido como ventilação de espaço morto, que tem como consequência que dos 500 ml inalados nos alvéolos a cada respiração apenas 350 ml (500 ml - 150 ml = 350 ml) é o ar fresco, quente e úmido.

Como esses 350 ml de ar fresco são completamente misturados e diluídos pelo ar que permanece nos alvéolos após a expiração normal (ou seja, a capacidade residual funcional de cerca de 2,5 a 3,0 litros), fica claro que a composição do ar alveolar muda muito pouco durante o ciclo respiratório (ver Fig. 9).

A tensão do oxigênio (ou pressão parcial) permanece próxima de 13-14 kPa (cerca de 100 mm Hg), e a do dióxido de carbono muito próxima de 5,3 kPa (ou 40 mm Hg).

Isso contrasta com a composição do ar externo seco ao nível do mar, onde a pressão parcial de oxigênio é de 21 kPa (ou 160 mm Hg) e a de dióxido de carbono é de 0,04 kPa (ou 0,3 mmHg). por exemplo, durante o exercício, a inalação é provocada por uma excursão mais poderosa e maior do diafragma em contração do que em repouso (Fig. 8).

Além disso, os "músculos acessórios da inspiração" exageram as ações dos músculos intercostais (Fig. 8).

Esses músculos acessórios da inspiração são músculos que se estendem das vértebras cervicais e da base do crânio até as costelas superiores e o esterno, às vezes por meio de uma fixação intermediária às clavículas.

Quando eles se contraem, o volume interno da caixa torácica aumenta muito mais do que pode ser alcançado apenas pela contração dos músculos intercostais.

Visto de fora do corpo, o levantamento das clavículas durante a inalação extenuante ou difícil às vezes é chamado de respiração clavicular, visto especialmente durante ataques de asma e em pessoas com doença pulmonar obstrutiva crônica.
Durante a respiração pesada, a expiração é causada pelo relaxamento de todos os músculos da inspiração.

Mas agora, os músculos abdominais, em vez de permanecerem relaxados (como fazem em repouso), se contraem com força, puxando as bordas inferiores da caixa torácica para baixo (frente e laterais) (Fig. 8).

Isso não apenas diminui drasticamente o tamanho da caixa torácica, mas também empurra os órgãos abdominais para cima contra o diafragma, que consequentemente se projeta profundamente no tórax (Fig. 8).

O volume pulmonar expiratório final está agora bem abaixo da posição média de repouso e contém muito menos ar do que a "capacidade residual funcional" em repouso.

No entanto, em um mamífero normal, os pulmões não podem ser esvaziados completamente.

Em um ser humano adulto sempre resta pelo menos 1 litro de ar residual nos pulmões após a expiração máxima. uma ampla gama de emoções (rindo, suspirando, gritando de dor, inspirações exasperadas) e por atos voluntários como falar, cantar, assobiar e tocar instrumentos de sopro.

Todas essas ações dependem dos músculos descritos acima e de seus efeitos no movimento do ar para dentro e para fora dos pulmões.
Embora não seja uma forma de respiração, a manobra de Valsalva envolve os músculos respiratórios.

É, de fato, um esforço exalatório muito forte contra uma glote bem fechada, de modo que nenhum ar pode escapar dos pulmões.

Em vez disso, o conteúdo abdominal é evacuado na direção oposta, através de orifícios no assoalho pélvico.

Os músculos abdominais se contraem com muita força, fazendo com que a pressão dentro do abdome e do tórax suba a níveis extremamente altos.

A manobra de Valsalva pode ser realizada voluntariamente, mas geralmente é um reflexo obtido ao tentar esvaziar o abdome durante, por exemplo, uma defecação difícil ou durante o parto.

A respiração cessa durante esta manobra.


=== Troca gasosa ===


 

O objetivo primário do sistema respiratório é igualar as pressões parciais dos gases respiratórios no ar alveolar com as do sangue capilar pulmonar (Fig. 11).

Esse processo ocorre por difusão simples, através de uma membrana muito fina (conhecida como barreira sangue-ar), que forma as paredes dos alvéolos pulmonares (Fig. 10).

É constituído pelas células epiteliais alveolares, suas membranas basais e as células endoteliais dos capilares alveolares (Fig. 10).

Essa barreira de gases no sangue é extremamente fina (em humanos, em média, 2,2 μm de espessura).

Ele é dobrado em cerca de 300 milhões de pequenos sacos aéreos chamados alvéolos (cada um entre 75 e 300 µm de diâmetro) ramificando-se dos bronquíolos respiratórios nos pulmões, fornecendo assim uma área de superfície extremamente grande (aproximadamente 145 m2) para que ocorram as trocas gasosas. O ar contido nos alvéolos tem um volume semi-permanente de cerca de 2,5-3,0 litros que envolve completamente o sangue capilar alveolar (Fig. 12).

Isso garante que o equilíbrio das pressões parciais dos gases nos dois compartimentos seja muito eficiente e ocorra muito rapidamente.

O sangue que sai dos capilares alveolares e é eventualmente distribuído por todo o corpo tem, portanto, uma pressão parcial de oxigênio de 13-14 kPa (100 mmHg) e uma pressão parcial de dióxido de carbono de 5,3 kPa (40 mmHg) (ou seja, a mesma que a tensões gasosas de oxigênio e dióxido de carbono como nos alvéolos).

Conforme mencionado na seção acima, as pressões parciais correspondentes de oxigênio e dióxido de carbono no ar ambiente (seco) ao nível do mar são 21 kPa (160 mmHg) e 0,04 kPa (0,3 mmHg), respectivamente. Esta diferença marcante entre a composição do O ar alveolar e o do ar ambiente podem ser mantidos porque a capacidade residual funcional está contida em sacos sem saída conectados ao ar externo por tubos bastante estreitos e relativamente longos (as vias aéreas: nariz, faringe, laringe, traqueia, brônquios e suas vias aéreas). ramificam-se para os bronquíolos), através dos quais o ar deve ser inspirado e expirado (ou seja, não há fluxo unidirecional como no pulmão da ave).

Essa anatomia típica dos mamíferos combinada com o fato de os pulmões não serem esvaziados e reinflados a cada respiração (deixando um volume substancial de ar, de cerca de 2,5-3,0 litros, nos alvéolos após a expiração), garante que a composição do o ar só é minimamente perturbado quando os 350 ml de ar fresco são misturados nele a cada inalação.

Assim, o animal recebe uma "atmosfera portátil" muito especial, cuja composição difere significativamente do ar ambiente atual.

É a essa atmosfera portátil (a capacidade residual funcional) que o sangue e, portanto, os tecidos do corpo estão expostos – não ao ar externo.
As pressões parciais arteriais resultantes de oxigênio e dióxido de carbono são controladas homeostaticamente.

Um aumento na pressão parcial arterial de CO2 e, em menor grau, uma queda na pressão parcial arterial de O2, causará, por reflexo, uma respiração mais profunda e mais rápida até que as tensões dos gases sanguíneos nos pulmões e, portanto, o sangue arterial, voltem ao normal. normal.

O inverso acontece quando a tensão do dióxido de carbono cai, ou, novamente em menor grau, a tensão do oxigênio aumenta: a taxa e a profundidade da respiração são reduzidas até que a normalidade dos gases sanguíneos seja restaurada.
Como o sangue que chega aos capilares alveolares tem uma pressão parcial de O2 de, em média, 6 kPa (45 mmHg), enquanto a pressão no ar alveolar é de 13-14 kPa (100 mmHg), haverá uma difusão líquida de oxigênio para o sangue capilar, alterando ligeiramente a composição dos 3 litros de ar alveolar.

Da mesma forma, como o sangue que chega aos capilares alveolares tem uma pressão parcial de CO2 também de cerca de 6 kPa (45 mmHg), enquanto a do ar alveolar é de 5,3 kPa (40 mmHg), há um movimento líquido de dióxido de carbono para fora do capilares para os alvéolos.

As mudanças provocadas por esses fluxos líquidos de gases individuais para dentro e para fora do ar alveolar exigem a substituição de cerca de 15% do ar alveolar por ar ambiente a cada 5 segundos ou mais.

Isso é muito controlado pelo monitoramento dos gases sanguíneos arteriais (que refletem com precisão a composição do ar alveolar) pelos corpos aórticos e carotídeos, bem como pelo sensor de gases sanguíneos e pH na superfície anterior da medula oblonga no cérebro.

Existem também sensores de oxigênio e dióxido de carbono nos pulmões, mas eles determinam principalmente os diâmetros dos bronquíolos e capilares pulmonares e, portanto, são responsáveis ​​por direcionar o fluxo de ar e sangue para diferentes partes dos pulmões.
É somente como resultado da manutenção precisa da composição dos 3 litros de ar alveolar que, a cada respiração, algum dióxido de carbono é descarregado na atmosfera e algum oxigênio é retirado do ar externo.

Se mais dióxido de carbono do que o normal for perdido por um curto período de hiperventilação, a respiração será desacelerada ou interrompida até que a pressão parcial alveolar de dióxido de carbono retorne a 5,3 kPa (40 mmHg).

Portanto, estritamente falando, é falso que a função primária do sistema respiratório seja livrar o corpo dos “resíduos” de dióxido de carbono.

O dióxido de carbono que é expirado a cada respiração provavelmente poderia ser visto mais corretamente como um subproduto do dióxido de carbono do fluido extracelular e dos homeostatos de pH.
Se esses homeostatos estiverem comprometidos, ocorrerá acidose respiratória ou alcalose respiratória.

A longo prazo, estes podem ser compensados ​​por ajustes renais nas concentrações de H+ e HCO3− no plasma; mas como isso leva tempo, a síndrome de hiperventilação pode, por exemplo, ocorrer quando a agitação ou a ansiedade fazem com que uma pessoa respire rápida e profundamente, causando uma alcalose respiratória angustiante devido à expulsão de muito CO2 do sangue para o ar externo. tem uma solubilidade muito baixa em água e, portanto, é transportada no sangue frouxamente combinada com a hemoglobina.

O oxigênio é mantido na hemoglobina por quatro grupos heme contendo ferro ferroso por molécula de hemoglobina.

Quando todos os grupos heme carregam uma molécula de O2 cada, diz-se que o sangue está “saturado” com oxigênio, e nenhum aumento adicional na pressão parcial de oxigênio aumentará significativamente a concentração de oxigênio no sangue.

A maior parte do dióxido de carbono no sangue é transportada como íons bicarbonato (HCO3-) no plasma.

No entanto, a conversão de CO2 dissolvido em HCO3- (através da adição de água) é muito lenta para a velocidade com que o sangue circula pelos tecidos, por um lado, e pelos capilares alveolares, por outro.

A reação é, portanto, catalisada pela anidrase carbônica, uma enzima dentro dos glóbulos vermelhos.

A reação pode ocorrer em ambas as direções, dependendo da pressão parcial predominante de CO2.

Uma pequena quantidade de dióxido de carbono é transportada na porção proteica das moléculas de hemoglobina como grupos carbamino.

A concentração total de dióxido de carbono (na forma de íons bicarbonato, CO2 dissolvido e grupos carbamino) no sangue arterial (ou seja, após o equilíbrio com o ar alveolar) é de cerca de 26 mM (ou 58 ml/100 ml), em comparação com a concentração de oxigênio no sangue arterial saturado de cerca de 9 mM (ou 20 ml/100 ml de sangue).


=== Controle da ventilação ===


A ventilação dos pulmões em mamíferos ocorre através dos centros respiratórios na medula oblonga e na ponte do tronco encefálico.

Essas áreas formam uma série de vias neurais que recebem informações sobre as pressões parciais de oxigênio e dióxido de carbono no sangue arterial.

Essas informações determinam a taxa média de ventilação dos alvéolos dos pulmões, para manter essas pressões constantes.

O centro respiratório faz isso por meio de nervos motores que ativam o diafragma e outros músculos da respiração.
A taxa de respiração aumenta quando a pressão parcial de dióxido de carbono no sangue aumenta.

Isso é detectado por quimiorreceptores centrais de gases sanguíneos na superfície anterior da medula oblonga.

Os corpos aórticos e carotídeos são os quimiorreceptores periféricos dos gases sanguíneos que são particularmente sensíveis à pressão parcial arterial de O2, embora também respondam, mas menos fortemente, à pressão parcial de CO2.

Ao nível do mar, em circunstâncias normais, a frequência e a profundidade da respiração são determinadas principalmente pela pressão parcial arterial de dióxido de carbono, e não pela pressão parcial arterial de oxigênio, que pode variar dentro de uma faixa bastante ampla antes dos centros respiratórios em a medula oblonga e a ponte respondem a ela para alterar a taxa e a profundidade da respiração. O exercício aumenta a taxa de respiração devido ao dióxido de carbono extra produzido pelo metabolismo aprimorado dos músculos em exercício.

Além disso, os movimentos passivos dos membros também produzem reflexivamente um aumento na frequência respiratória. As informações recebidas dos receptores de estiramento nos pulmões limitam o volume corrente (a profundidade da inspiração e expiração).


=== Respostas a baixas pressões atmosféricas ===

Os alvéolos estão abertos (através das vias aéreas) para a atmosfera, com o resultado de que a pressão do ar alveolar é exatamente a mesma que a pressão do ar ambiente ao nível do mar, em altitude ou em qualquer atmosfera artificial (por exemplo, uma câmara de mergulho ou câmara de descompressão ) em que o indivíduo está respirando livremente.

Com a expansão dos pulmões, o ar alveolar ocupa um volume maior e sua pressão cai proporcionalmente, fazendo com que o ar flua pelas vias aéreas, até que a pressão nos alvéolos volte a ser a pressão do ar ambiente.

O inverso acontece durante a expiração.

Este processo (de inspiração e expiração) é exatamente o mesmo ao nível do mar, como no topo do Monte.

Everest, ou em uma câmara de mergulho ou câmara de descompressão.

 
No entanto, à medida que se sobe acima do nível do mar, a densidade do ar diminui exponencialmente (veja a Fig. 14), diminuindo aproximadamente pela metade a cada 5.500 m de altitude.

Como a composição do ar atmosférico é quase constante abaixo de 80 km, como resultado do efeito de mistura contínua do clima, a concentração de oxigênio no ar (mmols O2 por litro de ar ambiente) diminui na mesma proporção que a queda na pressão do ar com a altitude.

Portanto, para respirar a mesma quantidade de oxigênio por minuto, a pessoa precisa inalar um volume de ar por minuto proporcionalmente maior em altitude do que no nível do mar.

Isso é conseguido respirando mais profundamente e mais rápido (ou seja, hiperpnéia) do que ao nível do mar (veja abaixo).

 
Existe, no entanto, uma complicação que aumenta o volume de ar que precisa ser inalado por minuto (volume respiratório minuto) para fornecer a mesma quantidade de oxigênio aos pulmões em altitude e ao nível do mar.

Durante a inalação o ar é aquecido e saturado com vapor de água durante a sua passagem pelas fossas nasais e faringe.

A pressão de vapor de água saturada depende apenas da temperatura.

A uma temperatura corporal central de 37 °C é de 6,3 kPa (47,0 mmHg), independentemente de quaisquer outras influências, incluindo a altitude.

Assim, ao nível do mar, onde a pressão atmosférica ambiente é de cerca de 100 kPa, o ar umedecido que flui para os pulmões da traqueia consiste em vapor de água (6,3 kPa), nitrogênio (74,0 kPa), oxigênio (19,7 kPa) e vestígios de dióxido de carbono e outros gases (um total de 100 kPa).

No ar seco, a pressão parcial de O2 ao nível do mar é de 21,0 kPa (ou seja, 21% de 100 kPa), em comparação com os 19,7 kPa de oxigênio que entram no ar alveolar. (A pressão parcial traqueal de oxigênio é 21% de [100 kPa – 6,3 kPa] = 19,7 kPa).

No cume do Monte.

Everest (a uma altitude de 8.848 m ou 29.029 pés) a pressão atmosférica total é de 33,7 kPa, dos quais 7,1 kPa (ou 21%) é oxigênio.

O ar que entra nos pulmões também tem uma pressão total de 33,7 kPa, dos quais 6,3 kPa são, inevitavelmente, vapor de água (como está ao nível do mar).

Isso reduz a pressão parcial de oxigênio que entra nos alvéolos para 5,8 kPa (ou 21% de [33,7 kPa – 6,3 kPa] = 5,8 kPa).

A redução na pressão parcial de oxigênio no ar inalado é, portanto, substancialmente maior do que a redução da pressão atmosférica total em altitude sugeriria (no Monte Everest: 5,8 kPa vs. 7,1 kPa).
Uma outra complicação menor existe em altitude.

Se o volume dos pulmões fosse instantaneamente duplicado no início da inspiração, a pressão do ar dentro dos pulmões seria reduzida pela metade.

Isso acontece independentemente da altitude.

Assim, a redução pela metade da pressão do ar ao nível do mar (100 kPa) resulta em uma pressão de ar intrapulmonar de 50 kPa.

Fazendo o mesmo a 5500 m, onde a pressão atmosférica é de apenas 50 kPa, a pressão do ar intrapulmonar cai para 25 kPa.

Portanto, a mesma mudança no volume pulmonar ao nível do mar resulta em uma diferença de 50 kPa na pressão entre o ar ambiente e o ar intrapulmonar, enquanto resulta em uma diferença de apenas 25 kPa a 5.500 m.

A pressão de condução forçando o ar para os pulmões durante a inalação é, portanto, reduzida pela metade nessa altitude.

A taxa de entrada de ar nos pulmões durante a inalação ao nível do mar é, portanto, o dobro da que ocorre a 5500 m.

No entanto, na realidade, a inspiração e a expiração ocorrem de forma muito mais suave e menos abrupta do que no exemplo dado.

As diferenças entre as pressões atmosférica e intrapulmonar, conduzindo o ar para dentro e para fora dos pulmões durante o ciclo respiratório, estão na região de apenas 2-3 kPa.

Uma duplicação ou mais dessas pequenas diferenças de pressão só poderia ser alcançada por grandes mudanças no esforço respiratório em grandes altitudes.
Todas as influências acima de baixas pressões atmosféricas na respiração são acomodadas principalmente pela respiração mais profunda e rápida (hiperpneia).

O grau exato de hiperpneia é determinado pelo homeostato dos gases sanguíneos, que regula as pressões parciais de oxigênio e dióxido de carbono no sangue arterial.

Este homeostato prioriza a regulação da pressão parcial arterial de dióxido de carbono sobre a de oxigênio ao nível do mar.

Ou seja, ao nível do mar, a pressão parcial arterial de CO2 é mantida muito próxima de 5,3 kPa (ou 40 mmHg) sob uma ampla gama de circunstâncias, à custa da pressão parcial arterial de O2, que pode variar dentro de uma faixa muito ampla de valores, antes de eliciar uma resposta ventilatória corretiva.

No entanto, quando a pressão atmosférica (e, portanto, a pressão parcial de O2 no ar ambiente) cai abaixo de 50-75% de seu valor ao nível do mar, a homeostase do oxigênio tem prioridade sobre a homeostase do dióxido de carbono.

Esta mudança ocorre a uma altitude de cerca de 2.500 m (ou cerca de 8.000 pés).

Se essa mudança ocorrer de forma relativamente abrupta, a hiperpneia em grandes altitudes causará uma queda acentuada na pressão parcial arterial de dióxido de carbono, com conseqüente elevação do pH do plasma arterial.

Este é um contribuinte para a doença de alta altitude.

Por outro lado, se a mudança para a homeostase do oxigênio for incompleta, a hipóxia pode complicar o quadro clínico com resultados potencialmente fatais.
Existem sensores de oxigênio nos brônquios e bronquíolos menores.

Em resposta a baixas pressões parciais de oxigênio no ar inalado, esses sensores provocam reflexivamente a constrição das arteríolas pulmonares. (Isso é exatamente o oposto do reflexo correspondente nos tecidos, onde pressões parciais arteriais baixas de O2 causam vasodilatação arteriolar). ocorre ao nível do mar.

Ao nível do mar, a pressão arterial pulmonar é muito baixa, com o resultado de que os topos dos pulmões recebem muito menos sangue do que as bases, que são relativamente superperfundidas com sangue.

É apenas no meio dos pulmões que o fluxo de sangue e ar para os alvéolos é idealmente combinado.

Em altitude, essa variação na relação ventilação/perfusão dos alvéolos do topo para o fundo dos pulmões é eliminada, com todos os alvéolos perfundidos e ventilados mais ou menos da maneira fisiologicamente ideal.

Este é mais um importante contribuinte para a aclimatação a altas altitudes e baixas pressões de oxigênio.
Os rins medem o conteúdo de oxigênio (mmol O2/litro de sangue, em vez da pressão parcial de O2) do sangue arterial.

Quando o conteúdo de oxigênio do sangue é cronicamente baixo, como em grandes altitudes, as células renais sensíveis ao oxigênio secretam eritropoietina (EPO) no sangue.

Este hormônio estimula a medula óssea vermelha a aumentar sua taxa de produção de glóbulos vermelhos, o que leva a um aumento no hematócrito do sangue e um conseqüente aumento em sua capacidade de transporte de oxigênio (devido ao agora alto teor de hemoglobina do sangue).

Em outras palavras, com a mesma pressão parcial arterial de O2, uma pessoa com hematócrito alto carrega mais oxigênio por litro de sangue do que uma pessoa com hematócrito mais baixo.

Os moradores de altitudes elevadas, portanto, têm hematócritos mais elevados do que os moradores do nível do mar.


=== Outras funções dos pulmões ===



==== Defesas locais ====
A irritação das terminações nervosas nas passagens nasais ou vias aéreas pode induzir um reflexo de tosse e espirros.

Essas respostas fazem com que o ar seja expelido com força da traqueia ou do nariz, respectivamente.

Desta forma, os irritantes capturados no muco que reveste o trato respiratório são expelidos ou movidos para a boca, onde podem ser engolidos.

Durante a tosse, a contração do músculo liso nas paredes das vias aéreas estreita a traqueia, aproximando as extremidades das placas de cartilagem e empurrando o tecido mole para dentro do lúmen.

Isso aumenta a taxa de fluxo de ar expirado para desalojar e remover qualquer partícula irritante ou muco.
O epitélio respiratório pode secretar uma variedade de moléculas que auxiliam na defesa dos pulmões.

Estes incluem imunoglobulinas secretoras (IgA), coletinas, defensinas e outros peptídeos e proteases, espécies reativas de oxigênio e espécies reativas de nitrogênio.

Essas secreções podem atuar diretamente como antimicrobianos para ajudar a manter as vias aéreas livres de infecção.

Também são secretadas uma variedade de quimiocinas e citocinas que recrutam as células imunes tradicionais e outras para o local das infecções.
A função imune do surfactante é atribuída principalmente a duas proteínas: SP-A e SP-D.

Essas proteínas podem se ligar a açúcares na superfície de patógenos e, assim, opsonizá-los para serem absorvidos pelos fagócitos.

Também regula as respostas inflamatórias e interage com a resposta imune adaptativa.

A degradação ou inativação do surfactante pode contribuir para aumentar a suscetibilidade à inflamação e infecção pulmonar. A maior parte do sistema respiratório é revestida por membranas mucosas que contêm tecido linfóide associado à mucosa, que produz glóbulos brancos, como os linfócitos.


==== Prevenção do colapso alveolar ====

Os pulmões produzem um surfactante, um complexo de lipoproteínas de superfície ativa (fosfolipoproteína) formado por células alveolares do tipo II.

Ele flutua na superfície da fina camada aquosa que reveste o interior dos alvéolos, reduzindo a tensão superficial da água.
A tensão superficial de uma superfície aquosa (a interface água-ar) tende a fazer essa superfície encolher.

Quando essa superfície é curvada como nos alvéolos dos pulmões, o encolhimento da superfície diminui o diâmetro dos alvéolos.

Quanto mais aguda a curvatura da interface água-ar, maior a tendência de colapso do alvéolo.

Isso tem três efeitos.

Em primeiro lugar, a tensão superficial dentro dos alvéolos resiste à expansão dos alvéolos durante a inalação (isto é, torna o pulmão rígido ou não complacente).

O surfactante reduz a tensão superficial e, portanto, torna os pulmões mais complacentes, ou menos rígidos, do que se não estivessem lá.

Em segundo lugar, os diâmetros dos alvéolos aumentam e diminuem durante o ciclo respiratório.

Isso significa que os alvéolos têm maior tendência a colapsar (ou seja, causar atelectasia) no final da expiração do que no final da inspiração.

Como o surfactante flutua na superfície aquosa, suas moléculas são mais compactadas quando os alvéolos encolhem durante a expiração.

Isso faz com que eles tenham um efeito maior de redução da tensão superficial quando os alvéolos são pequenos do que quando são grandes (como no final da inalação, quando as moléculas de surfactante estão mais espaçadas).

A tendência de colapso dos alvéolos é, portanto, quase a mesma no final da expiração e no final da inspiração.

Em terceiro lugar, a tensão superficial da camada aquosa curva que reveste os alvéolos tende a atrair água dos tecidos pulmonares para os alvéolos.

O surfactante reduz esse perigo a níveis insignificantes e mantém os alvéolos secos. Bebês prematuros que não conseguem fabricar surfactante têm pulmões que tendem a entrar em colapso cada vez que expiram.

A menos que seja tratada, esta condição, chamada síndrome do desconforto respiratório, é fatal.

Experimentos científicos básicos, realizados com células de pulmões de galinha, confirmam o potencial do uso de esteróides como meio de promover o desenvolvimento de células alveolares do tipo II.

De fato, uma vez que um parto prematuro é ameaçado, todos os esforços são feitos para retardar o nascimento, e uma série de injeções de esteróides é frequentemente administrada à mãe durante esse atraso em um esforço para promover a maturação pulmonar.


==== Contribuições para as funções do corpo inteiro ====
Os vasos pulmonares contêm um sistema fibrinolítico que dissolve coágulos que podem ter chegado à circulação pulmonar por embolia, muitas vezes das veias profundas das pernas.

Eles também liberam uma variedade de substâncias que entram no sangue arterial sistêmico e removem outras substâncias do sangue venoso sistêmico que os atingem pela artéria pulmonar.

Algumas prostaglandinas são removidas da circulação, enquanto outras são sintetizadas nos pulmões e liberadas no sangue quando o tecido pulmonar é esticado.
Os pulmões ativam um hormônio.

O decapeptídeo fisiologicamente inativo angiotensina I é convertido no octapeptídeo liberador de aldosterona, angiotensina II, na circulação pulmonar.

A reação também ocorre em outros tecidos, mas é particularmente proeminente nos pulmões.

A angiotensina II também tem efeito direto nas paredes arteriolares, causando vasoconstrição arteriolar e, consequentemente, aumento da pressão arterial.

Grandes quantidades da enzima conversora de angiotensina responsável por essa ativação estão localizadas nas superfícies das células endoteliais dos capilares alveolares.

A enzima de conversão também inativa a bradicinina.

O tempo de circulação através dos capilares alveolares é inferior a um segundo, mas 70% da angiotensina I que chega aos pulmões é convertida em angiotensina II em uma única passagem pelos capilares.

Quatro outras peptidases foram identificadas na superfície das células endoteliais pulmonares.


==== Vocalização ====
O movimento do gás através da laringe, faringe e boca permite que os humanos falem ou façam fonação.

A vocalização, ou canto, em pássaros ocorre através da siringe, um órgão localizado na base da traqueia.

A vibração do ar que flui através da laringe (cordas vocais), em humanos, e da siringe, em pássaros, resulta em som.

Por isso, o movimento do gás é vital para fins de comunicação.


==== Controle de temperatura ====
A respiração ofegante em cães, gatos, pássaros e alguns outros animais fornece um meio de reduzir a temperatura corporal, evaporando a saliva na boca (em vez de evaporar o suor na pele).


=== Significado clínico ===

Os distúrbios do sistema respiratório podem ser classificados em vários grupos gerais:

Condições obstrutivas das vias aéreas (por exemplo, enfisema, bronquite, asma)
Condições pulmonares restritivas (por exemplo, fibrose, sarcoidose, dano alveolar, derrame pleural)
Doenças vasculares (por exemplo, edema pulmonar, embolia pulmonar, hipertensão pulmonar)
Doenças infecciosas, ambientais e outras "doenças" (por exemplo, pneumonia, tuberculose, asbestose, poluentes particulados)
Cânceres primários (por exemplo, carcinoma brônquico, mesotelioma)
Cânceres secundários (por exemplo, cânceres que se originaram em outras partes do corpo, mas se espalharam nos pulmões)
Surfactante insuficiente (por exemplo, síndrome do desconforto respiratório em bebês prematuros). Distúrbios do sistema respiratório geralmente são tratados por um pneumologista e terapeuta respiratório.
Onde houver incapacidade de respirar ou insuficiência respiratória, um ventilador médico pode ser usado.


== Mamíferos excepcionais ==



=== Cavalos ===


Os cavalos são respiradores nasais obrigatórios, o que significa que são diferentes de muitos outros mamíferos porque não têm a opção de respirar pela boca e precisam respirar pelo nariz.


=== Elefantes ===

O elefante é o único mamífero conhecido que não possui espaço pleural.

Em vez disso, a pleura parietal e visceral são ambas compostas por tecido conjuntivo denso e unidas uma à outra por meio de tecido conjuntivo frouxo.

Acredita-se que essa falta de espaço pleural, juntamente com um diafragma extraordinariamente grosso, sejam adaptações evolutivas que permitem que o elefante permaneça debaixo d'água por longos períodos de tempo enquanto respira através de sua tromba, que emerge como um snorkel. o diafragma e a respiração dependem principalmente do diafragma e não da expansão da caixa torácica.


== Pássaros ==


O sistema respiratório das aves difere significativamente daquele encontrado nos mamíferos.

Em primeiro lugar, eles têm pulmões rígidos que não se expandem e se contraem durante o ciclo respiratório.

Em vez disso, um extenso sistema de sacos aéreos (Fig. 15) distribuídos por todo o corpo atua como o fole, puxando o ar ambiente para dentro dos sacos e expelindo o ar gasto após ter passado pelos pulmões (Fig. 18).

As aves também não possuem diafragmas ou cavidades pleurais.
Os pulmões das aves são menores do que os dos mamíferos de tamanho comparável, mas os sacos aéreos respondem por 15% do volume total do corpo, em comparação com os 7% dedicados aos alvéolos que atuam como foles nos mamíferos. alternadamente aumentando e diminuindo o volume de toda a cavidade tóraco-abdominal (ou celoma) usando seus músculos abdominais e costais.

Durante a inspiração, os músculos ligados às costelas vertebrais (Fig. 17) se contraem inclinando-os para frente e para fora.

Isso empurra as costelas do esterno, às quais estão presas em ângulo quase reto, para baixo e para frente, levando o esterno (com sua quilha proeminente) na mesma direção (Fig. 17).

Isso aumenta os diâmetros vertical e transversal da porção torácica do tronco.

O movimento para frente e para baixo, principalmente da extremidade posterior do esterno, puxa a parede abdominal para baixo, aumentando também o volume dessa região do tronco.

O aumento de volume de toda a cavidade do tronco reduz a pressão do ar em todos os sacos aéreos toraco-abdominais, fazendo com que eles se encham de ar conforme descrito a seguir.
Durante a expiração, o músculo oblíquo externo que está ligado ao esterno e às costelas vertebrais anteriormente e à pelve (púbis e ílio na Fig. 17) posteriormente (formando parte da parede abdominal) reverte o movimento inalatório, enquanto comprime o conteúdo abdominal, aumentando assim a pressão em todos os sacos de ar.

O ar é, portanto, expelido do sistema respiratório no ato da expiração.

Durante a inalação, o ar entra na traqueia através das narinas e da boca, e continua um pouco além da siringe, ponto em que a traqueia se ramifica em dois brônquios primários, indo para os dois pulmões (Fig. 16).

Os brônquios primários entram nos pulmões para se tornarem os brônquios intrapulmonares, que emitem um conjunto de ramos paralelos chamados ventrobrônquios e, um pouco mais adiante, um conjunto equivalente de dorsobrônquios (Fig. 16).

As extremidades dos brônquios intrapulmonares descarregam o ar nos sacos aéreos posteriores na extremidade caudal da ave.

Cada par de dorsoventrobrônquios é conectado por um grande número de capilares aéreos microscópicos paralelos (ou parabrônquios) onde ocorre a troca gasosa (Fig. 16).

À medida que a ave inspira, o ar traqueal flui através dos brônquios intrapulmonares para os sacos aéreos posteriores, bem como para os dorsobrônquios, mas não para os ventróbrônquios (Fig. 18).

Isso se deve à arquitetura brônquica que direciona o ar inspirado para longe das aberturas dos ventróbrônquios, para a continuação do brônquio intrapulmonar em direção aos dorsbrônquios e sacos aéreos posteriores.

Dos brônquios dorsais, o ar inalado flui através dos parabrônquios (e, portanto, do trocador de gás) para os ventróbrônquios, de onde o ar só pode escapar para os sacos aéreos anteriores em expansão.

Assim, durante a inalação, os sacos aéreos posteriores e anteriores se expandem, os sacos aéreos posteriores se enchem de ar inalado fresco, enquanto os sacos aéreos anteriores se enchem de ar "gasto" (pobre em oxigênio) que acabou de passar pelos pulmões.

Durante a expiração, a pressão nos sacos aéreos posteriores (que foram preenchidos com ar fresco durante a inspiração) aumenta devido à contração do músculo oblíquo descrito acima.

A aerodinâmica das aberturas de interconexão dos sacos aéreos posteriores para os brônquios dorsobrônquios e brônquios intrapulmonares garante que o ar deixe esses sacos na direção dos pulmões (através dos brônquios dorsais), em vez de retornar pelos brônquios intrapulmonares (Fig. 18).

Dos dorsobrônquios, o ar fresco dos sacos aéreos posteriores flui através dos parabrônquios (na mesma direção que ocorreu durante a inalação) para os ventrobrônquios.

As passagens de ar que conectam os ventrobrônquios e os sacos aéreos anteriores aos brônquios intrapulmonares direcionam o ar "gasto", pobre em oxigênio desses dois órgãos para a traqueia, de onde escapa para o exterior.

O ar oxigenado, portanto, flui constantemente (durante todo o ciclo respiratório) em uma única direção através dos parabrônquios. . 19).

A pressão parcial de oxigênio nos parabrônquios diminui ao longo de seus comprimentos à medida que o O2 se difunde no sangue.

Os capilares sanguíneos que saem do trocador perto da entrada do fluxo de ar absorvem mais O2 do que os capilares que saem perto da extremidade de saída dos parabrônquios.

Quando os conteúdos de todos os capilares se misturam, a pressão parcial final de oxigênio do sangue venoso pulmonar misto é maior do que a do ar expirado, mas é, no entanto, menor que a metade do ar inspirado, alcançando assim aproximadamente a mesma pressão parcial do sangue arterial sistêmico. pressão de oxigênio como os mamíferos fazem com seus pulmões tipo fole. A traqueia é uma área de espaço morto: o ar pobre em oxigênio que ela contém no final da expiração é o primeiro ar a reentrar nos sacos aéreos posteriores e nos pulmões.

Em comparação com o trato respiratório de mamíferos, o volume de espaço morto em uma ave é, em média, 4,5 vezes maior do que em mamíferos do mesmo tamanho.

Aves com pescoço longo inevitavelmente terão traqueias longas e, portanto, devem respirar mais fundo do que os mamíferos para compensar seus maiores volumes de espaço morto.

Em algumas aves (por exemplo, o cisne-bravo, Cygnus cygnus, o colhereiro branco, Platalea leucorodia, o grou-bravo, Grus americana, e o mutum-de-capacete, Pauxi pauxi) a traqueia, que alguns grous podem ter 1,5 m de comprimento, é enrolada para trás e dentro do corpo, aumentando drasticamente a ventilação do espaço morto.

O objetivo desse recurso extraordinário é desconhecido.


== Répteis ==


A estrutura anatômica dos pulmões é menos complexa em répteis do que em mamíferos, com répteis sem a estrutura de árvore das vias aéreas muito extensa encontrada nos pulmões de mamíferos.

No entanto, as trocas gasosas em répteis ainda ocorrem nos alvéolos.

Os répteis não possuem diafragma.

Assim, a respiração ocorre por meio de uma mudança no volume da cavidade corporal que é controlada pela contração dos músculos intercostais em todos os répteis, exceto nas tartarugas.

Nas tartarugas, a contração de pares específicos de músculos do flanco governa a inspiração e a expiração.


== Anfíbios ==


Tanto os pulmões quanto a pele servem como órgãos respiratórios nos anfíbios.

A ventilação dos pulmões em anfíbios depende da ventilação com pressão positiva.

Os músculos abaixam o assoalho da cavidade oral, aumentando-o e puxando o ar pelas narinas para a cavidade oral.

Com as narinas e a boca fechadas, o assoalho da cavidade oral é então empurrado para cima, o que força o ar pela traqueia para os pulmões.

A pele desses animais é altamente vascularizada e úmida, com umidade mantida pela secreção de muco de células especializadas, e está envolvida na respiração cutânea.

Enquanto os pulmões são os órgãos primários para as trocas gasosas entre o sangue e o ar ambiente (quando fora da água), as propriedades únicas da pele auxiliam nas trocas gasosas rápidas quando os anfíbios são submersos em água rica em oxigênio.
Alguns anfíbios têm brânquias, quer nas fases iniciais do seu desenvolvimento (por exemplo, girinos de rãs), enquanto outros as mantêm na idade adulta (por exemplo, algumas salamandras).


== Peixe ==


O oxigênio é pouco solúvel em água.

Portanto, a água doce totalmente aerada contém apenas 8–10 ml de O2/litro em comparação com a concentração de O2 de 210 ml/litro no ar ao nível do mar.

Além disso, o coeficiente de difusão (ou seja, a taxa na qual uma substância se difunde de uma região de alta concentração para uma de baixa concentração, sob condições padrão) dos gases respiratórios é tipicamente 10.000 mais rápido no ar do que na água.

Assim, o oxigênio, por exemplo, tem um coeficiente de difusão de 17,6 mm2/s no ar, mas apenas 0,0021 mm2/s na água.

Os valores correspondentes para o dióxido de carbono são 16 mm2/s no ar e 0,0016 mm2/s na água.

Isso significa que quando o oxigênio é retirado da água em contato com um trocador de gás, ele é substituído consideravelmente mais lentamente pelo oxigênio das regiões ricas em oxigênio a pequenas distâncias do trocador do que teria ocorrido no ar.

Os peixes desenvolveram brânquias para lidar com esses problemas.

As brânquias são órgãos especializados contendo filamentos, que se dividem em lamelas.

As lamelas contêm uma densa rede capilar de paredes finas que expõe uma grande área de superfície de troca gasosa aos grandes volumes de água que passam sobre elas. As brânquias usam um sistema de troca contracorrente que aumenta a eficiência da absorção de oxigênio da água.

A água oxigenada fresca ingerida pela boca é ininterruptamente "bombeada" pelas brânquias em uma direção, enquanto o sangue nas lamelas flui na direção oposta, criando o fluxo de sangue e água em contracorrente (Fig. 22), no qual a sobrevivência do peixe depende. A água é puxada pela boca fechando o opérculo (tampa branquial) e alargando a cavidade bucal (Fig. 23).

Simultaneamente, as câmaras branquiais aumentam, produzindo uma pressão mais baixa do que na boca, fazendo com que a água flua sobre as brânquias.

A cavidade bucal então se contrai, induzindo o fechamento das válvulas orais passivas, evitando assim o refluxo da água da boca (Fig. 23).

A água na boca é, em vez disso, forçada sobre as brânquias, enquanto as câmaras branquiais se contraem esvaziando a água que contêm através das aberturas operculares (Fig. 23).

O refluxo para a câmara branquial durante a fase inalatória é impedido por uma membrana ao longo da borda ventroposterior do opérculo (diagrama à esquerda na Fig. 23).

Assim, a cavidade bucal e as câmaras branquiais atuam alternadamente como bomba de sucção e bomba de pressão para manter um fluxo constante de água sobre as brânquias em uma direção.

Como o sangue nos capilares lamelares flui na direção oposta à da água, o conseqüente fluxo em contracorrente de sangue e água mantém gradientes de concentração acentuados de oxigênio e dióxido de carbono ao longo de todo o comprimento de cada capilar (diagrama inferior na Fig. 22) .

O oxigênio é, portanto, capaz de difundir-se continuamente a favor de seu gradiente para o sangue, e o dióxido de carbono, a favor de seu gradiente, para a água.

Embora os sistemas de troca de contracorrente teoricamente permitam uma transferência quase completa de um gás respiratório de um lado do trocador para o outro, em peixes menos de 80% do oxigênio na água que flui pelas brânquias geralmente é transferido para o sangue. tubarões pelágicos, a água passa pela boca e pelas brânquias enquanto eles estão em movimento, em um processo conhecido como "ventilação do carneiro".

Enquanto em repouso, a maioria dos tubarões bombeia água sobre suas brânquias, como a maioria dos peixes ósseos, para garantir que a água oxigenada continue fluindo sobre suas brânquias.

Mas um pequeno número de espécies perdeu a capacidade de bombear água através de suas brânquias e deve nadar sem descanso.

Essas espécies são ventiladores de carneiro obrigatórios e presumivelmente asfixiariam se não pudessem se mover.

A ventilação obrigatória do carneiro também é verdadeira para algumas espécies de peixes ósseos pelágicos. Existem alguns peixes que podem obter oxigênio por breves períodos de tempo do ar engolido acima da superfície da água.

Assim, os peixes pulmonados possuem um ou dois pulmões, e os peixes labirinto desenvolveram um "órgão labirinto" especial, que caracteriza essa subordem de peixes.

O órgão labiríntico é um órgão respiratório acessório suprabranquial muito dobrado.

É formado por uma expansão vascularizada do osso epibranquial do primeiro arco branquial e é utilizado para a respiração no ar.

Este órgão permite que os peixes labirinto absorvam oxigênio diretamente do ar, em vez de retirá-lo da água em que residem através do uso de brânquias.

O órgão labirinto ajuda o oxigênio no ar inalado a ser absorvido pela corrente sanguínea.

Como resultado, os peixes labirinto podem sobreviver por um curto período de tempo fora da água, pois podem inalar o ar ao seu redor, desde que permaneçam úmidos.

Os peixes labirinto não nascem com órgãos labirínticos funcionais.

O desenvolvimento do órgão é gradual e a maioria dos peixes labirinto juvenis respiram inteiramente com suas brânquias e desenvolvem os órgãos labirínticos quando envelhecem.


== Invertebrados ==



=== Artrópodes ===


Algumas espécies de caranguejos usam um órgão respiratório chamado pulmão branquiostegal.

Sua estrutura em forma de brânquia aumenta a área de superfície para troca gasosa, que é mais adequada para retirar oxigênio do ar do que da água.

Algumas das menores aranhas e ácaros podem respirar simplesmente trocando gases pela superfície do corpo.

Aranhas maiores, escorpiões e outros artrópodes usam um pulmão de livro primitivo.


==== Insetos ====

A maioria dos insetos respira passivamente através de seus espiráculos (aberturas especiais no exoesqueleto) e o ar chega a todas as partes do corpo por meio de uma série de tubos cada vez menores chamados 'traqueias' quando seus diâmetros são relativamente grandes, e 'traqueolas' quando seus diâmetros são muito pequenos.

As traqueolas fazem contato com células individuais em todo o corpo.

Eles são parcialmente preenchidos com líquido, que pode ser retirado das traqueolas individuais quando os tecidos, como os músculos, estão ativos e têm alta demanda de oxigênio, aproximando o ar das células ativas.

Isso provavelmente é causado pelo acúmulo de ácido lático nos músculos ativos, causando um gradiente osmótico, movendo a água para fora das traqueolas e para dentro das células ativas.

A difusão de gases é eficaz em pequenas distâncias, mas não em distâncias maiores, essa é uma das razões pelas quais os insetos são todos relativamente pequenos.

Insetos que não possuem espiráculos e traqueias, como alguns Collembola, respiram diretamente pela pele, também por difusão de gases. do corpo, e geralmente um par por segmento.

Alguns dos Diplura têm onze, com quatro pares no tórax, mas na maioria das formas antigas de insetos, como libélulas e gafanhotos, existem dois espiráculos torácicos e oito abdominais.

No entanto, na maioria dos insetos restantes, há menos.

É no nível das traqueolas que o oxigênio é fornecido às células para a respiração.
Acreditava-se que os insetos trocavam gases com o ambiente continuamente pela simples difusão de gases no sistema traqueal.

Mais recentemente, no entanto, uma grande variação nos padrões ventilatórios dos insetos foi documentada e a respiração dos insetos parece ser altamente variável.

Alguns pequenos insetos não demonstram movimentos respiratórios contínuos e podem não ter controle muscular dos espiráculos.

Outros, no entanto, utilizam a contração muscular do abdome juntamente com a contração e o relaxamento coordenados do espiráculo para gerar padrões cíclicos de trocas gasosas e reduzir a perda de água para a atmosfera.

A forma mais extrema desses padrões é chamada de ciclos descontínuos de troca gasosa.


=== Moluscos ===


Os moluscos geralmente possuem brânquias que permitem a troca gasosa entre o meio aquoso e seus sistemas circulatórios.

Esses animais também possuem um coração que bombeia sangue contendo hemocianina como sua molécula de captura de oxigênio.

Assim, este sistema respiratório é semelhante ao dos peixes vertebrados.

O sistema respiratório dos gastrópodes pode incluir brânquias ou um pulmão.


== Plantas ==


As plantas usam o gás dióxido de carbono no processo de fotossíntese e exalam o gás oxigênio como resíduo.

A equação química da fotossíntese é 6 CO2 (dióxido de carbono) e 6 H2O (água), que na presença da luz solar produz C6H12O6 (glicose) e 6 O2 (oxigênio).

A fotossíntese usa elétrons nos átomos de carbono como repositório da energia obtida da luz solar.

A respiração é o oposto da fotossíntese.

Ele recupera a energia para alimentar reações químicas nas células.

Ao fazê-lo, os átomos de carbono e seus elétrons são combinados com o oxigênio formando CO2, que é facilmente removido tanto das células quanto do organismo.

As plantas usam ambos os processos, a fotossíntese para capturar a energia e o metabolismo oxidativo para usá-la.
A respiração das plantas é limitada pelo processo de difusão.

As plantas absorvem dióxido de carbono através de orifícios, conhecidos como estômatos, que podem abrir e fechar na parte inferior de suas folhas e, às vezes, em outras partes de sua anatomia.

A maioria das plantas requer algum oxigênio para processos catabólicos (reações de quebra que liberam energia).

Mas a quantidade de O2 utilizada por hora é pequena, pois não estão envolvidos em atividades que exijam altas taxas de metabolismo aeróbico.

Sua necessidade de ar, no entanto, é muito alta, pois precisam de CO2 para a fotossíntese, que constitui apenas 0,04% do ar ambiental.

Assim, para fazer 1 g de glicose é preciso remover todo o CO2 de pelo menos 18,7 litros de ar ao nível do mar.

Mas as ineficiências no processo fotossintético fazem com que volumes de ar consideravelmente maiores sejam usados.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Respiratory_system

;;;FR;;;



SYSTÈME RESPIRATOIRE


Le système respiratoire (également appareil respiratoire, système ventilatoire) est un système biologique constitué d'organes et de structures spécifiques utilisés pour les échanges gazeux chez les animaux et les plantes.

L'anatomie et la physiologie qui rendent cela possible varient considérablement en fonction de la taille de l'organisme, de l'environnement dans lequel il vit et de son histoire évolutive.

Chez les animaux terrestres, la surface respiratoire est intériorisée en tant que revêtement des poumons.

Les échanges gazeux dans les poumons se produisent dans des millions de petits sacs aériens; chez les mammifères et les reptiles, on les appelle des alvéoles et chez les oiseaux, on les appelle des oreillettes.

Ces sacs aériens microscopiques ont un apport sanguin très riche, amenant ainsi l'air en contact étroit avec le sang.

Ces sacs aériens communiquent avec l'environnement extérieur via un système de voies respiratoires, ou tubes creux, dont le plus grand est la trachée, qui se ramifie au milieu de la poitrine dans les deux bronches principales.

Ceux-ci pénètrent dans les poumons où ils se ramifient dans des bronches secondaires et tertiaires de plus en plus étroites qui se ramifient en de nombreux tubes plus petits, les bronchioles.

Chez les oiseaux, les bronchioles sont appelées parabronchi.

Ce sont les bronchioles, ou parabronches, qui débouchent généralement dans les alvéoles microscopiques chez les mammifères et les oreillettes chez les oiseaux.

L'air doit être pompé de l'environnement dans les alvéoles ou les oreillettes par le processus de respiration qui implique les muscles de la respiration.
Chez la plupart des poissons et un certain nombre d'autres animaux aquatiques (vertébrés et invertébrés), le système respiratoire est constitué de branchies, qui sont des organes partiellement ou complètement externes, baignés dans l'environnement aqueux.

Cette eau s'écoule sur les branchies par divers moyens actifs ou passifs.

Les échanges gazeux ont lieu dans les branchies constituées de filaments et de lamelles minces ou très plats qui exposent à l'eau une très grande surface de tissu hautement vascularisé.
D'autres animaux, comme les insectes, ont des systèmes respiratoires avec des caractéristiques anatomiques très simples, et chez les amphibiens, même la peau joue un rôle vital dans les échanges gazeux.

Les plantes ont également des systèmes respiratoires, mais la directionnalité des échanges gazeux peut être opposée à celle des animaux.

Le système respiratoire des plantes comprend des caractéristiques anatomiques telles que les stomates, que l'on trouve dans diverses parties de la plante.


== Mammifères ==



=== Anatomie ===


Chez l'homme et d'autres mammifères, l'anatomie d'un système respiratoire typique est les voies respiratoires.

Les voies respiratoires sont divisées en voies respiratoires supérieures et inférieures.

Le tractus supérieur comprend le nez, les cavités nasales, les sinus, le pharynx et la partie du larynx au-dessus des cordes vocales.

Le tractus inférieur (Fig. 2.) comprend la partie inférieure du larynx, la trachée, les bronches, les bronchioles et les alvéoles.
Les voies respiratoires ramifiées du tractus inférieur sont souvent décrites comme l'arbre respiratoire ou l'arbre trachéobronchique (Fig. 2).

Les intervalles entre les points de ramification successifs le long des différentes branches de "l'arbre" sont souvent appelés "générations" ramifiées, dont il y a, chez l'homme adulte, environ 23.

Les générations précédentes (environ les générations 0 à 16), constituées de la trachée et des bronches, ainsi que les plus grandes bronchioles qui agissent simplement comme des conduits d'air, apportant de l'air aux bronchioles respiratoires, aux canaux alvéolaires et aux alvéoles (environ générations 17 à 23) , où se produisent les échanges gazeux.

Les bronchioles sont définies comme les petites voies respiratoires dépourvues de tout support cartilagineux. Les premières bronches à se ramifier à partir de la trachée sont les bronches principales droite et gauche.

Deuxième seulement en diamètre après la trachée (1,8 cm), ces bronches (1 à 1,4 cm de diamètre) pénètrent dans les poumons à chaque hile, où elles se ramifient en bronches secondaires plus étroites appelées bronches lobaires, et celles-ci se ramifient en bronches tertiaires plus étroites appelées bronches segmentaires.

D'autres divisions des bronches segmentaires (1 à 6 mm de diamètre) sont connues sous le nom de bronches segmentaires du 4e ordre, du 5e ordre et du 6e ordre, ou regroupées sous le nom de bronches sous-segmentaires. Par rapport au nombre de 23 (en moyenne) de ramifications des voies respiratoires arbre chez l'homme adulte, la souris n'a qu'environ 13 ramifications de ce type.
Les alvéoles sont les extrémités sans issue de "l'arbre", ce qui signifie que tout air qui y pénètre doit sortir par le même chemin.

Un tel système crée un espace mort, un volume d'air (environ 150 ml chez l'homme adulte) qui remplit les voies respiratoires après l'expiration et est réinspiré dans les alvéoles avant que l'air ambiant ne les atteigne.

À la fin de l'inspiration, les voies respiratoires sont remplies d'air ambiant, qui est expiré sans entrer en contact avec l'échangeur de gaz.


=== Volumes ventilatoires ===


Les poumons se dilatent et se contractent pendant le cycle respiratoire, aspirant de l'air à l'intérieur et à l'extérieur des poumons.

Le volume d'air déplacé dans ou hors des poumons dans des circonstances de repos normales (le volume courant au repos d'environ 500 ml), et les volumes déplacés pendant l'inhalation forcée maximale et l'expiration forcée maximale sont mesurés chez l'homme par spirométrie.

Un spirogramme humain adulte typique avec les noms donnés aux différentes excursions de volume que les poumons peuvent subir est illustré ci-dessous (Fig. 3):

Tout l'air des poumons ne peut pas être expulsé lors d'une expiration forcée maximale.

Il s'agit du volume résiduel d'environ 1,0 à 1,5 litre qui ne peut être mesuré par spirométrie.

Les volumes qui incluent le volume résiduel (c'est-à-dire une capacité résiduelle fonctionnelle d'environ 2,5 à 3,0 litres et une capacité pulmonaire totale d'environ 6 litres) ne peuvent donc pas non plus être mesurés par spirométrie.

Leur mesure nécessite des techniques spéciales. Les taux d'inspiration ou d'expiration de l'air, soit par la bouche ou le nez, soit dans ou hors des alvéoles, sont présentés ci-dessous, ainsi que leur mode de calcul.

Le nombre de cycles respiratoires par minute est appelé fréquence respiratoire.


=== Mécanique de la respiration ===


Chez les mammifères, l'inhalation au repos est principalement due à la contraction du diaphragme.

Il s'agit d'une feuille musculaire bombée vers le haut qui sépare la cavité thoracique de la cavité abdominale.

Lorsqu'elle se contracte, la feuille s'aplatit (c'est-à-dire se déplace vers le bas comme le montre la figure 7) augmentant le volume de la cavité thoracique.

Le diaphragme qui se contracte pousse les organes abdominaux vers le bas.

Mais comme le plancher pelvien empêche les organes abdominaux les plus bas de se déplacer dans cette direction, le contenu abdominal pliable fait gonfler le ventre vers l'avant et les côtés, car les muscles abdominaux relâchés ne résistent pas à ce mouvement (Fig. 7).

Ce renflement entièrement passif (et rétrécissement lors de l'expiration) de l'abdomen lors de la respiration normale est parfois appelé «respiration abdominale», bien qu'il s'agisse en fait de «respiration diaphragmatique», qui n'est pas visible à l'extérieur du corps.

Les mammifères n'utilisent leurs muscles abdominaux que lors d'une expiration forcée (voir Fig. 8 et discussion ci-dessous).

Jamais pendant toute forme d'inhalation.
Lorsque le diaphragme se contracte, la cage thoracique est simultanément élargie par les côtes tirées vers le haut par les muscles intercostaux, comme illustré à la Fig. 4.

Toutes les nervures sont inclinées vers le bas de l'arrière vers l'avant (comme illustré à la Fig. 4); mais les côtes les plus basses sont également inclinées vers le bas à partir de la ligne médiane vers l'extérieur (Fig. 5).

Ainsi, le diamètre transversal de la cage thoracique peut être augmenté de la même manière que le diamètre antéro-postérieur est augmenté par le mouvement dit de la poignée de pompe illustré à la Fig. 4.
L'élargissement de la dimension verticale de la cavité thoracique par la contraction du diaphragme, et de ses deux dimensions horizontales par le soulèvement de l'avant et des côtés des côtes, fait chuter la pression intrathoracique.

L'intérieur des poumons est ouvert à l'air extérieur et étant élastique, il se dilate donc pour remplir l'espace accru.

L'afflux d'air dans les poumons se fait par les voies respiratoires (Fig. 2).

En santé, ces voies respiratoires commencent par le nez.

Il est possible de commencer par la bouche, qui est le système respiratoire de secours.

Cependant, la respiration buccale chronique entraîne ou est un signe de maladie.

Ils se terminent par des sacs microscopiques sans issue appelés alvéoles, qui sont toujours ouverts, bien que les diamètres des différentes sections puissent être modifiés par les systèmes nerveux sympathique et parasympathique.

La pression de l'air alvéolaire est donc toujours proche de la pression de l'air atmosphérique (environ 100 kPa au niveau de la mer) au repos, les gradients de pression qui font entrer et sortir l'air des poumons pendant la respiration dépassant rarement 2 à 3 kPa. le diaphragme et les muscles intercostaux se détendent.

Cela ramène la poitrine et l'abdomen dans une position déterminée par leur élasticité anatomique.

Il s'agit de la "position médiane de repos" du thorax et de l'abdomen (Fig. 7) lorsque les poumons contiennent leur capacité résiduelle fonctionnelle d'air (la zone bleu clair sur l'illustration de droite de la Fig. 7), qui chez l'homme adulte a un volume d'environ 2,5 à 3,0 litres (Fig. 3).

L'expiration au repos dure environ deux fois plus longtemps que l'inspiration car le diaphragme se détend passivement plus doucement qu'il ne se contracte activement pendant l'inspiration.

Le volume d'air qui entre ou sort (par le nez ou la bouche) au cours d'un cycle respiratoire unique est appelé le volume courant.

Chez un humain adulte au repos, il est d'environ 500 ml par respiration.

A la fin de l'expiration, les voies respiratoires contiennent environ 150 ml d'air alvéolaire qui est le premier air qui est réinspiré dans les alvéoles lors de l'inspiration.

Ce volume d'air expiré par les alvéoles et réinspiré est connu sous le nom de ventilation de l'espace mort, ce qui a pour conséquence que sur les 500 ml inspirés dans les alvéoles à chaque respiration, seuls 350 ml (500 ml - 150 ml = 350 ml) est de l'air frais chaud et humidifié.

Étant donné que ces 350 ml d'air frais sont parfaitement mélangés et dilués par l'air qui reste dans les alvéoles après une expiration normale (c'est-à-dire la capacité résiduelle fonctionnelle d'environ 2,5 à 3,0 litres), il est clair que la composition de l'air alvéolaire change très peu pendant le cycle respiratoire (voir Fig. 9).

La tension (ou pression partielle) d'oxygène reste voisine de 13-14 kPa (environ 100 mm Hg), et celle du dioxyde de carbone très voisine de 5,3 kPa (soit 40 mm Hg).

Cela contraste avec la composition de l'air extérieur sec au niveau de la mer, où la pression partielle d'oxygène est de 21 kPa (ou 160 mm Hg) et celle du dioxyde de carbone de 0,04 kPa (ou 0,3 mm Hg). par exemple, pendant l'exercice, l'inspiration est provoquée par une excursion plus puissante et plus grande du diaphragme qui se contracte qu'au repos (fig. 8).

De plus, les "muscles accessoires de l'inspiration" exagèrent les actions des muscles intercostaux (Fig. 8).

Ces muscles accessoires de l'inhalation sont des muscles qui s'étendent des vertèbres cervicales et de la base du crâne aux côtes supérieures et au sternum, parfois par une attache intermédiaire aux clavicules.

Lorsqu'ils se contractent, le volume interne de la cage thoracique augmente bien plus que ce qui peut être obtenu par la seule contraction des muscles intercostaux.

Vu de l'extérieur du corps, le soulèvement des clavicules lors d'une inhalation intense ou laborieuse est parfois appelé respiration claviculaire, observé en particulier lors de crises d'asthme et chez les personnes atteintes de maladie pulmonaire obstructive chronique.
Lors d'une respiration intense, l'expiration est provoquée par le relâchement de tous les muscles d'inspiration.

Mais maintenant, les muscles abdominaux, au lieu de rester détendus (comme ils le font au repos), se contractent avec force en tirant vers le bas les bords inférieurs de la cage thoracique (avant et côtés) (Fig. 8).

Cela diminue non seulement considérablement la taille de la cage thoracique, mais pousse également les organes abdominaux vers le haut contre le diaphragme qui se renfle profondément dans le thorax (Fig. 8).

Le volume pulmonaire en fin d'expiration est maintenant bien inférieur à la position médiane de repos et contient beaucoup moins d'air que la "capacité résiduelle fonctionnelle" de repos.

Cependant, chez un mammifère normal, les poumons ne peuvent pas être complètement vidés.

Chez un être humain adulte, il reste toujours au moins 1 litre d'air résiduel dans les poumons après une expiration maximale. L'inspiration et l'expiration rythmiques automatiques peuvent être interrompues par la toux, les éternuements (formes d'expiration très vigoureuses), par l'expression de un large éventail d'émotions (rire, soupir, cri de douleur, inspirations exaspérées) et par des actes volontaires tels que la parole, le chant, le sifflement et le jeu d'instruments à vent.

Toutes ces actions reposent sur les muscles décrits ci-dessus et leurs effets sur le mouvement de l'air entrant et sortant des poumons.
Bien qu'il ne s'agisse pas d'une forme de respiration, la manœuvre de Valsalva implique les muscles respiratoires.

C'est, en fait, un effort expiratoire très puissant contre une glotte bien fermée, de sorte qu'aucun air ne puisse s'échapper des poumons.

Au lieu de cela, le contenu abdominal est évacué dans la direction opposée, à travers des orifices dans le plancher pelvien.

Les muscles abdominaux se contractent très puissamment, ce qui fait monter la pression à l'intérieur de l'abdomen et du thorax à des niveaux extrêmement élevés.

La manœuvre de Valsalva peut être effectuée volontairement, mais est plus généralement un réflexe déclenché lors d'une tentative de vidange de l'abdomen lors, par exemple, d'une défécation difficile ou lors d'un accouchement.

La respiration s'arrête pendant cette manœuvre.


=== Echange gazeux ===


 

L'objectif principal du système respiratoire est l'égalisation des pressions partielles des gaz respiratoires dans l'air alvéolaire avec celles du sang capillaire pulmonaire (Fig. 11).

Ce processus se produit par simple diffusion, à travers une membrane très fine (appelée barrière sang-air), qui forme les parois des alvéoles pulmonaires (Fig. 10).

Il est constitué des cellules épithéliales alvéolaires, de leurs membranes basales et des cellules endothéliales des capillaires alvéolaires (Fig. 10).

Cette barrière gazeuse du sang est extrêmement fine (chez l'homme, en moyenne, 2,2 μm d'épaisseur).

Il est plié en environ 300 millions de petits sacs aériens appelés alvéoles (chacun entre 75 et 300 µm de diamètre) partant des bronchioles respiratoires dans les poumons, fournissant ainsi une surface extrêmement grande (environ 145 m2) pour que les échanges gazeux se produisent. L'air contenu dans les alvéoles a un volume semi-permanent d'environ 2,5 à 3,0 litres qui entoure complètement le sang capillaire alvéolaire (Fig. 12).

Cela garantit que l'équilibrage des pressions partielles des gaz dans les deux compartiments est très efficace et se produit très rapidement.

Le sang sortant des capillaires alvéolaires et finalement distribué dans tout le corps a donc une pression partielle d'oxygène de 13-14 kPa (100 mmHg), et une pression partielle de dioxyde de carbone de 5,3 kPa (40 mmHg) (c'est-à-dire la même que la tensions d'oxygène et de gaz carbonique comme dans les alvéoles).

Comme mentionné dans la section ci-dessus, les pressions partielles correspondantes d'oxygène et de dioxyde de carbone dans l'air ambiant (sec) au niveau de la mer sont respectivement de 21 kPa (160 mmHg) et 0,04 kPa (0,3 mmHg). l'air alvéolaire et celui de l'air ambiant peuvent être maintenus car la capacité résiduelle fonctionnelle est contenue dans des sacs sans issue reliés à l'air extérieur par des conduits assez étroits et relativement longs (les voies respiratoires : nez, pharynx, larynx, trachée, bronches et leurs ramifications jusqu'aux bronchioles), à travers lesquelles l'air doit être inspiré et expiré (c'est-à-dire qu'il n'y a pas de flux unidirectionnel comme c'est le cas dans le poumon des oiseaux).

Cette anatomie typique des mammifères combinée au fait que les poumons ne sont pas vidés et regonflés à chaque respiration (laissant un volume d'air substantiel, d'environ 2,5 à 3,0 litres, dans les alvéoles après l'expiration), garantit que la composition du tissu alvéolaire l'air n'est que peu perturbé lorsque les 350 ml d'air frais y sont mélangés à chaque inhalation.

Ainsi l'animal dispose d'une « atmosphère portable » très particulière, dont la composition diffère sensiblement de l'air ambiant actuel.

C'est cette atmosphère portable (la capacité résiduelle fonctionnelle) à laquelle le sang et donc les tissus de l'organisme sont exposés – pas à l'air extérieur.
Les pressions partielles artérielles résultantes d'oxygène et de dioxyde de carbone sont contrôlées de manière homéostatique.

Une augmentation de la pression partielle artérielle de CO2 et, dans une moindre mesure, une baisse de la pression partielle artérielle d'O2, provoqueront par réflexe une respiration plus profonde et plus rapide jusqu'à ce que les tensions des gaz sanguins dans les poumons, et donc le sang artériel, reviennent à Ordinaire.

L'inverse se produit lorsque la tension de dioxyde de carbone diminue ou, encore une fois dans une moindre mesure, la tension d'oxygène augmente : le rythme et la profondeur de la respiration sont réduits jusqu'à ce que la normalité des gaz sanguins soit rétablie.
Étant donné que le sang arrivant dans les capillaires alvéolaires a une pression partielle d'O2 de 6 kPa (45 mmHg) en moyenne, tandis que la pression dans l'air alvéolaire est de 13-14 kPa (100 mmHg), il y aura une diffusion nette de l'oxygène dans le sang capillaire, modifiant légèrement la composition des 3 litres d'air alvéolaire.

De même, étant donné que le sang arrivant dans les capillaires alvéolaires a une pression partielle de CO2 également d'environ 6 kPa (45 mmHg), alors que celle de l'air alvéolaire est de 5,3 kPa (40 mmHg), il y a un mouvement net de dioxyde de carbone hors de les capillaires dans les alvéoles.

Les changements provoqués par ces flux nets de gaz individuels entrant et sortant de l'air alvéolaire nécessitent le remplacement d'environ 15% de l'air alvéolaire par de l'air ambiant toutes les 5 secondes environ.

Ceci est très étroitement contrôlé par la surveillance des gaz sanguins artériels (qui reflètent avec précision la composition de l'air alvéolaire) par les corps aortiques et carotidiens, ainsi que par le capteur de gaz sanguins et de pH sur la surface antérieure de la moelle allongée dans le cerveau.

Il existe également des capteurs d'oxygène et de dioxyde de carbone dans les poumons, mais ils déterminent principalement les diamètres des bronchioles et des capillaires pulmonaires, et sont donc chargés de diriger le flux d'air et de sang vers différentes parties des poumons.
Ce n'est qu'en maintenant avec précision la composition des 3 litres d'air alvéolaire qu'à chaque respiration, du dioxyde de carbone est rejeté dans l'atmosphère et de l'oxygène est prélevé de l'air extérieur.

Si plus de dioxyde de carbone que d'habitude a été perdu par une courte période d'hyperventilation, la respiration sera ralentie ou arrêtée jusqu'à ce que la pression partielle alvéolaire de dioxyde de carbone soit revenue à 5,3 kPa (40 mmHg).

Il est donc à proprement parler faux que la fonction première du système respiratoire soit de débarrasser l'organisme des « déchets » de dioxyde de carbone.

Le dioxyde de carbone expiré à chaque respiration pourrait probablement être considéré plus correctement comme un sous-produit du liquide extracellulaire du corps, le dioxyde de carbone et les homéostats de pH.
Si ces homéostats sont compromis, une acidose respiratoire ou une alcalose respiratoire se produira.

A long terme, ceux-ci peuvent être compensés par des ajustements rénaux des concentrations plasmatiques de H+ et HCO3− ; mais comme cela prend du temps, le syndrome d'hyperventilation peut, par exemple, survenir lorsque l'agitation ou l'anxiété amènent une personne à respirer rapidement et profondément, provoquant ainsi une alcalose respiratoire pénible par le rejet d'une trop grande quantité de CO2 du sang dans l'air extérieur.Oxygène a une très faible solubilité dans l'eau et est donc transporté dans le sang de manière lâche avec l'hémoglobine.

L'oxygène est retenu sur l'hémoglobine par quatre groupes hémiques contenant du fer ferreux par molécule d'hémoglobine.

Lorsque tous les groupes hémiques portent chacun une molécule d'O2, le sang est dit "saturé" en oxygène, et aucune augmentation supplémentaire de la pression partielle d'oxygène n'augmentera de manière significative la concentration en oxygène du sang.

La majeure partie du dioxyde de carbone dans le sang est transportée sous forme d'ions bicarbonate (HCO3−) dans le plasma.

Cependant la conversion du CO2 dissous en HCO3− (par ajout d'eau) est trop lente pour la vitesse à laquelle le sang circule dans les tissus d'une part, et dans les capillaires alvéolaires d'autre part.

La réaction est donc catalysée par l'anhydrase carbonique, une enzyme à l'intérieur des globules rouges.

La réaction peut aller dans les deux sens en fonction de la pression partielle de CO2 qui prévaut.

Une petite quantité de dioxyde de carbone est transportée sur la partie protéique des molécules d'hémoglobine sous forme de groupes carbamino.

La concentration totale de dioxyde de carbone (sous forme d'ions bicarbonate, de CO2 dissous et de groupes carbamino) dans le sang artériel (c'est-à-dire après son équilibre avec l'air alvéolaire) est d'environ 26 mM (ou 58 ml/100 ml), par rapport à la concentration d'oxygène dans le sang artériel saturé d'environ 9 mM (ou 20 ml/100 ml de sang).


=== Contrôle de la ventilation ===


La ventilation des poumons chez les mammifères se produit via les centres respiratoires de la moelle allongée et du pont du tronc cérébral.

Ces zones forment une série de voies neurales qui reçoivent des informations sur les pressions partielles d'oxygène et de dioxyde de carbone dans le sang artériel.

Cette information détermine le taux moyen de ventilation des alvéoles des poumons, pour maintenir ces pressions constantes.

Le centre respiratoire le fait via les nerfs moteurs qui activent le diaphragme et d'autres muscles de la respiration.
Le rythme respiratoire augmente lorsque la pression partielle de dioxyde de carbone dans le sang augmente.

Ceci est détecté par les chimiorécepteurs centraux des gaz sanguins sur la surface antérieure de la moelle allongée.

Les corps aortique et carotidien sont les chémorécepteurs périphériques des gaz sanguins qui sont particulièrement sensibles à la pression partielle artérielle d'O2 bien qu'ils répondent également, mais moins fortement, à la pression partielle de CO2.

Au niveau de la mer, dans des circonstances normales, le rythme et la profondeur respiratoires sont déterminés principalement par la pression partielle artérielle de dioxyde de carbone plutôt que par la pression partielle artérielle d'oxygène, qui est autorisée à varier dans une plage assez large avant les centres respiratoires dans le bulbe rachidien et le pons y réagissent pour modifier le rythme et la profondeur de la respiration. L'exercice augmente le rythme respiratoire en raison du dioxyde de carbone supplémentaire produit par le métabolisme accru des muscles qui s'exercent.

De plus, les mouvements passifs des membres produisent également par réflexe une augmentation du rythme respiratoire. Les informations reçues des récepteurs d'étirement dans les poumons limitent le volume courant (la profondeur d'inspiration et d'expiration).


=== Réponses aux basses pressions atmosphériques ===

Les alvéoles sont ouvertes (via les voies respiratoires) à l'atmosphère, de sorte que la pression de l'air alvéolaire est exactement la même que la pression de l'air ambiant au niveau de la mer, en altitude ou dans toute atmosphère artificielle (par exemple, une chambre de plongée ou une chambre de décompression). ) dans lequel l'individu respire librement.

Avec l'expansion des poumons, l'air alvéolaire occupe un plus grand volume et sa pression diminue proportionnellement, provoquant l'entrée d'air dans les voies respiratoires, jusqu'à ce que la pression dans les alvéoles soit à nouveau égale à la pression de l'air ambiant.

L'inverse se produit lors de l'expiration.

Ce processus (d'inspiration et d'expiration) est exactement le même au niveau de la mer, comme au sommet du mont.

Everest, ou dans une chambre de plongée ou une chambre de décompression.

 
Cependant, à mesure que l'on s'élève au-dessus du niveau de la mer, la densité de l'air diminue de façon exponentielle (voir Fig. 14), diminuant de moitié environ tous les 5 500 m de montée en altitude.

La composition de l'air atmosphérique étant quasiment constante en dessous de 80 km, du fait de l'effet brassage continu des conditions météorologiques, la concentration d'oxygène dans l'air (mmol O2 par litre d'air ambiant) diminue au même rythme que la chute en pression atmosphérique avec l'altitude.

Ainsi, pour respirer la même quantité d'oxygène par minute, la personne doit inhaler un volume d'air par minute proportionnellement plus important en altitude qu'au niveau de la mer.

Ceci est réalisé en respirant plus profondément et plus rapidement (c'est-à-dire l'hyperpnée) qu'au niveau de la mer (voir ci-dessous).

 
Il existe cependant une complication qui augmente le volume d'air qui doit être inhalé par minute (volume minute respiratoire) pour fournir la même quantité d'oxygène aux poumons en altitude qu'au niveau de la mer.

Lors de l'inhalation, l'air est réchauffé et saturé de vapeur d'eau lors de son passage dans les voies nasales et le pharynx.

La pression de vapeur d'eau saturante ne dépend que de la température.

À une température corporelle centrale de 37 °C, elle est de 6,3 kPa (47,0 mmHg), indépendamment de toute autre influence, y compris l'altitude.

Ainsi, au niveau de la mer, où la pression atmosphérique ambiante est d'environ 100 kPa, l'air humidifié qui s'écoule dans les poumons depuis la trachée se compose de vapeur d'eau (6,3 kPa), d'azote (74,0 kPa), d'oxygène (19,7 kPa) et de traces de dioxyde de carbone et autres gaz (un total de 100 kPa).

Dans l'air sec, la pression partielle d'O2 au niveau de la mer est de 21,0 kPa (soit 21 % de 100 kPa), contre 19,7 kPa d'oxygène entrant dans l'air alvéolaire. (La pression partielle trachéale d'oxygène est de 21 % de [100 kPa – 6,3 kPa] = 19,7 kPa).

Au sommet du mont.

Everest (à une altitude de 8 848 m ou 29 029 pieds), la pression atmosphérique totale est de 33,7 kPa, dont 7,1 kPa (ou 21 %) sont de l'oxygène.

L'air entrant dans les poumons a également une pression totale de 33,7 kPa, dont 6,3 kPa sont, inévitablement, de la vapeur d'eau (comme c'est le cas au niveau de la mer).

Cela réduit la pression partielle d'oxygène entrant dans les alvéoles à 5,8 kPa (ou 21% de [33,7 kPa - 6,3 kPa] = 5,8 kPa).

La diminution de la pression partielle d'oxygène dans l'air inhalé est donc nettement supérieure à ce que la diminution de la pression atmosphérique totale en altitude laisserait supposer (sur l'Everest : 5,8 kPa contre 7,1 kPa).
Une autre complication mineure existe en altitude.

Si le volume des poumons devait être instantanément doublé au début de l'inhalation, la pression de l'air à l'intérieur des poumons serait divisée par deux.

Cela se produit quelle que soit l'altitude.

Ainsi, la réduction de moitié de la pression atmosphérique au niveau de la mer (100 kPa) se traduit par une pression atmosphérique intrapulmonaire de 50 kPa.

En faisant de même à 5500 m, où la pression atmosphérique n'est que de 50 kPa, la pression d'air intrapulmonaire tombe à 25 kPa.

Ainsi, la même variation de volume pulmonaire au niveau de la mer se traduit par une différence de pression de 50 kPa entre l'air ambiant et l'air intrapulmonaire, alors qu'elle se traduit par une différence de seulement 25 kPa à 5500 m.

La pression motrice forçant l'air dans les poumons lors de l'inspiration est donc divisée par deux à cette altitude.

Le débit d'entrée d'air dans les poumons lors de l'inspiration au niveau de la mer est donc le double de celui qui se produit à 5500 m.

Cependant, en réalité, l'inspiration et l'expiration se produisent beaucoup plus doucement et moins brusquement que dans l'exemple donné.

Les différences entre les pressions atmosphérique et intrapulmonaire, entraînant l'air dans et hors des poumons pendant le cycle respiratoire, ne sont que de l'ordre de 2 à 3 kPa.

Un doublement ou plus de ces petites différences de pression ne peut être atteint que par des changements très importants dans l'effort respiratoire à haute altitude.
Toutes les influences ci-dessus des basses pressions atmosphériques sur la respiration sont principalement compensées par une respiration plus profonde et plus rapide (hyperpnée).

Le degré exact d'hyperpnée est déterminé par l'homéostat des gaz sanguins, qui régule les pressions partielles d'oxygène et de dioxyde de carbone dans le sang artériel.

Cet homéostat privilégie la régulation de la pression partielle artérielle de dioxyde de carbone sur celle d'oxygène au niveau de la mer.

C'est-à-dire qu'au niveau de la mer, la pression partielle artérielle de CO2 est maintenue très proche de 5,3 kPa (ou 40 mmHg) dans un large éventail de circonstances, au détriment de la pression partielle artérielle d'O2, qui peut varier dans une très large gamme de valeurs, avant de provoquer une réponse ventilatoire corrective.

Cependant, lorsque la pression atmosphérique (et donc la pression partielle d'O2 dans l'air ambiant) tombe en dessous de 50 à 75 % de sa valeur au niveau de la mer, l'homéostasie de l'oxygène est prioritaire sur l'homéostasie du dioxyde de carbone.

Cette commutation se produit à une altitude d'environ 2500 m (ou environ 8000 pieds).

Si ce basculement se produit de manière relativement brutale, l'hyperpnée à haute altitude provoquera une chute sévère de la pression partielle artérielle de dioxyde de carbone, avec pour conséquence une élévation du pH du plasma artériel.

C'est l'un des contributeurs au mal des hautes altitudes.

D'autre part, si le passage à l'homéostasie de l'oxygène est incomplet, l'hypoxie peut compliquer le tableau clinique avec des résultats potentiellement mortels.
Il y a des capteurs d'oxygène dans les petites bronches et les bronchioles.

En réponse à de faibles pressions partielles d'oxygène dans l'air inhalé, ces capteurs provoquent par réflexe une constriction des artérioles pulmonaires. (C'est exactement l'opposé du réflexe correspondant dans les tissus, où de faibles pressions partielles artérielles d'O2 provoquent une vasodilatation artériolaire.) En altitude, cela provoque une augmentation de la pression artérielle pulmonaire, ce qui entraîne une distribution beaucoup plus uniforme du flux sanguin vers les poumons que se produit au niveau de la mer.

Au niveau de la mer, la pression artérielle pulmonaire est très basse, de sorte que les sommets des poumons reçoivent beaucoup moins de sang que les bases, qui sont relativement sur-perfusées en sang.

Ce n'est qu'au milieu des poumons que le sang et le flux d'air vers les alvéoles sont parfaitement adaptés.

En altitude cette variation du rapport ventilation/perfusion des alvéoles du haut des poumons vers le bas est supprimée, toutes les alvéoles étant perfusées et ventilées de manière plus ou moins physiologiquement idéale.

C'est un autre facteur important de l'acclimatation aux hautes altitudes et aux basses pressions d'oxygène.
Les reins mesurent la teneur en oxygène (mmol O2/litre de sang, plutôt que la pression partielle d'O2) du sang artériel.

Lorsque la teneur en oxygène du sang est chroniquement basse, comme à haute altitude, les cellules rénales sensibles à l'oxygène sécrètent de l'érythropoïétine (EPO) dans le sang.

Cette hormone stimule la moelle osseuse rouge pour augmenter son taux de production de globules rouges, ce qui entraîne une augmentation de l'hématocrite du sang et une augmentation conséquente de sa capacité de transport d'oxygène (en raison de la teneur désormais élevée en hémoglobine du sang).

En d'autres termes, à la même pression partielle artérielle d'O2, une personne avec un hématocrite élevé transporte plus d'oxygène par litre de sang qu'une personne avec un hématocrite plus faible.

Les habitants de haute altitude ont donc des hématocrites plus élevés que les habitants du niveau de la mer.


=== Autres fonctions des poumons ===



==== Défenses locales ====
L'irritation des terminaisons nerveuses dans les voies nasales ou les voies respiratoires peut induire un réflexe de toux et des éternuements.

Ces réponses provoquent une expulsion forcée de l'air de la trachée ou du nez, respectivement.

De cette manière, les irritants capturés dans le mucus qui tapisse les voies respiratoires sont expulsés ou déplacés vers la bouche où ils peuvent être avalés.

Pendant la toux, la contraction du muscle lisse des parois des voies respiratoires rétrécit la trachée en rapprochant les extrémités des plaques cartilagineuses et en poussant les tissus mous dans la lumière.

Cela augmente le débit d'air expiré pour déloger et éliminer toute particule ou mucus irritant.
L'épithélium respiratoire peut sécréter une variété de molécules qui aident à la défense des poumons.

Ceux-ci comprennent les immunoglobulines sécrétoires (IgA), les collectines, les défensines et autres peptides et protéases, les espèces réactives de l'oxygène et les espèces réactives de l'azote.

Ces sécrétions peuvent agir directement comme antimicrobiens pour aider à maintenir les voies respiratoires exemptes d'infection.

Une variété de chimiokines et de cytokines sont également sécrétées qui recrutent les cellules immunitaires traditionnelles et d'autres sur le site des infections.
La fonction immunitaire du surfactant est principalement attribuée à deux protéines : SP-A et SP-D.

Ces protéines peuvent se lier aux sucres à la surface des agents pathogènes et ainsi les opsoniser pour être absorbés par les phagocytes.

Il régule également les réponses inflammatoires et interagit avec la réponse immunitaire adaptative.

La dégradation ou l'inactivation du surfactant peut contribuer à une susceptibilité accrue à l'inflammation et à l'infection pulmonaire. La majeure partie du système respiratoire est tapissée de membranes muqueuses qui contiennent du tissu lymphoïde associé à la muqueuse, qui produit des globules blancs tels que des lymphocytes.


==== Prévention du collapsus alvéolaire ====

Les poumons fabriquent un surfactant, un complexe lipoprotéique tensioactif (phospholipoprotéine) formé par les cellules alvéolaires de type II.

Il flotte à la surface de la fine couche aqueuse qui tapisse l'intérieur des alvéoles, réduisant la tension superficielle de l'eau.
La tension superficielle d'une surface aqueuse (l'interface eau-air) a tendance à faire rétrécir cette surface.

Lorsque cette surface est incurvée comme dans les alvéoles pulmonaires, le rétrécissement de la surface diminue le diamètre des alvéoles.

Plus la courbure de l'interface eau-air est aiguë, plus l'alvéole a tendance à s'effondrer.

Cela a trois effets.

Premièrement, la tension superficielle à l'intérieur des alvéoles résiste à l'expansion des alvéoles pendant l'inhalation (c'est-à-dire qu'elle rend le poumon rigide ou non conforme).

Le surfactant réduit la tension superficielle et rend donc les poumons plus souples, ou moins raides, que s'il n'y en avait pas.

Deuxièmement, les diamètres des alvéoles augmentent et diminuent au cours du cycle respiratoire.

Cela signifie que les alvéoles ont plus tendance à s'effondrer (c'est-à-dire à provoquer une atélectasie) en fin d'expiration qu'en fin d'inspiration.

Étant donné que le surfactant flotte à la surface de l'eau, ses molécules sont plus serrées lorsque les alvéoles rétrécissent pendant l'expiration.

Cela les amène à avoir un effet abaisseur de tension superficielle plus important lorsque les alvéoles sont petites que lorsqu'elles sont grandes (comme en fin d'inhalation, lorsque les molécules de surfactant sont plus espacées).

La tendance des alvéoles à s'effondrer est donc quasiment la même en fin d'expiration qu'en fin d'inspiration.

Troisièmement, la tension superficielle de la couche aqueuse incurvée tapissant les alvéoles a tendance à aspirer l'eau des tissus pulmonaires dans les alvéoles.

Le surfactant réduit ce danger à des niveaux négligeables et maintient les alvéoles sèches. Les bébés prématurés qui sont incapables de fabriquer du surfactant ont des poumons qui ont tendance à s'effondrer chaque fois qu'ils expirent.

À moins d'être traitée, cette affection, appelée syndrome de détresse respiratoire, est fatale.

Des expériences scientifiques de base, réalisées à l'aide de cellules de poumons de poulet, soutiennent la possibilité d'utiliser des stéroïdes comme moyen de favoriser le développement de cellules alvéolaires de type II.

En fait, une fois qu'une naissance prématurée est menacée, tous les efforts sont faits pour retarder la naissance, et une série d'injections de stéroïdes est fréquemment administrée à la mère pendant ce retard dans le but de favoriser la maturation pulmonaire.


==== Contributions aux fonctions de tout le corps ====
Les vaisseaux pulmonaires contiennent un système fibrinolytique qui dissout les caillots qui peuvent être arrivés dans la circulation pulmonaire par embolie, souvent à partir des veines profondes des jambes.

Ils libèrent également une variété de substances qui pénètrent dans le sang artériel systémique et éliminent d'autres substances du sang veineux systémique qui les atteignent via l'artère pulmonaire.

Certaines prostaglandines sont éliminées de la circulation, tandis que d'autres sont synthétisées dans les poumons et libérées dans le sang lorsque le tissu pulmonaire est étiré.
Les poumons activent une hormone.

L'angiotensine I décapeptide physiologiquement inactive est convertie en octapeptide libérant de l'aldostérone, l'angiotensine II, dans la circulation pulmonaire.

La réaction se produit également dans d'autres tissus, mais elle est particulièrement importante dans les poumons.

L'angiotensine II a également un effet direct sur les parois artériolaires, provoquant une vasoconstriction artériolaire, et par conséquent une élévation de la pression artérielle.

De grandes quantités de l'enzyme de conversion de l'angiotensine responsable de cette activation sont localisées sur les surfaces des cellules endothéliales des capillaires alvéolaires.

L'enzyme de conversion inactive également la bradykinine.

Le temps de circulation à travers les capillaires alvéolaires est inférieur à une seconde, mais 70 % de l'angiotensine I atteignant les poumons est convertie en angiotensine II en un seul passage à travers les capillaires.

Quatre autres peptidases ont été identifiées à la surface des cellules endothéliales pulmonaires.


==== Vocalisation ====
Le mouvement du gaz à travers le larynx, le pharynx et la bouche permet aux humains de parler ou de phoner.

La vocalisation, ou le chant, chez les oiseaux se produit via la syrinx, un organe situé à la base de la trachée.

La vibration de l'air circulant à travers le larynx (cordes vocales), chez l'homme, et la syrinx, chez les oiseaux, produit un son.

Pour cette raison, le mouvement du gaz est vital à des fins de communication.


==== Contrôle de la température ====
Le halètement chez les chiens, les chats, les oiseaux et certains autres animaux permet de réduire la température corporelle en évaporant la salive dans la bouche (au lieu d'évaporer la sueur sur la peau).


=== Signification clinique ===

Les troubles du système respiratoire peuvent être classés en plusieurs groupes généraux :

Affections obstructives des voies respiratoires (p. ex., emphysème, bronchite, asthme)
Affections pulmonaires restrictives (p. ex., fibrose, sarcoïdose, lésions alvéolaires, épanchement pleural)
Maladies vasculaires (p. ex., œdème pulmonaire, embolie pulmonaire, hypertension pulmonaire)
Maladies infectieuses, environnementales et autres (p. ex. pneumonie, tuberculose, asbestose, polluants particulaires)
Cancers primaires (par exemple carcinome bronchique, mésothéliome)
Cancers secondaires (par exemple, des cancers qui ont pris naissance ailleurs dans le corps, mais qui se sont propagés dans les poumons)
Surfactant insuffisant (par exemple, syndrome de détresse respiratoire chez les bébés prématurés). Les troubles du système respiratoire sont généralement traités par un pneumologue et un inhalothérapeute.
En cas d'incapacité ou d'insuffisance respiratoire, un ventilateur médical peut être utilisé.


== Mammifères exceptionnels ==



=== Chevaux ===


Les chevaux sont des respirateurs nasaux obligatoires, ce qui signifie qu'ils sont différents de nombreux autres mammifères car ils n'ont pas la possibilité de respirer par la bouche et doivent aspirer de l'air par le nez.


=== Éléphants ===

L'éléphant est le seul mammifère connu à ne pas avoir d'espace pleural.

Au contraire, les plèvres pariétale et viscérale sont toutes deux composées de tissu conjonctif dense et reliées l'une à l'autre par un tissu conjonctif lâche.

On pense que ce manque d'espace pleural, ainsi qu'un diaphragme exceptionnellement épais, sont des adaptations évolutives permettant à l'éléphant de rester sous l'eau pendant de longues périodes tout en respirant à travers sa trompe qui émerge comme un tuba. Chez l'éléphant, les poumons sont attachés à le diaphragme et la respiration repose principalement sur le diaphragme plutôt que sur l'expansion de la cage thoracique.


== Oiseaux ==


Le système respiratoire des oiseaux diffère considérablement de celui des mammifères.

Premièrement, ils ont des poumons rigides qui ne se dilatent pas et ne se contractent pas pendant le cycle respiratoire.

Au lieu de cela, un vaste système de sacs aériens (Fig. 15) répartis dans tout leur corps agit comme un soufflet attirant l'air ambiant dans les sacs et expulsant l'air usé après son passage dans les poumons (Fig. 18).

Les oiseaux n'ont pas non plus de diaphragme ni de cavité pleurale.
Les poumons des oiseaux sont plus petits que ceux des mammifères de taille comparable, mais les sacs aériens représentent 15 % du volume corporel total, contre 7 % consacrés aux alvéoles qui agissent comme soufflet chez les mammifères. L'inspiration et l'expiration sont provoquées par augmentant et diminuant alternativement le volume de toute la cavité thoraco-abdominale (ou coelome) en utilisant à la fois leurs muscles abdominaux et costaux.

Pendant l'inspiration, les muscles attachés aux côtes vertébrales (Fig. 17) se contractent en les inclinant vers l'avant et vers l'extérieur.

Cela pousse les côtes sternales, auxquelles elles sont attachées presque à angle droit, vers le bas et vers l'avant, entraînant le sternum (avec sa carène proéminente) dans la même direction (Fig. 17).

Cela augmente à la fois les diamètres verticaux et transversaux de la partie thoracique du tronc.

Le mouvement vers l'avant et vers le bas, en particulier de l'extrémité postérieure du sternum, tire la paroi abdominale vers le bas, augmentant également le volume de cette région du tronc.

L'augmentation du volume de toute la cavité du tronc réduit la pression de l'air dans tous les sacs aériens thoraco-abdominaux, les obligeant à se remplir d'air comme décrit ci-dessous.
Lors de l'expiration, le muscle oblique externe qui est attaché au sternum et aux côtes vertébrales en avant, et au bassin (pubis et ilium sur la Fig. 17) en arrière (faisant partie de la paroi abdominale) inverse le mouvement inhalatoire, tout en comprimant le contenu abdominal, augmentant ainsi la pression dans tous les sacs aériens.

L'air est donc expulsé du système respiratoire lors de l'expiration.

Pendant l'inhalation, l'air pénètre dans la trachée par les narines et la bouche, et continue juste au-delà de la syrinx, point auquel la trachée se ramifie en deux bronches primaires, allant aux deux poumons (Fig. 16).

Les bronches primaires pénètrent dans les poumons pour devenir les bronches intrapulmonaires, qui dégagent un ensemble de branches parallèles appelées ventrobronches et, un peu plus loin, un ensemble équivalent de dorsobronches (Fig. 16).

Les extrémités des bronches intrapulmonaires déchargent l'air dans les sacs aériens postérieurs à l'extrémité caudale de l'oiseau.

Chaque paire de dorso-ventrobronches est reliée par un grand nombre de capillaires d'air microscopiques parallèles (ou parabronches) où se produisent les échanges gazeux (Fig. 16).

Lorsque l'oiseau inhale, l'air trachéal circule à travers les bronches intrapulmonaires dans les sacs aériens postérieurs, ainsi que dans les dorsobronches, mais pas dans les ventrobronches (Fig. 18).

Cela est dû à l'architecture bronchique qui dirige l'air inhalé loin des ouvertures des ventrobronches, dans le prolongement de la bronche intrapulmonaire vers les dorsobronches et les sacs aériens postérieurs.

Depuis les dorsobronches, l'air inhalé s'écoule à travers les parabronches (et donc l'échangeur de gaz) vers les ventrobronches d'où l'air ne peut s'échapper que dans les sacs aériens antérieurs en expansion.

Ainsi, pendant l'inhalation, les sacs aériens postérieur et antérieur se dilatent, les sacs aériens postérieurs se remplissant d'air frais inhalé, tandis que les sacs aériens antérieurs se remplissent d'air "usé" (pauvre en oxygène) qui vient de traverser les poumons.

Pendant l'expiration, la pression dans les sacs aériens postérieurs (qui étaient remplis d'air frais pendant l'inspiration) augmente en raison de la contraction du muscle oblique décrite ci-dessus.

L'aérodynamique des ouvertures d'interconnexion des sacs aériens postérieurs vers les dorsobronches et les bronches intrapulmonaires garantit que l'air quitte ces sacs en direction des poumons (via les dorsobronches), plutôt que de retourner dans les bronches intrapulmonaires (Fig. 18).

Depuis les dorsobronches, l'air frais des sacs aériens postérieurs traverse les parabronches (dans la même direction que celle qui s'est produite lors de l'inhalation) dans les ventrobronches.

Les passages d'air reliant les ventrobronches et les sacs aériens antérieurs aux bronches intrapulmonaires dirigent l'air "usé", pauvre en oxygène de ces deux organes vers la trachée d'où il s'échappe vers l'extérieur.

L'air oxygéné circule donc constamment (pendant tout le cycle respiratoire) dans une seule direction à travers les parabronches. Le flux sanguin à travers le poumon de l'oiseau est perpendiculaire au flux d'air à travers les parabronches, formant un système d'échange de flux à contre-courant (Fig. 19).

La pression partielle d'oxygène dans les parabronches diminue le long de leur longueur à mesure que l'O2 se diffuse dans le sang.

Les capillaires sanguins quittant l'échangeur près de l'entrée du flux d'air absorbent plus d'O2 que les capillaires quittant près de l'extrémité de sortie des parabronches.

Lorsque le contenu de tous les capillaires se mélange, la pression partielle finale d'oxygène du sang veineux pulmonaire mixte est supérieure à celle de l'air expiré, mais est néanmoins inférieure à la moitié de celle de l'air inhalé, obtenant ainsi à peu près la même pression partielle de sang artériel systémique. pression d'oxygène comme le font les mammifères avec leurs poumons de type soufflet.

Par rapport aux voies respiratoires des mammifères, le volume de l'espace mort chez un oiseau est, en moyenne, 4,5 fois supérieur à celui des mammifères de même taille.

Les oiseaux à long cou auront inévitablement de longues trachées et doivent donc respirer plus profondément que les mammifères pour tenir compte de leurs plus grands volumes d'espace mort.

Chez certains oiseaux (par exemple le cygne chanteur, Cygnus cygnus, la spatule blanche, Platalea leucorodia, la grue blanche, Grus americana, et le hocco casqué, Pauxi pauxi), la trachée, dont certaines grues peuvent mesurer 1,5 m de long, est enroulée vers l'arrière et dans le corps, augmentant considérablement la ventilation de l'espace mort.

Le but de cette fonctionnalité extraordinaire est inconnu.


== Reptiles ==


La structure anatomique des poumons est moins complexe chez les reptiles que chez les mammifères, les reptiles n'ayant pas la très vaste structure arborescente des voies respiratoires que l'on trouve dans les poumons des mammifères.

Cependant, les échanges gazeux chez les reptiles se produisent toujours dans les alvéoles.

Les reptiles ne possèdent pas de diaphragme.

Ainsi, la respiration se produit via une modification du volume de la cavité corporelle qui est contrôlée par la contraction des muscles intercostaux chez tous les reptiles à l'exception des tortues.

Chez les tortues, la contraction de paires spécifiques de muscles du flanc régit l'inspiration et l'expiration.


== Amphibiens ==


Les poumons et la peau servent d'organes respiratoires chez les amphibiens.

La ventilation des poumons chez les amphibiens repose sur une ventilation à pression positive.

Les muscles abaissent le plancher de la cavité buccale, l'élargissent et aspirent l'air par les narines dans la cavité buccale.

Avec les narines et la bouche fermées, le plancher de la cavité buccale est alors poussé vers le haut, ce qui force l'air à descendre la trachée dans les poumons.

La peau de ces animaux est hautement vascularisée et humide, l'humidité étant maintenue par la sécrétion de mucus de cellules spécialisées, et est impliquée dans la respiration cutanée.

Alors que les poumons sont des organes primaires pour l'échange de gaz entre le sang et l'air ambiant (lorsqu'ils sont hors de l'eau), les propriétés uniques de la peau favorisent un échange de gaz rapide lorsque les amphibiens sont immergés dans de l'eau riche en oxygène.
Certains amphibiens ont des branchies, soit dans les premiers stades de leur développement (par exemple les têtards de grenouilles), tandis que d'autres les conservent à l'âge adulte (par exemple certaines salamandres).


== Poisson ==


L'oxygène est peu soluble dans l'eau.

L'eau douce entièrement aérée ne contient donc que 8 à 10 ml d'O2/litre par rapport à la concentration d'O2 de 210 ml/litre dans l'air au niveau de la mer.

De plus, le coefficient de diffusion (c'est-à-dire la vitesse à laquelle une substance diffuse d'une région à forte concentration à une région à faible concentration, dans des conditions standard) des gaz respiratoires est généralement 10 000 plus rapide dans l'air que dans l'eau.

Ainsi l'oxygène, par exemple, a un coefficient de diffusion de 17,6 mm2/s dans l'air, mais de seulement 0,0021 mm2/s dans l'eau.

Les valeurs correspondantes pour le dioxyde de carbone sont de 16 mm2/s dans l'air et de 0,0016 mm2/s dans l'eau.

Cela signifie que lorsque l'oxygène est prélevé de l'eau en contact avec un échangeur de gaz, il est remplacé considérablement plus lentement par l'oxygène des régions riches en oxygène à faible distance de l'échangeur que ce qui se serait produit dans l'air.

Les poissons ont développé des branchies pour faire face à ces problèmes.

Les branchies sont des organes spécialisés contenant des filaments, qui se divisent ensuite en lamelles.

Les lamelles contiennent un réseau capillaire dense à parois minces qui expose une grande surface d'échange de gaz aux très grands volumes d'eau qui les traversent. Les branchies utilisent un système d'échange à contre-courant qui augmente l'efficacité de l'absorption d'oxygène de l'eau.

L'eau fraîche oxygénée aspirée par la bouche est "pompée" sans interruption à travers les branchies dans un sens, tandis que le sang dans les lamelles s'écoule dans le sens opposé, créant le flux sanguin et hydrique à contre-courant (Fig. 22), sur lequel la survie du poisson dépend.L'eau est aspirée par la bouche en fermant l'opercule (couverture branchiale) et en élargissant la cavité buccale (Fig. 23).

Simultanément, les chambres branchiales s'élargissent, produisant une pression plus faible que dans la bouche, provoquant l'écoulement de l'eau sur les branchies.

La cavité buccale se contracte alors, induisant la fermeture des valves orales passives, empêchant ainsi le reflux de l'eau de la bouche (Fig. 23).

L'eau dans la bouche est, au contraire, forcée sur les branchies, tandis que les chambres branchiales se contractent en vidant l'eau qu'elles contiennent à travers les ouvertures operculaires (Fig. 23).

Le reflux dans la chambre branchiale pendant la phase d'inhalation est empêché par une membrane le long du bord ventropostérieur de l'opercule (schéma de gauche sur la Fig. 23).

Ainsi, la cavité buccale et les chambres branchiales agissent alternativement comme pompe d'aspiration et pompe à pression pour maintenir un flux constant d'eau sur les branchies dans une direction.

Étant donné que le sang dans les capillaires lamellaires s'écoule dans la direction opposée à celle de l'eau, le flux de sang et d'eau à contre-courant qui en résulte maintient des gradients de concentration abrupts pour l'oxygène et le dioxyde de carbone sur toute la longueur de chaque capillaire (diagramme inférieur de la Fig. 22) .

L'oxygène est donc capable de diffuser continuellement son gradient dans le sang, et le dioxyde de carbone de descendre son gradient dans l'eau.

Bien que les systèmes d'échange à contre-courant permettent théoriquement un transfert presque complet d'un gaz respiratoire d'un côté à l'autre de l'échangeur, chez les poissons moins de 80 % de l'oxygène de l'eau circulant sur les branchies est généralement transféré au sang. requins pélagiques, l'eau passe par la bouche et sur les branchies pendant qu'ils se déplacent, dans un processus connu sous le nom de "ventilation par bélier".

Au repos, la plupart des requins pompent de l'eau sur leurs branchies, comme le font la plupart des poissons osseux, pour s'assurer que l'eau oxygénée continue de couler sur leurs branchies.

Mais un petit nombre d'espèces ont perdu la capacité de pomper de l'eau à travers leurs branchies et doivent nager sans repos.

Ces espèces sont des ventilateurs de bélier obligatoires et s'asphyxieraient vraisemblablement si elles ne pouvaient pas bouger.

La ventilation obligatoire du bélier est également vraie pour certaines espèces de poissons pélagiques osseux. Il y a quelques poissons qui peuvent obtenir de l'oxygène pendant de brèves périodes de temps à partir de l'air avalé au-dessus de la surface de l'eau.

Ainsi, les poissons-poumons possèdent un ou deux poumons, et les poissons labyrinthes ont développé un "organe labyrinthe" spécial, qui caractérise ce sous-ordre de poissons.

L'organe du labyrinthe est un organe respiratoire accessoire suprabranchial très plié.

Il est formé par une expansion vascularisée de l'os épibranchial du premier arc branchial et est utilisé pour la respiration dans l'air.

Cet organe permet aux poissons labyrinthes d'absorber l'oxygène directement de l'air, au lieu de le prélever de l'eau dans laquelle ils résident grâce à l'utilisation de branchies.

L'organe du labyrinthe aide l'oxygène de l'air inhalé à être absorbé dans la circulation sanguine.

En conséquence, les poissons labyrinthes peuvent survivre pendant une courte période hors de l'eau, car ils peuvent inhaler l'air qui les entoure, à condition qu'ils restent humides.

Les poissons labyrinthes ne naissent pas avec des organes labyrinthiques fonctionnels.

Le développement de l'organe est progressif et la plupart des poissons labyrinthes juvéniles respirent entièrement avec leurs branchies et développent les organes du labyrinthe lorsqu'ils vieillissent.


== Invertébrés ==



=== Arthropodes ===


Certaines espèces de crabes utilisent un organe respiratoire appelé poumon branchiostegal.

Sa structure en branchies augmente la surface d'échange gazeux qui est plus adaptée pour prélever l'oxygène de l'air que de l'eau.

Certaines des plus petites araignées et acariens peuvent respirer simplement en échangeant du gaz à travers la surface du corps.

Les araignées, scorpions et autres arthropodes plus gros utilisent un poumon de livre primitif.


==== Insectes ====

La plupart des insectes respirent passivement à travers leurs spiracles (ouvertures spéciales dans l'exosquelette) et l'air atteint toutes les parties du corps au moyen d'une série de tubes de plus en plus petits appelés «trachées» lorsque leurs diamètres sont relativement grands, et «trachéoles» lorsque leur les diamètres sont très petits.

Les trachéoles entrent en contact avec des cellules individuelles dans tout le corps.

Ils sont partiellement remplis de liquide, qui peut être retiré des trachéoles individuelles lorsque les tissus, tels que les muscles, sont actifs et ont une forte demande en oxygène, rapprochant l'air des cellules actives.

Ceci est probablement provoqué par l'accumulation d'acide lactique dans les muscles actifs provoquant un gradient osmotique, déplaçant l'eau des trachéoles vers les cellules actives.

La diffusion des gaz est efficace sur de petites distances mais pas sur de plus grandes, c'est l'une des raisons pour lesquelles les insectes sont tous relativement petits.

Les insectes qui n'ont pas de spiracles et de trachées, comme certains collemboles, respirent directement à travers leur peau, également par diffusion de gaz. Le nombre de spiracles d'un insecte est variable selon les espèces, cependant, ils viennent toujours par paires, un de chaque côté du corps, et généralement une paire par segment.

Certains des Diplura en ont onze, avec quatre paires sur le thorax, mais dans la plupart des formes anciennes d'insectes, comme les libellules et les sauterelles, il y a deux spiracles thoraciques et huit abdominaux.

Cependant, dans la plupart des insectes restants, il y en a moins.

C'est au niveau des trachéoles que l'oxygène est délivré aux cellules pour la respiration.
On croyait autrefois que les insectes échangeaient continuellement des gaz avec l'environnement par simple diffusion de gaz dans le système trachéal.

Plus récemment, cependant, une grande variation dans les modèles de ventilation des insectes a été documentée et la respiration des insectes semble être très variable.

Certains petits insectes ne présentent pas de mouvements respiratoires continus et peuvent manquer de contrôle musculaire des spiracles.

D'autres, cependant, utilisent la contraction musculaire de l'abdomen avec la contraction et la relaxation coordonnées du spiracle pour générer des modèles d'échange de gaz cycliques et pour réduire la perte d'eau dans l'atmosphère.

La forme la plus extrême de ces schémas est appelée cycles d'échange gazeux discontinus.


=== Mollusques ===


Les mollusques possèdent généralement des branchies qui permettent les échanges gazeux entre le milieu aqueux et leurs systèmes circulatoires.

Ces animaux possèdent également un cœur qui pompe le sang contenant de l'hémocyanine comme molécule capturant l'oxygène.

Par conséquent, ce système respiratoire est similaire à celui des poissons vertébrés.

Le système respiratoire des gastéropodes peut comprendre soit des branchies, soit un poumon.


== Plantes ==


Les plantes utilisent du gaz carbonique dans le processus de photosynthèse et exhalent de l'oxygène gazeux comme déchet.

L'équation chimique de la photosynthèse est 6 CO2 (dioxyde de carbone) et 6 H2O (eau), ce qui en présence de lumière solaire donne du C6H12O6 (glucose) et 6 O2 (oxygène).

La photosynthèse utilise des électrons sur les atomes de carbone comme référentiel pour l'énergie obtenue à partir de la lumière du soleil.

La respiration est le contraire de la photosynthèse.

Il récupère l'énergie pour alimenter les réactions chimiques dans les cellules.

Ce faisant, les atomes de carbone et leurs électrons sont combinés avec de l'oxygène formant du CO2 qui est facilement éliminé à la fois des cellules et de l'organisme.

Les plantes utilisent les deux processus, la photosynthèse pour capter l'énergie et le métabolisme oxydatif pour l'utiliser.
La respiration des plantes est limitée par le processus de diffusion.

Les plantes absorbent le dioxyde de carbone à travers des trous, appelés stomates, qui peuvent s'ouvrir et se fermer sur la face inférieure de leurs feuilles et parfois sur d'autres parties de leur anatomie.

La plupart des plantes ont besoin d'oxygène pour les processus cataboliques (réactions de dégradation qui libèrent de l'énergie).

Mais la quantité d'O2 utilisée par heure est faible car ils ne sont pas impliqués dans des activités nécessitant des taux élevés de métabolisme aérobie.

Leur besoin en air est cependant très élevé car ils ont besoin de CO2 pour la photosynthèse, qui ne constitue que 0,04 % de l'air ambiant.

Ainsi, fabriquer 1 g de glucose nécessite l'élimination de tout le CO2 d'au moins 18,7 litres d'air au niveau de la mer.

Mais les inefficacités du processus photosynthétique entraînent l'utilisation de volumes d'air considérablement plus importants.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Respiratory_system
