

SCAPULA


In anatomy, the scapula (plural scapulae or scapulas), also known as the shoulder bone, shoulder blade, wing bone, speal bone or blade bone, is the bone that connects the humerus (upper arm bone) with the clavicle (collar bone). 

Like their connected bones, the scapulae are paired, with each scapula on either side of the body being roughly a mirror image of the other. 

The name derives from the Classical Latin word for trowel or small shovel, which it was thought to resemble.

In compound terms, the prefix omo- is used for the shoulder blade in medical terminology. 

This prefix is derived from ὦμος (ōmos), the Ancient Greek word for shoulder, and is cognate with the Latin (h)umerus, which in Latin signifies either the shoulder or the upper arm bone.

The scapula forms the back of the shoulder girdle. In humans, it is a flat bone, roughly triangular in shape, placed on a posterolateral aspect of the thoracic cage.


== Structure ==

The scapula is a wide, flat bone lying on the thoracic wall that provides an attachment for three groups of muscles: intrinsic, extrinsic, and stabilising and rotating muscles. 

The intrinsic muscles of the scapula include the muscles of the rotator cuff—the subscapularis, teres minor, supraspinatus, and infraspinatus. 

These muscles attach to the surface of the scapula and are responsible for the internal and external rotation of the shoulder joint, along with humeral abduction.

The extrinsic muscles include the biceps, triceps, and deltoid muscles and attach to the coracoid process and supraglenoid tubercle of the scapula, infraglenoid tubercle of the scapula, and spine of the scapula. 

These muscles are responsible for several actions of the glenohumeral joint.

The third group, which is mainly responsible for stabilization and rotation of the scapula, consists of the trapezius, serratus anterior, levator scapulae, and rhomboid muscles. 

These attach to the medial, superior, and inferior borders of the scapula.

The head, processes, and the thickened parts of the bone contain cancellous tissue; the rest consists of a thin layer of compact tissue.

The central part of the supraspinatus fossa and the upper part of the infraspinatous fossa, but especially the former, are usually so thin in humans as to be semitransparent; occasionally the bone is found wanting in this situation, and the adjacent muscles are separated only by fibrous tissue. 

The scapula has two surfaces, three borders, three angles, and three processes.


=== Surfaces ===

===Front or subscapular fossa===

The front of the scapula (also known as the costal or ventral surface) has a broad concavity called the subscapular fossa, to which the subscapularis muscle attaches. 

The medial two-thirds of the fossa have 3 longitudinal oblique ridges, and another thick ridge adjoins the lateral border; they run outward and upward. 

The ridges give attachment to the tendinous insertions, and the surfaces between them to the fleshy fibers, of the subscapularis muscle. 

The lateral third of the fossa is smooth and covered by the fibers of this muscle.

At the upper part of the fossa is a transverse depression, where the bone appears to be bent on itself along a line at right angles to and passing through the center of the glenoid cavity, forming a considerable angle, called the subscapular angle; this gives greater strength to the body of the bone by its arched form, while the summit of the arch serves to support the spine and acromion.

The costal surface superior of the scapula is the origin of 1st digitation for the serratus anterior origin.

===Back===

The back of the scapula (also called the dorsal or posterior surface) is arched from above downward, and is subdivided into two unequal parts by the spine of the scapula. 

The portion above the spine is called the supraspinous fossa, and that below it the infraspinous fossa. 

The two fossae are connected by the spinoglenoid notch, situated lateral to the root of the spine.

The supraspinous fossa, above the spine of scapula, is concave, smooth, and broader at its vertebral than at its humeral end; its medial two-thirds give origin to the Supraspinatus. 

At its lateral surface resides the spinoglenoid fossa which is situated by the medial margin of the glenoid. 

The spinoglenoid fossa houses the suprascpular canal which forms a connecting passage between the suprascapular notch and the spinoglenoid notch conveying the suprascapular nerve and vessels.

The infraspinous fossa is much larger than the preceding; toward its vertebral margin a shallow concavity is seen at its upper part; its center presents a prominent convexity, while near the axillary border is a deep groove which runs from the upper toward the lower part. 

The medial two-thirds of the fossa give origin to the Infraspinatus; the lateral third is covered by this muscle.

There is a ridge on the outer part of the back of the scapula. This runs from the lower part of the glenoid cavity, downward and backward to the vertebral border, about 2.5 cm above the inferior angle. 

Attached to the ridge is a fibrous septum, which separates the infraspinatus muscle from the Teres major and Teres minor muscles. 

The upper two-thirds of the surface between the ridge and the axillary border is narrow, and is crossed near its center by a groove for the scapular circumflex vessels; the Teres minor attaches here.

The broad and narrow portions above alluded to are separated by an oblique line, which runs from the axillary border, downward and backward, to meet the elevated ridge: 
    to it is attached a fibrous septum which separates the Teres muscles from each other.

Its lower third presents a broader, somewhat triangular surface, the inferior angle of the scapula, which gives origin to the Teres major, and over which the Latissimus dorsi glides; frequently the latter muscle takes origin by a few fibers from this part.

===Side===

The acromion forms the summit of the shoulder, and is a large, somewhat triangular or oblong process, flattened from behind forward, projecting at first laterally, and then curving forward and upward, so as to overhang the glenoid cavity.


=== Angles ===

There are 3 angles:

    -The superior angle of the scapula or medial angle, is covered by the trapezius muscle. 

This angle is formed by the junction of the superior and medial borders of the scapula. 

The superior angle is located at the approximate level of the second thoracic vertebra. 

The superior angle of the scapula is thin, smooth, rounded, and inclined somewhat lateralward, and gives attachment to a few fibers of the levator scapulae muscle.

    -The inferior angle of the scapula is the lowest part of the scapula and is covered by the latissimus dorsi muscle. 

It moves forwards round the chest when the arm is abducted. 

The inferior angle is formed by the union of the medial and lateral borders of the scapula. 

It is thick and rough and its posterior or back surface affords attachment to the teres major and often to a few fibers of the latissimus dorsi. 

The anatomical plane that passes vertically through the inferior angle is named the scapular line.

    -The lateral angle of the scapula or glenoid angle also known as the head of the scapula is the thickest part of the scapula. 
    
It is broad and bears the glenoid cavity on its articular surface which is directed forward, laterally and slightly upwards, and articulates with the head of the humerus. 

The inferior angle is broader below than above and its vertical diameter is the longest. 

The surface is covered with cartilage in the fresh state; and its margins, slightly raised, give attachment to a fibrocartilaginous structure, the glenoidal labrum, which deepens the cavity. 

At its apex is a slight elevation, the supraglenoid tuberosity, to which the long head of the biceps brachii is attached.

The anatomic neck of the scapula is the slightly constricted portion which surrounds the head and is more distinct below and behind than above and in front. 

The surgical neck of the scapula passes directly medial to the base of the coracoid process.


=== Borders ===

There are three borders of the scapula:

    -The superior border is the shortest and thinnest; it is concave, and extends from the superior angle to the base of the coracoid process. 

It is referred to as the cranial border in animals.

At its lateral part is a deep, semicircular notch, the scapular notch, formed partly by the base of the coracoid process. 

This notch is converted into a foramen by the superior transverse scapular ligament, and serves for the passage of the suprascapular nerve; sometimes the ligament is ossified.

The adjacent part of the superior border affords attachment to the omohyoideus.
		
		
    -The axillary border (or "lateral border") is the thickest of the three. 
    
It begins above at the lower margin of the glenoid cavity, and inclines obliquely downward and backward to the inferior angle. 

It is referred to as the caudal border in animals.

It begins above at the lower margin of the glenoid cavity, and inclines obliquely downward and backward to the inferior angle.

Immediately below the glenoid cavity is a rough impression, the infraglenoid tuberosity, about 2.5 cm (1 in). in length, which gives origin to the long head of the triceps brachii; in front of this is a longitudinal groove, which extends as far as the lower third of this border, and affords origin to part of the subscapularis.

The inferior third is thin and sharp, and serves for the attachment of a few fibers of the teres major behind, and of the subscapularis in front.
		
		
    -The medial border (also called the vertebral border or medial margin) is the longest of the three borders, and extends from the superior angle to the inferior angle. 

In animals it is referred to as the dorsal border.Four muscles attach to the medial border. Serratus anterior has a long attachment on the anterior lip. 

Three muscles insert along the posterior lip: 
    the levator scapulae (uppermost), rhomboid minor (middle), and to the rhomboid major (lower middle).		


=== Development ===

The scapula is ossified from 7 or more centers: one for the body, two for the coracoid process, two for the acromion, one for the vertebral border, and one for the inferior angle. 

Ossification of the body begins about the second month of fetal life, by an irregular quadrilateral plate of bone forming, immediately behind the glenoid cavity. 

This plate extends to form the chief part of the bone, the scapular spine growing up from its dorsal surface about the third month. 

Ossification starts as membranous ossification before birth. After birth, the cartilaginous components would undergo endochondral ossification. 

The larger part of the scapula undergoes membranous ossification. Some of the outer parts of the scapula are cartilaginous at birth, and would therefore undergo endochondral ossification.

At birth, a large part of the scapula is osseous, but the glenoid cavity, the coracoid process, the acromion, the vertebral border and the inferior angle are cartilaginous. 

From the 15th to the 18th month after birth, ossification takes place in the middle of the coracoid process, which as a rule becomes joined with the rest of the bone about the 15th year.

Between the 14th and 20th years, the remaining parts ossify in quick succession, and usually in the following order: first, in the root of the coracoid process, in the form of a broad scale; secondly, near the base of the acromion; thirdly, in the inferior angle and contiguous part of the vertebral border; fourthly, near the outer end of the acromion; fifthly, in the vertebral border.

The base of the acromion is formed by an extension from the spine; the two nuclei of the acromion unite, and then join with the extension from the spine. 

The upper third of the glenoid cavity is ossified from a separate center (sub coracoid), which appears between the 10th and 11th years and joins between the 16th and the 18th years. 

Further, an epiphysial plate appears for the lower part of the glenoid cavity, and the tip of the coracoid process frequently has a separate nucleus. 

These various epiphyses are joined to the bone by the 25th year.

Failure of bony union between the acromion and spine sometimes occurs (see os acromiale), the junction being effected by fibrous tissue, or by an imperfect articulation; in some cases of supposed fracture of the acromion with ligamentous union, it is probable that the detached segment was never united to the rest of the bone.

"In terms of comparative anatomy the human scapula represents two bones that have become fused together; the (dorsal) scapula proper and the (ventral) coracoid. 

The epiphyseal line across the glenoid cavity is the line of fusion. They are the counterparts of the ilium and ischium of the pelvic girdle."


== Function ==

The following muscles attach to the scapula:


=== Movements ===

Movements of the scapula are brought about by the scapular muscles. 

The scapula can perform six actions:

Elevation: upper trapezius and levator scapulae
Depression: lower trapezius
Retraction (adduction): rhomboids and middle trapezius
Protraction (abduction): serratus anterior
Upward rotation: upper and lower trapezius, serratus anterior
Downward rotation: rhomboids, Levator Scapulae, and Pec Minor


== Clinical significance ==


=== Scapular fractures ===

Because of its sturdy structure and protected location, fractures of the scapula are uncommon. When they do occur, they are an indication that severe chest trauma has occurred.
Scapular fractures involving the neck of the scapula have two patterns. 

One (rare) type of fracture is through the anatomical neck of the scapula. The other more common type of fracture is through the surgical neck of the scapula. 

The surgical neck exits medial to the coracoid process.An abnormally protruding inferior angle of the scapula is known as a winged scapula and can be caused by paralysis of the serratus anterior muscle. 

In this condition the sides of the scapula nearest the spine are positioned outward and backward. 

The appearance of the upper back is said to be wing-like. 

In addition, any condition causing weakness of the serratus anterior muscle may cause scapular "winging".


=== Impingement syndrome ===

The scapula plays an important role in shoulder impingement syndrome.Abnormal scapular function is called scapular dyskinesis. 

One action the scapula performs during a throwing or serving motion is elevation of the acromion process in order to avoid impingement of the rotator cuff tendons. 

If the scapula fails to properly elevate the acromion, impingement may occur during the cocking and acceleration phase of an overhead activity. 

The two muscles most commonly inhibited during this first part of an overhead motion are the serratus anterior and the lower trapezius. 

These two muscles act as a force couple within the glenohumeral joint to properly elevate the acromion process, and if a muscle imbalance exists, shoulder impingement may develop.


=== Etymology ===

==== Scapula/Scapulae ====

The name scapula as synonym of shoulder blade is of Latin origin. 

It is commonly used in medical English and is part of the current official Latin nomenclature, Terminologia Anatomica.

In classical Latin scapula is only used in its plural scapulae. 

Although some sources mention that scapulae is used to refer during Roman antiquity to the shoulders  or to the shoulder blades, others persist in that the Romans used scapulae only to refer to the back, in contrast to the pectus, the Latin name for breast  or chest.


==== Os latum scapularum and related ====

The Roman encyclopedist Aulus Cornelius Celsus who lived during the beginning of the era, also used scapulae to refer to the back. He used os latum scapularum to refer to the shoulder blade. 

This expressions can be translated as broad (Latin: latum) bone (Latin: os) of the back (Latin: scapularum).

A similar expression in ancient Greek can be seen in the writings of the Greek philosopher Aristoteles and in the writings of the Greek physician Galen. 

They both use the name ὠμοπλάτη to refer to the shoulder blade. 

This compound consists of ancient Greek ὦμος, shoulder  and πλάτη, blade  or flat or broad object. Πλάτη in its plural πλάται without ὦμο- was also used in ancient Greek to refer to the shoulder blades. 

In anatomic Latin, ὠμοπλάτη is Latinized as omoplata.The Latin word umerus is related to ὦμος. 

The Romans referred with umerus to what is now commonly known in English as the following 3 bones: humerus or the upper bone of the arm, the clavicle or the collarbone and the scapula or the shoulder blade. 

The spelling humerus is actually incorrect in classical Latin.Those three bones were referred to as the ossa (Latin: bones) umeri (Latin: of the umerus). 

Umerus was also used to refer specifically to the shoulder. 

This mirrors the use of ὦμος in ancient Greek as that could refer to the shoulder with the upper arm  or to the shoulder  alone.
Since Celsus, the os umeri could refer specifically to the upper bone of the arm. 

The 16th century anatomist Andreas Vesalius used humerus to refer to the clavicle. 

Besides the aforementioned os latum scapularum, Celsus used os latum umeri to refer to the shoulder blade. Similarly, Laurentius used the expression latitudo umeri (Latitudo = breadth, width ) to refer to the shoulder blade.


==== Pala ====

The Roman physician Caelius Aurelianus (5th century) used pala to refer to the shoulder blade. 

The name pala is normally used to refer to a spade in Latin and was therefore probably used by Caelius Aurelianus to describe the shoulder blade, as both exhibit a flat curvature.


==== Spathula/Σπάθη ====

During the Middle Ages spathula was used to refer to the shoulder blade. 

Spathula is a diminutive of spatha, with the latter originally meaning broad, two-edged sword without a point, broad, flat, wooden instrument for stirring any liquid, a spattle, spatula  or spathe of the palm tree  and its diminutive used in classical and late Latin for referring to a leg of pork  or a little palmbranch.

The English word spatula is actually derived from Latin spatula, an orthographic variant of spathula. Oddly enough, classical Latin non-diminutive spatha can be translated as English spatula, while its Latin diminutive spatula is not translated as English spatula.

Latin spatha is derived from ancient Greek σπάθη. Therefore, the form spathula is more akin to its origin than spatula. 

Ancient Greek σπάθη has a similar meaning as Latin spatha, as any broad blade, and can also refer to a spatula or to the broad blade of a sword., but also to the blade of an oar. 

The aforementioned πλάται for shoulder blades was also used for blades of an oar. Concordantly σπάθη was also used to refer to the shoulder blade.

The English word spade, as well as the Dutch equivalent spade  is cognate with σπάθη. Please notice, that the aforementioned term pala as applied by Roman physician Caelius Aurelianus, also means spade. 

Pala is probably related to the Latin verb pandere, to spread out, and to extend. 

This verb is thought to be derived from an earlier form spandere, with the root spa-. Σπάθη is actually derived from the similar root spē(i), that means to extend.

It seems that os latum scapularum, ὠμοπλάτη, πλάται, pala, spathula and σπάθη all refer to the same aspect of the shoulder blade, i.e. being a flat, broad blade, with the latter three words etymological related to each other.


==== Scapula after the Middle Ages ====

After the Middle Ages, the name scapula for shoulder blade became dominant. 

The word scapula can etymologically be explained by its relatedness to the ancient Greek verb σκάπτειν, to dig. 

This relatedness gives rise to several possible explanations.
First, the noun σκάπετος, trench, and the scapula related noun σκαφη, are both derived from this verb and might connect scapula to the notion of concavity. The name scapula then may be related to the concavity of the bone that exists due to its spine. The designation scapulae is additionally seen as synonym of ancient Greek συνωμία, the space between the shoulder blades, that is obviously concave. Συνωμία consists of σύν, together with, and ὦμος, shoulder.Second, scapula, due to its relatedness to σκάπτειν might have originally meant shovel. Similarly to the Latin use of pala (spade), a resemblance might be felt between the shape of a shovel and the shoulder blade. Alternatively, the shoulder blade might have been used originally for digging and shoveling.


==== Shoulder blade ====
Shoulder blade is colloquial name for this bone. Shoulder is cognate to German and Dutch equivalents Schulter and schouder. There are a few etymological explanations for shoulder. The first supposes that shoulder can be literally translated as that which shields or protects, as its possibly related to Icelandic skioldr, shield and skyla, to cover, to defend. The second explanation relates shoulder to ancient Greek σκέλος, leg. The latter spots the possible root skel-, meaning to bend, to curve. The third explanation links the root skel- to to cleave. This meaning could refer to the shape of the shoulder blade.


== In other animals ==

In fish, the scapular blade is a structure attached to the upper surface of the articulation of the pectoral fin, and is accompanied by a similar coracoid plate on the lower surface. 

Although sturdy in cartilagenous fish, both plates are generally small in most other fish, and may be partially cartilagenous, or consist of multiple bony elements.

In the early tetrapods, these two structures respectively became the scapula and a bone referred to as the procoracoid (commonly called simply the "coracoid", but not homologous with the mammalian structure of that name). 

In amphibians and reptiles (birds included), these two bones are distinct, but together form a single structure bearing many of the muscle attachments for the forelimb. 

In such animals, the scapula is usually a relatively simple plate, lacking the projections and spine that it possesses in mammals. 

However, the detailed structure of these bones varies considerably in living groups. 

For example, in frogs, the procoracoid bones may be braced together at the animal's underside to absorb the shock of landing, while in turtles, the combined structure forms a Y-shape in order to allow the scapula to retain a connection to the clavicle (which is part of the shell). 

In birds, the procoracoids help to brace the wing against the top of the sternum.In the fossil therapsids, a third bone, the true coracoid, formed just behind the procoracoid. 

The resulting three-boned structure is still seen in modern monotremes, but in all other living mammals, the procoracoid has disappeared, and the coracoid bone has fused with the scapula, to become the coracoid process. 

These changes are associated with the upright gait of mammals, compared with the more sprawling limb arrangement of reptiles and amphibians; the muscles formerly attached to the procoracoid are no longer required. 

The altered musculature is also responsible for the alteration in the shape of the rest of the scapula; the forward margin of the original bone became the spine and acromion, from which the main shelf of the shoulder blade arises as a new structure.


=== In dinosaurs ===

In dinosaurs the main bones of the pectoral girdle were the scapula (shoulder blade) and the coracoid, both of which directly articulated with the clavicle. 

The clavicle was present in saurischian dinosaurs but largely absent in ornithischian dinosaurs. 

The place on the scapula where it articulated with the humerus (upper bone of the forelimb) is called the glenoid. 

The scapula serves as the attachment site for a dinosaur's back and forelimb muscles.


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scapula
;;;ES;;;



ESCÁPULA


En anatomía, la escápula (scapulae o escápulas en plural), también conocida como el hueso del hombro, el omóplato, el hueso del ala, el hueso de la espada o el hueso de la cuchilla, es el hueso que conecta el húmero (hueso de la parte superior del brazo) con la clavícula (clavícula). .

Al igual que sus huesos conectados, las escápulas están emparejadas, y cada escápula a cada lado del cuerpo es aproximadamente una imagen especular de la otra.

El nombre deriva de la palabra latina clásica para llana o pala pequeña, a la que se pensaba que se parecía.

En términos compuestos, el prefijo omo- se usa para el omóplato en la terminología médica.

Este prefijo se deriva de ὦμος (ōmos), la palabra griega antigua para hombro, y está relacionado con el latín (h)umerus, que en latín significa el hombro o la parte superior del brazo.

La escápula forma la parte posterior de la cintura escapular. En los humanos, es un hueso plano, de forma aproximadamente triangular, colocado en una cara posterolateral de la caja torácica.


== Estructura ==

La escápula es un hueso ancho y plano que se encuentra en la pared torácica y sirve de inserción para tres grupos de músculos: intrínsecos, extrínsecos y estabilizadores y rotatorios.

Los músculos intrínsecos de la escápula incluyen los músculos del manguito de los rotadores: el subescapular, el redondo menor, el supraespinoso y el infraespinoso.

Estos músculos se adhieren a la superficie de la escápula y son responsables de la rotación interna y externa de la articulación del hombro, junto con la abducción humeral.

Los músculos extrínsecos incluyen los músculos bíceps, tríceps y deltoides y se insertan en la apófisis coracoides y el tubérculo supraglenoideo de la escápula, el tubérculo infraglenoideo de la escápula y la espina de la escápula.

Estos músculos son responsables de varias acciones de la articulación glenohumeral.

El tercer grupo, que es principalmente responsable de la estabilización y rotación de la escápula, consiste en los músculos trapecio, serrato anterior, elevador de la escápula y romboides.

Estos se unen a los bordes medial, superior e inferior de la escápula.

La cabeza, los procesos y las partes engrosadas del hueso contienen tejido esponjoso; el resto consiste en una fina capa de tejido compacto.

La parte central de la fosa supraespinosa y la parte superior de la fosa infraespinosa, pero especialmente la primera, suelen ser tan delgadas en humanos que son semitransparentes; ocasionalmente el hueso se encuentra deficiente en esta situación, y los músculos adyacentes están separados solo por tejido fibroso.

La escápula tiene dos superficies, tres bordes, tres ángulos y tres procesos.


=== Superficies ===

===Fosa anterior o subescapular===

La parte frontal de la escápula (también conocida como superficie costal o ventral) tiene una amplia concavidad llamada fosa subescapular, a la que se une el músculo subescapular.

Los dos tercios mediales de la fosa tienen 3 crestas oblicuas longitudinales, y otra cresta gruesa se une al borde lateral; corren hacia afuera y hacia arriba.

Las crestas se adhieren a las inserciones tendinosas y las superficies entre ellas a las fibras carnosas del músculo subescapular.

El tercio lateral de la fosa es liso y está cubierto por las fibras de este músculo.

En la parte superior de la fosa hay una depresión transversal, donde el hueso parece estar doblado sobre sí mismo a lo largo de una línea en ángulo recto y que pasa por el centro de la cavidad glenoidea, formando un ángulo considerable, llamado ángulo subescapular; esto le da mayor fuerza al cuerpo del hueso por su forma arqueada, mientras que la cumbre del arco sirve para sostener la columna vertebral y el acromion.

La superficie costal superior de la escápula es el origen de la 1ª digitación del origen del serrato anterior.

===Atrás===

La parte posterior de la escápula (también llamada superficie dorsal o posterior) está arqueada de arriba hacia abajo y se subdivide en dos partes desiguales por la espina de la escápula.

La porción por encima de la columna se llama fosa supraespinosa, y la que está debajo, fosa infraespinosa.

Las dos fosas están conectadas por la escotadura espinoglenoidea, situada lateralmente a la raíz de la columna vertebral.

La fosa supraespinosa, por encima de la espina de la escápula, es cóncava, lisa y más ancha en su extremo vertebral que en el humeral; sus dos tercios mediales dan origen al supraespinoso.

En su superficie lateral reside la fosa espinoglenoidea que está situada en el margen medial de la cavidad glenoidea.

La fosa espinoglenoidea alberga el canal supraescapular que forma un pasaje de conexión entre la escotadura supraescapular y la escotadura espinoglenoidea que transporta el nervio y los vasos supraescapulares.

La fosa infraespinosa es mucho mayor que la anterior; hacia su margen vertebral se ve una concavidad poco profunda en su parte superior; su centro presenta una convexidad prominente, mientras que cerca del borde axilar hay un surco profundo que corre desde la parte superior hacia la inferior.

Los dos tercios mediales de la fosa dan origen al infraespinoso; el tercio lateral está cubierto por este músculo.

Hay una cresta en la parte exterior de la parte posterior de la escápula. Va desde la parte inferior de la cavidad glenoidea, hacia abajo y hacia atrás hasta el borde vertebral, unos 2,5 cm por encima del ángulo inferior.

Unido a la cresta hay un tabique fibroso que separa el músculo infraespinoso de los músculos redondo mayor y redondo menor.

Los dos tercios superiores de la superficie entre la cresta y el borde axilar son estrechos y están atravesados ​​cerca de su centro por un surco para los vasos circunflejos escapulares; el Teres menor se adjunta aquí.

Las porciones ancha y angosta a las que se alude anteriormente están separadas por una línea oblicua, que va desde el borde axilar, hacia abajo y hacia atrás, para encontrarse con la cresta elevada:
a él se adjunta un tabique fibroso que separa los músculos redondos entre sí.

Su tercio inferior presenta una superficie más ancha, algo triangular, el ángulo inferior de la escápula, que da origen al redondo mayor, y sobre el que se desliza el dorsal ancho; con frecuencia este último músculo tiene su origen en unas pocas fibras de esta parte.

===Lado===

El acromion forma la cima del hombro y es un proceso grande, algo triangular u oblongo, aplanado desde atrás hacia adelante, proyectándose al principio lateralmente y luego curvándose hacia adelante y hacia arriba, para sobresalir por encima de la cavidad glenoidea.


=== Ángulos ===

Hay 3 ángulos:

-El ángulo superior de la escápula o ángulo medial, está cubierto por el músculo trapecio.

Este ángulo está formado por la unión de los bordes superior y medial de la escápula.

El ángulo superior se encuentra aproximadamente al nivel de la segunda vértebra torácica.

El ángulo superior de la escápula es delgado, liso, redondeado y algo inclinado hacia los lados, y se une a unas pocas fibras del músculo elevador de la escápula.

-El ángulo inferior de la escápula es la parte más baja de la escápula y está cubierto por el músculo dorsal ancho.

Se mueve hacia adelante alrededor del pecho cuando el brazo está abducido.

El ángulo inferior está formado por la unión de los bordes medial y lateral de la escápula.

Es grueso y áspero y su superficie posterior o posterior permite la unión al redondo mayor y, a menudo, a unas pocas fibras del dorsal ancho.

El plano anatómico que pasa verticalmente por el ángulo inferior se denomina línea escapular.

-El ángulo lateral de la escápula o ángulo glenoideo también conocido como la cabeza de la escápula es la parte más gruesa de la escápula.
 
Es ancho y lleva la cavidad glenoidea en su superficie articular que se dirige hacia delante, lateralmente y ligeramente hacia arriba, y se articula con la cabeza del húmero.

El ángulo inferior es más ancho por debajo que por arriba y su diámetro vertical es el más largo.

La superficie está cubierta de cartílago en estado fresco; y sus márgenes, ligeramente elevados, dan unión a una estructura fibrocartilaginosa, el labrum glenoideo, que profundiza la cavidad.

En su vértice hay una ligera elevación, la tuberosidad supraglenoidea, a la que se une la cabeza larga del bíceps braquial.

El cuello anatómico de la escápula es la porción ligeramente constreñida que rodea la cabeza y se distingue más por debajo y por detrás que por arriba y por delante.

El cuello quirúrgico de la escápula pasa directamente medial a la base de la apófisis coracoides.


=== Fronteras ===

Hay tres bordes de la escápula:

-El borde superior es el más corto y delgado; es cóncava y se extiende desde el ángulo superior hasta la base de la apófisis coracoides.

Se le conoce como el borde craneal en los animales.

En su parte lateral hay una profunda muesca semicircular, la muesca escapular, formada en parte por la base de la apófisis coracoides.

Esta muesca es convertida en foramen por el ligamento escapular transverso superior, y sirve para el paso del nervio supraescapular; a veces el ligamento está osificado.

La parte adyacente del borde superior permite la unión al omohyoideus.
 
 
-El borde axilar (o "borde lateral") es el más grueso de los tres.
 
Comienza arriba en el margen inferior de la cavidad glenoidea y se inclina oblicuamente hacia abajo y hacia atrás hasta el ángulo inferior.

Se le conoce como el borde caudal en los animales.

Comienza arriba en el margen inferior de la cavidad glenoidea y se inclina oblicuamente hacia abajo y hacia atrás hasta el ángulo inferior.

Inmediatamente debajo de la cavidad glenoidea hay una impresión aproximada, la tuberosidad infraglenoidea, de unos 2,5 cm (1 pulgada). de longitud, que da origen a la cabeza larga del tríceps braquial; delante de este hay un surco longitudinal, que se extiende hasta el tercio inferior de este borde, y da origen a parte del subescapular.

El tercio inferior es delgado y afilado, y sirve para la unión de algunas fibras del redondo mayor por detrás y del subescapular por delante.
 
 
-El borde medial (también llamado borde vertebral o margen medial) es el más largo de los tres bordes y se extiende desde el ángulo superior hasta el ángulo inferior.

En los animales se le conoce como borde dorsal. Cuatro músculos se unen al borde medial. Serratus anterior tiene un accesorio largo en el labio anterior.

Tres músculos se insertan a lo largo del labio posterior:
el elevador de la escápula (superior), el romboide menor (centro) y el romboide mayor (centro inferior).


=== Desarrollo ===

La escápula se osifica a partir de siete o más centros: uno para el cuerpo, dos para la apófisis coracoides, dos para el acromion, uno para el borde vertebral y uno para el ángulo inferior.

La osificación del cuerpo comienza alrededor del segundo mes de vida fetal, mediante la formación de una placa de hueso cuadrilátera irregular, inmediatamente detrás de la cavidad glenoidea.

Esta placa se extiende para formar la parte principal del hueso, la espina escapular crece desde su superficie dorsal alrededor del tercer mes.

La osificación comienza como osificación membranosa antes del nacimiento. Después del nacimiento, los componentes cartilaginosos sufrirían una osificación endocondral.

La mayor parte de la escápula sufre osificación membranosa. Algunas de las partes externas de la escápula son cartilaginosas al nacer y, por lo tanto, sufrirán una osificación endocondral.

Al nacer, gran parte de la escápula es ósea, pero la cavidad glenoidea, la apófisis coracoides, el acromion, el borde vertebral y el ángulo inferior son cartilaginosos.

Del 15 al 18 mes después del nacimiento, la osificación tiene lugar en medio del proceso coracoides, que por lo general se une con el resto del hueso alrededor del año 15.

Entre los 14 y los 20 años, las partes restantes se osifican en rápida sucesión, y generalmente en el siguiente orden: primero, en la raíz del proceso coracoides, en forma de una escama ancha; en segundo lugar, cerca de la base del acromion; tercero, en el ángulo inferior y parte contigua del borde vertebral; en cuarto lugar, cerca del extremo exterior del acromion; quinto, en el borde vertebral.

La base del acromion está formada por una extensión de la columna vertebral; los dos núcleos del acromion se unen y luego se unen con la extensión de la columna vertebral.

El tercio superior de la cavidad glenoidea se osifica a partir de un centro separado (subcoracoideo), que aparece entre los 10 y los 11 años y se une entre los 16 y los 18 años.

Además, aparece una placa epifisaria para la parte inferior de la cavidad glenoidea y la punta de la apófisis coracoides suele tener un núcleo separado.

Estas diversas epífisis se unen al hueso a los 25 años.

A veces falla la unión ósea entre el acromion y la columna vertebral (ver os acromiale), siendo la unión efectuada por tejido fibroso o por una articulación imperfecta; en algunos casos de supuesta fractura del acromion con unión ligamentosa, es probable que el segmento desprendido nunca se uniera al resto del hueso.

"En términos de anatomía comparativa, la escápula humana representa dos huesos que se han fusionado; la escápula (dorsal) propiamente dicha y la coracoides (ventral).

La línea epifisaria que atraviesa la cavidad glenoidea es la línea de fusión. Son las contrapartes del ilion y el isquion de la cintura pélvica".


== Función ==

Los siguientes músculos se unen a la escápula:


=== Movimientos ===

Los músculos escapulares provocan los movimientos de la escápula.

La escápula puede realizar seis acciones:

Elevación: trapecio superior y elevador de la escápula
Depresión: trapecio inferior
Retracción (aducción): romboides y trapecio medio
Protracción (abducción): serrato anterior
Rotación hacia arriba: trapecio superior e inferior, serrato anterior
Rotación hacia abajo: romboides, elevador de la escápula y pectoral menor


== Importancia clínica ==


=== Fracturas escapulares ===

Debido a su estructura robusta y ubicación protegida, las fracturas de la escápula son poco comunes. Cuando ocurren, son una indicación de que se ha producido un traumatismo torácico grave.
Las fracturas escapulares que involucran el cuello de la escápula tienen dos patrones.

Un tipo (raro) de fractura es a través del cuello anatómico de la escápula. El otro tipo de fractura más común es a través del cuello quirúrgico de la escápula.

El cuello quirúrgico sale medial al proceso coracoides. Un ángulo inferior de la escápula que sobresale anormalmente se conoce como escápula alada y puede ser causado por parálisis del músculo serrato anterior.

En esta condición, los lados de la escápula más cercanos a la columna vertebral están colocados hacia afuera y hacia atrás.

Se dice que la apariencia de la parte superior de la espalda es como un ala.

Además, cualquier afección que provoque debilidad del músculo serrato anterior puede causar "alabeo" escapular.


=== Síndrome de pinzamiento ===

La escápula juega un papel importante en el síndrome de pinzamiento del hombro. La función escapular anormal se llama discinesia escapular.

Una acción que realiza la escápula durante un movimiento de lanzamiento o servicio es la elevación del proceso del acromion para evitar el pinzamiento de los tendones del manguito de los rotadores.

Si la escápula no logra elevar adecuadamente el acromion, puede ocurrir un pinzamiento durante la fase de aceleración y preparación de una actividad por encima de la cabeza.

Los dos músculos que se inhiben con mayor frecuencia durante esta primera parte de un movimiento por encima de la cabeza son el serrato anterior y el trapecio inferior.

Estos dos músculos actúan como un par de fuerzas dentro de la articulación glenohumeral para elevar adecuadamente el proceso del acromion y, si existe un desequilibrio muscular, se puede desarrollar un pinzamiento del hombro.


=== Etimología ===

==== Escápula/Escápulas ====

El nombre omóplato como sinónimo de omóplato es de origen latino.

Se usa comúnmente en inglés médico y es parte de la nomenclatura latina oficial actual, Terminologia Anatomica.

En latín clásico, scapula solo se usa en su plural scapulae.

Aunque algunas fuentes mencionan que scapulae se usaba en la antigüedad romana para referirse a los hombros o a los omóplatos, otras insisten en que los romanos usaban scapulae solo para referirse a la espalda, en contraposición al pectus, nombre en latín de mama o pecho. .


==== Os latum scapularum y relacionados ====

El enciclopedista romano Aulus Cornelius Celsus, que vivió durante el comienzo de la era, también usó scapulae para referirse a la espalda. Usó os latum scapularum para referirse al omóplato.

Esta expresión se puede traducir como hueso ancho (latín: latum) (latín: os) de la espalda (latín: scapularum).

Una expresión similar en griego antiguo se puede ver en los escritos del filósofo griego Aristóteles y en los escritos del médico griego Galeno.

Ambos usan el nombre ὠμοπλάτη para referirse al omóplato.

Este compuesto consta del griego antiguo ὦμος, hombro y πλάτη, hoja u objeto plano o ancho. Πλάτη en su plural πλάται sin ὦμο- también se usaba en griego antiguo para referirse a los omóplatos.

En latín anatómico, ὠμοπλάτη se latiniza como omoplata. La palabra latina umerus está relacionada con ὦμος.

Los romanos se referían con umerus a lo que ahora se conoce comúnmente en inglés como los siguientes 3 huesos: húmero o el hueso superior del brazo, la clavícula o la clavícula y la escápula o el omóplato.

La ortografía húmero es en realidad incorrecta en latín clásico. Esos tres huesos se denominaron ossa (latín: huesos) umeri (latín: del úmero).

Umerus también se utilizó para referirse específicamente al hombro.

Esto refleja el uso de ὦμος en griego antiguo, ya que podría referirse al hombro con la parte superior del brazo o solo al hombro.
Desde Celsus, el os umeri podría referirse específicamente al hueso superior del brazo.

El anatomista del siglo XVI Andreas Vesalius usó húmero para referirse a la clavícula.

Además del ya mencionado os latum scapularum, Celso usó os latum umeri para referirse al omóplato. De manera similar, Laurentius usó la expresión latitudo umeri (Latitudo = ancho, ancho) para referirse al omóplato.


==== Pala ====

El médico romano Caelius Aurelianus (siglo V) usó pala para referirse al omóplato.

El nombre pala se usa normalmente para referirse a una pala en latín y, por lo tanto, Caelius Aurelianus probablemente lo usó para describir el omóplato, ya que ambos exhiben una curvatura plana.


==== Espátula/Σπάθη ====

Durante la Edad Media se utilizó la espátula para referirse al omóplato.

Spathula es un diminutivo de spatha, y este último originalmente significa espada ancha de dos filos sin punta, instrumento de madera ancho y plano para remover cualquier líquido, una espátula, espátula o espata de la palmera y su diminutivo utilizado en clásico y Latín tardío para referirse a una pierna de cerdo o una pequeña palmera.

La palabra inglesa spatula en realidad se deriva del latín spatula, una variante ortográfica de espátula. Por extraño que parezca, el latín clásico no diminutivo spatha se puede traducir como espátula en inglés, mientras que su diminutivo en latín espátula no se traduce como espátula en inglés.

El latín spatha se deriva del griego antiguo σπάθη. Por tanto, la forma espátula es más afín a su origen que espátula.

El griego antiguo σπάθη tiene un significado similar al latín spatha, como cualquier hoja ancha, y también puede referirse a una espátula o a la hoja ancha de una espada, pero también a la hoja de un remo.

El πλάται antes mencionado para los omóplatos también se usó para las palas de un remo. En concordancia, σπάθη también se usó para referirse al omóplato.

La palabra inglesa spade, así como el equivalente holandés spade, está relacionada con σπάθη. Tenga en cuenta que el término pala antes mencionado, tal como lo aplica el médico romano Caelius Aurelianus, también significa espada.

Pala probablemente esté relacionado con el verbo latino pandere, esparcir y extender.

Se cree que este verbo se deriva de una forma anterior spandere, con la raíz spa-. Σπάθη en realidad se deriva de la raíz similar spē(i), que significa extender.

Parece que os latum scapularum, ὠμοπλάτη, πλάται, pala, spathula y σπάθη se refieren todos al mismo aspecto del omóplato, es decir, que es un omóplato plano y ancho, con las tres últimas palabras etimológicamente relacionadas entre sí.


==== Omóplato después de la Edad Media ====

Después de la Edad Media, el nombre de omóplato para el omóplato se volvió dominante.

La palabra scapula puede explicarse etimológicamente por su relación con el antiguo verbo griego σκάπτειν, cavar.

Esta relación da lugar a varias explicaciones posibles.
Primero, el sustantivo σκάπετος, trinchera, y el sustantivo relacionado con la escápula σκαφη, se derivan de este verbo y podrían conectar la escápula con la noción de concavidad. El nombre omóplato entonces puede estar relacionado con la concavidad del hueso que existe debido a su espina dorsal. La designación scapulae también se considera sinónimo del griego antiguo συνωμία, el espacio entre los omóplatos, que obviamente es cóncavo. Συνωμία consiste en σύν, junto con, y ὦμος, hombro. En segundo lugar, la escápula, debido a su relación con σκάπτειν, podría haber significado originalmente pala. De manera similar al uso latino de pala (pala), se puede sentir una semejanza entre la forma de una pala y el omóplato. Alternativamente, el omóplato podría haber sido usado originalmente para cavar y palear.


==== Omóplato ====
El omóplato es el nombre coloquial de este hueso. Hombro es afín a los equivalentes alemanes y holandeses Schulter y schouder. Hay algunas explicaciones etimológicas para el hombro. El primero supone que hombro puede traducirse literalmente como aquello que escuda o protege, ya que posiblemente esté relacionado con el islandés skioldr, escudo y skyla, cubrir, defender. La segunda explicación relaciona el hombro con el griego antiguo σκέλος, pierna. Este último señala la posible raíz skel-, que significa doblar, curvar. La tercera explicación vincula el esqueleto de la raíz con la escisión. Este significado podría referirse a la forma del omóplato.


== En otros animales ==

En los peces, la lámina escapular es una estructura adherida a la superficie superior de la articulación de la aleta pectoral, y está acompañada por una placa coracoides similar en la superficie inferior.

Aunque son resistentes en los peces cartilaginosos, ambas placas son generalmente pequeñas en la mayoría de los otros peces y pueden ser parcialmente cartilaginosas o consistir en múltiples elementos óseos.

En los primeros tetrápodos, estas dos estructuras se convirtieron respectivamente en la escápula y un hueso denominado procoracoide (comúnmente llamado simplemente "coracoide", pero no homólogo con la estructura de mamíferos de ese nombre).

En anfibios y reptiles (aves incluidas), estos dos huesos son distintos, pero juntos forman una sola estructura que soporta muchas de las inserciones musculares de la extremidad anterior.

En tales animales, la escápula suele ser una placa relativamente simple, que carece de las proyecciones y la columna vertebral que posee en los mamíferos.

Sin embargo, la estructura detallada de estos huesos varía considerablemente en los grupos vivos.

Por ejemplo, en las ranas, los huesos procoracoideos se pueden unir en la parte inferior del animal para absorber el impacto del aterrizaje, mientras que en las tortugas, la estructura combinada forma una Y para permitir que la escápula mantenga una conexión con la clavícula ( que es parte de la concha).

En las aves, los procoracoideos ayudan a sujetar el ala contra la parte superior del esternón. En los terápsidos fósiles, se formó un tercer hueso, el verdadero coracoides, justo detrás del procoracoideo.

La estructura de tres huesos resultante todavía se ve en los monotremas modernos, pero en todos los demás mamíferos vivos, el procoracoide ha desaparecido y el hueso coracoides se ha fusionado con la escápula para convertirse en el proceso coracoides.

Estos cambios están asociados con la marcha erguida de los mamíferos, en comparación con la disposición de las extremidades más extendida de los reptiles y anfibios; los músculos que antes estaban unidos al procoracoide ya no son necesarios.

La musculatura alterada también es responsable de la alteración en la forma del resto de la escápula; el margen anterior del hueso original se convirtió en la columna vertebral y el acromion, de los cuales surge la plataforma principal del omóplato como una nueva estructura.


=== En dinosaurios ===

En los dinosaurios, los huesos principales de la cintura pectoral eran la escápula (omóplato) y la coracoides, ambos directamente articulados con la clavícula.

La clavícula estaba presente en los dinosaurios saurisquios pero en gran parte ausente en los dinosaurios ornitisquios.

El lugar en la escápula donde se articula con el húmero (hueso superior de la extremidad anterior) se llama glenoideo.

La escápula sirve como sitio de unión para los músculos de la espalda y las extremidades anteriores de un dinosaurio.


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Escápula

;;;PT;;;



OMOPLATA


Em anatomia, a escápula (plural escápulas ou escápulas), também conhecida como osso do ombro, omoplata, osso da asa, osso speal ou osso da lâmina, é o osso que conecta o úmero (osso do braço) com a clavícula (clavícula) .

Como seus ossos conectados, as escápulas são emparelhadas, com cada escápula de cada lado do corpo sendo aproximadamente uma imagem espelhada da outra.

O nome deriva da palavra latina clássica para espátula ou pá pequena, com a qual se pensava que se assemelhava.

Em termos compostos, o prefixo omo- é usado para a escápula na terminologia médica.

Este prefixo é derivado de ὦμος (ōmos), a palavra grega antiga para ombro, e é cognato com o latim (h)umerus, que em latim significa o ombro ou o osso do braço.

A escápula forma a parte de trás da cintura escapular. Em humanos, é um osso plano, de formato aproximadamente triangular, colocado na face posterolateral da caixa torácica.


== Estrutura ==

A escápula é um osso largo e plano situado na parede torácica que fornece uma fixação para três grupos de músculos: músculos intrínsecos, extrínsecos e estabilizadores e rotatórios.

Os músculos intrínsecos da escápula incluem os músculos do manguito rotador – o subescapular, redondo menor, supraespinal e infraespinal.

Esses músculos se ligam à superfície da escápula e são responsáveis ​​pela rotação interna e externa da articulação do ombro, juntamente com a abdução do úmero.

Os músculos extrínsecos incluem os músculos bíceps, tríceps e deltóide e se inserem no processo coracóide e tubérculo supraglenoidal da escápula, tubérculo infraglenóide da escápula e espinha da escápula.

Esses músculos são responsáveis ​​por diversas ações da articulação glenoumeral.

O terceiro grupo, responsável principalmente pela estabilização e rotação da escápula, consiste nos músculos trapézio, serrátil anterior, elevador da escápula e rombóide.

Estes se ligam às bordas medial, superior e inferior da escápula.

A cabeça, os processos e as partes espessas do osso contêm tecido esponjoso; o resto consiste em uma fina camada de tecido compacto.

A parte central da fossa supraespinhal e a parte superior da fossa infraespinhal, mas especialmente a primeira, são geralmente tão finas em humanos que são semitransparentes; ocasionalmente, o osso é encontrado em falta nessa situação, e os músculos adjacentes são separados apenas por tecido fibroso.

A escápula tem duas superfícies, três bordas, três ângulos e três processos.


=== Superfícies ===

=== Fossa frontal ou subescapular ===

A frente da escápula (também conhecida como superfície costal ou ventral) tem uma ampla concavidade chamada fossa subescapular, à qual o músculo subescapular se insere.

Os dois terços mediais da fossa têm 3 cristas oblíquas longitudinais, e outra crista espessa adjacente à borda lateral; eles correm para fora e para cima.

As cristas dão fixação às inserções tendíneas e as superfícies entre elas às fibras carnudas do músculo subescapular.

O terço lateral da fossa é liso e recoberto pelas fibras desse músculo.

Na parte superior da fossa há uma depressão transversal, onde o osso parece estar dobrado sobre si mesmo ao longo de uma linha em ângulo reto e passando pelo centro da cavidade glenoidal, formando um ângulo considerável, chamado ângulo subescapular; isso dá maior resistência ao corpo do osso por sua forma arqueada, enquanto o cume do arco serve para sustentar a coluna e o acrômio.

A superfície costal superior da escápula é a origem da 1ª digitação para a origem do serrátil anterior.

===Voltar===

A parte de trás da escápula (também chamada de superfície dorsal ou posterior) é arqueada de cima para baixo e é subdividida em duas partes desiguais pela espinha da escápula.

A porção acima da coluna é chamada de fossa supraespinhosa, e aquela abaixo dela, fossa infraespinhosa.

As duas fossas são conectadas pela incisura espinoglenoide, situada lateralmente à raiz da coluna.

A fossa supraespinhosa, acima da espinha da escápula, é côncava, lisa e mais larga em sua extremidade vertebral do que em sua extremidade umeral; seus dois terços mediais dão origem ao Supra-espinhoso.

Na sua superfície lateral reside a fossa espinoglenóide que está situada na margem medial da glenóide.

A fossa espinoglenoidea abriga o canal supraescapular, que forma uma passagem de conexão entre a incisura supraescapular e a incisura espinoglenoidea, conduzindo o nervo e os vasos supraescapulares.

A fossa infraespinhosa é muito maior que a anterior; em direção à sua margem vertebral observa-se uma concavidade rasa em sua parte superior; seu centro apresenta uma convexidade proeminente, enquanto próximo à borda axilar há um sulco profundo que vai da parte superior para a inferior.

Os dois terços mediais da fossa dão origem ao infra-espinhoso; o terço lateral é coberto por este músculo.

Há uma crista na parte externa da parte de trás da escápula. Este vai da parte inferior da cavidade glenoidal, para baixo e para trás até a borda vertebral, cerca de 2,5 cm acima do ângulo inferior.

Anexado à crista está um septo fibroso, que separa o músculo infraespinal dos músculos redondo maior e redondo menor.

Os dois terços superiores da superfície entre a crista e a borda axilar são estreitos e são cruzados próximo ao seu centro por um sulco para os vasos circunflexos da escápula; a Teres menor anexa aqui.

As porções larga e estreita acima aludidas são separadas por uma linha oblíqua, que corre da borda axilar, para baixo e para trás, para encontrar a crista elevada:
a ele está ligado um septo fibroso que separa os músculos redondos uns dos outros.

Seu terço inferior apresenta uma superfície mais larga, um tanto triangular, o ângulo inferior da escápula, que dá origem ao redondo maior, e sobre o qual desliza o grande dorsal; freqüentemente este último músculo se origina por algumas fibras desta parte.

=== Lateral===

O acrômio forma o ápice do ombro e é um processo grande, um tanto triangular ou oblongo, achatado de trás para a frente, projetando-se primeiro lateralmente e depois curvando-se para frente e para cima, de modo a sobrepor a cavidade glenoidal.


=== Ângulos ===

Existem 3 ângulos:

-O ângulo superior da escápula ou ângulo medial, é coberto pelo músculo trapézio.

Este ângulo é formado pela junção das bordas superior e medial da escápula.

O ângulo superior está localizado no nível aproximado da segunda vértebra torácica.

O ângulo superior da escápula é fino, liso, arredondado e ligeiramente inclinado lateralmente, e dá fixação a algumas fibras do músculo elevador da escápula.

-O ângulo inferior da escápula é a parte mais baixa da escápula e é coberto pelo músculo grande dorsal.

Ele se move para frente em volta do peito quando o braço é abduzido.

O ângulo inferior é formado pela união das bordas medial e lateral da escápula.

É espesso e áspero e sua superfície posterior ou posterior permite fixação ao redondo maior e muitas vezes a algumas fibras do latíssimo do dorso.

O plano anatômico que passa verticalmente pelo ângulo inferior é denominado linha escapular.

-O ângulo lateral da escápula ou ângulo glenoide, também conhecido como cabeça da escápula, é a parte mais espessa da escápula.
 
Ele é largo e porta a cavidade glenoidal em sua superfície articular, que é direcionada para frente, lateralmente e levemente para cima, e articula-se com a cabeça do úmero.

O ângulo inferior é mais largo abaixo do que acima e seu diâmetro vertical é o mais longo.

A superfície é coberta com cartilagem no estado fresco; e suas margens, levemente elevadas, dão fixação a uma estrutura fibrocartilaginosa, o lábio glenoidal, que aprofunda a cavidade.

No seu ápice encontra-se uma ligeira elevação, a tuberosidade supraglenoidal, à qual se fixa a cabeça longa do bíceps braquial.

O colo anatômico da escápula é a porção ligeiramente contraída que circunda a cabeça e é mais distinta abaixo e atrás do que acima e na frente.

O colo cirúrgico da escápula passa diretamente medial à base do processo coracóide.


=== Fronteiras ===

Existem três bordas da escápula:

-A borda superior é a mais curta e mais fina; é côncava e estende-se do ângulo superior até a base do processo coracóide.

É referido como a borda craniana em animais.

Na sua parte lateral há uma incisura semicircular profunda, a incisura escapular, formada parcialmente pela base do processo coracóide.

Essa incisura é convertida em forame pelo ligamento transverso superior da escápula e serve para a passagem do nervo supraescapular; às vezes o ligamento é ossificado.

A parte adjacente da borda superior proporciona fixação ao omo-hióideo.
 
 
-A borda axilar (ou "borda lateral") é a mais espessa das três.
 
Começa acima na margem inferior da cavidade glenoidal e inclina-se obliquamente para baixo e para trás até o ângulo inferior.

É referido como a borda caudal em animais.

Começa acima na margem inferior da cavidade glenoidal e inclina-se obliquamente para baixo e para trás até o ângulo inferior.

Imediatamente abaixo da cavidade glenoidal há uma impressão grosseira, a tuberosidade infraglenoidal, com cerca de 2,5 cm (1 pol). de comprimento, que dá origem à cabeça longa do tríceps braquial; à sua frente há um sulco longitudinal, que se estende até o terço inferior dessa borda, e dá origem a parte do subescapular.

O terço inferior é fino e pontiagudo e serve para a fixação de algumas fibras do redondo maior atrás e do subescapular na frente.
 
 
-A borda medial (também chamada de borda vertebral ou margem medial) é a mais longa das três bordas e se estende do ângulo superior ao ângulo inferior.

Em animais é referido como a borda dorsal.Quatro músculos se ligam à borda medial. Serratus anterior tem uma longa inserção no lábio anterior.

Três músculos se inserem ao longo do lábio posterior:
o levantador da escápula (superior), rombóide menor (meio) e o rombóide maior (meio inferior).


=== Desenvolvimento ===

A escápula é ossificada a partir de 7 ou mais centros: um para o corpo, dois para o processo coracóide, dois para o acrômio, um para a borda vertebral e um para o ângulo inferior.

A ossificação do corpo começa por volta do segundo mês de vida fetal, pela formação de uma placa quadrilátera irregular de osso, imediatamente atrás da cavidade glenóide.

Esta placa se estende para formar a parte principal do osso, a espinha escapular crescendo de sua superfície dorsal por volta do terceiro mês.

A ossificação começa como ossificação membranosa antes do nascimento. Após o nascimento, os componentes cartilaginosos sofreriam ossificação endocondral.

A maior parte da escápula sofre ossificação membranosa. Algumas das partes externas da escápula são cartilaginosas ao nascimento e, portanto, sofreriam ossificação endocondral.

Ao nascimento, grande parte da escápula é óssea, mas a cavidade glenoidal, o processo coracóide, o acrômio, a borda vertebral e o ângulo inferior são cartilaginosos.

Do 15º ao 18º mês após o nascimento, ocorre a ossificação no meio do processo coracóide, que via de regra se une ao resto do osso por volta do 15º ano.

Entre os 14 e os 20 anos, as partes restantes se ossificam em rápida sucessão, e geralmente na seguinte ordem: primeiro, na raiz do processo coracóide, em larga escala; segundo, próximo à base do acrômio; terceiro, no ângulo inferior e parte contígua da borda vertebral; em quarto lugar, perto da extremidade externa do acrômio; quinto, na borda vertebral.

A base do acrômio é formada por uma extensão da espinha; os dois núcleos do acrômio se unem e depois se unem com a extensão da espinha.

O terço superior da cavidade glenoidal é ossificado a partir de um centro separado (subcoracóide), que aparece entre os 10 e 11 anos e se une entre os 16 e os 18 anos.

Além disso, uma placa epifisial aparece para a parte inferior da cavidade glenóide, e a ponta do processo coracóide frequentemente tem um núcleo separado.

Essas várias epífises são unidas ao osso por volta dos 25 anos.

Às vezes ocorre falha na união óssea entre o acrômio e a espinha (ver os acromiale), sendo a junção efetuada por tecido fibroso ou por uma articulação imperfeita; em alguns casos de suposta fratura do acrômio com união ligamentar, é provável que o segmento descolado nunca tenha se unido ao resto do osso.

"Em termos de anatomia comparada, a escápula humana representa dois ossos que se fundiram; a escápula (dorsal) propriamente dita e o coracóide (ventral).

A linha epifisária através da cavidade glenoidal é a linha de fusão. Eles são as contrapartes do ílio e ísquio da cintura pélvica."


== Função ==

Os seguintes músculos se ligam à escápula:


=== Movimentos ===

Os movimentos da escápula são provocados pelos músculos escapulares.

A escápula pode realizar seis ações:

Elevação: trapézio superior e elevador da escápula
Depressão: trapézio inferior
Retração (adução): rombóides e trapézio médio
Protração (abdução): serrátil anterior
Rotação para cima: trapézio superior e inferior, serrátil anterior
Rotação para baixo: rombóides, levantador da escápula e peitoral menor


== Significado clínico ==


=== Fraturas escapulares ===

Devido à sua estrutura robusta e localização protegida, as fraturas da escápula são incomuns. Quando ocorrem, são uma indicação de que ocorreu um trauma torácico grave.
As fraturas escapulares envolvendo o colo da escápula têm dois padrões.

Um tipo (raro) de fratura é através do colo anatômico da escápula. O outro tipo mais comum de fratura é através do colo cirúrgico da escápula.

O colo cirúrgico sai medialmente ao processo coracóide. Um ângulo inferior anormalmente protuberante da escápula é conhecido como escápula alada e pode ser causado por paralisia do músculo serrátil anterior.

Nesta condição, os lados da escápula mais próximos da coluna são posicionados para fora e para trás.

Diz-se que a aparência da parte superior das costas é semelhante a uma asa.

Além disso, qualquer condição que cause fraqueza do músculo serrátil anterior pode causar "asa" escapular.


=== Síndrome do impacto ===

A escápula desempenha um papel importante na síndrome do impacto do ombro. A função escapular anormal é chamada de discinesia escapular.

Uma ação que a escápula realiza durante um movimento de arremesso ou saque é a elevação do processo do acrômio para evitar o impacto dos tendões do manguito rotador.

Se a escápula não elevar adequadamente o acrômio, o impacto pode ocorrer durante a fase de armar e acelerar de uma atividade acima da cabeça.

Os dois músculos mais comumente inibidos durante esta primeira parte de um movimento acima da cabeça são o serrátil anterior e o trapézio inferior.

Esses dois músculos atuam como um par de forças dentro da articulação glenoumeral para elevar adequadamente o processo do acrômio e, se existir um desequilíbrio muscular, pode ocorrer o impacto do ombro.


=== Etimologia ===

==== Escápula / Escápula ====

O nome escápula como sinônimo de omoplata é de origem latina.

É comumente usado em inglês médico e faz parte da atual nomenclatura latina oficial, Terminologia Anatomica.

No latim clássico, a escápula é usada apenas no plural escápula.

Embora algumas fontes mencionem que as escápulas são usadas para se referir durante a antiguidade romana aos ombros ou às omoplatas, outras persistem em que os romanos usavam escápulas apenas para se referir às costas, em contraste com o pectus, o nome latino para peito ou peito .


==== Os latum scapularum e afins ====

O enciclopedista romano Aulus Cornelius Celsus, que viveu no início da era, também usou escápulas para se referir às costas. Ele usou os latum scapularum para se referir à omoplata.

Esta expressão pode ser traduzida como osso largo (latim: latum) (latim: os) das costas (latim: scapularum).

Uma expressão semelhante no grego antigo pode ser vista nos escritos do filósofo grego Aristóteles e nos escritos do médico grego Galeno.

Ambos usam o nome ὠμοπλάτη para se referir à omoplata.

Este composto consiste no grego antigo ὦμος, ombro e πλάτη, lâmina ou objeto plano ou largo. Πλάτη em seu plural πλάται sem ὦμο- também foi usado no grego antigo para se referir às omoplatas.

Em latim anatômico, ὠμοπλάτη é latinizado como omoplata. A palavra latina umerus está relacionada com ὦμος.

Os romanos se referiam com umerus ao que agora é comumente conhecido em inglês como os seguintes 3 ossos: úmero ou osso superior do braço, clavícula ou clavícula e escápula ou omoplata.

A ortografia úmero é realmente incorreta no latim clássico. Esses três ossos foram referidos como o ossa (latim: ossos) umeri (latim: do úmero).

Umerus também foi usado para se referir especificamente ao ombro.

Isso reflete o uso de ὦμος no grego antigo, pois isso pode se referir ao ombro com o braço ou apenas ao ombro.
Desde Celsus, o os umeri poderia se referir especificamente ao osso superior do braço.

O anatomista do século 16 Andreas Vesalius usou úmero para se referir à clavícula.

Além do já mencionado os latum scapularum, Celsus usou os latum umeri para se referir à omoplata. Da mesma forma, Laurentius usou a expressão latitudo umeri (Latitudo = largura, largura) para se referir à omoplata.


==== Pala ====

O médico romano Caelius Aureliano (século V) usou pala para se referir à omoplata.

O nome pala é normalmente usado para se referir a uma pá em latim e, portanto, provavelmente foi usado por Célio Aureliano para descrever a omoplata, pois ambas exibem uma curvatura plana.


==== Espátula/Σπάθη ====

Durante a Idade Média, a espátula era usada para se referir à omoplata.

Spathula é um diminutivo de spatha, com este último originalmente significando espada larga, de dois gumes, sem ponta, instrumento largo, plano, de madeira para mexer qualquer líquido, uma espátula, espátula ou espata da palmeira e seu diminutivo usado em clássicos e Latim tardio para se referir a uma perna de porco ou a um pequeno galho de palmeira.

A palavra inglesa spatula é na verdade derivada do latim spatula, uma variante ortográfica de spathula. Curiosamente, spatha não diminutivo latino clássico pode ser traduzido como espátula inglesa, enquanto sua espátula diminutiva latina não é traduzida como espátula inglesa.

O latim spatha é derivado do grego antigo σπάθη. Portanto, a forma espátula é mais parecida com sua origem do que espátula.

O grego antigo σπάθη tem um significado semelhante ao latim spatha, como qualquer lâmina larga, e também pode se referir a uma espátula ou à lâmina larga de uma espada., mas também à lâmina de um remo.

O mencionado πλάται para omoplatas também foi usado para lâminas de um remo. Concordantemente, σπάθη também foi usado para se referir à omoplata.

A palavra inglesa spade, bem como a equivalente holandesa spade, é cognata com σπάθη. Por favor, note que o termo pala acima mencionado, aplicado pelo médico romano Célio Aureliano, também significa pá.

Pala provavelmente está relacionado ao verbo latino pandere, espalhar e estender.

Acredita-se que este verbo seja derivado de uma forma anterior spandere, com a raiz spa-. Σπάθη é na verdade derivado da raiz similar spē(i), que significa estender.

Parece que os latum scapularum, ὠμοπλάτη, πλάται, pala, spathula e σπάθη todos se referem ao mesmo aspecto da omoplata, ou seja, sendo uma lâmina plana e larga, com as três últimas palavras etimologicamente relacionadas entre si.


==== Escápula após a Idade Média ====

Após a Idade Média, o nome escápula para omoplata tornou-se dominante.

A palavra escápula pode ser explicada etimologicamente por sua relação com o antigo verbo grego σκάπτειν, cavar.

Essa relação dá origem a várias explicações possíveis.
Primeiro, o substantivo σκάπετος, trincheira, e o substantivo relacionado à escápula σκαφη, são ambos derivados desse verbo e podem conectar a escápula à noção de concavidade. O nome escápula, então, pode estar relacionado à concavidade do osso que existe devido à sua coluna. A designação escapulae também é vista como sinônimo do grego antigo συνωμία, o espaço entre as omoplatas, que é obviamente côncavo. Συνωμία consiste em σύν, juntamente com, e ὦμος, ombro. Em segundo lugar, escápula, devido à sua relação com σκάπτειν pode ter significado originalmente pá. Da mesma forma que o uso latino de pala (pá), uma semelhança pode ser sentida entre a forma de uma pá e a omoplata. Alternativamente, a omoplata pode ter sido usada originalmente para cavar e cavar.


==== Omoplata ====
Omoplata é o nome coloquial para este osso. O ombro é cognato dos equivalentes alemães e holandeses Schulter e schouder. Existem algumas explicações etimológicas para o ombro. A primeira supõe que ombro pode ser traduzido literalmente como aquilo que protege ou protege, pois possivelmente está relacionado com skioldr islandês, escudo e skyla, cobrir, defender. A segunda explicação relaciona ombro ao grego antigo σκέλος, perna. Este último identifica a possível raiz skel-, que significa dobrar, curvar. A terceira explicação liga o esqueleto da raiz à clivagem. Esse significado pode se referir à forma da omoplata.


== Em outros animais ==

Nos peixes, a lâmina escapular é uma estrutura presa à superfície superior da articulação da barbatana peitoral, e é acompanhada por uma placa coracóide semelhante na superfície inferior.

Embora resistentes em peixes cartilaginosos, ambas as placas são geralmente pequenas na maioria dos outros peixes e podem ser parcialmente cartilaginosas ou consistir em múltiplos elementos ósseos.

Nos primeiros tetrápodes, essas duas estruturas tornaram-se respectivamente a escápula e um osso referido como procoracóide (comumente chamado simplesmente de "coracóide", mas não homólogo à estrutura mamífera de mesmo nome).

Em anfíbios e répteis (incluindo pássaros), esses dois ossos são distintos, mas juntos formam uma única estrutura que contém muitas das ligações musculares do membro anterior.

Nesses animais, a escápula é geralmente uma placa relativamente simples, sem as projeções e a espinha que possui nos mamíferos.

No entanto, a estrutura detalhada desses ossos varia consideravelmente nos grupos vivos.

Por exemplo, em rãs, os ossos procoracóides podem ser unidos na parte inferior do animal para absorver o choque da aterrissagem, enquanto em tartarugas, a estrutura combinada forma uma forma de Y para permitir que a escápula retenha uma conexão com a clavícula. que faz parte da casca).

Nas aves, os procoracóides ajudam a apoiar a asa contra o topo do esterno. Nos terapsídeos fósseis, um terceiro osso, o verdadeiro coracóide, formou-se logo atrás do procoracóide.

A estrutura de três ossos resultante ainda é vista em monotremados modernos, mas em todos os outros mamíferos vivos, o procoracóide desapareceu e o osso coracóide se fundiu com a escápula, para se tornar o processo coracóide.

Essas mudanças estão associadas ao andar ereto dos mamíferos, em comparação com a disposição dos membros mais esparramados dos répteis e anfíbios; os músculos anteriormente ligados ao procoracóide não são mais necessários.

A musculatura alterada também é responsável pela alteração da forma do restante da escápula; a margem anterior do osso original tornou-se a espinha e o acrômio, a partir do qual a plataforma principal da escápula surge como uma nova estrutura.


=== Em dinossauros ===

Nos dinossauros os principais ossos da cintura escapular eram a escápula (omoplata) e o coracóide, ambos diretamente articulados com a clavícula.

A clavícula estava presente nos dinossauros saurísquios, mas em grande parte ausente nos dinossauros ornitísquios.

O local da escápula onde se articula com o úmero (osso superior do membro anterior) é chamado de glenóide.

A escápula serve como local de fixação para os músculos das costas e dos membros anteriores de um dinossauro.


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scapula

;;;FR;;;



OMOPLATE


En anatomie, l'omoplate (omoplates au pluriel ou omoplates), également appelée os de l'épaule, omoplate, os de l'aile, os de la speal ou os de l'omoplate, est l'os qui relie l'humérus (os du bras) à la clavicule (clavicule) .

Comme leurs os connectés, les omoplates sont appariées, chaque omoplate de chaque côté du corps étant à peu près une image miroir de l'autre.

Le nom dérive du mot latin classique pour truelle ou petite pelle, auquel on pensait qu'il ressemblait.

En termes composés, le préfixe omo- est utilisé pour l'omoplate dans la terminologie médicale.

Ce préfixe est dérivé de ὦμος (ōmos), le mot grec ancien pour épaule, et est apparenté au latin (h)umerus, qui en latin signifie soit l'épaule, soit l'os du bras.

L'omoplate forme le dos de la ceinture scapulaire. Chez l'homme, il s'agit d'un os plat, de forme grossièrement triangulaire, placé sur une face postérolatérale de la cage thoracique.


== Structure ==

L'omoplate est un os large et plat reposant sur la paroi thoracique qui sert d'attache à trois groupes de muscles : muscles intrinsèques, extrinsèques, stabilisateurs et rotatifs.

Les muscles intrinsèques de l'omoplate comprennent les muscles de la coiffe des rotateurs - le sous-scapulaire, le petit rond, le sus-épineux et l'infra-épineux.

Ces muscles s'attachent à la surface de l'omoplate et sont responsables de la rotation interne et externe de l'articulation de l'épaule, ainsi que de l'abduction humérale.

Les muscles extrinsèques comprennent les biceps, les triceps et les muscles deltoïdes et se fixent au processus coracoïde et au tubercule supraglénoïde de l'omoplate, au tubercule sous-glénoïde de l'omoplate et à la colonne vertébrale de l'omoplate.

Ces muscles sont responsables de plusieurs actions de l'articulation gléno-humérale.

Le troisième groupe, qui est principalement responsable de la stabilisation et de la rotation de l'omoplate, comprend le trapèze, le dentelé antérieur, le releveur de l'omoplate et les muscles rhomboïdes.

Ceux-ci s'attachent aux bords médial, supérieur et inférieur de l'omoplate.

La tête, les processus et les parties épaissies de l'os contiennent du tissu spongieux; le reste consiste en une fine couche de tissu compact.

La partie centrale de la fosse sus-épineuse et la partie supérieure de la fosse sous-épineuse, mais surtout la première, sont généralement si minces chez l'homme qu'elles sont semi-transparentes; parfois l'os fait défaut dans cette situation, et les muscles adjacents ne sont séparés que par du tissu fibreux.

L'omoplate a deux surfaces, trois bordures, trois angles et trois processus.


=== Surfaces ===

=== Fosse antérieure ou sous-scapulaire ===

L'avant de l'omoplate (également connue sous le nom de surface costale ou ventrale) présente une large concavité appelée fosse sous-scapulaire, à laquelle se fixe le muscle sous-scapulaire.

Les deux tiers médiaux de la fosse ont 3 crêtes obliques longitudinales et une autre crête épaisse jouxte le bord latéral; ils courent vers l'extérieur et vers le haut.

Les crêtes donnent attache aux insertions tendineuses et les surfaces entre elles aux fibres charnues du muscle sous-scapulaire.

Le tiers latéral de la fosse est lisse et recouvert par les fibres de ce muscle.

À la partie supérieure de la fosse se trouve une dépression transversale, où l'os semble être plié sur lui-même le long d'une ligne perpendiculaire et passant par le centre de la cavité glénoïde, formant un angle considérable, appelé angle sous-scapulaire ; cela donne une plus grande force au corps de l'os par sa forme arquée, tandis que le sommet de l'arc sert à soutenir la colonne vertébrale et l'acromion.

La face costale supérieure de l'omoplate est l'origine de la 1ère digitation pour l'origine antérieure du dentelé.

===Retour===

Le dos de l'omoplate (également appelé surface dorsale ou postérieure) est arqué de haut en bas et est subdivisé en deux parties inégales par l'épine de l'omoplate.

La partie au-dessus de la colonne vertébrale s'appelle la fosse supra-épineuse, et celle en dessous la fosse sous-épineuse.

Les deux fosses sont reliées par l'échancrure spinoglénoïde, située latéralement à la racine de la colonne vertébrale.

La fosse sus-épineuse, au-dessus de l'épine de l'omoplate, est concave, lisse et plus large à son extrémité vertébrale qu'à son extrémité humérale ; ses deux tiers médians donnent origine au Supraspinatus.

A sa surface latérale réside la fosse spinoglénoïde qui est située par le bord médial de la glène.

La fosse spinoglénoïde abrite le canal suprascapulaire qui forme un passage de liaison entre l'encoche suprascapulaire et l'encoche spinoglénoïde véhiculant le nerf et les vaisseaux suprascapulaires.

La fosse sous-épineuse est beaucoup plus grande que la précédente ; vers sa marge vertébrale une concavité peu profonde est vue à sa partie supérieure ; son centre présente une convexité proéminente, tandis que près du bord axillaire se trouve un sillon profond qui va du haut vers le bas.

Les deux tiers médiaux de la fosse donnent naissance à l'Infraspinatus ; le tiers latéral est recouvert par ce muscle.

Il y a une crête sur la partie externe de l'arrière de l'omoplate. Cela va de la partie inférieure de la cavité glénoïde, vers le bas et vers l'arrière jusqu'au bord vertébral, à environ 2,5 cm au-dessus de l'angle inférieur.

Attaché à la crête est un septum fibreux, qui sépare le muscle sous-épineux des muscles Teres major et Teres minor.

Les deux tiers supérieurs de la surface entre la crête et le bord axillaire sont étroits et sont traversés près de son centre par une rainure pour les vaisseaux circonflexes scapulaires ; le Teres minor s'attache ici.

Les parties larges et étroites auxquelles il est fait allusion ci-dessus sont séparées par une ligne oblique, qui part du bord axillaire, vers le bas et vers l'arrière, pour rejoindre la crête élevée :
à lui est attaché un septum fibreux qui sépare les muscles ronds les uns des autres.

Son tiers inférieur présente une surface plus large, un peu triangulaire, l'angle inférieur de l'omoplate, qui donne origine au Teres major, et sur lequel glisse le Latissimus dorsi ; fréquemment ce dernier muscle prend naissance par quelques fibres de cette partie.

===Côté===

L'acromion forme le sommet de l'épaule et est un grand processus quelque peu triangulaire ou oblong, aplati d'arrière en avant, se projetant d'abord latéralement, puis se courbant vers l'avant et vers le haut, de manière à surplomber la cavité glénoïde.


=== Angles ===

Il y a 3 angles :

-L'angle supérieur de l'omoplate ou angle médial, est recouvert par le muscle trapèze.

Cet angle est formé par la jonction des bords supérieur et médial de l'omoplate.

L'angle supérieur est situé au niveau approximatif de la deuxième vertèbre thoracique.

L'angle supérieur de l'omoplate est mince, lisse, arrondi et quelque peu incliné latéralement, et donne attache à quelques fibres du muscle releveur de l'omoplate.

-L'angle inférieur de l'omoplate est la partie la plus basse de l'omoplate et est recouvert par le muscle latissimus dorsi.

Il se déplace vers l'avant autour de la poitrine lorsque le bras est en abduction.

L'angle inférieur est formé par la réunion des bords médial et latéral de l'omoplate.

Il est épais et rugueux et sa surface postérieure ou arrière permet une fixation au grand rond et souvent à quelques fibres du grand dorsal.

Le plan anatomique qui passe verticalement par l'angle inférieur s'appelle la ligne scapulaire.

-L'angle latéral de l'omoplate ou angle glénoïdien également appelé tête de l'omoplate est la partie la plus épaisse de l'omoplate.
 
Il est large et porte la cavité glénoïde sur sa surface articulaire qui est dirigée vers l'avant, latéralement et légèrement vers le haut, et s'articule avec la tête de l'humérus.

L'angle inférieur est plus large en bas qu'en haut et son diamètre vertical est le plus long.

La surface est recouverte de cartilage à l'état frais ; et ses bords, légèrement surélevés, donnent attache à une structure fibrocartilagineuse, le labrum glénoïdal, qui approfondit la cavité.

A son sommet se trouve une légère élévation, la tubérosité sus-glénoïdienne, à laquelle s'attache le long chef du biceps brachial.

Le col anatomique de l'omoplate est la partie légèrement resserrée qui entoure la tête et est plus distincte en dessous et en arrière qu'en haut et en avant.

Le col chirurgical de l'omoplate passe directement en dedans de la base de l'apophyse coracoïde.


=== Bordures ===

Il y a trois bords de l'omoplate:

-Le bord supérieur est le plus court et le plus fin ; il est concave et s'étend de l'angle supérieur à la base de l'apophyse coracoïde.

On l'appelle la frontière crânienne chez les animaux.

A sa partie latérale se trouve une profonde encoche semi-circulaire, l'encoche scapulaire, formée en partie par la base de l'apophyse coracoïde.

Cette encoche est convertie en foramen par le ligament scapulaire transverse supérieur, et sert au passage du nerf suprascapulaire ; parfois le ligament est ossifié.

La partie adjacente du bord supérieur permet l'attachement à l'omohyoideus.
 
 
-Le bord axillaire (ou "bord latéral") est le plus épais des trois.
 
Il commence au-dessus de la marge inférieure de la cavité glénoïde et s'incline obliquement vers le bas et vers l'arrière jusqu'à l'angle inférieur.

On l'appelle la bordure caudale chez les animaux.

Il commence au-dessus de la marge inférieure de la cavité glénoïde et s'incline obliquement vers le bas et vers l'arrière jusqu'à l'angle inférieur.

Immédiatement en dessous de la cavité glénoïde se trouve une empreinte rugueuse, la tubérosité sous-glénoïde, d'environ 2,5 cm (1 po). de longueur, qui donne origine à la longue tête du triceps brachial ; devant celle-ci se trouve une rainure longitudinale qui s'étend jusqu'au tiers inférieur de ce bord et donne naissance à une partie du sous-scapulaire.

Le tiers inférieur est mince et pointu, et sert à l'attache de quelques fibres du grand rond en arrière et du sous-scapulaire en avant.
 
 
-Le bord médial (également appelé bord vertébral ou bord médial) est le plus long des trois bords et s'étend de l'angle supérieur à l'angle inférieur.

Chez les animaux, on parle de bordure dorsale. Quatre muscles s'attachent à la bordure médiale. Le dentelé antérieur a une longue attache sur la lèvre antérieure.

Trois muscles s'insèrent le long de la lèvre postérieure :
le releveur des omoplates (en haut), le mineur rhomboïde (au milieu) et le majeur rhomboïde (au milieu inférieur).


=== Développement ===

L'omoplate est ossifiée à partir de 7 centres ou plus : un pour le corps, deux pour le processus coracoïde, deux pour l'acromion, un pour le bord vertébral et un pour l'angle inférieur.

L'ossification du corps commence vers le deuxième mois de la vie fœtale, par la formation d'une plaque quadrilatère irrégulière d'os, immédiatement derrière la cavité glénoïde.

Cette plaque s'étend pour former la partie principale de l'os, l'épine scapulaire grandissant à partir de sa surface dorsale vers le troisième mois.

L'ossification commence comme une ossification membraneuse avant la naissance. Après la naissance, les composants cartilagineux subiraient une ossification endochondrale.

La plus grande partie de l'omoplate subit une ossification membraneuse. Certaines des parties externes de l'omoplate sont cartilagineuses à la naissance et subiraient donc une ossification endochondrale.

A la naissance, une grande partie de l'omoplate est osseuse, mais la glène, l'apophyse coracoïde, l'acromion, le bord vertébral et l'angle inférieur sont cartilagineux.

Du 15e au 18e mois après la naissance, l'ossification a lieu au milieu de l'apophyse coracoïde, qui se rejoint en règle générale avec le reste de l'os vers la 15e année.

Entre la 14e et la 20e année, les parties restantes s'ossifient en succession rapide, et généralement dans l'ordre suivant : d'abord, à la racine de l'apophyse coracoïde, sous la forme d'une large écaille ; deuxièmement, près de la base de l'acromion ; troisièmement, dans l'angle inférieur et la partie contiguë du bord vertébral ; quatrièmement, près de l'extrémité extérieure de l'acromion ; cinquièmement, dans le bord vertébral.

La base de l'acromion est formée par une extension de la colonne vertébrale ; les deux noyaux de l'acromion s'unissent, puis se joignent à l'extension de la colonne vertébrale.

Le tiers supérieur de la cavité glénoïdienne est ossifié à partir d'un centre distinct (sous coracoïde), qui apparaît entre la 10e et la 11e année et se rejoint entre la 16e et la 18e année.

De plus, une plaque épiphysaire apparaît pour la partie inférieure de la cavité glénoïde et la pointe du processus coracoïde a fréquemment un noyau séparé.

Ces différentes épiphyses sont jointes à l'os vers la 25e année.

L'échec de l'union osseuse entre l'acromion et la colonne vertébrale se produit parfois (voir os acromiale), la jonction étant effectuée par du tissu fibreux ou par une articulation imparfaite ; dans quelques cas de fracture supposée de l'acromion avec union ligamentaire, il est probable que le segment détaché n'a jamais été uni au reste de l'os.

"En termes d'anatomie comparée, l'omoplate humaine représente deux os qui ont fusionné; l'omoplate (dorsale) proprement dite et la coracoïde (ventrale).

La ligne épiphysaire à travers la cavité glénoïdienne est la ligne de fusion. Ce sont les pendants de l'ilium et de l'ischion de la ceinture pelvienne."


== Fonction ==

Les muscles suivants s'attachent à l'omoplate :


=== Mouvements ===

Les mouvements de l'omoplate sont provoqués par les muscles scapulaires.

L'omoplate peut effectuer six actions :

Élévation : trapèze supérieur et élévateur des omoplates
Dépression : trapèze inférieur
Rétraction (adduction) : rhomboïdes et trapèze moyen
Protraction (abduction): dentelé antérieur
Rotation vers le haut : trapèze supérieur et inférieur, dentelé antérieur
Rotation vers le bas : rhomboïdes, levator scapulae et pec minor


== Signification clinique ==


=== Fractures scapulaires ===

En raison de sa structure robuste et de son emplacement protégé, les fractures de l'omoplate sont rares. Lorsqu'ils surviennent, ils indiquent qu'un traumatisme thoracique grave s'est produit.
Les fractures scapulaires impliquant le col de l'omoplate ont deux modèles.

Un type (rare) de fracture est à travers le col anatomique de l'omoplate. L'autre type de fracture le plus courant est le col chirurgical de l'omoplate.

Le col chirurgical sort en dedans du processus coracoïde. Un angle inférieur anormalement saillant de l'omoplate est connu sous le nom d'omoplate ailée et peut être causé par une paralysie du muscle dentelé antérieur.

Dans cette condition, les côtés de l'omoplate les plus proches de la colonne vertébrale sont positionnés vers l'extérieur et vers l'arrière.

On dit que l'apparence du haut du dos ressemble à une aile.

De plus, toute condition provoquant une faiblesse du muscle dentelé antérieur peut provoquer un « winging » scapulaire.


=== Syndrome de conflit ===

L'omoplate joue un rôle important dans le syndrome de conflit avec l'épaule. Une fonction scapulaire anormale est appelée dyskinésie scapulaire.

Une action que l'omoplate effectue lors d'un mouvement de lancer ou de service est l'élévation du processus d'acromion afin d'éviter l'impact des tendons de la coiffe des rotateurs.

Si l'omoplate ne parvient pas à élever correctement l'acromion, un conflit peut se produire pendant la phase d'armement et d'accélération d'une activité aérienne.

Les deux muscles les plus couramment inhibés lors de cette première partie d'un mouvement au-dessus de la tête sont le dentelé antérieur et le trapèze inférieur.

Ces deux muscles agissent comme un couple de force dans l'articulation gléno-humérale pour élever correctement le processus d'acromion, et si un déséquilibre musculaire existe, un conflit d'épaule peut se développer.


=== Étymologie ===

==== Omoplate/Omoplate ====

Le nom scapula comme synonyme d'omoplate est d'origine latine.

Il est couramment utilisé en anglais médical et fait partie de la nomenclature latine officielle actuelle, Terminologia Anatomica.

En latin classique, l'omoplate n'est utilisée qu'au pluriel des omoplates.

Bien que certaines sources mentionnent que les omoplates sont utilisées pour désigner pendant l'Antiquité romaine les épaules ou les omoplates, d'autres persistent en ce que les Romains n'utilisaient les omoplates que pour désigner le dos, contrairement au pectus, le nom latin du sein ou de la poitrine. .


==== Os latum scapularum et apparentés ====

L'encyclopédiste romain Aulus Cornelius Celsus qui a vécu au début de l'ère, a également utilisé des omoplates pour désigner le dos. Il a utilisé os latum scapularum pour désigner l'omoplate.

Cette expression peut être traduite par os large (latin : latum) (latin : os) du dos (latin : scapularum).

Une expression similaire en grec ancien peut être vue dans les écrits du philosophe grec Aristote et dans les écrits du médecin grec Galien.

Ils utilisent tous les deux le nom ὠμοπλάτη pour désigner l'omoplate.

Ce composé se compose du grec ancien ὦμος, épaule et πλάτη, lame ou objet plat ou large. Πλάτη au pluriel πλάται sans ὦμο- était également utilisé en grec ancien pour désigner les omoplates.

En latin anatomique, ὠμοπλάτη est latinisé comme omoplata. Le mot latin umerus est lié à ὦμος.

Les Romains se référaient avec l'umérus à ce qui est maintenant communément appelé en anglais les 3 os suivants : l'humérus ou l'os supérieur du bras, la clavicule ou la clavicule et l'omoplate ou l'omoplate.

L'orthographe humérus est en fait incorrecte en latin classique. Ces trois os étaient appelés ossa (latin : os) umeri (latin : de l'umérus).

Umerus était également utilisé pour désigner spécifiquement l'épaule.

Cela reflète l'utilisation de ὦμος en grec ancien car cela pourrait faire référence à l'épaule avec le haut du bras ou à l'épaule seule.
Depuis Celse, l'os umeri pouvait se référer spécifiquement à l'os supérieur du bras.

L'anatomiste du XVIe siècle Andreas Vesalius a utilisé l'humérus pour désigner la clavicule.

Outre l'os latum scapularum susmentionné, Celse a utilisé os latum umeri pour désigner l'omoplate. De même, Laurentius a utilisé l'expression latitudo umeri (Latitudo = largeur, largeur) pour désigner l'omoplate.


==== Pala ====

Le médecin romain Caelius Aurelianus (5ème siècle) a utilisé pala pour désigner l'omoplate.

Le nom pala est normalement utilisé pour désigner une pelle en latin et a donc probablement été utilisé par Caelius Aurelianus pour décrire l'omoplate, car les deux présentent une courbure plate.


==== Spathule/Σπάθη ====

Au Moyen Âge, la spatule était utilisée pour désigner l'omoplate.

Spathula est un diminutif de spatha, ce dernier signifiant à l'origine une épée large à deux tranchants sans pointe, un instrument large et plat en bois pour remuer tout liquide, une spatule, une spatule ou une spathe du palmier et son diminutif utilisé dans le classique et latin tardif pour désigner une cuisse de porc ou une petite branche de palmier.

Le mot anglais spatula est en fait dérivé du latin spatula, une variante orthographique de spathula. Curieusement, la spatha non diminutive latine classique peut être traduite par spatule anglaise, tandis que sa spatule diminutive latine n'est pas traduite par spatule anglaise.

Le latin spatha est dérivé du grec ancien σπάθη. Par conséquent, la forme spatule est plus proche de son origine que spatule.

Le grec ancien σπάθη a une signification similaire à celle du latin spatha, comme toute lame large, et peut également désigner une spatule ou la large lame d'une épée, mais aussi la lame d'une rame.

Le πλάται susmentionné pour les omoplates était également utilisé pour les lames d'une rame. De manière concordante, σπάθη a également été utilisé pour désigner l'omoplate.

Le mot anglais spade, ainsi que son équivalent néerlandais, est apparenté à σπάθη. Veuillez noter que le terme pala susmentionné, tel qu'appliqué par le médecin romain Caelius Aurelianus, signifie également pique.

Pala est probablement lié au verbe latin pandere, s'étaler et s'étendre.

On pense que ce verbe est dérivé d'une forme antérieure spandere, avec la racine spa-. Σπάθη est en fait dérivé de la racine similaire spē(i), qui signifie étendre.

Il semble que os latum scapularum, ὠμοπλάτη, πλάται, pala, spathula et σπάθη désignent tous le même aspect de l'omoplate, c'est-à-dire une omoplate plate et large, ces trois derniers mots étant étymologiquement liés les uns aux autres.


==== Scapula après le Moyen Age ====

Après le Moyen Âge, le nom d'omoplate pour omoplate est devenu dominant.

Le mot scapula peut étymologiquement s'expliquer par sa parenté avec le verbe grec ancien σκάπτειν, creuser.

Cette parenté donne lieu à plusieurs explications possibles.
Premièrement, le nom σκάπετος, tranchée, et le nom lié à l'omoplate σκαφη, sont tous deux dérivés de ce verbe et pourraient relier l'omoplate à la notion de concavité. Le nom d'omoplate peut alors être lié à la concavité de l'os qui existe en raison de sa colonne vertébrale. La désignation scapulae est en outre considérée comme synonyme du grec ancien συνωμία, l'espace entre les omoplates, qui est évidemment concave. Συνωμία se compose de σύν, avec et ὦμος, épaule. Deuxièmement, l'omoplate, en raison de sa parenté avec σκάπτειν, aurait pu à l'origine signifier pelle. À l'instar de l'utilisation latine de pala (bêche), une ressemblance pourrait être ressentie entre la forme d'une pelle et l'omoplate. Alternativement, l'omoplate aurait pu être utilisée à l'origine pour creuser et pelleter.


==== Omoplate ====
L'omoplate est le nom familier de cet os. L'épaule est apparentée aux équivalents allemands et néerlandais Schulter et schouder. Il y a quelques explications étymologiques pour l'épaule. La première suppose que l'épaule peut être littéralement traduite par ce qui protège ou protège, car il est peut-être lié à l'islandais skioldr, bouclier et skyla, couvrir, défendre. La deuxième explication concerne l'épaule du grec ancien σκέλος, jambe. Ce dernier repère la racine possible skel-, signifiant plier, courber. La troisième explication relie la racine skel- à cliver. Cette signification pourrait faire référence à la forme de l'omoplate.


== Chez d'autres animaux ==

Chez les poissons, la lame scapulaire est une structure attachée à la surface supérieure de l'articulation de la nageoire pectorale, et est accompagnée d'une plaque coracoïde similaire sur la surface inférieure.

Bien que robustes chez les poissons cartilagineux, les deux plaques sont généralement petites chez la plupart des autres poissons et peuvent être partiellement cartilagineuses ou constituées de plusieurs éléments osseux.

Chez les premiers tétrapodes, ces deux structures devinrent respectivement l'omoplate et un os appelé procoracoïde (communément appelé simplement « coracoïde », mais non homologue à la structure mammifère de ce nom).

Chez les amphibiens et les reptiles (y compris les oiseaux), ces deux os sont distincts, mais forment ensemble une structure unique portant de nombreuses attaches musculaires pour le membre antérieur.

Chez ces animaux, l'omoplate est généralement une plaque relativement simple, dépourvue des projections et de la colonne vertébrale qu'elle possède chez les mammifères.

Cependant, la structure détaillée de ces os varie considérablement selon les groupes vivants.

Par exemple, chez les grenouilles, les os procoracoïdes peuvent être entretoisés sous l'animal pour absorber le choc de l'atterrissage, tandis que chez les tortues, la structure combinée forme un Y afin de permettre à l'omoplate de conserver une connexion à la clavicule ( qui fait partie de la coque).

Chez les oiseaux, les procoracoïdes aident à caler l'aile contre le haut du sternum. Chez les thérapsides fossiles, un troisième os, le véritable coracoïde, s'est formé juste derrière le procoracoïde.

La structure à trois os qui en résulte est encore visible chez les monotrèmes modernes, mais chez tous les autres mammifères vivants, le procoracoïde a disparu et l'os coracoïde a fusionné avec l'omoplate pour devenir le processus coracoïde.

Ces changements sont associés à la démarche droite des mammifères, par rapport à la disposition plus étendue des membres des reptiles et des amphibiens; les muscles anciennement attachés au procoracoïde ne sont plus nécessaires.

La musculature altérée est également responsable de l'altération de la forme du reste de l'omoplate ; la marge avant de l'os d'origine est devenue la colonne vertébrale et l'acromion, à partir desquels l'étagère principale de l'omoplate se présente comme une nouvelle structure.


=== Chez les dinosaures ===

Chez les dinosaures, les principaux os de la ceinture pectorale étaient l'omoplate (omoplate) et la coracoïde, tous deux directement articulés avec la clavicule.

La clavicule était présente chez les dinosaures saurischiens mais largement absente chez les dinosaures ornithischiens.

L'endroit de l'omoplate où il s'articule avec l'humérus (os supérieur du membre antérieur) s'appelle la glène.

L'omoplate sert de site de fixation pour les muscles du dos et des membres antérieurs d'un dinosaure.


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/omoplate
