

THYMUS


The thymus is a specialized primary lymphoid organ of the immune system. 

Within the thymus, thymus cell lymphocytes or T cells mature. 

T cells are critical to the adaptive immune system, where the body adapts specifically to foreign invaders. 

The thymus is located in the upper front part of the chest, in the anterior superior mediastinum, behind the sternum, and in front of the heart. 

It is made up of two lobes, each consisting of a central medulla and an outer cortex, surrounded by a capsule.

The thymus is made up of immature T cells called thymocytes, as well as lining cells called epithelial cells which help the thymocytes develop. 

T cells that successfully develop react appropriately with MHC immune receptors of the body (called positive selection) and not against proteins of the body (called negative selection). 

The thymus is largest and most active during the neonatal and pre-adolescent periods. 

By the early teens, the thymus begins to decrease in size and activity and the tissue of the thymus is gradually replaced by fatty tissue. 

Nevertheless, some T cell development continues throughout adult life.

Abnormalities of the thymus can result in a decreased number of T cells and autoimmune diseases such as autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1 and myasthenia gravis. 

These are often associated with cancer of the tissue of the thymus, called thymoma, or tissues arising from immature lymphocytes such as T cells, called lymphoma. 

Removal of the thymus is called thymectomy. 

Although the thymus has been identified as a part of the body since the time of the Ancient Greeks, it is only since the 1960s that the function of the thymus in the immune system has become more clear.


== Structure ==

The thymus is an organ that sits beneath the sternum in the upper front part of the chest, stretching upwards towards the neck. 

In children, the thymus is pinkish-gray, soft, and lobulated on its surfaces. 

At birth it is about 4–6 cm long, 2.5–5 cm wide, and about 1 cm thick. 

It increases in size until puberty, where it may have a size of about 40–50 g, following which it decreases in size in a process known as involution.

The thymus is made up of two lobes that meet in the upper midline, and stretch from below the thyroid in the neck to as low as the cartilage of the fourth rib. 

The lobes are covered by a capsule. 

The thymus lies beneath the sternum, rests on the pericardium, and is separated from the aortic arch and great vessels by a layer of fascia. 

The left brachiocephalic vein may even be embedded within the thymus. 

In the neck, it lies on the front and sides of the trachea, behind the sternohyoid and sternothyroid muscles.


=== Microanatomy ===

The thymus consists of two lobes, merged in the middle, surrounded by a capsule that extends with blood vessels into the interior. 

The lobes consist of an outer cortex rich with cells and an inner less dense medulla. 

The lobes are divided into smaller lobules 0.5-2mm diameter, between which extrude radiating insertions from the capsule along septa.

The cortex is mainly made up of thymocytes and epithelial cells. 

The thymocytes, immature T cells, are supported by a network of the finely-branched epithelial reticular cells, which is continuous with a similar network in the medulla. 

This network forms an adventitia to the blood vessels, which enter the cortex via septa near the junction with the medulla. 

Other cells are also present in the thymus, including macrophages, dendritic cells, and a small amount of B cells, neutrophils and eosinophils.

In the medulla, the network of epithelial cells is coarser than in the cortex, and the lymphoid cells are relatively fewer in number. 

Concentric, nest-like bodies called Hassall's corpuscles (also called thymic corpuscles) are formed by aggregations of the medullary epithelial cells. 

These are concentric, layered whorls of epithelial cells that increase in number throughout life. 

They are the remains of the epithelial tubes, which grow out from the third pharyngeal pouches of the embryo to form the thymus.


=== Blood and nerve supply ===

The arteries supplying the thymus are branches of the internal thoracic, and inferior thyroid arteries, with branches from the superior thyroid artery sometimes seen. 

The branches reach the thymus and travel with the septa of the capsule into the area between the cortex and medulla, where they enter the thymus itself; or alternatively directly enter the capsule.

The veins of the thymus end in the left brachiocephalic vein, internal thoracic vein, and in the inferior thyroid veins. 

Sometimes the veins end directly in the superior vena cava.Lymphatic vessels travel only away from the thymus, accompanying the arteries and veins. 

These drain into the brachiocephalic, tracheobronchial and parasternal lymph nodes.

The nerves supplying the thymus arise from the vagus nerve and the cervical sympathetic chain. 

Branches from the phrenic nerves reach the capsule of the thymus, but do not enter into the thymus itself.


=== Variation ===

The two lobes differ slightly in size, with the left lobe usually higher than the right. 

Thymic tissue may be found scattered on or around the gland, and occasionally within the thyroid. 

The thymus in children stretches variably upwards, at times to as high as the thyroid gland.


== Development ==


The thymocytes and the epithelium of the thymus have different developmental origins. 

The epithelium of the thymus develops first, appearing as two outgrowths, one on either side, of the third pharyngeal pouch. 

It sometimes also involves the fourth pharyngeal pouch. 

These extend outward and backward into the surrounding mesoderm and neural crest-derived mesenchyme in front of the ventral aorta. 

Here the thymocytes and epithelium meet and join with connective tissue. 

The pharyngeal opening of each diverticulum is soon obliterated, but the neck of the flask persists for some time as a cellular cord. 

By further proliferation of the cells lining the flask, buds of cells are formed, which become surrounded and isolated by the invading mesoderm.

The epithelium forms fine lobules, and develops into a sponge-like structure. 

During this stage, hematopoietic bone-marrow precursors migrate into the thymus. 

Normal development is dependent on the interaction between the epithelium and the hematopoietic thymocytes. 

Iodine is also necessary for thymus development and activity.


=== Involution ===

The thymus continues to grow after the birth reaching the relative maximum size by puberty. 

It is most active in fetal and neonatal life. 

It increases to a mass of 20 to 50 grams by puberty. 

It then begins to decrease in size and activity in a process called thymic involution. 

After the first year of life the amount of T cells produced begins to fall. 

Fat and connective tissue fills a part of the thymic volume. 

During involution, the thymus decreases in size and activity. 

Fat cells are present at birth, but increase in size and number markedly after puberty, invading the gland from the walls between the lobules first, then into the cortex and medulla. 

This process continues into old age, where whether with a microscope or with the human eye, the thymus may be difficult to detect, although typically weighs 5–15 grams.

The atrophy is due to the increased circulating level of sex hormones, and chemical or physical castration of an adult results in the thymus increasing in size and activity. 

Severe illness or human immunodeficiency virus infection may also result in involution.


== Function ==

=== T cell maturation ===

The thymus facilitates the maturation of T cells, an important part of the immune system providing cell-mediated immunity. 

T cells begin as hematopoietic precursors from the bone-marrow, and migrate to the thymus, where they are referred to as thymocytes. 

In the thymus they undergo a process of maturation, which involves ensuring the cells react against antigens ("positive selection"), but that they do not react against antigens found on body tissue ("negative selection"). 

Once mature, T cells emigrate from the thymus to provide vital functions in the immune system.Each T cell has a distinct T cell receptor, suited to a specific substance, called an antigen. 

Most T cell receptors bind to the major histocompatibility complex on cells of the body. 

The MHC presents an antigen to the T cell receptor, which becomes active if this matches the specific T cell receptor. 

In order to be properly functional, a mature T cell needs to be able to bind to the MHC molecule ("positive selection"), and not to react against antigens that are actually from the tissues of body ("negative selection"). 

Positive selection occurs in the cortex and negative selection occurs in the medulla of the thymus. 

After this process T cells that have survived leave the thymus, regulated by sphingosine-1-phosphate. 

Further maturation occurs in the peripheral circulation. 

Some of this is because of hormones and cytokines secreted by cells within the thymus, including thymulin, thymopoietin, and thymosins.


=== Positive selection ===

T cells have distinct T cell receptors. 

These distinct receptors are formed by process of V(D)J recombination gene rearrangement stimulated by RAG1 and RAG2 genes. 

This process is error-prone, and some thymocytes fail to make functional T-cell receptors, whereas other thymocytes make T-cell receptors that are autoreactive. 

If a functional T cell receptor is formed, the thymocyte will begin to express simultaneously the cell surface proteins CD4 and CD8.

The survival and nature of the T cell then depends on its interaction with surrounding thymic epithelial cells. 

Here, the T cell receptor interacts with the MHC molecules on the surface of epithelial cells. 

A T cell with a receptor that doesn't react, or reacts weakly will die by apoptosis. 

A T cell that does react will survive and proliferate. 

A mature T cell expresses only CD4 or CD8, but not both. 

This depends on the strength of binding between the TCR and MHC class 1 or class 2. 

A T cell receptor that binds mostly to MHC class I tends to produce a mature "cytotoxic" CD8 positive T cell; a T cell receptor that binds mostly to MHC class II tends to produce a CD4 positive T cell.


=== Negative selection ===

T cells that attack the body's own proteins are eliminated in the thymus, called "negative selection". 

Epithelial cells in the medulla and dendritic cells in the thymus express major proteins from elsewhere in the body. 

The gene that stimulates this is AIRE. 

Thymocytes that react strongly to self antigens do not survive, and die by apoptosis. 

Some CD4 positive T cells exposed to self antigens persist as T regulatory cells.


== Clinical significance ==

=== Immunodeficiency ===

As the thymus is where T cells develop, congenital problems with the development of the thymus can lead to immunodeficiency, whether because of a problem with the development of the thymus gland, or a problem specific to thymocyte development. 

Immunodeficiency can be profound. 

Loss of the thymus at an early age through genetic mutation (as in DiGeorge syndrome, CHARGE syndrome, or a very rare "nude" thymus causing absence of hair and the thymus) results in severe immunodeficiency and subsequent high susceptibility to infection by viruses, protozoa, and fungi. 

Nude mice with the very rare "nude" deficiency as a result of FOXN1 mutation are a strain of research mice as a model of T cell deficiency.

The most common congenital cause of thymus-related immune deficiency results from the deletion of the 22nd chromosome, called DiGeorge syndrome. 

This results in a failure of development of the third and fourth pharyngeal pouches, resulting in failure of development of the thymus, and variable other associated problems, such as congenital heart disease, and abnormalities of mouth (such as cleft palate and cleft lip), failure of development of the parathyroid glands, and the presence of a fistula between the trachea and the oesophagus. 

Very low numbers of circulating T cells are seen. 

The condition is diagnosed by fluorescent in situ hybridization and treated with thymus transplantation.Severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) are group of rare congenital genetic diseases that can result in combined T, B, and NK cell deficiencies. 

These syndromes are caused by mutations that affect the maturation of the hematopoietic progenitor cells, which are the precursors of both B and T cells. 

A number of genetic defects can cause SCID, including IL-2 receptor gene loss of function, and mutation resulting in deficiency of the enzyme adenine deaminase.


=== Autoimmune disease ===

==== Autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome ====

Autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1, is a rare genetic autoimmune syndrome that results from a genetic defect of the thymus tissues. 

Specifically, the disease results from defects in the autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene, which stimulates expression of self antigens in the epithelial cells within the medulla of the thymus. 

Because of defects in this condition, self antigens are not expressed, resulting in T cells that are not conditioned to tolerate tissues of the body, and may treat them as foreign, stimulating an immune response and resulting in autoimmunity. 

People with APECED develop an autoimmune disease that affects multiple endocrine tissues, with the commonly affected organs being hypothyroidism of the thyroid gland, Addison's disease of the adrenal glands, and candida infection of body surfaces including the inner lining of the mouth and of the nails due to dysfunction of TH17 cells, and symptoms often beginning in childhood. 

Many other autoimmune diseases may also occur. 

Treatment is directed at the affected organs.


==== Thymoma-associated multiorgan autoimmunity ====

Thymoma-associated multiorgan autoimmunity can occur in people with thymoma. 

In this condition, the T cells developed in the thymus are directed against the tissues of the body. 

This is because the malignant thymus is incapable of appropriately educating developing thymocytes to eliminate self-reactive T cells. 

The condition is virtually indistinguishable from graft versus host disease.


==== Myasthenia gravis ====

Myasthenia gravis is an autoimmune disease most often due to antibodies that block acetylcholine receptors, involved in signalling between nerves and muscles. 

It is often associated with thymic hyperplasia or thymoma, with antibodies produced probably because of T cells that develop abnormally. 

Myasthenia gravis most often develops between young and middle age, causing easy fatiguing of muscle movements. 

Investigations include demonstrating antibodies (such as against acetylcholine receptors or muscle-specific kinase), and CT scan to detect thymoma or thymectomy. 

With regard to the thymus, removal of the thymus, called thymectomy may be considered as a treatment, particularly if a thymoma is found. 

Other treatments include increasing the duration of acetylcholine action at nerve synapses by decreasing the rate of breakdown. 

This is done by acetylcholinesterase inhibitors such as pyridostigmine.


=== Cancer ===

==== Thymomas ====

Tumours originating from the thymic epithelial cells are called thymomas. 

They most often occur in adults older than 40. 

Tumours are generally detected when they cause symptoms, such as a neck mass or affecting nearby structures such as the superior vena cava; detected because of screening in patients with myasthenia gravis, which has a strong association with thymomas and hyperplasia; and detected as an incidental finding on imaging such as chest x-rays. 

Hyperplasia and tumours originating form the thymus are associated with other autoimmune diseases – such as hypogammaglobulinemia, Graves disease, pure red cell aplasia, pernicious anaemia and dermatomyositis, likely because of defects in negative selection in proliferating T cells.

Thymomas can be benign; benign but by virtue of expansion, invading beyond the capsule of the thymus ("invasive thyoma"), or malignant (a carcinoma). 

This classification is based on the appearance of the cells. 

A WHO classification also exists but is not used as part of standard clinical practice. 

Benign tumours confined to the thymus are most common; followed by locally invasive tumours, and then by carcinomas. 

There is variation in reporting, with some sources reporting malignant tumours as more common. 

Invasive tumours, although not technically malignant, can still spread (metastasise) to other areas of the body. 

Even though thymomas occur of epithelial cells, they can also contain thymocytes. 

Treatment of thymomas often requires surgery to remove the entire thymus. 

This may also result in temporary remission of any associated autoimmune conditions.


==== Lymphomas ====

Tumours originating from T cells of the thymus form a subset of acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL). 

These are similar in symptoms, investigation approach and management to other forms of ALL. 

Symptoms that develop, like other forms of ALL, relate to deficiency of platelets, resulting in bruising or bleeding; immunosuppression resulting in infections; or infiltration by cells into parts of the body, resulting in an enlarged liver, spleen, lymph nodes or other sites. 

Blood test might reveal a large amount of white blood cells or lymphoblasts, and deficiency in other cell lines – such as low platelets or anaemia. 

Immunophenotyping will reveal cells that are CD3, a protein found on T cells, and help further distinguish the maturity of the T cells. 

Genetic analysis including karyotyping may reveal specific abnormalities that may influence prognosis or treatment, such as the Philadelphia translocation. 

Management can include multiple courses of chemotherapy, stem cell transplant, and management of associated problems, such as treatment of infections with antibiotics, and blood transfusions. 

Very high white cell counts may also require cytoreduction with apheresis.

Tumours originating from the small population of B cells present in the thymus lead to primary mediastinal (thymic) large B cell lymphomas. 

These are a rare subtype of Non-Hodgkins lymphoma, although by the activity of genes and occasionally microscopic shape, unusually they also have the characteristics of Hodgkins lymphomas. that occur most commonly in young and middle-aged, more prominent in females. 

Most often, when symptoms occur it is because of compression of structures near the thymus, such as the superior vena cava or the upper respiratory tract; when lymph nodes are affected it is often in the mediastinum and neck groups. 

Such tumours are often detected with a biopsy that is subject to immunohistochemistry. 

This will show the presence of clusters of differentiation, cell surface proteins – namely CD30, with CD19, CD20 and CD22, and with the absence of CD15. 

Other markers may also be used to confirm the diagnosis. 

Treatment usually includes the typical regimens of CHOP or EPOCH or other regimens; regimens generally including cyclophosphamide, an anthracycline, prednisone, and other chemotherapeutics; and potentially also a stem cell transplant.


=== Thymic cysts ===

The thymus may contain cysts, usually less than 4 cm in diameter. 

Thymic cysts are usually detected incidentally and do not generally cause symptoms. 

Thymic cysts can occur along the neck or in the chest (mediastinum). 

Cysts usually just contain fluid and are lined by either many layers of flat cells or column-shaped cells. 

Despite this, the presence of a cyst can cause problems similar to those of thymomas, by compressing nearby structures, and some may contact internal walls (septa) and be difficult to distinguish from tumours. 

When cysts are found, investigation may include a workup for tumours, which may include CT or MRI scan of the area the cyst is suspected to be in.


=== Surgical removal ===

Thymectomy is the surgical removal of the thymus. 

The usual reason for removal is to gain access to the heart for surgery to correct congenital heart defects in the neonatal period. 

Other indications for thymectomy include the removal of thymomas and the treatment of myasthenia gravis. 

In neonates the relative size of the thymus obstructs surgical access to the heart and its surrounding vessels. 

Removal of the thymus in infancy results in often fatal immunodeficiency, because functional T cells have not developed. 

In older children and adults, which have a functioning lymphatic system with mature T cells also situated in other lymphoid organs, the effect is reduced, and limited to failure to mount immune responses against new antigens.


== Society and culture ==

When used as food for humans, the thymus of animals is known as one of the kinds of sweetbread.


== History ==

The thymus was known to the ancient Greeks, and its name comes from the Greek word θυμός (thumos), meaning "anger", or "heart, soul, desire, life", possibly because of its location in the chest, near where emotions are subjectively felt; or else the name comes from the herb thyme (also in Greek θύμος or θυμάρι), which became the name for a "warty excrescence", possibly due to its resemblance to a bunch of thyme.Galen was the first to note that the size of the organ changed over the duration of a person's life.

In the nineteenth century, a condition was identified as status thymicolymphaticus defined by an increase in lymphoid tissue and an enlarged thymus. 

It was thought to be a cause of sudden infant death syndrome but is now an obsolete term.

The importance of the thymus in the immune system was discovered in 1961 by Jacques Miller, by surgically removing the thymus from one-day-old mice, and observing the subsequent deficiency in a lymphocyte population, subsequently named T cells after the organ of their origin. 

Until the discovery of its immunological role, the thymus had been dismissed as a "evolutionary accident", without functional importance. 

The role the thymus played in ensuring mature T cells tolerated the tissues of the body was uncovered in 1962, with the finding that T cells of a transplanted thymus in mice demonstrated tolerance towards tissues of the donor mouse. 

B cells and T cells were identified as different types of lymphocytes in 1968, and the fact that T cells required maturation in the thymus was understood. 

The subtypes of T cells (CD8 and CD4) were identified by 1975. 

The way that these subclasses of T cells matured – positive selection of cells that functionally bound to MHC receptors – was known by the 1990s. 

The important role of the AIRE gene, and the role of negative selection in preventing autoreactive T cells from maturing, was understood by 1994.

Recently, advances in immunology have allowed the function of the thymus in T-cell maturation to be more fully understood.


== Other animals ==

The thymus is present in all jawed vertebrates, where it undergoes the same shrinkage with age and plays the same immunological function as in other vertebrates. 

Recently, in 2011, a discrete thymus-like lympho-epithelial structure, termed the thymoid, was discovered in the gills of larval lampreys. 

Hagfish possess a protothymus associated with the pharyngeal velar muscles, which is responsible for a variety of immune responses.The thymus is also present in most other vertebrates with similar structure and function as the human thymus. 

A second thymus in the neck has been reported sometimes to occur in the mouse As in humans, the guinea pig's thymus naturally atrophies as the animal reaches adulthood, but the athymic hairless guinea pig (which arose from a spontaneous laboratory mutation) possesses no thymic tissue whatsoever, and the organ cavity is replaced with cystic spaces.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thymus
;;;ES;;;



TIMO


El timo es un órgano linfoide primario especializado del sistema inmunitario.

Dentro del timo, maduran los linfocitos de las células del timo o las células T.

Las células T son críticas para el sistema inmunológico adaptativo, donde el cuerpo se adapta específicamente a los invasores extraños.

El timo se encuentra en la parte anterior superior del tórax, en el mediastino anterosuperior, detrás del esternón y delante del corazón.

Está formado por dos lóbulos, cada uno de los cuales consta de una médula central y una corteza exterior, rodeados por una cápsula.

El timo está formado por células T inmaduras llamadas timocitos, así como por células de revestimiento llamadas células epiteliales que ayudan a que se desarrollen los timocitos.

Las células T que se desarrollan con éxito reaccionan adecuadamente con los receptores inmunitarios MHC del cuerpo (llamada selección positiva) y no contra las proteínas del cuerpo (llamada selección negativa).

El timo es más grande y más activo durante los períodos neonatal y preadolescente.

En los primeros años de la adolescencia, el timo comienza a disminuir de tamaño y actividad y el tejido del timo se reemplaza gradualmente por tejido adiposo.

Sin embargo, parte del desarrollo de las células T continúa a lo largo de la vida adulta.

Las anomalías del timo pueden provocar una disminución del número de células T y enfermedades autoinmunes como el síndrome poliendocrino autoinmune tipo 1 y la miastenia grave.

Estos a menudo se asocian con cáncer del tejido del timo, llamado timoma, o tejidos que surgen de linfocitos inmaduros como las células T, llamado linfoma.

La extirpación del timo se denomina timectomía.

Aunque el timo se ha identificado como una parte del cuerpo desde la época de los antiguos griegos, solo a partir de la década de 1960 se ha vuelto más clara la función del timo en el sistema inmunitario.


== Estructura ==

El timo es un órgano que se encuentra debajo del esternón en la parte frontal superior del tórax y se extiende hacia el cuello.

En los niños, el timo es de color gris rosado, blando y lobulado en su superficie.

Al nacer, mide entre 4 y 6 cm de largo, entre 2,5 y 5 cm de ancho y alrededor de 1 cm de grosor.

Aumenta de tamaño hasta la pubertad, donde puede tener un tamaño de alrededor de 40 a 50 g, después de lo cual disminuye de tamaño en un proceso conocido como involución.

El timo está formado por dos lóbulos que se encuentran en la línea media superior y se extienden desde debajo de la tiroides en el cuello hasta el cartílago de la cuarta costilla.

Los lóbulos están cubiertos por una cápsula.

El timo se encuentra debajo del esternón, descansa sobre el pericardio y está separado del arco aórtico y los grandes vasos por una capa de fascia.

La vena braquiocefálica izquierda puede incluso estar incrustada dentro del timo.

En el cuello, se encuentra en la parte frontal y lateral de la tráquea, detrás de los músculos esternotiroideo y esternocleidohioideo.


=== Microanatomía ===

El timo consta de dos lóbulos, fusionados en el medio, rodeados por una cápsula que se extiende con vasos sanguíneos hacia el interior.

Los lóbulos consisten en una corteza externa rica en células y una médula interna menos densa.

Los lóbulos se dividen en lóbulos más pequeños de 0,5 a 2 mm de diámetro, entre los cuales se extruyen inserciones radiales desde la cápsula a lo largo de los tabiques.

La corteza se compone principalmente de timocitos y células epiteliales.

Los timocitos, células T inmaduras, están sostenidos por una red de células reticulares epiteliales finamente ramificadas, que se continúa con una red similar en la médula.

Esta red forma una adventicia para los vasos sanguíneos, que ingresan a la corteza a través de tabiques cerca de la unión con la médula.

Otras células también están presentes en el timo, incluidos macrófagos, células dendríticas y una pequeña cantidad de células B, neutrófilos y eosinófilos.

En la médula, la red de células epiteliales es más gruesa que en la corteza y el número de células linfoides es relativamente menor.

Los cuerpos concéntricos en forma de nido llamados corpúsculos de Hassall (también llamados corpúsculos tímicos) están formados por agregaciones de las células epiteliales medulares.

Estos son verticilos concéntricos en capas de células epiteliales que aumentan en número a lo largo de la vida.

Son los restos de los tubos epiteliales, que crecen a partir de las terceras bolsas faríngeas del embrión para formar el timo.


=== Suministro de sangre y nervios ===

Las arterias que irrigan el timo son ramas de las arterias torácica interna y tiroidea inferior, a veces se ven ramas de la arteria tiroidea superior.

Las ramas alcanzan el timo y viajan con los tabiques de la cápsula hacia el área entre la corteza y la médula, donde ingresan al propio timo; o alternativamente entrar directamente en la cápsula.

Las venas del timo terminan en la vena braquiocefálica izquierda, la vena torácica interna y en las venas tiroideas inferiores.

A veces, las venas terminan directamente en la vena cava superior. Los vasos linfáticos solo se alejan del timo, acompañando a las arterias y las venas.

Estos drenan en los ganglios linfáticos braquiocefálicos, traqueobronquiales y paraesternales.

Los nervios que inervan el timo surgen del nervio vago y la cadena simpática cervical.

Las ramas de los nervios frénicos alcanzan la cápsula del timo, pero no entran en el timo mismo.


=== Variación ===

Los dos lóbulos difieren ligeramente en tamaño, siendo el lóbulo izquierdo generalmente más alto que el derecho.

El tejido tímico se puede encontrar disperso en o alrededor de la glándula y ocasionalmente dentro de la tiroides.

El timo en los niños se estira de manera variable hacia arriba, a veces tan alto como la glándula tiroides.


== Desarrollo ==


Los timocitos y el epitelio del timo tienen diferentes orígenes de desarrollo.

El epitelio del timo se desarrolla primero, apareciendo como dos excrecencias, una a cada lado, de la tercera bolsa faríngea.

A veces también afecta la cuarta bolsa faríngea.

Estos se extienden hacia afuera y hacia atrás en el mesodermo circundante y el mesénquima derivado de la cresta neural frente a la aorta ventral.

Aquí los timocitos y el epitelio se encuentran y se unen con el tejido conectivo.

La abertura faríngea de cada divertículo pronto se oblitera, pero el cuello del matraz persiste durante algún tiempo como un cordón celular.

Mediante una mayor proliferación de las células que recubren el matraz, se forman brotes de células, que quedan rodeadas y aisladas por el mesodermo invasor.

El epitelio forma lóbulos finos y se desarrolla en una estructura similar a una esponja.

Durante esta etapa, los precursores de la médula ósea hematopoyética migran hacia el timo.

El desarrollo normal depende de la interacción entre el epitelio y los timocitos hematopoyéticos.

El yodo también es necesario para el desarrollo y la actividad del timo.


=== Involución ===

El timo continúa creciendo después del nacimiento alcanzando el tamaño máximo relativo en la pubertad.

Es más activo en la vida fetal y neonatal.

Aumenta a una masa de 20 a 50 gramos en la pubertad.

Luego comienza a disminuir de tamaño y actividad en un proceso llamado involución tímica.

Después del primer año de vida, la cantidad de células T producidas comienza a disminuir.

La grasa y el tejido conjuntivo llenan una parte del volumen tímico.

Durante la involución, el timo disminuye de tamaño y actividad.

Las células grasas están presentes al nacer, pero aumentan en tamaño y número notablemente después de la pubertad, invadiendo la glándula desde las paredes entre los lóbulos primero, luego hacia la corteza y la médula.

Este proceso continúa hasta la vejez, donde, ya sea con un microscopio o con el ojo humano, el timo puede ser difícil de detectar, aunque por lo general pesa entre 5 y 15 gramos.

La atrofia se debe al aumento del nivel circulante de hormonas sexuales, y la castración química o física de un adulto hace que el timo aumente de tamaño y actividad.

Una enfermedad grave o una infección por el virus de la inmunodeficiencia humana también pueden provocar una involución.


== Función ==

=== maduración de células T ===

El timo facilita la maduración de las células T, una parte importante del sistema inmunitario que proporciona inmunidad mediada por células.

Las células T comienzan como precursores hematopoyéticos de la médula ósea y migran al timo, donde se denominan timocitos.

En el timo pasan por un proceso de maduración, que implica que las células reaccionen contra los antígenos ("selección positiva"), pero que no reaccionen contra los antígenos que se encuentran en el tejido corporal ("selección negativa").

Una vez maduras, las células T emigran del timo para desempeñar funciones vitales en el sistema inmunitario. Cada célula T tiene un receptor de células T distinto, adecuado para una sustancia específica, llamada antígeno.

La mayoría de los receptores de células T se unen al complejo principal de histocompatibilidad en las células del cuerpo.

El MHC presenta un antígeno al receptor de células T, que se activa si coincide con el receptor de células T específico.

Para ser correctamente funcional, una célula T madura debe poder unirse a la molécula MHC ("selección positiva") y no reaccionar contra los antígenos que en realidad provienen de los tejidos del cuerpo ("selección negativa").

La selección positiva ocurre en la corteza y la selección negativa ocurre en la médula del timo.

Después de este proceso, las células T que han sobrevivido abandonan el timo, reguladas por la esfingosina-1-fosfato.

La maduración adicional se produce en la circulación periférica.

Parte de esto se debe a las hormonas y citoquinas secretadas por las células dentro del timo, incluidas la timulina, la timopoyetina y las timosinas.


=== Selección positiva ===

Las células T tienen distintos receptores de células T.

Estos distintos receptores están formados por el proceso de reordenamiento del gen de recombinación V(D)J estimulado por los genes RAG1 y RAG2.

Este proceso es propenso a errores y algunos timocitos no pueden producir receptores de células T funcionales, mientras que otros timocitos producen receptores de células T que son autorreactivos.

Si se forma un receptor de células T funcional, el timocito comenzará a expresar simultáneamente las proteínas de superficie celular CD4 y CD8.

La supervivencia y naturaleza de la célula T depende entonces de su interacción con las células epiteliales tímicas circundantes.

Aquí, el receptor de células T interactúa con las moléculas MHC en la superficie de las células epiteliales.

La célula AT con un receptor que no reacciona o reacciona débilmente morirá por apoptosis.

La célula AT que reacciona sobrevivirá y proliferará.

Una célula T madura expresa solo CD4 o CD8, pero no ambos.

Esto depende de la fuerza de unión entre el TCR y el MHC de clase 1 o clase 2.

El receptor de células AT que se une principalmente al MHC de clase I tiende a producir un linfocito T CD8 positivo "citotóxico" maduro; un receptor de células T que se une principalmente al MHC de clase II tiende a producir una célula T CD4 positiva.


=== Selección negativa ===

Las células T que atacan las propias proteínas del cuerpo se eliminan en el timo, lo que se denomina "selección negativa".

Las células epiteliales en la médula y las células dendríticas en el timo expresan proteínas importantes de otras partes del cuerpo.

El gen que estimula esto es AIRE.

Los timocitos que reaccionan fuertemente a los antígenos propios no sobreviven y mueren por apoptosis.

Algunas células T CD4 positivas expuestas a autoantígenos persisten como células T reguladoras.


== Importancia clínica ==

=== Inmunodeficiencia ===

Como el timo es donde se desarrollan las células T, los problemas congénitos con el desarrollo del timo pueden conducir a la inmunodeficiencia, ya sea debido a un problema con el desarrollo de la glándula del timo o un problema específico del desarrollo de los timocitos.

La inmunodeficiencia puede ser profunda.

La pérdida del timo a una edad temprana a través de una mutación genética (como en el síndrome de DiGeorge, el síndrome CHARGE o un timo "desnudo" muy raro que causa la ausencia de cabello y el timo) da como resultado una inmunodeficiencia grave y una alta susceptibilidad posterior a la infección por virus, protozoos y hongos.

Los ratones desnudos con la muy rara deficiencia "desnuda" como resultado de la mutación FOXN1 son una cepa de ratones de investigación como modelo de deficiencia de células T.

La causa congénita más común de inmunodeficiencia relacionada con el timo resulta de la eliminación del cromosoma 22, llamado síndrome de DiGeorge.

Esto da como resultado una falla en el desarrollo de las bolsas faríngeas tercera y cuarta, lo que resulta en una falla en el desarrollo del timo y otros problemas asociados variables, como enfermedad cardíaca congénita y anomalías de la boca (como paladar hendido y labio hendido), falta de desarrollo de las glándulas paratiroides, y la presencia de una fístula entre la tráquea y el esófago.

Se observa un número muy bajo de células T circulantes.

La afección se diagnostica mediante hibridación fluorescente in situ y se trata con trasplante de timo. La inmunodeficiencia combinada grave (SCID) es un grupo de enfermedades genéticas congénitas raras que pueden provocar deficiencias combinadas de células T, B y NK.

Estos síndromes son causados ​​por mutaciones que afectan la maduración de las células progenitoras hematopoyéticas, que son las precursoras de las células B y T.

Varios defectos genéticos pueden causar SCID, incluida la pérdida de la función del gen del receptor de IL-2 y la mutación que resulta en la deficiencia de la enzima adenina desaminasa.


=== Enfermedad autoinmune ===

==== Síndrome poliendocrino autoinmune ====

El síndrome poliendocrino autoinmune tipo 1 es un síndrome autoinmune genético raro que resulta de un defecto genético de los tejidos del timo.

Específicamente, la enfermedad resulta de defectos en el gen regulador autoinmune (AIRE), que estimula la expresión de antígenos propios en las células epiteliales dentro de la médula del timo.

Debido a defectos en esta condición, los antígenos propios no se expresan, lo que da como resultado células T que no están condicionadas para tolerar los tejidos del cuerpo y pueden tratarlos como extraños, estimulando una respuesta inmune y dando como resultado autoinmunidad.

Las personas con APECED desarrollan una enfermedad autoinmune que afecta múltiples tejidos endocrinos, siendo los órganos comúnmente afectados el hipotiroidismo de la glándula tiroides, la enfermedad de Addison de las glándulas suprarrenales y la infección por cándida de las superficies del cuerpo, incluido el revestimiento interno de la boca y las uñas debido a a la disfunción de las células TH17, y los síntomas a menudo comienzan en la infancia.

También pueden ocurrir muchas otras enfermedades autoinmunes.

El tratamiento se dirige a los órganos afectados.


==== Autoinmunidad multiorgánica asociada al timoma ====

La autoinmunidad multiorgánica asociada al timoma puede ocurrir en personas con timoma.

En esta condición, las células T desarrolladas en el timo se dirigen contra los tejidos del cuerpo.

Esto se debe a que el timo maligno es incapaz de educar adecuadamente a los timocitos en desarrollo para que eliminen las células T autorreactivas.

La condición es prácticamente indistinguible de la enfermedad de injerto contra huésped.


==== Miastenia gravis ====

La miastenia gravis es una enfermedad autoinmune que con mayor frecuencia se debe a anticuerpos que bloquean los receptores de acetilcolina, involucrados en la señalización entre los nervios y los músculos.

A menudo se asocia con hiperplasia tímica o timoma, con anticuerpos producidos probablemente debido a células T que se desarrollan de manera anormal.

La miastenia gravis se desarrolla con mayor frecuencia entre los jóvenes y la mediana edad, lo que provoca una fatiga fácil de los movimientos musculares.

Las investigaciones incluyen la demostración de anticuerpos (como contra los receptores de acetilcolina o la cinasa específica de músculo) y una tomografía computarizada para detectar timoma o timectomía.

Con respecto al timo, la extirpación del timo, llamada timectomía, se puede considerar como un tratamiento, particularmente si se encuentra un timoma.

Otros tratamientos incluyen aumentar la duración de la acción de la acetilcolina en las sinapsis nerviosas al disminuir la tasa de ruptura.

Esto lo hacen los inhibidores de la acetilcolinesterasa como la piridostigmina.


=== Cáncer ===

==== Timomas ====

Los tumores que se originan en las células epiteliales del timo se denominan timomas.

Ocurren con mayor frecuencia en adultos mayores de 40 años.

Los tumores generalmente se detectan cuando provocan síntomas, como una masa en el cuello o afectación de estructuras cercanas como la vena cava superior; detectado debido a la detección en pacientes con miastenia gravis, que tiene una fuerte asociación con timomas e hiperplasia; y detectado como un hallazgo incidental en imágenes como radiografías de tórax.

La hiperplasia y los tumores que se originan en el timo están asociados con otras enfermedades autoinmunes, como la hipogammaglobulinemia, la enfermedad de Graves, la aplasia pura de glóbulos rojos, la anemia perniciosa y la dermatomiositis, probablemente debido a defectos en la selección negativa de las células T en proliferación.

Los timomas pueden ser benignos; benigno pero en virtud de la expansión, invadiendo más allá de la cápsula del timo ("tioma invasivo"), o maligno (un carcinoma).

Esta clasificación se basa en la apariencia de las células.

También existe una clasificación de la OMS, pero no se utiliza como parte de la práctica clínica estándar.

Los tumores benignos confinados al timo son los más comunes; seguido de tumores localmente invasivos y luego de carcinomas.

Hay variación en los informes, y algunas fuentes informan que los tumores malignos son más comunes.

Los tumores invasivos, aunque técnicamente no son malignos, aún pueden diseminarse (metástasis) a otras áreas del cuerpo.

Aunque los timomas se producen en las células epiteliales, también pueden contener timocitos.

El tratamiento de los timomas a menudo requiere cirugía para extirpar todo el timo.

Esto también puede resultar en una remisión temporal de cualquier condición autoinmune asociada.


==== Linfomas ====

Los tumores que se originan en las células T del timo forman un subconjunto de la leucemia linfoblástica aguda (LLA).

Estos son similares en síntomas, enfoque de investigación y manejo a otras formas de ALL.

Los síntomas que se desarrollan, como otras formas de ALL, se relacionan con la deficiencia de plaquetas, lo que provoca hematomas o sangrado; inmunosupresión que resulta en infecciones; o la infiltración de células en partes del cuerpo, lo que resulta en agrandamiento del hígado, el bazo, los ganglios linfáticos u otros sitios.

Los análisis de sangre pueden revelar una gran cantidad de glóbulos blancos o linfoblastos y deficiencias en otras líneas celulares, como plaquetas bajas o anemia.

La inmunofenotipificación revelará células que son CD3, una proteína que se encuentra en las células T, y ayudará a distinguir aún más la madurez de las células T.

El análisis genético, incluido el cariotipo, puede revelar anomalías específicas que pueden influir en el pronóstico o el tratamiento, como la translocación de Filadelfia.

El manejo puede incluir múltiples cursos de quimioterapia, trasplante de células madre y el manejo de problemas asociados, como el tratamiento de infecciones con antibióticos y transfusiones de sangre.

Los recuentos de glóbulos blancos muy altos también pueden requerir citorreducción con aféresis.

Los tumores que se originan a partir de la pequeña población de células B presentes en el timo conducen a linfomas primarios de células B grandes en el mediastino (tímico).

Estos son un subtipo raro de linfoma no Hodgkin, aunque por la actividad de los genes y, en ocasiones, la forma microscópica, inusualmente también tienen las características de los linfomas de Hodgkin. que ocurren más comúnmente en jóvenes y de mediana edad, más prominentes en mujeres.

La mayoría de las veces, cuando se presentan síntomas, se debe a la compresión de estructuras cercanas al timo, como la vena cava superior o las vías respiratorias superiores; cuando los ganglios linfáticos se ven afectados, a menudo se encuentra en los grupos de mediastino y cuello.

Dichos tumores a menudo se detectan con una biopsia que está sujeta a inmunohistoquímica.

Esto mostrará la presencia de grupos de diferenciación, proteínas de la superficie celular, a saber, CD30, con CD19, CD20 y CD22, y con la ausencia de CD15.

También se pueden usar otros marcadores para confirmar el diagnóstico.

El tratamiento suele incluir los regímenes típicos de CHOP o EPOCH u otros regímenes; regímenes que generalmente incluyen ciclofosfamida, una antraciclina, prednisona y otros quimioterapéuticos; y potencialmente también un trasplante de células madre.


=== Quistes tímicos ===

El timo puede contener quistes, generalmente de menos de 4 cm de diámetro.

Los quistes tímicos generalmente se detectan de manera incidental y generalmente no causan síntomas.

Los quistes tímicos pueden ocurrir a lo largo del cuello o en el pecho (mediastino).

Los quistes generalmente solo contienen líquido y están revestidos por muchas capas de células planas o células en forma de columna.

A pesar de esto, la presencia de un quiste puede causar problemas similares a los de los timomas, al comprimir estructuras cercanas, y algunos pueden contactar con las paredes internas (tabiques) y ser difíciles de distinguir de los tumores.

Cuando se encuentran quistes, la investigación puede incluir un estudio de tumores, que puede incluir una tomografía computarizada o una resonancia magnética del área en la que se sospecha que está el quiste.


=== Extirpación quirúrgica ===

La timectomía es la extirpación quirúrgica del timo.

El motivo habitual de la extracción es tener acceso al corazón para la cirugía para corregir defectos cardíacos congénitos en el período neonatal.

Otras indicaciones para la timectomía incluyen la extirpación de timomas y el tratamiento de la miastenia gravis.

En los recién nacidos, el tamaño relativo del timo obstruye el acceso quirúrgico al corazón y los vasos que lo rodean.

La extirpación del timo en la infancia da como resultado una inmunodeficiencia a menudo mortal, porque no se han desarrollado células T funcionales.

En niños mayores y adultos, que tienen un sistema linfático en funcionamiento con células T maduras también situadas en otros órganos linfoides, el efecto se reduce y se limita a la incapacidad de generar respuestas inmunitarias contra nuevos antígenos.


== Sociedad y cultura ==

Cuando se usa como alimento para humanos, el timo de los animales se conoce como uno de los tipos de mollejas.


== Historia ==

El timo era conocido por los antiguos griegos, y su nombre proviene de la palabra griega θυμός (thumos), que significa "ira", o "corazón, alma, deseo, vida", posiblemente por su ubicación en el pecho, cerca de donde se encuentran las emociones. se sienten subjetivamente; o bien el nombre proviene de la hierba tomillo (también en griego θύμος o θυμάρι), que se convirtió en el nombre de una "excrecencia verrugosa", posiblemente debido a su parecido con un manojo de tomillo. Galeno fue el primero en notar que el tamaño de el órgano cambió a lo largo de la vida de una persona.

En el siglo XIX, se identificó una condición como estado thymicolymphaticus definido por un aumento en el tejido linfoide y un timo agrandado.

Se pensó que era una causa del síndrome de muerte súbita del lactante, pero ahora es un término obsoleto.

La importancia del timo en el sistema inmunitario fue descubierta en 1961 por Jacques Miller, al extirpar quirúrgicamente el timo de ratones de un día de edad y observar la subsiguiente deficiencia en una población de linfocitos, posteriormente denominados células T por el órgano de origen. .

Hasta el descubrimiento de su papel inmunológico, el timo había sido descartado como un "accidente evolutivo", sin importancia funcional.

El papel que desempeñó el timo para garantizar que las células T maduras toleraran los tejidos del cuerpo se descubrió en 1962, con el hallazgo de que las células T de un timo trasplantado en ratones demostraron tolerancia hacia los tejidos del ratón donante.

Las células B y las células T se identificaron como diferentes tipos de linfocitos en 1968, y se entendió el hecho de que las células T requerían maduración en el timo.

Los subtipos de células T (CD8 y CD4) se identificaron en 1975.

La forma en que maduraron estas subclases de células T (selección positiva de células que se unían funcionalmente a los receptores MHC) se conocía en la década de 1990.

El importante papel del gen AIRE y el papel de la selección negativa en la prevención de la maduración de las células T autorreactivas se entendieron en 1994.

Recientemente, los avances en inmunología han permitido comprender mejor la función del timo en la maduración de las células T.


== Otros animales ==

El timo está presente en todos los vertebrados con mandíbula, donde sufre el mismo encogimiento con la edad y desempeña la misma función inmunológica que en otros vertebrados.

Recientemente, en 2011, se descubrió una estructura linfoepitelial discreta similar al timo, denominada timoide, en las branquias de las larvas de lamprea.

Los mixinos poseen un prototimo asociado con los músculos velares faríngeos, que es responsable de una variedad de respuestas inmunitarias. El timo también está presente en la mayoría de los otros vertebrados con una estructura y función similares a las del timo humano.

Se ha informado que a veces ocurre un segundo timo en el cuello del ratón. Al igual que en los humanos, el timo del conejillo de indias se atrofia naturalmente cuando el animal alcanza la edad adulta, pero el conejillo de Indias sin pelo atímico (que surgió de una mutación espontánea de laboratorio) no posee tejido tímico. cualquiera, y la cavidad del órgano es reemplazada por espacios quísticos.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thymus

;;;PT;;;



TIMO


O timo é um órgão linfóide primário especializado do sistema imunológico.

Dentro do timo, os linfócitos das células do timo ou células T amadurecem.

As células T são críticas para o sistema imunológico adaptativo, onde o corpo se adapta especificamente a invasores estranhos.

O timo está localizado na parte anterior superior do tórax, no mediastino ântero-superior, atrás do esterno e na frente do coração.

É constituído por dois lobos, cada um constituído por uma medula central e um córtex externo, rodeados por uma cápsula.

O timo é composto de células T imaturas chamadas timócitos, bem como células de revestimento chamadas células epiteliais que ajudam os timócitos a se desenvolverem.

As células T que se desenvolvem com sucesso reagem adequadamente com os receptores imunológicos do MHC do corpo (chamados de seleção positiva) e não contra as proteínas do corpo (chamadas de seleção negativa).

O timo é maior e mais ativo durante os períodos neonatal e pré-adolescente.

No início da adolescência, o timo começa a diminuir em tamanho e atividade e o tecido do timo é gradualmente substituído por tecido adiposo.

No entanto, algum desenvolvimento de células T continua ao longo da vida adulta.

Anormalidades do timo podem resultar em diminuição do número de células T e doenças autoimunes, como síndrome poliendócrina autoimune tipo 1 e miastenia gravis.

Estes são frequentemente associados ao câncer do tecido do timo, chamado timoma, ou tecidos decorrentes de linfócitos imaturos, como células T, chamado linfoma.

A remoção do timo é chamada de timectomia.

Embora o timo tenha sido identificado como parte do corpo desde a época dos gregos antigos, foi somente a partir da década de 1960 que a função do timo no sistema imunológico se tornou mais clara.


== Estrutura ==

O timo é um órgão que fica abaixo do esterno na parte frontal superior do peito, estendendo-se para cima em direção ao pescoço.

Nas crianças, o timo é cinza-rosado, macio e lobulado em suas superfícies.

Ao nascer, tem cerca de 4 a 6 cm de comprimento, 2,5 a 5 cm de largura e cerca de 1 cm de espessura.

Aumenta de tamanho até a puberdade, onde pode ter um tamanho de cerca de 40 a 50 g, após o que diminui de tamanho em um processo conhecido como involução.

O timo é composto por dois lobos que se encontram na linha média superior e se estendem desde abaixo da tireoide no pescoço até a cartilagem da quarta costela.

Os lobos são cobertos por uma cápsula.

O timo situa-se abaixo do esterno, repousa sobre o pericárdio e é separado do arco aórtico e dos grandes vasos por uma camada de fáscia.

A veia braquiocefálica esquerda pode até estar embutida no timo.

No pescoço, encontra-se na frente e nas laterais da traqueia, atrás dos músculos esterno-hióideo e esternotireóideo.


=== Microanatomia ===

O timo consiste em dois lobos, fundidos no meio, cercados por uma cápsula que se estende com vasos sanguíneos para o interior.

Os lobos consistem em um córtex externo rico em células e uma medula interna menos densa.

Os lobos são divididos em lóbulos menores de 0,5 a 2 mm de diâmetro, entre os quais extrudam inserções radiantes da cápsula ao longo dos septos.

O córtex é composto principalmente de timócitos e células epiteliais.

Os timócitos, células T imaturas, são sustentados por uma rede de células reticulares epiteliais finamente ramificadas, que é contínua com uma rede semelhante na medula.

Essa rede forma uma adventícia para os vasos sanguíneos, que entram no córtex via septos próximos à junção com a medula.

Outras células também estão presentes no timo, incluindo macrófagos, células dendríticas e uma pequena quantidade de células B, neutrófilos e eosinófilos.

Na medula, a rede de células epiteliais é mais grosseira do que no córtex, e as células linfóides são em número relativamente menor.

Corpos concêntricos semelhantes a ninhos chamados corpúsculos de Hassall (também chamados corpúsculos tímicos) são formados por agregações das células epiteliais medulares.

São espirais concêntricas e em camadas de células epiteliais que aumentam em número ao longo da vida.

Eles são os restos dos tubos epiteliais, que crescem das terceiras bolsas faríngeas do embrião para formar o timo.


=== Suprimento sanguíneo e nervoso ===

As artérias que suprem o timo são ramos das artérias torácica interna e tireóidea inferior, sendo às vezes observados ramos da artéria tireóidea superior.

Os ramos atingem o timo e viajam com os septos da cápsula para a área entre o córtex e a medula, onde entram no próprio timo; ou, alternativamente, entrar diretamente na cápsula.

As veias do timo terminam na veia braquiocefálica esquerda, na veia torácica interna e nas veias tireóideas inferiores.

Às vezes, as veias terminam diretamente na veia cava superior. Os vasos linfáticos se afastam apenas do timo, acompanhando as artérias e veias.

Estes drenam para os linfonodos braquiocefálicos, traqueobrônquicos e paraesternais.

Os nervos que suprem o timo originam-se do nervo vago e da cadeia simpática cervical.

Ramos dos nervos frênicos atingem a cápsula do timo, mas não entram no próprio timo.


=== Variação ===

Os dois lobos diferem ligeiramente em tamanho, com o lobo esquerdo geralmente mais alto que o direito.

O tecido tímico pode ser encontrado disperso sobre ou ao redor da glândula e, ocasionalmente, dentro da tireoide.

O timo nas crianças se estende variavelmente para cima, às vezes até a glândula tireoide.


== Desenvolvimento ==


Os timócitos e o epitélio do timo têm origens de desenvolvimento diferentes.

O epitélio do timo se desenvolve primeiro, aparecendo como duas protuberâncias, uma de cada lado, da terceira bolsa faríngea.

Às vezes, também envolve a quarta bolsa faríngea.

Estes se estendem para fora e para trás no mesoderma circundante e no mesênquima derivado da crista neural na frente da aorta ventral.

Aqui os timócitos e o epitélio se encontram e se unem ao tecido conjuntivo.

A abertura faríngea de cada divertículo é logo obliterada, mas o gargalo do frasco persiste por algum tempo como um cordão celular.

Pela proliferação adicional das células que revestem o frasco, formam-se brotos de células, que ficam cercados e isolados pelo mesoderma invasor.

O epitélio forma lóbulos finos e se desenvolve em uma estrutura esponjosa.

Durante esta fase, os precursores hematopoiéticos da medula óssea migram para o timo.

O desenvolvimento normal depende da interação entre o epitélio e os timócitos hematopoiéticos.

O iodo também é necessário para o desenvolvimento e atividade do timo.


=== Involução ===

O timo continua a crescer após o nascimento, atingindo o tamanho máximo relativo na puberdade.

É mais ativo na vida fetal e neonatal.

Aumenta para uma massa de 20 a 50 gramas na puberdade.

Ele então começa a diminuir em tamanho e atividade em um processo chamado involução tímica.

Após o primeiro ano de vida a quantidade de células T produzidas começa a cair.

O tecido adiposo e conjuntivo preenche uma parte do volume tímico.

Durante a involução, o timo diminui em tamanho e atividade.

As células de gordura estão presentes ao nascimento, mas aumentam de tamanho e número acentuadamente após a puberdade, invadindo a glândula a partir das paredes entre os lóbulos primeiro, depois para o córtex e a medula.

Esse processo continua na velhice, onde, seja com um microscópio ou com o olho humano, o timo pode ser difícil de detectar, embora normalmente pese de 5 a 15 gramas.

A atrofia é devida ao aumento do nível circulante de hormônios sexuais, e a castração química ou física de um adulto resulta no aumento do tamanho e da atividade do timo.

Doença grave ou infecção pelo vírus da imunodeficiência humana também pode resultar em involução.


== Função ==

=== maturação das células T ===

O timo facilita a maturação das células T, uma parte importante do sistema imunológico que fornece imunidade mediada por células.

As células T começam como precursores hematopoiéticos da medula óssea e migram para o timo, onde são chamadas de timócitos.

No timo, eles passam por um processo de maturação, que envolve garantir que as células reajam contra antígenos ("seleção positiva"), mas que não reajam contra antígenos encontrados no tecido corporal ("seleção negativa").

Uma vez maduras, as células T emigram do timo para fornecer funções vitais no sistema imunológico. Cada célula T tem um receptor de célula T distinto, adequado para uma substância específica, chamada antígeno.

A maioria dos receptores de células T liga-se ao principal complexo de histocompatibilidade nas células do corpo.

O MHC apresenta um antígeno para o receptor da célula T, que se torna ativo se corresponder ao receptor específico da célula T.

Para ser adequadamente funcional, uma célula T madura precisa ser capaz de se ligar à molécula do MHC ("seleção positiva"), e não reagir contra antígenos que são realmente dos tecidos do corpo ("seleção negativa").

A seleção positiva ocorre no córtex e a seleção negativa ocorre na medula do timo.

Após esse processo, as células T que sobreviveram deixam o timo, reguladas pela esfingosina-1-fosfato.

A maturação adicional ocorre na circulação periférica.

Parte disso é por causa de hormônios e citocinas secretados por células dentro do timo, incluindo timulina, timopoietina e timosinas.


=== Seleção positiva ===

As células T têm receptores de células T distintos.

Esses receptores distintos são formados pelo processo de rearranjo gênico de recombinação V(D)J estimulado pelos genes RAG1 e RAG2.

Esse processo é propenso a erros, e alguns timócitos não conseguem produzir receptores de células T funcionais, enquanto outros timócitos produzem receptores de células T que são autorreativos.

Se um receptor de célula T funcional for formado, o timócito começará a expressar simultaneamente as proteínas de superfície celular CD4 e CD8.

A sobrevivência e a natureza da célula T dependem de sua interação com as células epiteliais do timo circundantes.

Aqui, o receptor de células T interage com as moléculas do MHC na superfície das células epiteliais.

A célula AT com um receptor que não reage, ou reage fracamente, morrerá por apoptose.

A célula AT que reage sobreviverá e proliferará.

Uma célula T madura expressa apenas CD4 ou CD8, mas não ambos.

Isso depende da força de ligação entre o TCR e o MHC classe 1 ou classe 2.

O receptor da célula AT que se liga principalmente ao MHC classe I tende a produzir uma célula T CD8 positiva "citotóxica" madura; um receptor de células T que se liga principalmente ao MHC classe II tende a produzir uma célula T CD4 positiva.


=== Seleção negativa ===

As células T que atacam as próprias proteínas do corpo são eliminadas no timo, chamada de "seleção negativa".

As células epiteliais da medula e as células dendríticas do timo expressam as principais proteínas de outras partes do corpo.

O gene que estimula isso é o AIRE.

Os timócitos que reagem fortemente aos autoantígenos não sobrevivem e morrem por apoptose.

Algumas células T positivas para CD4 expostas a antígenos próprios persistem como células T reguladoras.


== Significado clínico ==

=== Imunodeficiência ===

Como o timo é onde as células T se desenvolvem, problemas congênitos com o desenvolvimento do timo podem levar à imunodeficiência, seja por um problema com o desenvolvimento da glândula timo, ou por um problema específico do desenvolvimento do timócito.

A imunodeficiência pode ser profunda.

A perda do timo em idade precoce por mutação genética (como na síndrome de DiGeorge, síndrome CHARGE ou um timo "nu" muito raro causando ausência de pêlos e timo) resulta em imunodeficiência grave e subsequente alta suscetibilidade à infecção por vírus, protozoários , e fungos.

Camundongos nus com a rara deficiência "nu" como resultado da mutação FOXN1 são uma linhagem de camundongos de pesquisa como modelo de deficiência de células T.

A causa congênita mais comum de imunodeficiência relacionada ao timo resulta da deleção do cromossomo 22, chamada síndrome de DiGeorge.

Isso resulta em uma falha no desenvolvimento da terceira e quarta bolsas faríngeas, resultando em falha no desenvolvimento do timo e vários outros problemas associados, como cardiopatia congênita e anormalidades da boca (como fenda palatina e lábio leporino). falha no desenvolvimento das glândulas paratireóides e presença de fístula entre a traqueia e o esôfago.

Números muito baixos de células T circulantes são vistos.

A condição é diagnosticada por hibridização fluorescente in situ e tratada com transplante de timo. A imunodeficiência combinada grave (SCID) é um grupo de doenças genéticas congênitas raras que podem resultar em deficiências combinadas de células T, B e NK.

Essas síndromes são causadas por mutações que afetam a maturação das células progenitoras hematopoiéticas, que são as precursoras das células B e T.

Vários defeitos genéticos podem causar SCID, incluindo perda de função do gene do receptor de IL-2 e mutação resultando em deficiência da enzima adenina desaminase.


=== Doença autoimune ===

==== Síndrome poliendócrina autoimune ====

A síndrome poliendócrina autoimune tipo 1 é uma síndrome genética autoimune rara que resulta de um defeito genético dos tecidos do timo.

Especificamente, a doença resulta de defeitos no gene regulador autoimune (AIRE), que estimula a expressão de autoantígenos nas células epiteliais dentro da medula do timo.

Devido a defeitos nessa condição, os autoantígenos não são expressos, resultando em células T que não estão condicionadas a tolerar tecidos do corpo, podendo tratá-los como estranhos, estimulando uma resposta imune e resultando em autoimunidade.

Pessoas com APECED desenvolvem uma doença autoimune que afeta vários tecidos endócrinos, sendo os órgãos comumente afetados o hipotireoidismo da glândula tireoide, a doença de Addison das glândulas adrenais e a infecção por Candida de superfícies do corpo, incluindo o revestimento interno da boca e das unhas devido à disfunção das células TH17, e os sintomas geralmente começam na infância.

Muitas outras doenças autoimunes também podem ocorrer.

O tratamento é direcionado aos órgãos afetados.


==== Autoimunidade multiorgânica associada ao timoma ====

A autoimunidade multiorgânica associada ao timoma pode ocorrer em pessoas com timoma.

Nesta condição, as células T desenvolvidas no timo são direcionadas contra os tecidos do corpo.

Isso ocorre porque o timo maligno é incapaz de educar adequadamente os timócitos em desenvolvimento para eliminar as células T autorreativas.

A condição é praticamente indistinguível da doença do enxerto versus hospedeiro.


==== Miastenia gravis ====

A miastenia gravis é uma doença autoimune na maioria das vezes devido a anticorpos que bloqueiam os receptores de acetilcolina, envolvidos na sinalização entre nervos e músculos.

Frequentemente está associada a hiperplasia tímica ou timoma, com anticorpos produzidos provavelmente por causa de células T que se desenvolvem de forma anormal.

A miastenia gravis geralmente se desenvolve entre a juventude e a meia-idade, causando fadiga fácil dos movimentos musculares.

As investigações incluem a demonstração de anticorpos (como contra receptores de acetilcolina ou quinase muscular específica) e tomografia computadorizada para detectar timoma ou timectomia.

Com relação ao timo, a remoção do timo, chamada timectomia, pode ser considerada como tratamento, principalmente se for encontrado um timoma.

Outros tratamentos incluem aumentar a duração da ação da acetilcolina nas sinapses nervosas, diminuindo a taxa de degradação.

Isso é feito por inibidores da acetilcolinesterase, como a piridostigmina.


=== Câncer ===

==== Timomas ====

Os tumores originários das células epiteliais do timo são chamados de timomas.

Eles ocorrem mais frequentemente em adultos com mais de 40 anos.

Os tumores geralmente são detectados quando causam sintomas, como uma massa cervical ou que afetam estruturas próximas, como a veia cava superior; detectada por triagem em pacientes com miastenia gravis, que tem forte associação com timomas e hiperplasia; e detectado como um achado incidental em exames de imagem, como radiografias de tórax.

A hiperplasia e os tumores originários do timo estão associados a outras doenças autoimunes – como hipogamaglobulinemia, doença de Graves, aplasia eritrocitária pura, anemia perniciosa e dermatomiosite, provavelmente por defeitos na seleção negativa das células T em proliferação.

Timomas podem ser benignos; benigno, mas em virtude da expansão, invadindo além da cápsula do timo ("timoma invasivo"), ou maligno (um carcinoma).

Esta classificação é baseada na aparência das células.

Uma classificação da OMS também existe, mas não é usada como parte da prática clínica padrão.

Os tumores benignos confinados ao timo são os mais comuns; seguido por tumores localmente invasivos, e depois por carcinomas.

Há variação nos relatos, com algumas fontes relatando tumores malignos como mais comuns.

Tumores invasivos, embora não sejam tecnicamente malignos, ainda podem se espalhar (metástase) para outras áreas do corpo.

Embora os timomas ocorram de células epiteliais, eles também podem conter timócitos.

O tratamento de timomas geralmente requer cirurgia para remover todo o timo.

Isso também pode resultar em remissão temporária de quaisquer condições autoimunes associadas.


==== Linfomas ====

Tumores originários de células T do timo formam um subconjunto de leucemia linfoblástica aguda (LLA).

Estes são semelhantes em sintomas, abordagem de investigação e gestão a outras formas de ALL.

Os sintomas que se desenvolvem, como outras formas de LLA, estão relacionados à deficiência de plaquetas, resultando em hematomas ou sangramento; imunossupressão resultando em infecções; ou infiltração de células em partes do corpo, resultando em aumento do fígado, baço, linfonodos ou outros locais.

O exame de sangue pode revelar uma grande quantidade de glóbulos brancos ou linfoblastos e deficiência em outras linhagens celulares – como plaquetas baixas ou anemia.

A imunofenotipagem revelará células que são CD3, uma proteína encontrada nas células T, e ajudará a distinguir ainda mais a maturidade das células T.

A análise genética, incluindo o cariótipo, pode revelar anormalidades específicas que podem influenciar o prognóstico ou o tratamento, como a translocação de Filadélfia.

O manejo pode incluir vários cursos de quimioterapia, transplante de células-tronco e tratamento de problemas associados, como tratamento de infecções com antibióticos e transfusões de sangue.

Contagens de leucócitos muito altas também podem exigir citorredução com aférese.

Os tumores originários da pequena população de células B presentes no timo levam a linfomas primários de grandes células B mediastinais (tímicos).

Estes são um subtipo raro de linfoma não-Hodgkin, embora pela atividade dos genes e ocasionalmente pela forma microscópica, invulgarmente também tenham as características dos linfomas de Hodgkin. que ocorrem mais comumente em jovens e de meia-idade, mais proeminentes no sexo feminino.

Na maioria das vezes, quando os sintomas ocorrem, é por compressão de estruturas próximas ao timo, como a veia cava superior ou o trato respiratório superior; quando os linfonodos são afetados, geralmente ocorre nos grupos do mediastino e do pescoço.

Tais tumores são frequentemente detectados com uma biópsia sujeita a imuno-histoquímica.

Isso mostrará a presença de clusters de diferenciação, proteínas de superfície celular – ou seja, CD30, com CD19, CD20 e CD22, e com a ausência de CD15.

Outros marcadores também podem ser usados ​​para confirmar o diagnóstico.

O tratamento geralmente inclui os regimes típicos de CHOP ou EPOCH ou outros regimes; regimes geralmente incluindo ciclofosfamida, uma antraciclina, prednisona e outros quimioterápicos; e potencialmente também um transplante de células-tronco.


=== Cistos tímicos ===

O timo pode conter cistos, geralmente com menos de 4 cm de diâmetro.

Os cistos tímicos geralmente são detectados incidentalmente e geralmente não causam sintomas.

Os cistos tímicos podem ocorrer ao longo do pescoço ou no tórax (mediastino).

Os cistos geralmente contêm apenas fluido e são revestidos por muitas camadas de células planas ou células em forma de coluna.

Apesar disso, a presença de um cisto pode causar problemas semelhantes aos dos timomas, por comprimir estruturas próximas, e alguns podem entrar em contato com paredes internas (septos) e serem difíceis de distinguir de tumores.

Quando os cistos são encontrados, a investigação pode incluir uma investigação para tumores, que pode incluir tomografia computadorizada ou ressonância magnética da área em que se suspeita que o cisto esteja.


=== Remoção cirúrgica ===

Timectomia é a remoção cirúrgica do timo.

A razão usual para a remoção é obter acesso ao coração para cirurgia para corrigir defeitos cardíacos congênitos no período neonatal.

Outras indicações para a timectomia incluem a remoção de timomas e o tratamento da miastenia gravis.

Em recém-nascidos, o tamanho relativo do timo obstrui o acesso cirúrgico ao coração e seus vasos circundantes.

A remoção do timo na infância resulta em imunodeficiência muitas vezes fatal, porque as células T funcionais não se desenvolveram.

Em crianças mais velhas e adultos, que têm um sistema linfático funcional com células T maduras também situadas em outros órgãos linfoides, o efeito é reduzido e limitado à falha na montagem de respostas imunes contra novos antígenos.


== Sociedade e cultura ==

Quando usado como alimento para humanos, o timo dos animais é conhecido como um dos tipos de pão doce.


== História ==

O timo era conhecido dos antigos gregos, e seu nome vem da palavra grega θυμός (thumos), que significa "raiva", ou "coração, alma, desejo, vida", possivelmente por causa de sua localização no peito, perto de onde as emoções são subjetivamente sentidas; ou então o nome vem da erva tomilho (também em grego θύμος ou θυμάρι), que se tornou o nome de uma "excrescência verrucosa", possivelmente devido à sua semelhança com um ramo de tomilho. o órgão mudou ao longo da vida de uma pessoa.

No século XIX, uma condição foi identificada como status thymicolymphaticus definida por um aumento no tecido linfóide e um timo aumentado.

Pensava-se ser uma causa da síndrome da morte súbita infantil, mas agora é um termo obsoleto.

A importância do timo no sistema imunológico foi descoberta em 1961 por Jacques Miller, ao remover cirurgicamente o timo de camundongos com um dia de idade e observar a subsequente deficiência em uma população de linfócitos, posteriormente denominada células T em homenagem ao órgão de sua origem .

Até a descoberta de seu papel imunológico, o timo havia sido descartado como um "acidente evolutivo", sem importância funcional.

O papel que o timo desempenhou em garantir que as células T maduras tolerassem os tecidos do corpo foi descoberto em 1962, com a descoberta de que as células T de um timo transplantado em camundongos demonstraram tolerância aos tecidos do camundongo doador.

As células B e as células T foram identificadas como tipos diferentes de linfócitos em 1968, e o fato de as células T necessitarem de maturação no timo foi entendido.

Os subtipos de células T (CD8 e CD4) foram identificados em 1975.

A maneira como essas subclasses de células T amadureceram – seleção positiva de células que se ligam funcionalmente aos receptores do MHC – era conhecida na década de 1990.

O importante papel do gene AIRE e o papel da seleção negativa na prevenção do amadurecimento de células T autorreativas foi entendido em 1994.

Recentemente, os avanços na imunologia permitiram que a função do timo na maturação das células T fosse mais completamente compreendida.


== Outros animais ==

O timo está presente em todos os vertebrados com mandíbula, onde sofre o mesmo encolhimento com a idade e desempenha a mesma função imunológica que em outros vertebrados.

Recentemente, em 2011, uma estrutura linfoepitelial discreta semelhante ao timo, denominada timoide, foi descoberta nas brânquias de larvas de lampreias.

O peixe-bruxa possui um prototimo associado aos músculos velares da faringe, que é responsável por uma variedade de respostas imunes. O timo também está presente na maioria dos outros vertebrados com estrutura e função semelhantes ao timo humano.

Um segundo timo no pescoço foi relatado algumas vezes no camundongo Como em humanos, o timo do porquinho-da-índia atrofia naturalmente quando o animal atinge a idade adulta, mas o porquinho-da-índia sem pêlos atímico (que surgiu de uma mutação laboratorial espontânea) não possui tecido tímico qualquer, e a cavidade do órgão é substituída por espaços císticos.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thymus

;;;FR;;;



THYMUS


Le thymus est un organe lymphoïde primaire spécialisé du système immunitaire.

Dans le thymus, les lymphocytes des cellules du thymus ou les cellules T mûrissent.

Les cellules T sont essentielles au système immunitaire adaptatif, où le corps s'adapte spécifiquement aux envahisseurs étrangers.

Le thymus est situé dans la partie supérieure avant de la poitrine, dans le médiastin antéro-supérieur, derrière le sternum et devant le cœur.

Il est composé de deux lobes, chacun constitué d'une moelle centrale et d'un cortex externe, entourés d'une capsule.

Le thymus est composé de cellules T immatures appelées thymocytes, ainsi que de cellules de revêtement appelées cellules épithéliales qui aident les thymocytes à se développer.

Les cellules T qui se développent avec succès réagissent de manière appropriée avec les récepteurs immunitaires du CMH du corps (appelée sélection positive) et non contre les protéines du corps (appelée sélection négative).

Le thymus est le plus grand et le plus actif pendant les périodes néonatale et préadolescente.

Au début de l'adolescence, le thymus commence à diminuer en taille et en activité et le tissu du thymus est progressivement remplacé par du tissu adipeux.

Néanmoins, une partie du développement des lymphocytes T se poursuit tout au long de la vie adulte.

Les anomalies du thymus peuvent entraîner une diminution du nombre de lymphocytes T et des maladies auto-immunes telles que le syndrome polyendocrinien auto-immun de type 1 et la myasthénie grave.

Ceux-ci sont souvent associés à un cancer du tissu du thymus, appelé thymome, ou à des tissus provenant de lymphocytes immatures tels que les lymphocytes T, appelés lymphome.

L'ablation du thymus est appelée thymectomie.

Bien que le thymus ait été identifié comme faisant partie du corps depuis l'époque des Grecs de l'Antiquité, ce n'est que depuis les années 1960 que la fonction du thymus dans le système immunitaire est devenue plus claire.


== Structure ==

Le thymus est un organe qui se trouve sous le sternum dans la partie avant supérieure de la poitrine, s'étendant vers le haut vers le cou.

Chez les enfants, le thymus est gris rosâtre, mou et lobulé sur ses surfaces.

À la naissance, il mesure environ 4 à 6 cm de long, 2,5 à 5 cm de large et environ 1 cm d'épaisseur.

Il augmente de taille jusqu'à la puberté, où il peut avoir une taille d'environ 40 à 50 g, après quoi il diminue de taille dans un processus connu sous le nom d'involution.

Le thymus est composé de deux lobes qui se rejoignent sur la ligne médiane supérieure et s'étendent du dessous de la thyroïde dans le cou jusqu'au cartilage de la quatrième côte.

Les lobes sont recouverts d'une capsule.

Le thymus se trouve sous le sternum, repose sur le péricarde et est séparé de l'arc aortique et des gros vaisseaux par une couche de fascia.

La veine brachiocéphalique gauche peut même être intégrée dans le thymus.

Dans le cou, il se situe à l'avant et sur les côtés de la trachée, derrière les muscles sternohyoïdiens et sternothyroïdiens.


=== Microanatomie ===

Le thymus se compose de deux lobes, fusionnés au milieu, entourés d'une capsule qui s'étend avec des vaisseaux sanguins à l'intérieur.

Les lobes sont constitués d'un cortex externe riche en cellules et d'une moelle interne moins dense.

Les lobes sont divisés en lobules plus petits de 0,5 à 2 mm de diamètre, entre lesquels extrudent des insertions rayonnantes de la capsule le long des septa.

Le cortex est principalement composé de thymocytes et de cellules épithéliales.

Les thymocytes, cellules T immatures, sont soutenus par un réseau de cellules réticulaires épithéliales finement ramifiées, qui se continue avec un réseau similaire dans la moelle.

Ce réseau forme une adventice aux vaisseaux sanguins, qui pénètrent dans le cortex via des septa près de la jonction avec la moelle.

D'autres cellules sont également présentes dans le thymus, notamment les macrophages, les cellules dendritiques et une petite quantité de cellules B, de neutrophiles et d'éosinophiles.

Dans la moelle, le réseau de cellules épithéliales est plus grossier que dans le cortex et les cellules lymphoïdes sont relativement moins nombreuses.

Des corps concentriques en forme de nid appelés corpuscules de Hassall (également appelés corpuscules thymiques) sont formés par des agrégations de cellules épithéliales médullaires.

Ce sont des verticilles concentriques et stratifiées de cellules épithéliales qui augmentent en nombre tout au long de la vie.

Ce sont les restes des tubes épithéliaux, qui se développent à partir des troisièmes poches pharyngées de l'embryon pour former le thymus.


=== Apport sanguin et nerveux ===

Les artères irriguant le thymus sont des branches des artères thoraciques internes et thyroïdiennes inférieures, avec parfois des branches de l'artère thyroïdienne supérieure.

Les branches atteignent le thymus et voyagent avec les septa de la capsule dans la zone située entre le cortex et la moelle, où elles pénètrent dans le thymus lui-même ; ou bien entrer directement dans la capsule.

Les veines du thymus se terminent par la veine brachiocéphalique gauche, la veine thoracique interne et les veines thyroïdiennes inférieures.

Parfois, les veines se terminent directement dans la veine cave supérieure. Les vaisseaux lymphatiques ne voyagent que loin du thymus, accompagnant les artères et les veines.

Ceux-ci se drainent dans les ganglions lymphatiques brachiocéphaliques, trachéobronchiques et parasternaux.

Les nerfs qui alimentent le thymus proviennent du nerf vague et de la chaîne sympathique cervicale.

Les branches des nerfs phréniques atteignent la capsule du thymus, mais n'entrent pas dans le thymus lui-même.


=== Variante ===

Les deux lobes diffèrent légèrement en taille, le lobe gauche étant généralement plus haut que le droit.

Le tissu thymique peut être trouvé dispersé sur ou autour de la glande, et parfois dans la thyroïde.

Le thymus chez les enfants s'étend de manière variable vers le haut, parfois aussi haut que la glande thyroïde.


== Développement ==


Les thymocytes et l'épithélium du thymus ont des origines de développement différentes.

L'épithélium du thymus se développe en premier, apparaissant comme deux excroissances, une de chaque côté, de la troisième poche pharyngienne.

Il implique parfois aussi la quatrième poche pharyngienne.

Ceux-ci s'étendent vers l'extérieur et vers l'arrière dans le mésoderme environnant et le mésenchyme dérivé de la crête neurale devant l'aorte ventrale.

Ici, les thymocytes et l'épithélium se rencontrent et se rejoignent avec le tissu conjonctif.

L'ouverture pharyngienne de chaque diverticule est bientôt oblitérée, mais le col du flacon persiste quelque temps sous la forme d'un cordon cellulaire.

Par une prolifération supplémentaire des cellules tapissant le flacon, des bourgeons de cellules se forment, qui sont entourés et isolés par le mésoderme envahissant.

L'épithélium forme de fins lobules et se développe en une structure semblable à une éponge.

Au cours de cette étape, les précurseurs hématopoïétiques de la moelle osseuse migrent dans le thymus.

Le développement normal dépend de l'interaction entre l'épithélium et les thymocytes hématopoïétiques.

L'iode est également nécessaire au développement et à l'activité du thymus.


=== Involution ===

Le thymus continue de croître après la naissance pour atteindre sa taille maximale relative à la puberté.

Il est le plus actif dans la vie fœtale et néonatale.

Il augmente jusqu'à une masse de 20 à 50 grammes à la puberté.

Il commence alors à diminuer en taille et en activité dans un processus appelé involution thymique.

Après la première année de vie, la quantité de cellules T produites commence à diminuer.

Le tissu adipeux et conjonctif remplit une partie du volume thymique.

Au cours de l'involution, le thymus diminue de taille et d'activité.

Les cellules graisseuses sont présentes à la naissance, mais leur taille et leur nombre augmentent nettement après la puberté, envahissant d'abord la glande à partir des parois entre les lobules, puis dans le cortex et la moelle.

Ce processus se poursuit jusqu'à un âge avancé, où que ce soit avec un microscope ou avec l'œil humain, le thymus peut être difficile à détecter, bien qu'il pèse généralement de 5 à 15 grammes.

L'atrophie est due à l'augmentation du niveau circulant d'hormones sexuelles, et la castration chimique ou physique d'un adulte entraîne une augmentation de la taille et de l'activité du thymus.

Une maladie grave ou une infection par le virus de l'immunodéficience humaine peut également entraîner une involution.


== Fonction ==

=== Maturation des lymphocytes T ===

Le thymus facilite la maturation des cellules T, une partie importante du système immunitaire fournissant une immunité à médiation cellulaire.

Les cellules T commencent comme précurseurs hématopoïétiques de la moelle osseuse et migrent vers le thymus, où elles sont appelées thymocytes.

Dans le thymus, ils subissent un processus de maturation, qui consiste à s'assurer que les cellules réagissent contre les antigènes ("sélection positive"), mais qu'elles ne réagissent pas contre les antigènes trouvés sur les tissus corporels ("sélection négative").

Une fois matures, les cellules T émigrent du thymus pour assurer des fonctions vitales dans le système immunitaire. Chaque cellule T possède un récepteur de cellule T distinct, adapté à une substance spécifique, appelée antigène.

La plupart des récepteurs des lymphocytes T se lient au complexe majeur d'histocompatibilité sur les cellules du corps.

Le CMH présente un antigène au récepteur des lymphocytes T, qui devient actif s'il correspond au récepteur spécifique des lymphocytes T.

Pour être correctement fonctionnelle, une cellule T mature doit être capable de se lier à la molécule du CMH ("sélection positive") et de ne pas réagir contre des antigènes qui proviennent en fait des tissus de l'organisme ("sélection négative").

La sélection positive se produit dans le cortex et la sélection négative se produit dans la moelle du thymus.

Après ce processus, les cellules T qui ont survécu quittent le thymus, régulées par la sphingosine-1-phosphate.

Une maturation plus poussée se produit dans la circulation périphérique.

Cela est dû en partie aux hormones et aux cytokines sécrétées par les cellules du thymus, notamment la thymuline, la thymopoïétine et les thymosines.


=== Sélection positive ===

Les lymphocytes T ont des récepteurs de lymphocytes T distincts.

Ces récepteurs distincts sont formés par le processus de réarrangement du gène de recombinaison V(D)J stimulé par les gènes RAG1 et RAG2.

Ce processus est sujet aux erreurs et certains thymocytes ne parviennent pas à fabriquer des récepteurs de lymphocytes T fonctionnels, tandis que d'autres thymocytes fabriquent des récepteurs de lymphocytes T qui sont autoréactifs.

Si un récepteur fonctionnel des lymphocytes T est formé, le thymocyte commencera à exprimer simultanément les protéines de surface cellulaire CD4 et CD8.

La survie et la nature de la cellule T dépendent alors de son interaction avec les cellules épithéliales thymiques environnantes.

Ici, le récepteur des lymphocytes T interagit avec les molécules du CMH à la surface des cellules épithéliales.

Une cellule AT avec un récepteur qui ne réagit pas ou réagit faiblement mourra par apoptose.

La cellule AT qui réagit survivra et proliférera.

Une cellule T mature exprime uniquement CD4 ou CD8, mais pas les deux.

Cela dépend de la force de la liaison entre le TCR et le CMH de classe 1 ou de classe 2.

Le récepteur des cellules AT qui se lie principalement au CMH de classe I a tendance à produire une cellule T positive CD8 "cytotoxique" mature ; un récepteur de cellule T qui se lie principalement au CMH de classe II a tendance à produire une cellule T CD4 positive.


=== Sélection négative ===

Les lymphocytes T qui attaquent les propres protéines de l'organisme sont éliminés dans le thymus, ce que l'on appelle la "sélection négative".

Les cellules épithéliales de la moelle et les cellules dendritiques du thymus expriment des protéines majeures provenant d'ailleurs dans le corps.

Le gène qui stimule cela est AIRE.

Les thymocytes qui réagissent fortement aux antigènes du soi ne survivent pas et meurent par apoptose.

Certaines cellules T CD4 positives exposées à des antigènes du soi persistent en tant que cellules T régulatrices.


== Signification clinique ==

=== Immunodéficience ===

Le thymus étant le lieu de développement des cellules T, des problèmes congénitaux de développement du thymus peuvent entraîner un déficit immunitaire, que ce soit à cause d'un problème de développement du thymus ou d'un problème spécifique au développement des thymocytes.

L'immunodéficience peut être profonde.

La perte du thymus à un âge précoce par mutation génétique (comme dans le syndrome de DiGeorge, le syndrome CHARGE ou un thymus "nu" très rare provoquant l'absence de poils et de thymus) entraîne une immunodéficience sévère et une forte sensibilité ultérieure à l'infection par des virus, des protozoaires , et champignons.

Les souris nues présentant la très rare déficience "nude" résultant de la mutation FOXN1 sont une souche de souris de recherche comme modèle de déficience en lymphocytes T.

La cause congénitale la plus fréquente de déficit immunitaire lié au thymus résulte de la suppression du 22e chromosome, appelée syndrome de DiGeorge.

Cela se traduit par un échec du développement des troisième et quatrième poches pharyngiennes, entraînant un échec du développement du thymus, et d'autres problèmes associés variables, tels qu'une cardiopathie congénitale et des anomalies de la bouche (telles que la fente palatine et la fente labiale), un défaut de développement des glandes parathyroïdes et la présence d'une fistule entre la trachée et l'œsophage.

De très faibles nombres de lymphocytes T circulants sont observés.

La maladie est diagnostiquée par hybridation fluorescente in situ et traitée par greffe de thymus. Le déficit immunitaire combiné sévère (SCID) est un groupe de maladies génétiques congénitales rares pouvant entraîner des déficits combinés en cellules T, B et NK.

Ces syndromes sont causés par des mutations qui affectent la maturation des cellules progénitrices hématopoïétiques, qui sont les précurseurs des cellules B et T.

Un certain nombre de défauts génétiques peuvent provoquer un SCID, notamment la perte de fonction du gène du récepteur de l'IL-2 et une mutation entraînant une déficience de l'enzyme adénine désaminase.


=== Maladie auto-immune ===

==== Syndrome polyendocrinien auto-immun ====

Le syndrome polyendocrinien auto-immun de type 1 est un syndrome auto-immun génétique rare qui résulte d'un défaut génétique des tissus du thymus.

Plus précisément, la maladie résulte de défauts du gène régulateur auto-immun (AIRE), qui stimule l'expression des antigènes du soi dans les cellules épithéliales de la moelle du thymus.

En raison de défauts dans cette condition, les antigènes du soi ne sont pas exprimés, ce qui entraîne des cellules T qui ne sont pas conditionnées pour tolérer les tissus du corps et peuvent les traiter comme étrangères, stimulant une réponse immunitaire et entraînant une auto-immunité.

Les personnes atteintes d'APECED développent une maladie auto-immune qui affecte plusieurs tissus endocriniens, les organes couramment touchés étant l'hypothyroïdie de la glande thyroïde, la maladie d'Addison des glandes surrénales et l'infection à Candida des surfaces corporelles, y compris la paroi interne de la bouche et des ongles dus à un dysfonctionnement des cellules TH17 et à des symptômes commençant souvent dans l'enfance.

De nombreuses autres maladies auto-immunes peuvent également survenir.

Le traitement est dirigé vers les organes affectés.


==== Auto-immunité multiorganique associée au thymome ====

L'auto-immunité multiorganique associée au thymome peut survenir chez les personnes atteintes de thymome.

Dans cette condition, les cellules T développées dans le thymus sont dirigées contre les tissus du corps.

En effet, le thymus malin est incapable d'éduquer de manière appropriée les thymocytes en développement pour éliminer les lymphocytes T auto-réactifs.

La condition est pratiquement impossible à distinguer de la maladie du greffon contre l'hôte.


==== Myasthénie grave ====

La myasthénie grave est une maladie auto-immune le plus souvent due à des anticorps qui bloquent les récepteurs de l'acétylcholine, impliqués dans la signalisation entre les nerfs et les muscles.

Elle est souvent associée à une hyperplasie thymique ou à un thymome, avec des anticorps produits probablement à cause des lymphocytes T qui se développent anormalement.

La myasthénie grave se développe le plus souvent entre le jeune et l'âge moyen, provoquant une fatigue facile des mouvements musculaires.

Les investigations comprennent la démonstration d'anticorps (tels que contre les récepteurs de l'acétylcholine ou la kinase spécifique du muscle) et la tomodensitométrie pour détecter le thymome ou la thymectomie.

En ce qui concerne le thymus, l'ablation du thymus, appelée thymectomie, peut être envisagée comme traitement, notamment si un thymome est retrouvé.

D'autres traitements comprennent l'augmentation de la durée d'action de l'acétylcholine au niveau des synapses nerveuses en diminuant le taux de dégradation.

Ceci est fait par des inhibiteurs de l'acétylcholinestérase tels que la pyridostigmine.


=== Cancer ===

==== Thymomes ====

Les tumeurs provenant des cellules épithéliales thymiques sont appelées thymomes.

Ils surviennent le plus souvent chez les adultes de plus de 40 ans.

Les tumeurs sont généralement détectées lorsqu'elles provoquent des symptômes, tels qu'une masse au cou ou affectent des structures voisines telles que la veine cave supérieure ; détecté en raison du dépistage chez les patients atteints de myasthénie grave, qui a une forte association avec les thymomes et l'hyperplasie ; et détecté comme une découverte fortuite sur l'imagerie telle que les radiographies pulmonaires.

L'hyperplasie et les tumeurs provenant du thymus sont associées à d'autres maladies auto-immunes - telles que l'hypogammaglobulinémie, la maladie de Graves, l'aplasie pure des globules rouges, l'anémie pernicieuse et la dermatomyosite, probablement en raison de défauts de sélection négative dans les cellules T en prolifération.

Les thymomes peuvent être bénins; bénigne mais en vertu de l'expansion, envahissant au-delà de la capsule du thymus ("thyome invasif"), ou maligne (un carcinome).

Cette classification est basée sur l'apparence des cellules.

Une classification de l'OMS existe également mais n'est pas utilisée dans le cadre de la pratique clinique standard.

Les tumeurs bénignes confinées au thymus sont les plus fréquentes ; suivies de tumeurs localement invasives, puis de carcinomes.

Il existe des variations dans les rapports, certaines sources signalant que les tumeurs malignes sont plus courantes.

Les tumeurs invasives, bien qu'elles ne soient pas techniquement malignes, peuvent néanmoins se propager (métastaser) à d'autres parties du corps.

Même si les thymomes se produisent à partir de cellules épithéliales, ils peuvent également contenir des thymocytes.

Le traitement des thymomes nécessite souvent une intervention chirurgicale pour retirer tout le thymus.

Cela peut également entraîner une rémission temporaire de toute affection auto-immune associée.


==== Lymphomes ====

Les tumeurs provenant des cellules T du thymus forment un sous-ensemble de la leucémie aiguë lymphoblastique (LAL).

Celles-ci sont similaires en termes de symptômes, d'approche d'investigation et de prise en charge à d'autres formes de LAL.

Les symptômes qui se développent, comme d'autres formes de LAL, sont liés à une carence en plaquettes, entraînant des ecchymoses ou des saignements ; immunosuppression entraînant des infections; ou infiltration par des cellules dans des parties du corps, entraînant une hypertrophie du foie, de la rate, des ganglions lymphatiques ou d'autres sites.

Le test sanguin peut révéler une grande quantité de globules blancs ou de lymphoblastes, et une déficience dans d'autres lignées cellulaires - comme un faible nombre de plaquettes ou une anémie.

L'immunophénotypage révélera les cellules qui sont CD3, une protéine présente sur les cellules T, et aidera à mieux distinguer la maturité des cellules T.

L'analyse génétique, y compris le caryotypage, peut révéler des anomalies spécifiques susceptibles d'influencer le pronostic ou le traitement, telles que la translocation de Philadelphie.

La prise en charge peut inclure plusieurs cycles de chimiothérapie, une greffe de cellules souches et la prise en charge des problèmes associés, tels que le traitement des infections par des antibiotiques et des transfusions sanguines.

Un nombre très élevé de globules blancs peut également nécessiter une cytoréduction avec aphérèse.

Les tumeurs provenant de la petite population de cellules B présentes dans le thymus conduisent à des lymphomes médiastinaux primaires (thymiques) à grandes cellules B.

Il s'agit d'un sous-type rare de lymphomes non hodgkiniens, bien que, par l'activité des gènes et parfois la forme microscopique, ils présentent également les caractéristiques des lymphomes hodgkiniens. qui surviennent le plus souvent chez les jeunes et les personnes d'âge moyen, plus importantes chez les femmes.

Le plus souvent, lorsque les symptômes surviennent, c'est à cause de la compression des structures proches du thymus, telles que la veine cave supérieure ou les voies respiratoires supérieures ; lorsque les ganglions lymphatiques sont touchés, c'est souvent dans les groupes du médiastin et du cou.

De telles tumeurs sont souvent détectées avec une biopsie soumise à une immunohistochimie.

Cela montrera la présence de clusters de différenciation, les protéines de surface cellulaire - à savoir CD30, avec CD19, CD20 et CD22, et avec l'absence de CD15.

D'autres marqueurs peuvent également être utilisés pour confirmer le diagnostic.

Le traitement comprend généralement les schémas thérapeutiques typiques de CHOP ou EPOCH ou d'autres schémas thérapeutiques ; des régimes comprenant généralement du cyclophosphamide, une anthracycline, de la prednisone et d'autres agents chimiothérapeutiques ; et potentiellement aussi une greffe de cellules souches.


=== Kystes thymiques ===

Le thymus peut contenir des kystes, généralement de moins de 4 cm de diamètre.

Les kystes thymiques sont généralement détectés de manière fortuite et ne provoquent généralement pas de symptômes.

Les kystes thymiques peuvent apparaître le long du cou ou dans la poitrine (médiastin).

Les kystes ne contiennent généralement que du liquide et sont tapissés de plusieurs couches de cellules plates ou de cellules en forme de colonne.

Malgré cela, la présence d'un kyste peut provoquer des problèmes similaires à ceux des thymomes, en comprimant les structures voisines, et certains peuvent entrer en contact avec les parois internes (septa) et être difficiles à distinguer des tumeurs.

Lorsque des kystes sont découverts, l'investigation peut inclure un bilan des tumeurs, qui peut inclure une tomodensitométrie ou une IRM de la zone dans laquelle le kyste est suspecté.


=== Ablation chirurgicale ===

La thymectomie est l'ablation chirurgicale du thymus.

La raison habituelle du retrait est d'avoir accès au cœur pour une intervention chirurgicale visant à corriger des malformations cardiaques congénitales pendant la période néonatale.

Les autres indications de la thymectomie comprennent l'ablation des thymomes et le traitement de la myasthénie grave.

Chez les nouveau-nés, la taille relative du thymus obstrue l'accès chirurgical au cœur et aux vaisseaux environnants.

L'ablation du thymus pendant la petite enfance entraîne une immunodéficience souvent mortelle, car les cellules T fonctionnelles ne se sont pas développées.

Chez les enfants plus âgés et les adultes, qui ont un système lymphatique fonctionnel avec des cellules T matures également situées dans d'autres organes lymphoïdes, l'effet est réduit et limité à l'incapacité de monter des réponses immunitaires contre de nouveaux antigènes.


== Société et culture ==

Lorsqu'il est utilisé comme nourriture pour l'homme, le thymus des animaux est connu comme l'un des types de ris de veau.


== Historique ==

Le thymus était connu des anciens Grecs, et son nom vient du mot grec θυμός (thumos), signifiant "colère", ou "cœur, âme, désir, vie", peut-être à cause de sa localisation dans la poitrine, près d'où les émotions sont ressentis subjectivement ; ou bien le nom vient de l'herbe thym (également en grec θύμος ou θυμάρι), qui est devenu le nom d'une "excroissance verruqueuse", peut-être en raison de sa ressemblance avec un bouquet de thym.Galien a été le premier à noter que la taille de l'organe a changé au cours de la vie d'une personne.

Au XIXe siècle, une condition a été identifiée comme un état thymicolymphaticus défini par une augmentation du tissu lymphoïde et un thymus élargi.

On pensait qu'il s'agissait d'une cause du syndrome de mort subite du nourrisson, mais c'est maintenant un terme obsolète.

L'importance du thymus dans le système immunitaire a été découverte en 1961 par Jacques Miller, en enlevant chirurgicalement le thymus de souris âgées d'un jour, et en observant la déficience subséquente dans une population de lymphocytes, nommées par la suite cellules T d'après l'organe de leur origine. .

Jusqu'à la découverte de son rôle immunologique, le thymus avait été écarté comme un "accident évolutif", sans importance fonctionnelle.

Le rôle joué par le thymus pour garantir que les cellules T matures toléraient les tissus du corps a été découvert en 1962, avec la découverte que les cellules T d'un thymus transplanté chez la souris démontraient une tolérance envers les tissus de la souris donneuse.

Les lymphocytes B et les lymphocytes T ont été identifiés comme différents types de lymphocytes en 1968, et le fait que les lymphocytes T nécessitaient une maturation dans le thymus a été compris.

Les sous-types de lymphocytes T (CD8 et CD4) ont été identifiés en 1975.

La façon dont ces sous-classes de lymphocytes T ont mûri - sélection positive de cellules qui se lient fonctionnellement aux récepteurs du CMH - était connue dans les années 1990.

Le rôle important du gène AIRE et le rôle de la sélection négative dans la prévention de la maturation des cellules T autoréactives ont été compris en 1994.

Récemment, les progrès de l'immunologie ont permis de mieux comprendre la fonction du thymus dans la maturation des lymphocytes T.


== Autres animaux ==

Le thymus est présent chez tous les vertébrés à mâchoires, où il subit le même rétrécissement avec l'âge et joue la même fonction immunologique que chez les autres vertébrés.

Récemment, en 2011, une structure lympho-épithéliale discrète de type thymus, appelée thymoïde, a été découverte dans les branchies des larves de lamproies.

La myxine possède un protothymus associé aux muscles vélaires pharyngés, qui est responsable d'une variété de réponses immunitaires. Le thymus est également présent chez la plupart des autres vertébrés avec une structure et une fonction similaires à celles du thymus humain.

Un deuxième thymus dans le cou a parfois été signalé chez la souris. Comme chez l'homme, le thymus du cobaye s'atrophie naturellement lorsque l'animal atteint l'âge adulte, mais le cobaye athymique sans poils (résultant d'une mutation spontanée en laboratoire) ne possède pas de tissu thymique. que ce soit, et la cavité de l'organe est remplacée par des espaces kystiques.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thymus
