

VAGINA


In mammals, the vagina is the elastic, muscular part of the female genital tract. 

In humans, it extends from the vestibule to the cervix. 

The outer vaginal opening is normally partly covered by a thin layer of mucosal tissue called the hymen. 

At the deep end, the cervix (neck of the uterus) bulges into the vagina. 

The vagina allows for sexual intercourse and birth. 

It also channels menstrual flow, which occurs in humans and closely related primates as part of the menstrual cycle.
Although research on the vagina is especially lacking for different animals, its location, structure and size are documented as varying among species. 

Female mammals usually have two external openings in the vulva; these are the urethral opening for the urinary tract and the vaginal opening for the genital tract. 

This is different from male mammals, who usually have a single urethral opening for both urination and reproduction. 

The vaginal opening is much larger than the nearby urethral opening, and both are protected by the labia in humans. 

In amphibians, birds, reptiles and monotremes, the cloaca is the single external opening for the gastrointestinal, urinary, and reproductive tracts.
To accommodate smoother penetration of the vagina during sexual intercourse or other sexual activity, vaginal moisture increases during sexual arousal in human females and other female mammals. 

This increase in moisture provides vaginal lubrication, which reduces friction. 

The texture of the vaginal walls creates friction for the penis during sexual intercourse and stimulates it toward ejaculation, enabling fertilization. 

Along with pleasure and bonding, women's sexual behavior with others (which can include heterosexual or lesbian sexual activity) can result in sexually transmitted infections (STIs), the risk of which can be reduced by recommended safe sex practices. 

Other health issues may also affect the human vagina.
The vagina and vulva have evoked strong reactions in societies throughout history, including negative perceptions and language, cultural taboos, and their use as symbols for female sexuality, spirituality, or regeneration of life. 

In common speech, the word vagina is often used to refer to the vulva or to the female genitals in general. 

By its dictionary and anatomical definitions, however, vagina refers exclusively to the specific internal structure, and understanding the distinction can improve knowledge of the female genitalia and aid in healthcare communication.


== Etymology and definition ==

The term vagina is from Latin meaning "sheath" or "scabbard"; the plural of vagina is either vaginae, or vaginas. 

The vagina may also be referred to as the birth canal in the context of pregnancy and childbirth. 

Although by its dictionary and anatomical definitions, the term vagina refers exclusively to the specific internal structure, it is colloquially used to refer to the vulva or to both the vagina and vulva.Using the term vagina to mean "vulva" can pose medical or legal confusion; for example, a person's interpretation of its location might not match another's interpretation of the location. 

Medically, the vagina is the canal between the hymen (or remnants of the hymen) and the cervix, while, legally, it begins at the vulva (between the labia). 

It may be that the incorrect use of the term vagina is due to not as much thought going into the anatomy of the female genitals as has gone into the study of male genitals, and that this has contributed to an absence of correct vocabulary for the external female genitalia among both the general public and health professionals. 

Because a better understanding of female genitalia can help combat sexual and psychological harm with regard to female development, researchers endorse correct terminology for the vulva.


== Structure ==



=== Gross anatomy ===


The human vagina is an elastic, muscular canal that extends from the vulva to the cervix. 

The opening of the vagina lies in the urogenital triangle. 

The urogenital triangle is the front triangle of the perineum and also consists of the urethral opening and associated parts of the external genitalia. 

The vaginal canal travels upwards and backwards, between the urethra at the front, and the rectum at the back. 

Near the upper vagina, the cervix protrudes into the vagina on its front surface at approximately a 90 degree angle. 

The vaginal and urethral openings are protected by the labia.When not sexually aroused, the vagina is a collapsed tube, with the front and back walls placed together. 

The lateral walls, especially their middle area, are relatively more rigid. 

Because of this, the collapsed vagina has an H-shaped cross section. 

Behind, the upper vagina is separated from the rectum by the recto-uterine pouch, the middle vagina by loose connective tissue, and the lower vagina by the perineal body. 

Where the vaginal lumen surrounds the cervix of the uterus, it is divided into four continuous regions (vaginal fornices); these are the anterior, posterior, right lateral, and left lateral fornices. 

The posterior fornix is deeper than the anterior fornix.Supporting the vagina are its upper, middle, and lower third muscles and ligaments. 

The upper third are the levator ani muscles, and the transcervical, pubocervical, and sacrocervical ligaments. 

It is supported by the upper portions of the cardinal ligaments and the parametrium. 

The middle third of the vagina involves the urogenital diaphragm. 

It is supported by the levator ani muscles and the lower portion of the cardinal ligaments. 

The lower third is supported by the perineal body, or the urogenital and pelvic diaphragms. 

The lower third may also be described as being supported by the perineal body and the pubovaginal part of the levator ani muscle.


==== Vaginal opening and hymen ====
The vaginal opening is at the posterior end of the vulval vestibule, behind the urethral opening. 

The opening to the vagina is normally obscured by the labia minora (vaginal lips), but may be exposed after vaginal delivery.The hymen is a thin layer of mucosal tissue that surrounds or partially covers the vaginal opening. 

The effects of intercourse and childbirth on the hymen are variable. 

Where it is broken, it may completely disappear or remnants known as carunculae myrtiformes may persist. 

Otherwise, being very elastic, it may return to its normal position. 

Additionally, the hymen may be lacerated by disease, injury, medical examination, masturbation or physical exercise. 

For these reasons, virginity cannot be definitively determined by examining the hymen.


==== Variations and size ====

The length of the vagina varies among women of child-bearing age. 

Because of the presence of the cervix in the front wall of the vagina, there is a difference in length between the front wall, approximately 7.5 cm (2.5 to 3 in) long, and the back wall, approximately 9 cm (3.5 in) long. 

During sexual arousal, the vagina expands both in length and width. 

If a woman stands upright, the vaginal canal points in an upward-backward direction and forms an angle of approximately 45 degrees with the uterus. 

The vaginal opening and hymen also vary in size; in children, although the hymen commonly appears crescent-shaped, many shapes are possible.


=== Development ===


The vaginal plate is the precursor to the vagina. 

During development, the vaginal plate begins to grow where the fused ends of the paramesonephric ducts (Müllerian ducts) enter the back wall of the urogenital sinus as the sinus tubercle. 

As the plate grows, it significantly separates the cervix and the urogenital sinus; eventually, the central cells of the plate break down to form the vaginal lumen. 

This usually occurs by the twenty to twenty-fourth week of development. 

If the lumen does not form, or is incomplete, membranes known as vaginal septae can form across or around the tract, causing obstruction of the outflow tract later in life.During sexual differentiation, without testosterone, the urogenital sinus persists as the vestibule of the vagina. 

The two urogenital folds of the genital tubercle form the labia minora, and the labioscrotal swellings enlarge to form the labia majora.There are conflicting views on the embryologic origin of the vagina. 

The majority view is Koff's 1933 description, which posits that the upper two-thirds of the vagina originate from the caudal part of the Müllerian duct, while the lower part of the vagina develops from the urogenital sinus. 

Other views are Bulmer's 1957's description that the vaginal epithelium derives solely from the urogenital sinus epithelium, and Witschi's 1970 research, which reexamined Koff's description and concluded that the sinovaginal bulbs are the same as the lower portions of the Wolffian ducts. 

Witschi's view is supported by research by Acién et al., Bok and Drews. 

Robboy et al. reviewed Koff and Bulmer's theories, and support Bulmer's description in light of their own research. 

The debates stem from the complexity of the interrelated tissues and the absence of an animal model that matches human vaginal development. 

Because of this, study of human vaginal development is ongoing and may help resolve the conflicting data.


=== Microanatomy ===


The vaginal wall from the lumen outwards consists firstly of a mucosa of stratified squamous epithelium that is not keratinized, with a lamina propria (a thin layer of connective tissue) underneath it. 

Secondly, there is a layer of smooth muscle with bundles of circular fibers internal to longitudinal fibers (those that run lengthwise). 

Lastly, is an outer layer of connective tissue called the adventitia. 

Some texts list four layers by counting the two sublayers of the mucosa (epithelium and lamina propria) separately.The smooth muscular layer within the vagina has a weak contractive force that can create some pressure in the lumen of the vagina; much stronger contractive force, such as during childbirth, comes from muscles in the pelvic floor that are attached to the adventitia around the vagina.The lamina propria is rich in blood vessels and lymphatic channels. 

The muscular layer is composed of smooth muscle fibers, with an outer layer of longitudinal muscle, an inner layer of circular muscle, and oblique muscle fibers between. 

The outer layer, the adventitia, is a thin dense layer of connective tissue and it blends with loose connective tissue containing blood vessels, lymphatic vessels and nerve fibers that are between pelvic organs. 

The vaginal mucosa is absent of glands. 

It forms folds (transverse ridges or rugae), which are more prominent in the outer third of the vagina; their function is to provide the vagina with increased surface area for extension and stretching.

The epithelium of the ectocervix (the portion the uterine cervix extending into the vagina) is an extension of, and shares a border with, the vaginal epithelium. 

The vaginal epithelium is made up of layers of cells, including the basal cells, the parabasal cells, the superficial squamous flat cells, and the intermediate cells. 

The basal layer of the epithelium is the most mitotically active and reproduces new cells. 

The superficial cells shed continuously and basal cells replace them. 

Estrogen induces the intermediate and superficial cells to fill with glycogen. 

Cells from the lower basal layer transition from active metabolic activity to death (apoptosis). 

In these mid-layers of the epithelia, the cells begin to lose their mitochondria and other organelles. 

The cells retain a usually high level of glycogen compared to other epithelial tissue in the body.Under the influence of maternal estrogen, the vagina of a newborn is lined by thick stratified squamous epithelium (or mucosa) for two to four weeks after birth. 

Between then to puberty, the epithelium remains thin with only a few layers of cuboidal cells without glycogen. 

The epithelium also has few rugae and is red in color before puberty. 

When puberty begins, the mucosa thickens and again becomes stratified squamous epithelium with glycogen containing cells, under the influence of the girl's rising estrogen levels. 

Finally, the epithelium thins out from menopause onward and eventually ceases to contain glycogen, because of the lack of estrogen.Flattened squamous cells are more resistant to both abrasion and infection. 

The permeability of the epithelium allows for an effective response from the immune system since antibodies and other immune components can easily reach the surface. 

The vaginal epithelium differs from the similar tissue of the skin. 

The epidermis of the skin is relatively resistant to water because it contains high levels of lipids. 

The vaginal epithelium contains lower levels of lipids. 

This allows the passage of water and water-soluble substances through the tissue.Keratinization happens when the epithelium is exposed to the dry external atmosphere. 

In abnormal circumstances, such as in pelvic organ prolapse, the mucosa may be exposed to air, becoming dry and keratinized.


=== Blood and nerve supply ===

Blood is supplied to the vagina mainly via the vaginal artery, which emerges from a branch of the internal iliac artery or the uterine artery. 

The vaginal arteries anastamose (are joined) along the side of the vagina with the cervical branch of the uterine artery; this forms the azygos artery, which lies on the midline of the anterior and posterior vagina. 

Other arteries which supply the vagina include the middle rectal artery and the internal pudendal artery, all branches of the internal iliac artery. 

Three groups of lymphatic vessels accompany these arteries; the upper group accompanies the vaginal branches of the uterine artery; a middle group accompanies the vaginal arteries; and the lower group, draining lymph from the area outside the hymen, drain to the inguinal lymph nodes. 

Ninety-five percent of the lymphatic channels of the vagina are within 3 mm of the surface of the vagina.Two main veins drain blood from the vagina, one on the left and one on the right. 

These form a network of smaller veins, the vaginal venous plexus, on the sides of the vagina, connecting with similar venous plexuses of the uterus, bladder, and rectum. 

These ultimately drain into the internal iliac veins.The nerve supply of the upper vagina is provided by the sympathetic and parasympathetic areas of the pelvic plexus. 

The lower vagina is supplied by the pudendal nerve.


== Function ==



=== Secretions ===


Vaginal secretions are primarily from the uterus, cervix, and vaginal epithelium in addition to minuscule vaginal lubrication from the Bartholin's glands upon sexual arousal. 

It takes little vaginal secretion to make the vagina moist; secretions may increase during sexual arousal, the middle of or a little prior to menstruation, or during pregnancy. 

Menstruation (also known as a "period" or "monthly") is the regular discharge of blood and mucosal tissue (known as menses) from the inner lining of the uterus through the vagina. 

The vaginal mucous membrane varies in thickness and composition during the menstrual cycle, which is the regular, natural change that occurs in the female reproductive system (specifically the uterus and ovaries) that makes pregnancy possible. 

Different hygiene products such as tampons, menstrual cups, and sanitary napkins are available to absorb or capture menstrual blood.The Bartholin's glands, located near the vaginal opening, were originally considered the primary source for vaginal lubrication, but further examination showed that they provide only a few drops of mucus. 

Vaginal lubrication is mostly provided by plasma seepage known as transudate from the vaginal walls. 

This initially forms as sweat-like droplets, and is caused by increased fluid pressure in the tissue of the vagina (vasocongestion), resulting in the release of plasma as transudate from the capillaries through the vaginal epithelium.Before and during ovulation, the mucus glands within the cervix secrete different variations of mucus, which provides an alkaline, fertile environment in the vaginal canal that is favorable to the survival of sperm. 

Following menopause, vaginal lubrication naturally decreases.


=== Sexual activity ===


Nerve endings in the vagina can provide pleasurable sensations when the vagina is stimulated during sexual activity. 

Women may derive pleasure from one part of the vagina, or from a feeling of closeness and fullness during vaginal penetration. 

Because the vagina is not rich in nerve endings, women often do not receive sufficient sexual stimulation, or orgasm, solely from vaginal penetration. 

Although the literature commonly cites a greater concentration of nerve endings and therefore greater sensitivity near the vaginal entrance (the outer one-third or lower third), some scientific examinations of vaginal wall innervation indicate no single area with a greater density of nerve endings. 

Other research indicates that only some women have a greater density of nerve endings in the anterior vaginal wall. 

Because of the fewer nerve endings in the vagina, childbirth pain is significantly more tolerable.Pleasure can be derived from the vagina in a variety of ways. 

In addition to penile penetration, pleasure can come from masturbation, fingering, oral sex (cunnilingus), or specific sex positions (such as the missionary position or the spoons sex position). 

Heterosexual couples may engage in cunnilingus or fingering as forms of foreplay to incite sexual arousal or as accompanying acts, or as a type of birth control, or to preserve virginity. 

Less commonly, they may use non penile-vaginal sexual acts as a primary means of sexual pleasure. 

By contrast, lesbians and other women who have sex with women commonly engage in cunnilingus or fingering as main forms of sexual activity. 

Some women and couples use sex toys, such as a vibrator or dildo, for vaginal pleasure. 

The Kama Sutra – an ancient Hindu text written by Vātsyāyana, which includes a number of sexual positions – may also be used to increase sexual pleasure, with special emphasis on female sexual satisfaction.Most women require direct stimulation of the clitoris to orgasm. 

The clitoris plays a part in vaginal stimulation. 

It is a sex organ of multiplanar structure containing an abundance of nerve endings, with a broad attachment to the pubic arch and extensive supporting tissue to the labia. 

Research indicates that it forms a tissue cluster with the vagina. 

This tissue is perhaps more extensive in some women than in others, which may contribute to orgasms experienced vaginally.During sexual arousal, and particularly the stimulation of the clitoris, the walls of the vagina lubricate. 

This begins after ten to thirty seconds of sexual arousal, and increases in amount the longer the woman is aroused. 

It reduces friction or injury that can be caused by insertion of the penis into the vagina or other penetration of the vagina during sexual activity. 

The vagina lengthens during the arousal, and can continue to lengthen in response to pressure; as the woman becomes fully aroused, the vagina expands in length and width, while the cervix retracts. 

With the upper two-thirds of the vagina expanding and lengthening, the uterus rises into the greater pelvis, and the cervix is elevated above the vaginal floor, resulting in tenting of the mid-vaginal plane. 

This is known as the tenting or ballooning effect. 

As the elastic walls of the vagina stretch or contract, with support from the pelvic muscles, to wrap around the inserted penis (or other object), this creates friction for the penis and helps to cause a man to experience orgasm and ejaculation, which in turn enables fertilization.An area in the vagina that may be an erogenous zone is the G-spot. 

It is typically defined as being located at the anterior wall of the vagina, a couple or few inches in from the entrance, and some women experience intense pleasure, and sometimes an orgasm, if this area is stimulated during sexual activity. 

A G-spot orgasm may be responsible for female ejaculation, leading some doctors and researchers to believe that G-spot pleasure comes from the Skene's glands, a female homologue of the prostate, rather than any particular spot on the vaginal wall; other researchers consider the connection between the Skene's glands and the G-spot area to be weak. 

The G-spot's existence (and existence as a distinct structure) is still under dispute because reports of its location can vary from woman to woman, it appears to be nonexistent in some women, and it is hypothesized to be an extension of the clitoris and therefore the reason for orgasms experienced vaginally.


=== Childbirth ===


The vagina is the birth canal for the delivery of a baby. 

When labor (a physiological process preceding delivery) nears, several signs may occur, including vaginal discharge, and the rupture of membranes (water breaking) that can result in a gush of amniotic fluid or an irregular or small stream of fluid from the vagina. 

Water breaking most commonly happens during labor; however, it can occur before labor (known as premature rupture of membranes) and this happens in 10% of cases. 

Braxton Hicks contractions are also a sign of nearing labor, but not all women notice them. 

Among women giving birth for the first time, Braxton Hicks contractions are mistaken for actual contractions, and are usually very strong in the days leading up to labor.As the body prepares for childbirth, the cervix softens, thins, moves forward to face the front, and begins to open. 

This allows the fetus to settle or "drop" into the pelvis. 

As the fetus settles into the pelvis, pain from the sciatic nerves, increased vaginal discharge, and increased urinary frequency can occur. 

While these symptoms are likelier to happen after labor has begun for women who have given birth before, they may happen ten to fourteen days before labor in women experiencing labor for the first time.The fetus begins to lose the support of the cervix when contractions begin. 

With cervical dilation reaching a diameter of more than 10 cm (4 in) to accommodate the head of the fetus, the head moves from the uterus to the vagina. 

The elasticity of the vagina allows it to stretch to many times its normal diameter in order to deliver the child.Vaginal births are more common, but if there is a risk of complications a caesarean section (C-section) may be performed. 

The vaginal mucosa has an abnormal accumulation of fluid (edematous) and is thin, with few rugae, a little after birth. 

The mucosa thickens and rugae return in approximately three weeks once the ovaries regain usual function and estrogen flow is restored. 

The vaginal opening gapes and is relaxed, until it returns to its approximate pre-pregnant state six to eight weeks after delivery, known as the postpartum period; however, the vagina will continue to be larger in size than it was previously.After giving birth, there is a phase of vaginal discharge called lochia that can vary significantly in the amount of loss and its duration but can go on for up to six weeks.


=== Vaginal microbiota ===


The vaginal flora is a complex ecosystem that changes throughout life, from birth to menopause. 

The vaginal microbiota resides in and on the outermost layer of the vaginal epithelium. 

This microbiome consists of species and genera which typically do not cause symptoms or infections in women with normal immunity. 

The vaginal microbiome is dominated by Lactobacillus species. 

These species metabolize glycogen, breaking it down into sugar. 

Lactobacilli metabolize the sugar into glucose and lactic acid. 

Under the influence of hormones, such as estrogen, progesterone and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), the vaginal ecosystem undergoes cyclic or periodic changes.


== Clinical significance ==



=== Pelvic examinations ===


Vaginal health can be assessed during a pelvic examination, along with the health of most of the organs of the female reproductive system. 

Such exams may include the Pap test (or cervical smear). 

In the United States, Pap test screening is recommended starting around 21 years of age until the age of 65. 

However, other countries do not recommend pap testing in non-sexually active women. 

Guidelines on frequency vary from every three to five years. 

Routine pelvic examination on adult women who are not pregnant and lack symptoms may be more harmful than beneficial. 

A normal finding during the pelvic exam of a pregnant women is a bluish tinge to the vaginal wall.Pelvic exams are most often performed when there are unexplained symptoms of discharge, pain, unexpected bleeding or urinary problems. 

During a pelvic exam, the vaginal opening is assessed for position, symmetry, presence of the hymen, and shape. 

The vagina is assessed internally by the examiner with gloved fingers, before the speculum is inserted, to note the presence of any weakness, lumps or nodules. 

Inflammation and discharge are noted if present. 

During this time, the Skene's and Bartolin's glands are palpated to identify abnormalities in these structures. 

After the digital examination of the vagina is complete, the speculum, an instrument to visualize internal structures, is carefully inserted to make the cervix visible. 

Examination of the vagina may also be done during a cavity search.Lacerations or other injuries to the vagina can occur during sexual assault or other sexual abuse. 

These can be tears, bruises, inflammation and abrasions. 

Sexual assault with objects can damage the vagina and X-ray examination may reveal the presence of foreign objects. 

If consent is given, a pelvic examination is part of the assessment of sexual assault. 

Pelvic exams are also performed during pregnancy, and women with high risk pregnancies have exams more often.


=== Medications ===

Intravaginal administration is a route of administration where the medication is inserted into the vagina as a creme or tablet. 

Pharmacologically, this has the potential advantage of promoting therapeutic effects primarily in the vagina or nearby structures (such as the vaginal portion of cervix) with limited systemic adverse effects compared to other routes of administration. 

Medications used to ripen the cervix and induce labor are commonly administered via this route, as are estrogens, contraceptive agents, propranolol, and antifungals. 

Vaginal rings can also be used to deliver medication, including birth control in contraceptive vaginal rings. 

These are inserted into the vagina and provide continuous, low dose and consistent drug levels in the vagina and throughout the body.Before the baby merges from the womb, an injection for pain control during childbirth may be administered through the vaginal wall and near the pudendal nerve. 

Because the pudendal nerve carries motor and sensory fibers that innervate the pelvic muscles, a pudendal nerve block relieves birth pain. 

The medicine does not harm the child, and is without significant complications.


=== Infections, diseases, and safe sex ===


Vaginal infections or diseases include yeast infection, vaginitis, sexually transmitted infections (STIs) and cancer. 

Lactobacillus gasseri and other Lactobacillus species in the vaginal flora provide some protection from infections by their secretion of bacteriocins and hydrogen peroxide. 

The healthy vagina of a woman of child-bearing age is acidic, with a pH normally ranging between 3.8 and 4.5. 

The low pH prohibits growth of many strains of pathogenic microbes. 

The acidic balance of the vagina may also be affected by pregnancy, menstruation, diabetes or other illness, birth control pills, certain antibiotics, poor diet, and stress (such as from a lack of sleep). 

Any of these changes to the acidic balance of the vagina may contribute to yeast infection. 

An elevated pH (greater than 4.5) of the vaginal fluid can be caused by an overgrowth of bacteria as in bacterial vaginosis, or in the parasitic infection trichomoniasis, both of which have vaginitis as a symptom. 

Vaginal flora populated by a number of different bacteria characteristic of bacterial vaginosis increases the risk of adverse pregnancy outcomes. 

During a pelvic exam, samples of vaginal fluids may be taken to screen for sexually transmitted infections or other infections.Because the vagina is self-cleansing, it usually does not need special hygiene. 

Clinicians generally discourage the practice of douching for maintaining vulvovaginal health. 

Since the vaginal flora gives protection against disease, a disturbance of this balance may lead to infection and abnormal discharge. 

Vaginal discharge may indicate a vaginal infection by color and odor, or the resulting symptoms of discharge, such as irritation or burning. 

Abnormal vaginal discharge may be caused by STIs, diabetes, douches, fragranced soaps, bubble baths, birth control pills, yeast infection (commonly as a result of antibiotic use) or another form of vaginitis. 

While vaginitis is an inflammation of the vagina, and is attributed to infection, hormonal issues, or irritants, vaginismus is an involuntary tightening of the vagina muscles during vaginal penetration that is caused by a conditioned reflex or disease. 

Vaginal discharge due to yeast infection is usually thick, creamy in color and odorless, while discharge due to bacterial vaginosis is gray-white in color, and discharge due to trichomoniasis is usually a gray color, thin in consistency, and has a fishy odor. 

Discharge in 25% of the trichomoniasis cases is yellow-green.HIV/AIDS, human papillomavirus (HPV), genital herpes and trichomoniasis are some STIs that may affect the vagina, and health sources recommend safe sex (or barrier method) practices to prevent the transmission of these and other STIs. 

Safe sex commonly involves the use of condoms, and sometimes female condoms (which give women more control). 

Both types can help avert pregnancy by preventing semen from coming in contact with the vagina. 

There is, however, little research on whether female condoms are as effective as male condoms at preventing STIs, and they are slightly less effective than male condoms at preventing pregnancy, which may be because the female condom fits less tightly than the male condom or because it can slip into the vagina and spill semen.The vaginal lymph nodes often trap cancerous cells that originate in the vagina. 

These nodes can be assessed for the presence of disease. 

Selective surgical removal (rather than total and more invasive removal) of vaginal lymph nodes reduces the risk of complications that can accompany more radical surgeries. 

These selective nodes act as sentinel lymph nodes. 

Instead of surgery, the lymph nodes of concern are sometimes treated with radiation therapy administered to the patient's pelvic, inguinal lymph nodes, or both.Vaginal cancer and vulvar cancer are very rare, and primarily affect older women. 

Cervical cancer (which is relatively common) increases the risk of vaginal cancer, which is why there is a significant chance for vaginal cancer to occur at the same time as, or after, cervical cancer. 

It may be that their causes are the same. 

Cervical cancer may be prevented by pap smear screening and HPV vaccines, but HPV vaccines only cover HPV types 16 and 18, the cause of 70% of cervical cancers. 

Some symptoms of cervical and vaginal cancer are dyspareunia, and abnormal vaginal bleeding or vaginal discharge, especially after sexual intercourse or menopause. 

However, most cervical cancers are asymptomatic (present no symptoms). 

Vaginal intracavity brachytherapy (VBT) is used to treat endometrial, vaginal and cervical cancer. 

An applicator is inserted into the vagina to allow the administration of radiation as close to the site of the cancer as possible. 

Survival rates increase with VBT when compared to external beam radiation therapy. 

By using the vagina to place the emitter as close to the cancerous growth as possible, the systemic effects of radiation therapy are reduced and cure rates for vaginal cancer are higher. 

Research is unclear on whether treating cervical cancer with radiation therapy increases the risk of vaginal cancer.


=== Effects of aging and childbirth ===

Age and hormone levels significantly correlate with the pH of the vagina. 

Estrogen, glycogen and lactobacilli impact these levels. 

At birth, the vagina is acidic with a pH of approximately 4.5, and ceases to be acidic by three to six weeks of age, becoming alkaline. 

Average vaginal pH is 7.0 in pre-pubertal girls. 

Although there is a high degree of variability in timing, girls who are approximately seven to twelve years of age will continue to have labial development as the hymen thickens and the vagina elongates to approximately 8 cm. 

The vaginal mucosa thickens and the vaginal pH becomes acidic again. 

Girls may also experience a thin, white vaginal discharge called leukorrhea. 

The vaginal microbiota of adolescent girls aged 13 to 18 years is similar to women of reproductive age, who have an average vaginal pH of 3.8–4.5, but research is not as clear on whether this is the same for premenarcheal or perimenarcheal girls. 

The vaginal pH during menopause is 6.5–7.0 (without hormone replacement therapy), or 4.5–5.0 with hormone replacement therapy.

After menopause, the body produces less estrogen. 

This causes atrophic vaginitis (thinning and inflammation of the vaginal walls), which can lead to vaginal itching, burning, bleeding, soreness, or vaginal dryness (a decrease in lubrication). 

Vaginal dryness can cause discomfort on its own or discomfort or pain during sexual intercourse. 

Hot flashes are also characteristic of menopause. 

Menopause also affects the composition of vaginal support structures. 

The vascular structures become fewer with advancing age. 

Specific collagens become altered in composition and ratios. 

It is thought that the weakening of the support structures of the vagina is due to the physiological changes in this connective tissue.Menopausal symptoms can be eased by estrogen-containing vaginal creams, non-prescription, non-hormonal medications, vaginal estrogen rings such as the Femring, or other hormone replacement therapies, but there are risks (including adverse effects) associated with hormone replacement therapy. 

Vaginal creams and vaginal estrogen rings may not have the same risks as other hormone replacement treatments. 

Hormone replacement therapy can treat vaginal dryness, but a personal lubricant may be used to temporarily remedy vaginal dryness specifically for sexual intercourse. 

Some women have an increase in sexual desire following menopause. 

It may be that menopausal women who continue to engage in sexual activity regularly experience vaginal lubrication similar to levels in women who have not entered menopause, and can enjoy sexual intercourse fully. 

They may have less vaginal atrophy and fewer problems concerning sexual intercourse.Vaginal changes that happen with aging and childbirth include mucosal redundancy, rounding of the posterior aspect of the vagina with shortening of the distance from the distal end of the anal canal to the vaginal opening, diastasis or disruption of the pubococcygeus muscles caused by poor repair of an episiotomy, and blebs that may protrude beyond the area of the vaginal opening. 

Other vaginal changes related to aging and childbirth are stress urinary incontinence, rectocele, and cystocele. 

Physical changes resulting from pregnancy, childbirth, and menopause often contribute to stress urinary incontinence. 

If a woman has weak pelvic floor muscle support and tissue damage from childbirth or pelvic surgery, a lack of estrogen can further weaken the pelvic muscles and contribute to stress urinary incontinence. 

Pelvic organ prolapse, such as a rectocele or cystocele, is characterized by the descent of pelvic organs from their normal positions to impinge upon the vagina. 

A reduction in estrogen does not cause rectocele, cystocele or uterine prolapse, but childbirth and weakness in pelvic support structures can. 

Prolapse may also occur when the pelvic floor becomes injured during a hysterectomy, gynecological cancer treatment, or heavy lifting. 

Pelvic floor exercises such as Kegel exercises can be used to strengthen the pelvic floor muscles, preventing or arresting the progression of prolapse. 

There is no evidence that doing Kegel exercises isotonically or with some form of weight is superior; there are greater risks with using weights since a foreign object is introduced into the vagina.During the third stage of labor, while the infant is being born, the vagina undergoes significant changes. 

A gush of blood from the vagina may be seen right before the baby is born. 

Lacerations to the vagina that can occur during birth vary in depth, severity and the amount of adjacent tissue involvement. 

The laceration can be so extensive as to involve the rectum and anus. 

This event can be especially distressing to a new mother. 

When this occurs, fecal incontinence develops and stool can leave through the vagina. 

Close to 85% of spontaneous vaginal births develop some form of tearing. 

Out of these, 60–70% require suturing. 

Lacerations from labor do not always occur.


=== Surgery ===

The vagina, including the vaginal opening, may be altered as a result of surgeries such as an episiotomy, vaginectomy, vaginoplasty or labiaplasty. 

Those who undergo vaginoplasty are usually older and have given birth. 

A thorough examination of the vagina before a vaginoplasty is standard, as well as a referral to a urogynecologist to diagnose possible vaginal disorders. 

With regard to labiaplasty, reduction of the labia minora is quick without hindrance, complications are minor and rare, and can be corrected. 

Any scarring from the procedure is minimal, and long-term problems have not been identified.During an episiotomy, a surgical incision is made during the second stage of labor to enlarge the vaginal opening for the baby to pass through. 

Although its routine use is no longer recommended, and not having an episiotomy is found to have better results than an episiotomy, it is one of the most common medical procedures performed on women. 

The incision is made through the skin, vaginal epithelium, subcutaneous fat, perineal body and superficial transverse perineal muscle and extends from the vagina to the anus. 

Episiotomies can be painful after delivery. 

Women often report pain during sexual intercourse up to three months after laceration repair or an episiotomy. 

Some surgical techniques result in less pain than others. 

The two types of episiotomies performed are the medial incision and the medio-lateral incision. 

The median incision is a perpendicular cut between the vagina and the anus and is the most common. 

The medio-lateral incision is made between the vagina at an angle and is not as likely to tear through to the anus. 

The medio-lateral cut takes more time to heal than the median cut.Vaginectomy is surgery to remove all or part of the vagina, and is usually used to treat malignancy. 

Removal of some or all of the reproductive organs and genitalia can result in damage to the nerves and leave behind scarring or adhesions. 

Sexual function may also be impaired as a result, as in the case of some cervical cancer surgeries. 

These surgeries can impact pain, elasticity, vaginal lubrication and sexual arousal. 

This often resolves after one year but may take longer.Women, especially those who are older and have had multiple births, may choose to surgically correct vaginal laxity. 

This surgery has been described as vaginal tightening or rejuvenation. 

While a woman may experience an improvement in self-image and sexual pleasure by undergoing vaginal tightening or rejuvenation, there are risks associated with the procedures, including infection, narrowing of the vaginal opening, insufficient tightening, decreased sexual function (such as pain during sexual intercourse), and rectovaginal fistula. 

Women who undergo this procedure may unknowingly have a medical issue, such as a prolapse, and an attempt to correct this is also made during the surgery.Surgery on the vagina can be elective or cosmetic. 

Women who seek cosmetic surgery can have congenital conditions, physical discomfort or wish to alter the appearance of their genitals. 

Concerns over average genital appearance or measurements are largely unavailable and make defining a successful outcome for such surgery difficult. 

A number of sex reassignment surgeries are available to transgender people. 

Although not all intersex conditions require surgical treatment, some choose genital surgery to correct atypical anatomical conditions.


=== Anomalies and other health issues ===


Vaginal anomalies are defects that result in an abnormal or absent vagina. 

The most common obstructive vaginal anomaly is an imperforate hymen, a condition in which the hymen obstructs menstrual flow or other vaginal secretions. 

Another vaginal anomaly is a transverse vaginal septum, which partially or completely blocks the vaginal canal. 

The precise cause of an obstruction must be determined before it is repaired, since corrective surgery differs depending on the cause. 

In some cases, such as isolated vaginal agenesis, the external genitalia may appear normal.Abnormal openings known as fistulas can cause urine or feces to enter the vagina, resulting in incontinence. 

The vagina is susceptible to fistula formation because of its proximity to the urinary and gastrointestinal tracts. 

Specific causes are manifold and include obstructed labor, hysterectomy, malignancy, radiation, episiotomy, and bowel disorders. 

A small number of vaginal fistulas are congenital. 

Various surgical methods are employed to repair fistulas. 

Untreated, fistulas can result in significant disability and have a profound impact on quality of life.Vaginal evisceration is a serious complication of a vaginal hysterectomy and occurs when the vaginal cuff ruptures, allowing the small intestine to protrude from the vagina.Cysts may also affect the vagina. 

Various types of vaginal cysts can develop on the surface of the vaginal epithelium or in deeper layers of the vagina and can grow to be as large as 7 cm. 

Often, they are an incidental finding during a routine pelvic examination. 

Vaginal cysts can mimic other structures that protrude from the vagina such as a rectocele and cystocele. 

Cysts that can be present include Müllerian cysts, Gartner's duct cysts, and epidermoid cysts. 

A vaginal cyst is most likely to develop in women between the ages of 30 to 40. 

It is estimated that 1 out of 200 women has a vaginal cyst. 

The Bartholin's cyst is of vulvar rather than vaginal origin, but it presents as a lump at the vaginal opening. 

It is more common in younger women and is usually without symptoms, but it can cause pain if an abscess forms, block the entrance to the vulval vestibule if large, and impede walking or cause painful sexual intercourse.


== Society and culture ==



=== Perceptions, symbolism and vulgarity ===


Various perceptions of the vagina have existed throughout history, including the belief it is the center of sexual desire, a metaphor for life via birth, inferior to the penis, unappealing to sight or smell, or vulgar. 

These views can largely be attributed to sex differences, and how they are interpreted. 

David Buss, an evolutionary psychologist, stated that because a penis is significantly larger than a clitoris and is readily visible while the vagina is not, and males urinate through the penis, boys are taught from childhood to touch their penises while girls are often taught that they should not touch their own genitalia, which implies that there is harm in doing so. 

Buss attributed this as the reason many women are not as familiar with their genitalia, and that researchers assume these sex differences explain why boys learn to masturbate before girls and do so more often.The word vagina is commonly avoided in conversation, and many people are confused about the vagina's anatomy and may be unaware that it is not used for urination. 

This is exacerbated by phrases such as "boys have a penis, girls have a vagina", which causes children to think that girls have one orifice in the pelvic area. 

Author Hilda Hutcherson stated, "Because many [women] have been conditioned since childhood through verbal and nonverbal cues to think of [their] genitals as ugly, smelly and unclean, [they] aren't able to fully enjoy intimate encounters" because of fear that their partner will dislike the sight, smell, or taste of their genitals. 

She argued that women, unlike men, did not have locker room experiences in school where they compared each other's genitals, which is one reason so many women wonder if their genitals are normal. 

Scholar Catherine Blackledge stated that having a vagina meant she would typically be treated less well than her vagina-less counterparts and subject to inequalities (such as job inequality), which she categorized as being treated like a second-class citizen.

Negative views of the vagina are simultaneously contrasted by views that it is a powerful symbol of female sexuality, spirituality, or life. 

Author Denise Linn stated that the vagina "is a powerful symbol of womanliness, openness, acceptance, and receptivity. 

It is the inner valley spirit." Sigmund Freud placed significant value on the vagina, postulating the concept that vaginal orgasm is separate from clitoral orgasm, and that, upon reaching puberty, the proper response of mature women is a changeover to vaginal orgasms (meaning orgasms without any clitoral stimulation). 

This theory made many women feel inadequate, as the majority of women cannot achieve orgasm via vaginal intercourse alone. 

Regarding religion, the womb represents a powerful symbol as the yoni in Hinduism which represents "the feminine potency", and this may indicate the value that Hindu society has given female sexuality and the vagina's ability to deliver life; however, yoni as a representation of "womb" is not the primary denotation.While, in ancient times, the vagina was often considered equivalent (homologous) to the penis, with anatomists Galen (129 AD – 200 AD) and Vesalius (1514–1564) regarding the organs as structurally the same except for the vagina being inverted, anatomical studies over latter centuries showed the clitoris to be the penile equivalent. 

Another perception of the vagina was that the release of vaginal fluids would cure or remedy a number of ailments; various methods were used over the centuries to release "female seed" (via vaginal lubrication or female ejaculation) as a treatment for suffocatio ex semine retento (suffocation of the womb, lit. 'suffocation from retained seed'), green sickness, and possibly for female hysteria. 

Reported methods for treatment included a midwife rubbing the walls of the vagina or insertion of the penis or penis-shaped objects into the vagina. 

Symptoms of the female hysteria diagnosis – a concept that is no longer recognized by medical authorities as a medical disorder – included faintness, nervousness, insomnia, fluid retention, heaviness in abdomen, muscle spasm, shortness of breath, irritability, loss of appetite for food or sex, and a propensity for causing trouble. 

It may be that women who were considered suffering from female hysteria condition would sometimes undergo "pelvic massage" – stimulation of the genitals by the doctor until the woman experienced "hysterical paroxysm" (i.e., orgasm). 

In this case, paroxysm was regarded as a medical treatment, and not a sexual release.The vagina and vulva have been given many vulgar names, three of which are cunt, twat, and pussy. 

Cunt is also used as a derogatory epithet referring to people of either sex. 

This usage is relatively recent, dating from the late nineteenth century. 

Reflecting different national usages, cunt is described as "an unpleasant or stupid person" in the Compact Oxford English Dictionary, whereas the Merriam-Webster has a usage of the term as "usually disparaging and obscene: woman", noting that it is used in the United States as "an offensive way to refer to a woman". 

Random House defines it as "a despicable, contemptible or foolish man". 

Some feminists of the 1970s sought to eliminate disparaging terms such as cunt. 

Twat is widely used as a derogatory epithet, especially in British English, referring to a person considered obnoxious or stupid. 

Pussy can indicate "cowardice or weakness", and "the human vulva or vagina" or by extension "sexual intercourse with a woman". 

In contemporary English, use of the word pussy to refer to women is considered derogatory or demeaning, treating people as sexual objects.


=== In contemporary literature and art ===


The vagina loquens, or "talking vagina", is a significant tradition in literature and art, dating back to the ancient folklore motifs of the "talking cunt". 

These tales usually involve vaginas talking due to the effect of magic or charms, and often admitting to their lack of chastity. 

Other folk tales relate the vagina as having teeth – vagina dentata (Latin for "toothed vagina"). 

These carry the implication that sexual intercourse might result in injury, emasculation, or castration for the man involved. 

These stories were frequently told as cautionary tales warning of the dangers of unknown women and to discourage rape.In 1966, the French artist Niki de Saint Phalle collaborated with Dadaist artist Jean Tinguely and Per Olof Ultvedt on a large sculpture installation entitled "hon-en katedral" (also spelled "Hon-en-Katedrall", which means "she-a cathedral") for Moderna Museet, in Stockholm, Sweden. 

The outer form is a giant, reclining sculpture of a woman which visitors can enter through a door-sized vaginal opening between her spread legs.The Vagina Monologues, a 1996 episodic play by Eve Ensler, has contributed to making female sexuality a topic of public discourse. 

It is made up of a varying number of monologues read by a number of women. 

Initially, Ensler performed every monologue herself, with subsequent performances featuring three actresses; latter versions feature a different actress for every role. 

Each of the monologues deals with an aspect of the feminine experience, touching on matters such as sexual activity, love, rape, menstruation, female genital mutilation, masturbation, birth, orgasm, the various common names for the vagina, or simply as a physical aspect of the body. 

A recurring theme throughout the pieces is the vagina as a tool of female empowerment, and the ultimate embodiment of individuality.


=== Influence on modification ===


Societal views, influenced by tradition, a lack of knowledge on anatomy, or sexism, can significantly impact a person's decision to alter their own or another person's genitalia. 

Women may want to alter their genitalia (vagina or vulva) because they believe that its appearance, such as the length of the labia minora covering the vaginal opening, is not normal, or because they desire a smaller vaginal opening or tighter vagina. 

Women may want to remain youthful in appearance and sexual function. 

These views are often influenced by the media, including pornography, and women can have low self-esteem as a result. 

They may be embarrassed to be naked in front of a sexual partner and may insist on having sex with the lights off. 

When modification surgery is performed purely for cosmetic reasons, it is often viewed poorly, and some doctors have compared such surgeries to female genital mutilation (FGM).Female genital mutilation, also known as female circumcision or female genital cutting, is genital modification with no health benefits. 

The most severe form is Type III FGM, which is infibulation and involves removing all or part of the labia and the vagina being closed up. 

A small hole is left for the passage of urine and menstrual blood, and the vagina is opened up for sexual intercourse and childbirth.Significant controversy surrounds female genital mutilation, with the World Health Organization (WHO) and other health organizations campaigning against the procedures on behalf of human rights, stating that it is "a violation of the human rights of girls and women" and "reflects deep-rooted inequality between the sexes". 

Female genital mutilation has existed at one point or another in almost all human civilizations, most commonly to exert control over the sexual behavior, including masturbation, of girls and women. 

It is carried out in several countries, especially in Africa, and to a lesser extent in other parts of the Middle East and Southeast Asia, on girls from a few days old to mid-adolescent, often to reduce sexual desire in an effort to preserve vaginal virginity. 

Comfort Momoh stated it may be that female genital mutilation was "practiced in ancient Egypt as a sign of distinction among the aristocracy"; there are reports that traces of infibulation are on Egyptian mummies.Custom and tradition are the most frequently cited reasons for the practice of female genital mutilation. 

Some cultures believe that female genital mutilation is part of a girl's initiation into adulthood and that not performing it can disrupt social and political cohesion. 

In these societies, a girl is often not considered an adult unless she has undergone the procedure.


== Other animals ==


The vagina is a structure of animals in which the female is internally fertilized, rather than by traumatic insemination used by some invertebrates. 

The shape of the vagina varies among different animals. 

In placental mammals and marsupials, the vagina leads from the uterus to the exterior of the female body. 

Female marsupials have two lateral vaginas, which lead to separate uteri, but both open externally through the same orifice; a third canal, which is known as the median vagina, and can be transitory or permanent, is used for birth. 

The female spotted hyena does not have an external vaginal opening. 

Instead, the vagina exits through the clitoris, allowing the females to urinate, copulate and give birth through the clitoris. 

The vagina of the female coyote contracts during copulation, forming a copulatory tie.Birds, monotremes, and some reptiles have a part of the oviduct that leads to the cloaca. 

Chickens have a vaginal aperture that opens from the vertical apex of the cloaca. 

The vagina extends upward from the aperture and becomes the egg gland. 

In some jawless fish, there is neither oviduct nor vagina and instead the egg travels directly through the body cavity (and is fertilised externally as in most fish and amphibians). 

In insects and other invertebrates, the vagina can be a part of the oviduct (see insect reproductive system). 

Birds have a cloaca into which the urinary, reproductive tract (vagina) and gastrointestinal tract empty. 

Females of some waterfowl species have developed vaginal structures called dead end sacs and clockwise coils to protect themselves from sexual coercion.A lack of research on the vagina and other female genitalia, especially for different animals, has stifled knowledge on female sexual anatomy. 

One explanation for why male genitalia is studied more includes penises being significantly simpler to analyze than female genital cavities, because male genitals usually protrude and are therefore easier to assess and measure. 

By contrast, female genitals are more often concealed, and require more dissection, which in turn requires more time. 

Another explanation is that a main function of the penis is to impregnate, while female genitals may alter shape upon interaction with male organs, especially as to benefit or hinder reproductive success.Non-human primates are optimal models for human biomedical research because humans and non-human primates share physiological characteristics as a result of evolution. 

While menstruation is heavily associated with human females, and they have the most pronounced menstruation, it is also typical of ape relatives and monkeys. 

Female macaques menstruate, with a cycle length over the course of a lifetime that is comparable to that of female humans. 

Estrogens and progestogens in the menstrual cycles and during premenarche and postmenopause are also similar in female humans and macaques; however, only in macaques does keratinization of the epithelium occur during the follicular phase. 

The vaginal pH of macaques also differs, with near-neutral to slightly alkaline median values and is widely variable, which may be due to its lack of lactobacilli in the vaginal flora. 

This is one reason why, although macaques are used for studying HIV transmission and testing microbicides, animal models are not often used in the study of sexually transmitted infections, such as trichomoniasis. 

Another is that such conditions' causes are inextricably bound to humans' genetic makeup, making results from other species difficult to apply to humans.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vagina
;;;ES;;;



VAGINA


En los mamíferos, la vagina es la parte elástica y muscular del tracto genital femenino.

En humanos, se extiende desde el vestíbulo hasta el cuello uterino.

La abertura vaginal externa normalmente está parcialmente cubierta por una fina capa de tejido mucoso llamada himen.

En el extremo más profundo, el cuello uterino (cuello del útero) sobresale hacia la vagina.

La vagina permite las relaciones sexuales y el parto.

También canaliza el flujo menstrual, que ocurre en humanos y primates estrechamente relacionados como parte del ciclo menstrual.
Aunque la investigación sobre la vagina es especialmente escasa para diferentes animales, se documenta que su ubicación, estructura y tamaño varían entre las especies.

Las hembras de los mamíferos suelen tener dos aberturas externas en la vulva; estos son la abertura uretral para el tracto urinario y la abertura vaginal para el tracto genital.

Esto es diferente de los mamíferos machos, que suelen tener una sola abertura uretral tanto para orinar como para reproducirse.

La abertura vaginal es mucho más grande que la abertura uretral cercana y ambas están protegidas por los labios en los humanos.

En anfibios, aves, reptiles y monotremas, la cloaca es la única abertura externa para los tractos gastrointestinal, urinario y reproductivo.
Para acomodar una penetración más suave de la vagina durante las relaciones sexuales u otra actividad sexual, la humedad vaginal aumenta durante la excitación sexual en hembras humanas y otros mamíferos hembra.

Este aumento de la humedad proporciona lubricación vaginal, lo que reduce la fricción.

La textura de las paredes vaginales crea fricción para el pene durante las relaciones sexuales y lo estimula hacia la eyaculación, lo que permite la fertilización.

Junto con el placer y la vinculación, el comportamiento sexual de las mujeres con los demás (que puede incluir la actividad sexual heterosexual o lésbica) puede provocar infecciones de transmisión sexual (ITS), cuyo riesgo puede reducirse mediante las prácticas recomendadas de sexo seguro.

Otros problemas de salud también pueden afectar la vagina humana.
La vagina y la vulva han provocado fuertes reacciones en las sociedades a lo largo de la historia, incluidas percepciones y lenguaje negativos, tabúes culturales y su uso como símbolos de la sexualidad femenina, la espiritualidad o la regeneración de la vida.

En el habla común, la palabra vagina se usa a menudo para referirse a la vulva oa los genitales femeninos en general.

Sin embargo, según su diccionario y definiciones anatómicas, la vagina se refiere exclusivamente a la estructura interna específica, y comprender la distinción puede mejorar el conocimiento de los genitales femeninos y ayudar en la comunicación de atención médica.


== Etimología y definición ==

El término vagina proviene del latín y significa "vaina" o "vaina"; el plural de vagina es vaginae o vaginas.

La vagina también puede denominarse el canal del parto en el contexto del embarazo y el parto.

Aunque por su diccionario y definiciones anatómicas, el término vagina se refiere exclusivamente a la estructura interna específica, coloquialmente se usa para referirse a la vulva o tanto a la vagina como a la vulva. Usar el término vagina para significar "vulva" puede plantear problemas médicos o legales. confusión; por ejemplo, la interpretación de una persona sobre su ubicación puede no coincidir con la interpretación de otra sobre la ubicación.

Médicamente, la vagina es el canal entre el himen (o restos del himen) y el cuello uterino, mientras que, legalmente, comienza en la vulva (entre los labios).

Puede ser que el uso incorrecto del término vagina se deba a que no se ha pensado tanto en la anatomía de los genitales femeninos como en el estudio de los genitales masculinos, y que esto haya contribuido a la ausencia de un vocabulario correcto para los genitales externos. genitales femeninos entre el público en general y los profesionales de la salud.

Debido a que una mejor comprensión de los genitales femeninos puede ayudar a combatir el daño sexual y psicológico relacionado con el desarrollo femenino, los investigadores respaldan la terminología correcta para la vulva.


== Estructura ==



=== Anatomía macroscópica ===


La vagina humana es un canal muscular elástico que se extiende desde la vulva hasta el cuello uterino.

La abertura de la vagina se encuentra en el triángulo urogenital.

El triángulo urogenital es el triángulo frontal del perineo y también consta de la abertura uretral y partes asociadas de los genitales externos.

El canal vaginal viaja hacia arriba y hacia atrás, entre la uretra en la parte delantera y el recto en la parte posterior.

Cerca de la parte superior de la vagina, el cuello uterino sobresale en la vagina en su superficie frontal en un ángulo de aproximadamente 90 grados.

Las aberturas de la vagina y la uretra están protegidas por los labios. Cuando no hay excitación sexual, la vagina es un tubo colapsado, con las paredes delantera y trasera juntas.

Las paredes laterales, especialmente su zona media, son relativamente más rígidas.

Debido a esto, la vagina colapsada tiene una sección transversal en forma de H.

Detrás, la vagina superior está separada del recto por la bolsa recto-uterina, la vagina media por tejido conjuntivo laxo y la vagina inferior por el cuerpo perineal.

Donde la luz vaginal rodea el cuello uterino del útero, se divide en cuatro regiones continuas (fondos de saco vaginales); estos son los fondos de saco anterior, posterior, lateral derecho y lateral izquierdo.

El fórnix posterior es más profundo que el fórnix anterior. Sujetando la vagina se encuentran los músculos y ligamentos del tercio superior, medio e inferior.

El tercio superior son los músculos elevadores del ano y los ligamentos transcervical, pubocervical y sacrocervical.

Está sostenido por las porciones superiores de los ligamentos cardinales y el parametrio.

El tercio medio de la vagina involucra el diafragma urogenital.

Está sostenido por los músculos elevadores del ano y la porción inferior de los ligamentos cardinales.

El tercio inferior está sostenido por el cuerpo perineal o los diafragmas urogenital y pélvico.

El tercio inferior también puede describirse como sostenido por el cuerpo perineal y la parte pubovaginal del músculo elevador del ano.


==== Abertura vaginal e himen ====
La abertura vaginal está en el extremo posterior del vestíbulo vulvar, detrás de la abertura uretral.

La abertura de la vagina normalmente está oculta por los labios menores (labios vaginales), pero puede quedar expuesta después del parto vaginal. El himen es una capa delgada de tejido mucoso que rodea o cubre parcialmente la abertura vaginal.

Los efectos del coito y el parto sobre el himen son variables.

Donde se rompe, puede desaparecer por completo o pueden persistir restos conocidos como carunculae myrtiformes.

De lo contrario, al ser muy elástica, puede volver a su posición normal.

Además, el himen puede ser lacerado por enfermedad, lesión, examen médico, masturbación o ejercicio físico.

Por estas razones, la virginidad no puede determinarse definitivamente examinando el himen.


==== Variaciones y tamaño ====

La longitud de la vagina varía entre las mujeres en edad fértil.

Debido a la presencia del cuello uterino en la pared frontal de la vagina, existe una diferencia de longitud entre la pared frontal, de aproximadamente 7,5 cm (2,5 a 3 pulgadas) de largo, y la pared posterior, de aproximadamente 9 cm (3,5 pulgadas) de largo. .

Durante la excitación sexual, la vagina se expande tanto a lo largo como a lo ancho.

Si una mujer se pone de pie, el canal vaginal apunta hacia arriba y hacia atrás y forma un ángulo de aproximadamente 45 grados con el útero.

La abertura vaginal y el himen también varían en tamaño; en los niños, aunque el himen suele tener forma de media luna, son posibles muchas formas.


=== Desarrollo ===


La placa vaginal es el precursor de la vagina.

Durante el desarrollo, la placa vaginal comienza a crecer donde los extremos fusionados de los conductos paramesonéfricos (conductos de Müller) ingresan a la pared posterior del seno urogenital como el tubérculo sinusal.

A medida que la placa crece, separa significativamente el cuello uterino y el seno urogenital; eventualmente, las células centrales de la placa se descomponen para formar la luz vaginal.

Esto suele ocurrir entre la vigésima semana y la vigésima cuarta semana de desarrollo.

Si el lumen no se forma, o está incompleto, se pueden formar membranas conocidas como tabiques vaginales a lo largo o alrededor del tracto, causando la obstrucción del tracto de salida más adelante en la vida. Durante la diferenciación sexual, sin testosterona, el seno urogenital persiste como el vestíbulo del vagina.

Los dos pliegues urogenitales del tubérculo genital forman los labios menores, y las protuberancias labioescrotales se agrandan para formar los labios mayores. Hay puntos de vista contradictorios sobre el origen embriológico de la vagina.

La opinión mayoritaria es la descripción de Koff de 1933, que postula que los dos tercios superiores de la vagina se originan en la parte caudal del conducto de Müller, mientras que la parte inferior de la vagina se desarrolla a partir del seno urogenital.

Otros puntos de vista son la descripción de Bulmer de 1957 de que el epitelio vaginal se deriva únicamente del epitelio del seno urogenital y la investigación de Witschi de 1970, que reexaminó la descripción de Koff y concluyó que los bulbos sinovaginales son los mismos que las partes inferiores de los conductos de Wolff.

La opinión de Witschi está respaldada por la investigación de Acién et al., Bok y Drews.

Robboy et al. revisó las teorías de Koff y Bulmer y apoya la descripción de Bulmer a la luz de su propia investigación.

Los debates surgen de la complejidad de los tejidos interrelacionados y la ausencia de un modelo animal que coincida con el desarrollo vaginal humano.

Debido a esto, el estudio del desarrollo vaginal humano está en curso y puede ayudar a resolver los datos contradictorios.


=== Microanatomía ===


La pared vaginal desde el lumen hacia el exterior consiste en primer lugar en una mucosa de epitelio escamoso estratificado no queratinizado, con una lámina propia (una capa delgada de tejido conectivo) por debajo.

En segundo lugar, hay una capa de músculo liso con haces de fibras circulares internas a las fibras longitudinales (aquellas que corren a lo largo).

Por último, hay una capa externa de tejido conectivo llamada adventicia.

Algunos textos enumeran cuatro capas contando las dos subcapas de la mucosa (epitelio y lámina propia) por separado. La capa muscular lisa dentro de la vagina tiene una fuerza de contracción débil que puede crear cierta presión en la luz de la vagina; una fuerza de contracción mucho más fuerte, como durante el parto, proviene de los músculos del piso pélvico que están unidos a la adventicia alrededor de la vagina. La lámina propia es rica en vasos sanguíneos y canales linfáticos.

La capa muscular está compuesta por fibras musculares lisas, con una capa externa de músculo longitudinal, una capa interna de músculo circular y fibras musculares oblicuas en el medio.

La capa externa, la adventicia, es una capa delgada y densa de tejido conectivo y se mezcla con tejido conectivo laxo que contiene vasos sanguíneos, vasos linfáticos y fibras nerviosas que se encuentran entre los órganos pélvicos.

La mucosa vaginal está ausente de glándulas.

Forma pliegues (crestas transversales o rugosidades), que son más prominentes en el tercio externo de la vagina; su función es proporcionar a la vagina un área de superficie aumentada para extensión y estiramiento.

El epitelio del exocérvix (la porción del cuello uterino que se extiende hacia la vagina) es una extensión y comparte un borde con el epitelio vaginal.

El epitelio vaginal está formado por capas de células, incluidas las células basales, las células parabasales, las células planas escamosas superficiales y las células intermedias.

La capa basal del epitelio es la más mitóticamente activa y reproduce nuevas células.

Las células superficiales se desprenden continuamente y las células basales las reemplazan.

El estrógeno induce a las células intermedias y superficiales a llenarse de glucógeno.

Las células de la capa basal inferior pasan de la actividad metabólica activa a la muerte (apoptosis).

En estas capas intermedias del epitelio, las células comienzan a perder sus mitocondrias y otros orgánulos.

Las células retienen un nivel generalmente alto de glucógeno en comparación con otros tejidos epiteliales del cuerpo. Bajo la influencia del estrógeno materno, la vagina de un recién nacido está revestida por un epitelio escamoso estratificado grueso (o mucosa) durante dos a cuatro semanas después del nacimiento.

Entre entonces y la pubertad, el epitelio permanece delgado con solo unas pocas capas de células cuboidales sin glucógeno.

El epitelio también tiene pocas rugosidades y es de color rojo antes de la pubertad.

Cuando comienza la pubertad, la mucosa se espesa y nuevamente se convierte en epitelio escamoso estratificado con células que contienen glucógeno, bajo la influencia de los niveles crecientes de estrógeno de la niña.

Finalmente, el epitelio se adelgaza a partir de la menopausia y finalmente deja de contener glucógeno debido a la falta de estrógeno. Las células escamosas aplanadas son más resistentes tanto a la abrasión como a la infección.

La permeabilidad del epitelio permite una respuesta eficaz del sistema inmunitario ya que los anticuerpos y otros componentes inmunitarios pueden llegar fácilmente a la superficie.

El epitelio vaginal difiere del tejido similar de la piel.

La epidermis de la piel es relativamente resistente al agua porque contiene altos niveles de lípidos.

El epitelio vaginal contiene niveles más bajos de lípidos.

Esto permite el paso de agua y sustancias hidrosolubles a través del tejido. La queratinización ocurre cuando el epitelio se expone a la atmósfera externa seca.

En circunstancias anormales, como en el prolapso de órganos pélvicos, la mucosa puede exponerse al aire, resecarse y queratinizarse.


=== Suministro de sangre y nervios ===

La sangre se suministra a la vagina principalmente a través de la arteria vaginal, que emerge de una rama de la arteria ilíaca interna o la arteria uterina.

Las arterias vaginales se anastomosan (se unen) a lo largo del costado de la vagina con la rama cervical de la arteria uterina; esto forma la arteria ácigos, que se encuentra en la línea media de la vagina anterior y posterior.

Otras arterias que irrigan la vagina incluyen la arteria rectal media y la arteria pudenda interna, todas ramas de la arteria ilíaca interna.

Tres grupos de vasos linfáticos acompañan a estas arterias; el grupo superior acompaña a las ramas vaginales de la arteria uterina; un grupo medio acompaña a las arterias vaginales; y el grupo inferior, que drena la linfa del área fuera del himen, drena a los ganglios linfáticos inguinales.

El noventa y cinco por ciento de los canales linfáticos de la vagina se encuentran dentro de los 3 mm de la superficie de la vagina. Dos venas principales drenan la sangre de la vagina, una a la izquierda y otra a la derecha.

Estos forman una red de venas más pequeñas, el plexo venoso vaginal, a los lados de la vagina, que se conectan con plexos venosos similares del útero, la vejiga y el recto.

Estos finalmente drenan en las venas ilíacas internas. La inervación de la parte superior de la vagina es proporcionada por las áreas simpática y parasimpática del plexo pélvico.

La parte inferior de la vagina está inervada por el nervio pudendo.


== Función ==



=== Secreciones ===


Las secreciones vaginales provienen principalmente del útero, el cuello uterino y el epitelio vaginal, además de la minúscula lubricación vaginal de las glándulas de Bartolino cuando se produce la excitación sexual.

Se necesita poca secreción vaginal para humedecer la vagina; las secreciones pueden aumentar durante la excitación sexual, a la mitad o un poco antes de la menstruación, o durante el embarazo.

La menstruación (también conocida como "período" o "mensual") es la descarga regular de sangre y tejido mucoso (conocido como menstruación) del revestimiento interno del útero a través de la vagina.

La membrana mucosa vaginal varía en grosor y composición durante el ciclo menstrual, que es el cambio natural y regular que ocurre en el sistema reproductivo femenino (específicamente el útero y los ovarios) que hace posible el embarazo.

Existen diferentes productos de higiene como tampones, copas menstruales y toallas sanitarias para absorber o capturar la sangre menstrual. Las glándulas de Bartholin, ubicadas cerca de la abertura vaginal, se consideraron originalmente como la principal fuente de lubricación vaginal, pero un examen posterior mostró que solo proporcionan unas gotas de moco.

La lubricación vaginal es proporcionada principalmente por la filtración de plasma conocida como trasudado de las paredes vaginales.

Inicialmente, se forma como gotitas similares al sudor y es causado por el aumento de la presión del líquido en el tejido de la vagina (vasocongestión), lo que resulta en la liberación de plasma como trasudado de los capilares a través del epitelio vaginal. Antes y durante la ovulación, las glándulas mucosas dentro del cuello uterino secretan diferentes variaciones de moco, lo que proporciona un ambiente alcalino y fértil en el canal vaginal que es favorable para la supervivencia de los espermatozoides.

Después de la menopausia, la lubricación vaginal disminuye naturalmente.


=== Actividad sexual ===


Las terminaciones nerviosas de la vagina pueden proporcionar sensaciones placenteras cuando se estimula la vagina durante la actividad sexual.

Las mujeres pueden obtener placer de una parte de la vagina o de una sensación de cercanía y plenitud durante la penetración vaginal.

Debido a que la vagina no es rica en terminaciones nerviosas, las mujeres a menudo no reciben suficiente estimulación sexual u orgasmo únicamente a través de la penetración vaginal.

Aunque la literatura comúnmente cita una mayor concentración de terminaciones nerviosas y, por lo tanto, una mayor sensibilidad cerca de la entrada vaginal (el tercio externo o el tercio inferior), algunos exámenes científicos de la inervación de la pared vaginal no indican un área única con una mayor densidad de terminaciones nerviosas.

Otras investigaciones indican que solo algunas mujeres tienen una mayor densidad de terminaciones nerviosas en la pared vaginal anterior.

Debido a la menor cantidad de terminaciones nerviosas en la vagina, el dolor del parto es significativamente más tolerable. El placer se puede derivar de la vagina de varias maneras.

Además de la penetración del pene, el placer puede provenir de la masturbación, los dedos, el sexo oral (cunnilingus) o posiciones sexuales específicas (como la posición del misionero o la posición sexual de las cucharas).

Las parejas heterosexuales pueden participar en el cunnilingus o la digitación como formas de juego previo para incitar la excitación sexual o como actos de acompañamiento, o como un tipo de control de la natalidad, o para preservar la virginidad.

Con menos frecuencia, pueden usar actos sexuales no peneanos-vaginales como medio principal de placer sexual.

Por el contrario, las lesbianas y otras mujeres que tienen sexo con mujeres comúnmente practican el cunnilingus o los dedos como formas principales de actividad sexual.

Algunas mujeres y parejas usan juguetes sexuales, como un vibrador o un consolador, para el placer vaginal.

El Kama Sutra, un antiguo texto hindú escrito por Vātsyāyana, que incluye varias posiciones sexuales, también puede usarse para aumentar el placer sexual, con especial énfasis en la satisfacción sexual femenina. La mayoría de las mujeres requieren estimulación directa del clítoris para llegar al orgasmo.

El clítoris juega un papel en la estimulación vaginal.

Es un órgano sexual de estructura multiplanar que contiene abundantes terminaciones nerviosas, con una amplia inserción en el arco púbico y extenso tejido de sostén en los labios.

Las investigaciones indican que forma un grupo de tejido con la vagina.

Este tejido es quizás más extenso en algunas mujeres que en otras, lo que puede contribuir a los orgasmos experimentados por vía vaginal. Durante la excitación sexual, y particularmente la estimulación del clítoris, las paredes de la vagina se lubrican.

Esto comienza después de diez a treinta segundos de excitación sexual y aumenta en cantidad cuanto más tiempo está excitada la mujer.

Reduce la fricción o lesión que puede causar la inserción del pene en la vagina u otra penetración de la vagina durante la actividad sexual.

La vagina se alarga durante la excitación y puede continuar alargándose en respuesta a la presión; a medida que la mujer se excita por completo, la vagina se expande a lo largo y ancho, mientras que el cuello uterino se retrae.

Con los dos tercios superiores de la vagina expandiéndose y alargándose, el útero se eleva hacia la pelvis mayor y el cuello uterino se eleva por encima del piso vaginal, lo que da como resultado una tienda de campaña en el plano vaginal medio.

Esto se conoce como el efecto carpa o globo.

A medida que las paredes elásticas de la vagina se estiran o se contraen, con el apoyo de los músculos pélvicos, para envolver el pene insertado (u otro objeto), esto crea fricción para el pene y ayuda a que el hombre experimente el orgasmo y la eyaculación, que en a su vez permite la fertilización. Un área de la vagina que puede ser una zona erógena es el punto G.

Por lo general, se define como estar ubicado en la pared anterior de la vagina, a un par de pulgadas de la entrada, y algunas mujeres experimentan un placer intenso y, a veces, un orgasmo, si esta área se estimula durante la actividad sexual.

Un orgasmo del punto G puede ser responsable de la eyaculación femenina, lo que lleva a algunos médicos e investigadores a creer que el placer del punto G proviene de las glándulas de Skene, un homólogo femenino de la próstata, en lugar de cualquier punto particular en la pared vaginal; otros investigadores consideran que la conexión entre las glándulas de Skene y el área del punto G es débil.

La existencia del punto G (y la existencia como una estructura distinta) todavía está en disputa porque los informes de su ubicación pueden variar de una mujer a otra, parece ser inexistente en algunas mujeres y se supone que es una extensión del clítoris y por lo tanto, la razón de los orgasmos experimentados vaginalmente.


=== Parto ===


La vagina es el canal de parto para el nacimiento de un bebé.

Cuando se acerca el trabajo de parto (un proceso fisiológico que precede al parto), pueden ocurrir varios signos, incluido el flujo vaginal y la ruptura de las membranas (rompimiento de aguas) que puede provocar un chorro de líquido amniótico o un flujo irregular o pequeño de líquido de la vagina.

La ruptura de fuente ocurre más comúnmente durante el trabajo de parto; sin embargo, puede ocurrir antes del trabajo de parto (conocido como ruptura prematura de membranas) y esto sucede en el 10% de los casos.

Las contracciones de Braxton Hicks también son una señal de que se acerca el trabajo de parto, pero no todas las mujeres las notan.

Entre las mujeres que dan a luz por primera vez, las contracciones de Braxton Hicks se confunden con contracciones reales y, por lo general, son muy fuertes en los días previos al trabajo de parto. A medida que el cuerpo se prepara para el parto, el cuello uterino se ablanda, se adelgaza y se mueve hacia adelante y comienza a abrirse.

Esto permite que el feto se asiente o "caiga" en la pelvis.

A medida que el feto se asienta en la pelvis, puede ocurrir dolor de los nervios ciáticos, aumento del flujo vaginal y aumento de la frecuencia urinaria.

Si bien es más probable que estos síntomas ocurran después de que haya comenzado el trabajo de parto en mujeres que han dado a luz antes, pueden ocurrir de diez a catorce días antes del trabajo de parto en mujeres que experimentan trabajo de parto por primera vez. El feto comienza a perder el apoyo del cuello uterino cuando comienzan las contracciones. .

Con la dilatación cervical que alcanza un diámetro de más de 10 cm (4 pulgadas) para acomodar la cabeza del feto, la cabeza se mueve desde el útero hasta la vagina.

La elasticidad de la vagina le permite estirarse muchas veces su diámetro normal para dar a luz al niño. Los partos vaginales son más comunes, pero si existe el riesgo de complicaciones, se puede realizar una cesárea (cesárea).

La mucosa vaginal tiene una acumulación anormal de líquido (edematosa) y es delgada, con pocas arrugas, poco después del nacimiento.

La mucosa se espesa y las arrugas regresan en aproximadamente tres semanas una vez que los ovarios recuperan su función habitual y se restablece el flujo de estrógeno.

La abertura vaginal se abre y se relaja, hasta que vuelve a su estado anterior al embarazo aproximadamente de seis a ocho semanas después del parto, lo que se conoce como período posparto; sin embargo, la vagina seguirá siendo más grande que antes. Después de dar a luz, hay una fase de flujo vaginal llamada loquios que puede variar significativamente en la cantidad de pérdida y su duración, pero puede durar hasta seis semanas. .


=== Microbiota vaginal ===


La flora vaginal es un ecosistema complejo que cambia a lo largo de la vida, desde el nacimiento hasta la menopausia.

La microbiota vaginal reside en y sobre la capa más externa del epitelio vaginal.

Este microbioma consta de especies y géneros que normalmente no causan síntomas ni infecciones en mujeres con inmunidad normal.

El microbioma vaginal está dominado por especies de Lactobacillus.

Estas especies metabolizan el glucógeno, descomponiéndolo en azúcar.

Los lactobacilos metabolizan el azúcar en glucosa y ácido láctico.

Bajo la influencia de hormonas, como el estrógeno, la progesterona y la hormona estimulante del folículo (FSH), el ecosistema vaginal sufre cambios cíclicos o periódicos.


== Importancia clínica ==



=== Exámenes pélvicos ===


La salud vaginal se puede evaluar durante un examen pélvico, junto con la salud de la mayoría de los órganos del sistema reproductivo femenino.

Dichos exámenes pueden incluir la prueba de Papanicolaou (o frotis cervical).

En los Estados Unidos, se recomienda la prueba de Papanicolaou a partir de los 21 años hasta los 65 años.

Sin embargo, otros países no recomiendan la prueba de Papanicolaou en mujeres no sexualmente activas.

Las pautas sobre la frecuencia varían de cada tres a cinco años.

El examen pélvico de rutina en mujeres adultas que no están embarazadas y carecen de síntomas puede ser más dañino que beneficioso.

Un hallazgo normal durante el examen pélvico de una mujer embarazada es un tinte azulado en la pared vaginal. Los exámenes pélvicos se realizan con mayor frecuencia cuando hay síntomas inexplicables de secreción, dolor, sangrado inesperado o problemas urinarios.

Durante un examen pélvico, se evalúa la posición, la simetría, la presencia del himen y la forma de la abertura vaginal.

La vagina es evaluada internamente por el examinador con los dedos enguantados, antes de insertar el espéculo, para notar la presencia de debilidad, bultos o nódulos.

Si hay inflamación y secreción, se observan.

Durante este tiempo, se palpan las glándulas de Skene y Bartolin para identificar anomalías en estas estructuras.

Una vez que se completa el examen digital de la vagina, se inserta con cuidado el espéculo, un instrumento para visualizar las estructuras internas, para hacer visible el cuello uterino.

El examen de la vagina también se puede realizar durante una búsqueda de cavidad. Las laceraciones u otras lesiones en la vagina pueden ocurrir durante una agresión sexual u otro abuso sexual.

Estos pueden ser lágrimas, hematomas, inflamación y abrasiones.

La agresión sexual con objetos puede dañar la vagina y el examen de rayos X puede revelar la presencia de objetos extraños.

Si se da el consentimiento, un examen pélvico es parte de la evaluación de la agresión sexual.

Los exámenes pélvicos también se realizan durante el embarazo, y las mujeres con embarazos de alto riesgo se realizan exámenes con mayor frecuencia.


=== Medicamentos ===

La administración intravaginal es una vía de administración en la que el medicamento se inserta en la vagina en forma de crema o tableta.

Farmacológicamente, esto tiene la ventaja potencial de promover efectos terapéuticos principalmente en la vagina o estructuras cercanas (como la porción vaginal del cuello uterino) con efectos adversos sistémicos limitados en comparación con otras vías de administración.

Los medicamentos utilizados para madurar el cuello uterino e inducir el parto se administran comúnmente por esta vía, al igual que los estrógenos, los agentes anticonceptivos, el propranolol y los antimicóticos.

Los anillos vaginales también se pueden usar para administrar medicamentos, incluido el control de la natalidad en los anillos vaginales anticonceptivos.

Estos se insertan en la vagina y proporcionan niveles continuos, de dosis baja y constantes del fármaco en la vagina y en todo el cuerpo. Antes de que el bebé salga del útero, se puede administrar una inyección para controlar el dolor durante el parto a través de la pared vaginal y cerca del pudendo. nervio.

Debido a que el nervio pudendo transporta fibras motoras y sensoriales que inervan los músculos pélvicos, un bloqueo del nervio pudendo alivia el dolor de parto.

El medicamento no daña al niño y no tiene complicaciones significativas.


=== Infecciones, enfermedades y sexo seguro ===


Las infecciones o enfermedades vaginales incluyen candidiasis, vaginitis, infecciones de transmisión sexual (ITS) y cáncer.

Lactobacillus gasseri y otras especies de Lactobacillus en la flora vaginal brindan cierta protección contra las infecciones por su secreción de bacteriocinas y peróxido de hidrógeno.

La vagina sana de una mujer en edad fértil es ácida, con un pH que normalmente oscila entre 3,8 y 4,5.

El pH bajo impide el crecimiento de muchas cepas de microbios patógenos.

El equilibrio ácido de la vagina también puede verse afectado por el embarazo, la menstruación, la diabetes u otras enfermedades, las píldoras anticonceptivas, ciertos antibióticos, una dieta deficiente y el estrés (como la falta de sueño).

Cualquiera de estos cambios en el equilibrio ácido de la vagina puede contribuir a la candidiasis.

Un pH elevado (superior a 4,5) del fluido vaginal puede ser causado por un crecimiento excesivo de bacterias como en la vaginosis bacteriana o en la tricomoniasis por infección parasitaria, ambas con vaginitis como síntoma.

La flora vaginal poblada por varias bacterias diferentes características de la vaginosis bacteriana aumenta el riesgo de resultados adversos en el embarazo.

Durante un examen pélvico, se pueden tomar muestras de fluidos vaginales para detectar infecciones de transmisión sexual u otras infecciones. Debido a que la vagina se limpia sola, por lo general no necesita una higiene especial.

Los médicos generalmente desaconsejan la práctica de las duchas vaginales para mantener la salud vulvovaginal.

Dado que la flora vaginal brinda protección contra las enfermedades, una alteración de este equilibrio puede provocar una infección y un flujo anormal.

El flujo vaginal puede indicar una infección vaginal por el color y el olor, o los síntomas resultantes del flujo, como irritación o ardor.

El flujo vaginal anormal puede ser causado por ITS, diabetes, duchas vaginales, jabones perfumados, baños de burbujas, píldoras anticonceptivas, candidiasis (comúnmente como resultado del uso de antibióticos) u otra forma de vaginitis.

Mientras que la vaginitis es una inflamación de la vagina y se atribuye a una infección, problemas hormonales o irritantes, el vaginismo es un endurecimiento involuntario de los músculos de la vagina durante la penetración vaginal causado por un reflejo condicionado o una enfermedad.

El flujo vaginal debido a la candidiasis suele ser espeso, de color cremoso e inodoro, mientras que el flujo debido a la vaginosis bacteriana es de color blanco grisáceo, y el flujo debido a la tricomoniasis suele ser de color gris, de consistencia delgada y tiene un olor a pescado.

La descarga en el 25% de los casos de tricomoniasis es de color amarillo verdoso. El VIH/SIDA, el virus del papiloma humano (VPH), el herpes genital y la tricomoniasis son algunas ITS que pueden afectar la vagina, y las fuentes de salud recomiendan prácticas de sexo seguro (o método de barrera) para prevenirlas. la transmisión de estas y otras ITS.

El sexo seguro generalmente implica el uso de condones y, a veces, condones femeninos (que les dan a las mujeres más control).

Ambos tipos pueden ayudar a evitar el embarazo al evitar que el semen entre en contacto con la vagina.

Sin embargo, hay poca investigación sobre si los condones femeninos son tan efectivos como los masculinos para prevenir las ITS, y son levemente menos efectivos que los masculinos para prevenir el embarazo, lo que puede deberse a que el condón femenino se ajusta menos que el masculino o porque puede deslizarse dentro de la vagina y derramar semen. Los ganglios linfáticos vaginales a menudo atrapan células cancerosas que se originan en la vagina.

Estos ganglios se pueden evaluar para detectar la presencia de enfermedad.

La extirpación quirúrgica selectiva (en lugar de la extirpación total y más invasiva) de los ganglios linfáticos vaginales reduce el riesgo de complicaciones que pueden acompañar a las cirugías más radicales.

Estos ganglios selectivos actúan como ganglios linfáticos centinela.

En lugar de cirugía, los ganglios linfáticos en cuestión a veces se tratan con radioterapia administrada a los ganglios linfáticos pélvicos, inguinales o ambos de la paciente. El cáncer vaginal y el cáncer de vulva son muy raros y afectan principalmente a mujeres mayores.

El cáncer de cuello uterino (que es relativamente común) aumenta el riesgo de cáncer de vagina, por lo que existe una probabilidad significativa de que el cáncer de vagina ocurra al mismo tiempo que el cáncer de cuello uterino o después.

Puede ser que sus causas sean las mismas.

El cáncer de cuello uterino puede prevenirse mediante pruebas de Papanicolaou y vacunas contra el VPH, pero las vacunas contra el VPH solo cubren los tipos de VPH 16 y 18, la causa del 70 % de los cánceres de cuello uterino.

Algunos síntomas del cáncer cervical y vaginal son dispareunia y sangrado vaginal anormal o flujo vaginal, especialmente después de las relaciones sexuales o la menopausia.

Sin embargo, la mayoría de los cánceres de cuello uterino son asintomáticos (no presentan síntomas).

La braquiterapia intracavitaria vaginal (VBT) se usa para tratar el cáncer de endometrio, vagina y cuello uterino.

Se inserta un aplicador en la vagina para permitir la administración de radiación lo más cerca posible del sitio del cáncer.

Las tasas de supervivencia aumentan con VBT en comparación con la radioterapia de haz externo.

Al usar la vagina para colocar el emisor lo más cerca posible del crecimiento canceroso, los efectos sistémicos de la radioterapia se reducen y las tasas de curación del cáncer de vagina son más altas.

La investigación no está clara sobre si el tratamiento del cáncer de cuello uterino con radioterapia aumenta el riesgo de cáncer de vagina.


=== Efectos del envejecimiento y el parto ===

La edad y los niveles hormonales se correlacionan significativamente con el pH de la vagina.

El estrógeno, el glucógeno y los lactobacilos afectan estos niveles.

Al nacer, la vagina es ácida con un pH de aproximadamente 4,5, y deja de ser ácida entre las tres y seis semanas de edad y se vuelve alcalina.

El pH vaginal promedio es de 7,0 en niñas prepuberales.

Aunque existe un alto grado de variabilidad en el tiempo, las niñas que tienen entre siete y doce años de edad seguirán teniendo un desarrollo labial a medida que el himen se engrosa y la vagina se alarga hasta aproximadamente 8 cm.

La mucosa vaginal se espesa y el pH vaginal vuelve a ser ácido.

Las niñas también pueden experimentar un flujo vaginal blanco y delgado llamado leucorrea.

La microbiota vaginal de las adolescentes de 13 a 18 años es similar a la de las mujeres en edad reproductiva, que tienen un pH vaginal promedio de 3,8 a 4,5, pero la investigación no es tan clara sobre si esto es lo mismo para las niñas premenárquicas o perimenárquicas.

El pH vaginal durante la menopausia es de 6,5 a 7,0 (sin terapia de reemplazo hormonal) o de 4,5 a 5,0 con terapia de reemplazo hormonal.

Después de la menopausia, el cuerpo produce menos estrógeno.

Esto causa vaginitis atrófica (adelgazamiento e inflamación de las paredes vaginales), que puede provocar picazón vaginal, ardor, sangrado, dolor o sequedad vaginal (disminución de la lubricación).

La sequedad vaginal puede causar molestias por sí sola o molestias o dolor durante las relaciones sexuales.

Los sofocos también son característicos de la menopausia.

La menopausia también afecta la composición de las estructuras de soporte vaginal.

Las estructuras vasculares disminuyen con el avance de la edad.

Colágenos específicos se alteran en composición y proporciones.

Se cree que el debilitamiento de las estructuras de soporte de la vagina se debe a los cambios fisiológicos en este tejido conectivo. Los síntomas de la menopausia pueden aliviarse con cremas vaginales que contienen estrógeno, medicamentos sin receta, sin hormonas, anillos vaginales de estrógeno como Femring u otras terapias de reemplazo hormonal, pero existen riesgos (incluidos los efectos adversos) asociados con la terapia de reemplazo hormonal.

Es posible que las cremas vaginales y los anillos vaginales de estrógeno no tengan los mismos riesgos que otros tratamientos de reemplazo hormonal.

La terapia de reemplazo hormonal puede tratar la sequedad vaginal, pero se puede usar un lubricante personal para remediar temporalmente la sequedad vaginal específicamente para las relaciones sexuales.

Algunas mujeres tienen un aumento en el deseo sexual después de la menopausia.

Puede ser que las mujeres menopáusicas que continúan participando en la actividad sexual regularmente experimenten una lubricación vaginal similar a los niveles de las mujeres que no han entrado en la menopausia y pueden disfrutar plenamente de las relaciones sexuales.

Pueden tener menos atrofia vaginal y menos problemas relacionados con las relaciones sexuales. Los cambios vaginales que ocurren con el envejecimiento y el parto incluyen redundancia de la mucosa, redondeo del aspecto posterior de la vagina con acortamiento de la distancia desde el extremo distal del canal anal hasta la abertura vaginal. , diástasis o disrupción de los músculos pubococcígeos causada por una mala reparación de una episiotomía y vesículas que pueden sobresalir más allá del área de la abertura vaginal.

Otros cambios vaginales relacionados con el envejecimiento y el parto son la incontinencia urinaria de esfuerzo, el rectocele y el cistocele.

Los cambios físicos que resultan del embarazo, el parto y la menopausia a menudo contribuyen a la incontinencia urinaria de esfuerzo.

Si una mujer tiene un soporte muscular del suelo pélvico débil y daño en los tejidos debido al parto oa la cirugía pélvica, la falta de estrógeno puede debilitar aún más los músculos pélvicos y contribuir a la incontinencia urinaria de esfuerzo.

El prolapso de órganos pélvicos, como un rectocele o un cistocele, se caracteriza por el descenso de los órganos pélvicos desde sus posiciones normales para comprimir la vagina.

Una reducción en el estrógeno no causa rectocele, cistocele o prolapso uterino, pero el parto y la debilidad en las estructuras de soporte pélvico sí pueden.

El prolapso también puede ocurrir cuando el piso pélvico se lesiona durante una histerectomía, un tratamiento de cáncer ginecológico o levantar objetos pesados.

Los ejercicios del suelo pélvico, como los ejercicios de Kegel, se pueden utilizar para fortalecer los músculos del suelo pélvico, previniendo o deteniendo la progresión del prolapso.

No hay evidencia de que hacer los ejercicios de Kegel isotónicamente o con algún tipo de peso sea superior; existen mayores riesgos con el uso de pesas ya que se introduce un objeto extraño en la vagina. Durante la tercera etapa del trabajo de parto, mientras nace el bebé, la vagina sufre cambios significativos.

Se puede ver un chorro de sangre de la vagina justo antes de que nazca el bebé.

Las laceraciones en la vagina que pueden ocurrir durante el parto varían en profundidad, gravedad y grado de afectación del tejido adyacente.

La laceración puede ser tan extensa como para involucrar el recto y el ano.

Este evento puede ser especialmente angustioso para una nueva madre.

Cuando esto ocurre, se desarrolla incontinencia fecal y las heces pueden salir por la vagina.

Cerca del 85% de los partos vaginales espontáneos desarrollan algún tipo de desgarro.

De estos, 60 a 70% requieren sutura.

Las laceraciones del parto no siempre ocurren.


=== Cirugía ===

La vagina, incluida la abertura vaginal, puede verse alterada como resultado de cirugías como una episiotomía, vaginectomía, vaginoplastia o labioplastia.

Las que se someten a una vaginoplastia suelen ser mayores y haber dado a luz.

Un examen completo de la vagina antes de una vaginoplastia es estándar, así como una derivación a un uroginecólogo para diagnosticar posibles trastornos vaginales.

Con respecto a la labioplastia, la reducción de los labios menores es rápida y sin obstáculos, las complicaciones son menores y raras, y pueden corregirse.

Cualquier cicatriz del procedimiento es mínima y no se han identificado problemas a largo plazo. Durante una episiotomía, se hace una incisión quirúrgica durante la segunda etapa del trabajo de parto para agrandar la abertura vaginal por la que pasa el bebé.

Aunque ya no se recomienda su uso rutinario, y se encuentra que no tener una episiotomía tiene mejores resultados que una episiotomía, es uno de los procedimientos médicos más comunes realizados en mujeres.

La incisión se realiza a través de la piel, el epitelio vaginal, la grasa subcutánea, el cuerpo perineal y el músculo perineal transverso superficial y se extiende desde la vagina hasta el ano.

Las episiotomías pueden ser dolorosas después del parto.

Las mujeres a menudo informan dolor durante las relaciones sexuales hasta tres meses después de la reparación de la laceración o una episiotomía.

Algunas técnicas quirúrgicas producen menos dolor que otras.

Los dos tipos de episiotomías que se realizan son la incisión medial y la incisión medio-lateral.

La incisión mediana es un corte perpendicular entre la vagina y el ano y es la más común.

La incisión mediolateral se hace entre la vagina en ángulo y no es tan probable que se desgarre hasta el ano.

El corte medio lateral tarda más tiempo en sanar que el corte medio. La vaginectomía es una cirugía para extirpar toda o parte de la vagina y, por lo general, se usa para tratar tumores malignos.

La extirpación de algunos o todos los órganos reproductivos y los genitales puede dañar los nervios y dejar cicatrices o adherencias.

La función sexual también puede verse afectada como resultado, como en el caso de algunas cirugías de cáncer de cuello uterino.

Estas cirugías pueden afectar el dolor, la elasticidad, la lubricación vaginal y la excitación sexual.

Esto a menudo se resuelve después de un año, pero puede llevar más tiempo. Las mujeres, especialmente las que son mayores y han tenido partos múltiples, pueden optar por corregir quirúrgicamente la laxitud vaginal.

Esta cirugía ha sido descrita como estiramiento o rejuvenecimiento vaginal.

Si bien una mujer puede experimentar una mejora en la imagen de sí misma y el placer sexual al someterse a un estiramiento o rejuvenecimiento vaginal, existen riesgos asociados con los procedimientos, que incluyen infección, estrechamiento de la abertura vaginal, ajuste insuficiente, disminución de la función sexual (como dolor durante el acto sexual). relaciones sexuales) y fístula rectovaginal.

Las mujeres que se someten a este procedimiento pueden, sin saberlo, tener un problema médico, como un prolapso, y también se intenta corregir esto durante la cirugía. La cirugía en la vagina puede ser electiva o cosmética.

Las mujeres que buscan cirugía estética pueden tener condiciones congénitas, molestias físicas o desear alterar la apariencia de sus genitales.

Las preocupaciones sobre la apariencia o las medidas genitales promedio no están disponibles en gran medida y dificultan la definición de un resultado exitoso para dicha cirugía.

Varias cirugías de reasignación de sexo están disponibles para personas transgénero.

Aunque no todas las condiciones intersexuales requieren tratamiento quirúrgico, algunas optan por la cirugía genital para corregir condiciones anatómicas atípicas.


=== Anomalías y otros problemas de salud ===


Las anomalías vaginales son defectos que resultan en una vagina anormal o ausente.

La anomalía vaginal obstructiva más común es un himen imperforado, una condición en la que el himen obstruye el flujo menstrual u otras secreciones vaginales.

Otra anomalía vaginal es un tabique vaginal transverso, que bloquea parcial o completamente el canal vaginal.

La causa precisa de una obstrucción debe determinarse antes de repararla, ya que la cirugía correctiva difiere según la causa.

En algunos casos, como la agenesia vaginal aislada, los genitales externos pueden parecer normales. Las aberturas anormales conocidas como fístulas pueden hacer que la orina o las heces entren en la vagina, lo que provoca incontinencia.

La vagina es susceptible a la formación de fístulas debido a su proximidad a los tractos urinario y gastrointestinal.

Las causas específicas son múltiples e incluyen trabajo de parto obstruido, histerectomía, malignidad, radiación, episiotomía y trastornos intestinales.

Un pequeño número de fístulas vaginales son congénitas.

Se emplean varios métodos quirúrgicos para reparar las fístulas.

Si no se tratan, las fístulas pueden provocar una discapacidad significativa y tener un profundo impacto en la calidad de vida. La evisceración vaginal es una complicación grave de una histerectomía vaginal y ocurre cuando se rompe el manguito vaginal, lo que permite que el intestino delgado sobresalga de la vagina. Los quistes también pueden afectar la vagina

Varios tipos de quistes vaginales pueden desarrollarse en la superficie del epitelio vaginal o en las capas más profundas de la vagina y pueden crecer hasta 7 cm.

A menudo, son un hallazgo incidental durante un examen pélvico de rutina.

Los quistes vaginales pueden imitar otras estructuras que sobresalen de la vagina, como un rectocele y un cistocele.

Los quistes que pueden estar presentes incluyen quistes de Müller, quistes del conducto de Gartner y quistes epidermoides.

Es más probable que se desarrolle un quiste vaginal en mujeres de entre 30 y 40 años.

Se estima que 1 de cada 200 mujeres tiene un quiste vaginal.

El quiste de Bartholin es de origen vulvar más que vaginal, pero se presenta como un bulto en la abertura vaginal.

Es más común en mujeres jóvenes y generalmente no presenta síntomas, pero puede causar dolor si se forma un absceso, bloquear la entrada al vestíbulo vulvar si es grande e impedir caminar o causar dolor en las relaciones sexuales.


== Sociedad y cultura ==



=== Percepciones, simbolismo y vulgaridad ===


Han existido varias percepciones de la vagina a lo largo de la historia, incluida la creencia de que es el centro del deseo sexual, una metáfora de la vida a través del nacimiento, inferior al pene, desagradable a la vista o al olfato, o vulgar.

Estos puntos de vista se pueden atribuir en gran medida a las diferencias sexuales y a cómo se interpretan.

David Buss, un psicólogo evolutivo, afirmó que debido a que el pene es significativamente más grande que el clítoris y es fácilmente visible mientras que la vagina no lo es, y los hombres orinan a través del pene, a los niños se les enseña desde la infancia a tocar sus penes, mientras que a las niñas se les enseña a menudo que no deben tocar sus propios genitales, lo que implica que hay daño al hacerlo.

Buss atribuyó esto como la razón por la que muchas mujeres no están tan familiarizadas con sus genitales, y que los investigadores asumen que estas diferencias sexuales explican por qué los niños aprenden a masturbarse antes que las niñas y lo hacen con más frecuencia. confundida acerca de la anatomía de la vagina y puede no saber que no se usa para orinar.

Esto se ve exacerbado por frases como "los niños tienen pene, las niñas tienen vagina", lo que hace que los niños piensen que las niñas tienen un orificio en el área pélvica.

La autora Hilda Hutcherson declaró: "Debido a que muchas [mujeres] han sido condicionadas desde la infancia a través de señales verbales y no verbales para pensar en [sus] genitales como feos, malolientes y sucios, [ellas] no pueden disfrutar plenamente de los encuentros íntimos" debido a miedo de que a su pareja no le guste la vista, el olor o el sabor de sus genitales.

Argumentó que las mujeres, a diferencia de los hombres, no tenían experiencias en el vestuario de la escuela donde compararan los genitales de las demás, razón por la cual muchas mujeres se preguntan si sus genitales son normales.

La académica Catherine Blackledge afirmó que tener una vagina significaba que, por lo general, sería tratada peor que sus contrapartes sin vagina y sujeta a desigualdades (como la desigualdad laboral), que clasificó como ser tratada como una ciudadana de segunda clase.

Las opiniones negativas sobre la vagina se contrastan simultáneamente con las opiniones de que es un poderoso símbolo de la sexualidad, la espiritualidad o la vida femenina.

La autora Denise Linn afirmó que la vagina "es un poderoso símbolo de feminidad, apertura, aceptación y receptividad.

Es el espíritu del valle interior." Sigmund Freud asignó un valor significativo a la vagina, postulando el concepto de que el orgasmo vaginal está separado del orgasmo del clítoris y que, al llegar a la pubertad, la respuesta adecuada de las mujeres maduras es un cambio a los orgasmos vaginales (es decir, orgasmos sin estimulación del clítoris).

Esta teoría hizo que muchas mujeres se sintieran inadecuadas, ya que la mayoría de las mujeres no pueden alcanzar el orgasmo solo a través del coito vaginal.

En cuanto a la religión, el útero representa un símbolo poderoso como el yoni en el hinduismo que representa "la potencia femenina", y esto puede indicar el valor que la sociedad hindú le ha dado a la sexualidad femenina y la capacidad de la vagina para dar vida; sin embargo, yoni como representación de "matriz" no es la denotación principal. Si bien, en la antigüedad, la vagina a menudo se consideraba equivalente (homóloga) al pene, con los anatomistas Galeno (129 d.C. - 200 d.C.) y Vesalio (1514-200 d.C.). 1564) considerando que los órganos eran estructuralmente iguales excepto que la vagina estaba invertida, los estudios anatómicos de los últimos siglos mostraron que el clítoris era el equivalente del pene.

Otra percepción de la vagina era que la liberación de fluidos vaginales curaría o remediaría una serie de dolencias; Se utilizaron varios métodos a lo largo de los siglos para liberar la "semilla femenina" (a través de la lubricación vaginal o la eyaculación femenina) como tratamiento para la asfixia ex semine retento (asfixia del útero, literalmente "asfixia por semilla retenida"), enfermedad verde y posiblemente por la histeria femenina.

Los métodos de tratamiento informados incluían una partera que frotaba las paredes de la vagina o la inserción del pene u objetos con forma de pene en la vagina.

Los síntomas del diagnóstico de histeria femenina, un concepto que las autoridades médicas ya no reconocen como un trastorno médico, incluían desmayos, nerviosismo, insomnio, retención de líquidos, pesadez en el abdomen, espasmos musculares, dificultad para respirar, irritabilidad, pérdida del apetito por los alimentos. o sexo, y una propensión a causar problemas.

Puede ser que las mujeres que se consideraba que sufrían de una condición de histeria femenina a veces se sometían a un "masaje pélvico": estimulación de los genitales por parte del médico hasta que la mujer experimentaba un "paroxismo histérico" (es decir, un orgasmo).

En este caso, el paroxismo se consideró un tratamiento médico y no una liberación sexual. La vagina y la vulva han recibido muchos nombres vulgares, tres de los cuales son coño, idiota y coño.

Cunt también se usa como un epíteto despectivo que se refiere a personas de cualquier sexo.

Este uso es relativamente reciente, data de finales del siglo XIX.

Como reflejo de diferentes usos nacionales, el coño se describe como "una persona desagradable o estúpida" en el Diccionario Inglés Compact Oxford, mientras que Merriam-Webster tiene un uso del término como "generalmente despectivo y obsceno: mujer", señalando que se usa en Estados Unidos como "una forma ofensiva de referirse a una mujer".

Random House lo define como "un hombre despreciable, despreciable o tonto".

Algunas feministas de la década de 1970 buscaron eliminar términos despectivos como coño.

Twat se usa ampliamente como un epíteto despectivo, especialmente en inglés británico, para referirse a una persona considerada desagradable o estúpida.

Pussy puede indicar "cobardía o debilidad", y "la vulva o vagina humana" o, por extensión, "relaciones sexuales con una mujer".

En inglés contemporáneo, el uso de la palabra pussy para referirse a las mujeres se considera despectivo o degradante, y trata a las personas como objetos sexuales.


=== En la literatura y el arte contemporáneos ===


La vagina loquens, o "vagina parlante", es una importante tradición en la literatura y el arte, que se remonta a los antiguos motivos folclóricos del "coño parlante".

Estos cuentos generalmente involucran vaginas que hablan debido al efecto de la magia o los encantos y, a menudo, admiten su falta de castidad.

Otros cuentos populares relatan que la vagina tiene dientes: vagina dentata (en latín, "vagina dentada").

Estos conllevan la implicación de que las relaciones sexuales pueden resultar en lesiones, emasculación o castración para el hombre involucrado.

Estas historias se contaban con frecuencia como advertencias sobre los peligros de las mujeres desconocidas y para desalentar la violación. katedral" (también escrito "Hon-en-Katedrall", que significa "ella-una catedral") para Moderna Museet, en Estocolmo, Suecia.

La forma exterior es una escultura gigante reclinada de una mujer a la que los visitantes pueden entrar a través de una abertura vaginal del tamaño de una puerta entre sus piernas abiertas. discurso.

Se compone de un número variable de monólogos leídos por varias mujeres.

Inicialmente, Ensler interpretó todos los monólogos ella misma, con actuaciones posteriores con tres actrices; Las últimas versiones cuentan con una actriz diferente para cada papel.

Cada uno de los monólogos trata un aspecto de la experiencia femenina, tocando temas como la actividad sexual, el amor, la violación, la menstruación, la mutilación genital femenina, la masturbación, el parto, el orgasmo, los diversos nombres comunes de la vagina, o simplemente como una condición física. aspecto del cuerpo.

Un tema recurrente a lo largo de las piezas es la vagina como herramienta de empoderamiento femenino y la máxima encarnación de la individualidad.


=== Influencia en la modificación ===


Los puntos de vista sociales, influenciados por la tradición, la falta de conocimiento sobre la anatomía o el sexismo, pueden afectar significativamente la decisión de una persona de alterar sus propios genitales o los de otra persona.

Las mujeres pueden querer alterar sus genitales (vagina o vulva) porque creen que su apariencia, como la longitud de los labios menores que cubren la abertura vaginal, no es normal, o porque desean una abertura vaginal más pequeña o una vagina más estrecha.

Las mujeres pueden querer permanecer jóvenes en apariencia y función sexual.

Estos puntos de vista a menudo están influenciados por los medios de comunicación, incluida la pornografía, y como resultado, las mujeres pueden tener una baja autoestima.

Pueden sentirse avergonzados de estar desnudos frente a una pareja sexual y pueden insistir en tener relaciones sexuales con las luces apagadas.

Cuando la cirugía de modificación se realiza únicamente por razones estéticas, a menudo se ve mal y algunos médicos han comparado este tipo de cirugías con la mutilación genital femenina (MGF). La mutilación genital femenina, también conocida como circuncisión femenina o corte genital femenino, es una modificación genital sin beneficios de la salud.

La forma más grave es la mutilación genital femenina de tipo III, que es la infibulación e implica la extirpación total o parcial de los labios y el cierre de la vagina.

Se deja un pequeño orificio para el paso de la orina y la sangre menstrual, y se abre la vagina para las relaciones sexuales y el parto. Existe una gran controversia en torno a la mutilación genital femenina, y la Organización Mundial de la Salud (OMS) y otras organizaciones sanitarias hacen campaña contra los procedimientos en en nombre de los derechos humanos, afirmando que se trata de "una violación de los derechos humanos de las niñas y las mujeres" y "refleja una profunda desigualdad entre los sexos".

La mutilación genital femenina ha existido en un momento u otro en casi todas las civilizaciones humanas, más comúnmente para ejercer control sobre el comportamiento sexual, incluida la masturbación, de niñas y mujeres.

Se lleva a cabo en varios países, especialmente en África y, en menor medida, en otras partes del Medio Oriente y el Sudeste Asiático, en niñas desde unos pocos días hasta la adolescencia, a menudo para reducir el deseo sexual en un esfuerzo por preservar virginidad vaginal.

Comfort Momoh afirmó que puede ser que la mutilación genital femenina "se practicara en el antiguo Egipto como un signo de distinción entre la aristocracia"; hay informes de que hay rastros de infibulación en las momias egipcias. La costumbre y la tradición son las razones citadas con más frecuencia para la práctica de la mutilación genital femenina.

Algunas culturas creen que la mutilación genital femenina es parte de la iniciación de una niña a la edad adulta y que no realizarla puede perturbar la cohesión social y política.

En estas sociedades, una niña a menudo no se considera adulta a menos que se haya sometido al procedimiento.


== Otros animales ==


La vagina es una estructura de los animales en la que la hembra es fecundada internamente, en lugar de la inseminación traumática que utilizan algunos invertebrados.

La forma de la vagina varía entre los diferentes animales.

En los mamíferos placentarios y marsupiales, la vagina va desde el útero hasta el exterior del cuerpo femenino.

Las hembras marsupiales tienen dos vaginas laterales, que conducen a úteros separados, pero ambas se abren externamente a través del mismo orificio; un tercer canal, que se conoce como vagina mediana, y puede ser transitorio o permanente, se utiliza para el parto.

La hiena manchada hembra no tiene una abertura vaginal externa.

En cambio, la vagina sale a través del clítoris, lo que permite a las hembras orinar, copular y dar a luz a través del clítoris.

La vagina de la hembra del coyote se contrae durante la cópula, formando un lazo copulador. Las aves, los monotremas y algunos reptiles tienen una parte del oviducto que conduce a la cloaca.

Los pollos tienen una abertura vaginal que se abre desde el vértice vertical de la cloaca.

La vagina se extiende hacia arriba desde la abertura y se convierte en el óvulo.

En algunos peces sin mandíbula, no hay oviducto ni vagina y, en cambio, el huevo viaja directamente a través de la cavidad del cuerpo (y es fertilizado externamente como en la mayoría de los peces y anfibios).

En insectos y otros invertebrados, la vagina puede ser parte del oviducto (ver sistema reproductivo de insectos).

Las aves tienen una cloaca en la que se vacían el tracto urinario, reproductivo (vagina) y gastrointestinal.

Las hembras de algunas especies de aves acuáticas han desarrollado estructuras vaginales llamadas sacos sin salida y espirales en el sentido de las agujas del reloj para protegerse de la coerción sexual. La falta de investigación sobre la vagina y otros genitales femeninos, especialmente para diferentes animales, ha sofocado el conocimiento sobre la anatomía sexual femenina.

Una explicación de por qué los genitales masculinos se estudian más incluye que los penes son significativamente más simples de analizar que las cavidades genitales femeninas, porque los genitales masculinos generalmente sobresalen y, por lo tanto, son más fáciles de evaluar y medir.

Por el contrario, los genitales femeninos se ocultan con mayor frecuencia y requieren más disección, lo que a su vez requiere más tiempo.

Otra explicación es que una función principal del pene es fecundar, mientras que los genitales femeninos pueden alterar su forma al interactuar con los órganos masculinos, especialmente para beneficiar o dificultar el éxito reproductivo. Los primates no humanos son modelos óptimos para la investigación biomédica humana porque los humanos y los no humanos -Los primates humanos comparten características fisiológicas como resultado de la evolución.

Si bien la menstruación está fuertemente asociada con las hembras humanas, y ellas tienen la menstruación más pronunciada, también es típica de los parientes de los simios y los monos.

Las hembras de macaco menstrúan, con una duración del ciclo a lo largo de su vida comparable a la de las hembras humanas.

Los estrógenos y progestágenos en los ciclos menstruales y durante la premenarquia y la posmenopausia también son similares en hembras humanas y macacas; sin embargo, sólo en los macacos se produce la queratinización del epitelio durante la fase folicular.

El pH vaginal de los macacos también difiere, con valores medianos casi neutros a ligeramente alcalinos y es muy variable, lo que puede deberse a la falta de lactobacilos en la flora vaginal.

Esta es una de las razones por las que, aunque los macacos se utilizan para estudiar la transmisión del VIH y probar microbicidas, los modelos animales no suelen utilizarse en el estudio de infecciones de transmisión sexual, como la tricomoniasis.

Otra es que las causas de tales condiciones están indisolublemente ligadas a la composición genética de los humanos, lo que hace que los resultados de otras especies sean difíciles de aplicar a los humanos.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vagina

;;;PT;;;



VAGINA


Nos mamíferos, a vagina é a parte elástica e muscular do trato genital feminino.

Nos humanos, estende-se do vestíbulo ao colo do útero.

A abertura vaginal externa é normalmente parcialmente coberta por uma fina camada de tecido mucoso chamado hímen.

Na extremidade profunda, o colo do útero (colo do útero) se projeta para dentro da vagina.

A vagina permite a relação sexual e o parto.

Também canaliza o fluxo menstrual, que ocorre em humanos e primatas intimamente relacionados como parte do ciclo menstrual.
Embora a pesquisa sobre a vagina seja especialmente deficiente para diferentes animais, sua localização, estrutura e tamanho são documentados como variáveis ​​entre as espécies.

Mamíferos fêmeas geralmente têm duas aberturas externas na vulva; estas são a abertura uretral para o trato urinário e a abertura vaginal para o trato genital.

Isso é diferente dos mamíferos machos, que geralmente têm uma única abertura uretral para micção e reprodução.

A abertura vaginal é muito maior do que a abertura uretral próxima, e ambas são protegidas pelos lábios em humanos.

Em anfíbios, aves, répteis e monotremados, a cloaca é a única abertura externa para os tratos gastrointestinal, urinário e reprodutivo.
Para acomodar uma penetração mais suave da vagina durante a relação sexual ou outra atividade sexual, a umidade vaginal aumenta durante a excitação sexual em fêmeas humanas e outras fêmeas de mamíferos.

Esse aumento na umidade fornece lubrificação vaginal, o que reduz o atrito.

A textura das paredes vaginais cria atrito para o pênis durante a relação sexual e o estimula em direção à ejaculação, permitindo a fertilização.

Juntamente com o prazer e o vínculo, o comportamento sexual das mulheres com outras pessoas (que pode incluir atividade sexual heterossexual ou lésbica) pode resultar em infecções sexualmente transmissíveis (IST), cujo risco pode ser reduzido pelas práticas recomendadas de sexo seguro.

Outros problemas de saúde também podem afetar a vagina humana.
A vagina e a vulva provocaram fortes reações nas sociedades ao longo da história, incluindo percepções e linguagem negativas, tabus culturais e seu uso como símbolos da sexualidade feminina, espiritualidade ou regeneração da vida.

Na linguagem comum, a palavra vagina é frequentemente usada para se referir à vulva ou aos órgãos genitais femininos em geral.

Por seu dicionário e definições anatômicas, no entanto, vagina refere-se exclusivamente à estrutura interna específica, e entender a distinção pode melhorar o conhecimento da genitália feminina e auxiliar na comunicação em saúde.


== Etimologia e definição ==

O termo vagina vem do latim e significa "bainha" ou "bainha"; o plural de vagina é vaginae ou vaginas.

A vagina também pode ser referida como o canal do parto no contexto da gravidez e do parto.

Embora por seu dicionário e definições anatômicas, o termo vagina se refira exclusivamente à estrutura interna específica, é coloquialmente usado para se referir à vulva ou à vagina e à vulva. confusão; por exemplo, a interpretação de uma pessoa sobre sua localização pode não corresponder à interpretação de outra sobre a localização.

Medicamente, a vagina é o canal entre o hímen (ou restos do hímen) e o colo do útero, enquanto, legalmente, começa na vulva (entre os lábios).

Pode ser que o uso incorreto do termo vagina se deva a não se pensar tanto na anatomia dos genitais femininos quanto no estudo dos genitais masculinos, e que isso tenha contribuído para a ausência de um vocabulário correto para os órgãos externos. genitália feminina entre o público em geral e os profissionais de saúde.

Como uma melhor compreensão da genitália feminina pode ajudar a combater os danos sexuais e psicológicos no que diz respeito ao desenvolvimento feminino, os pesquisadores endossam a terminologia correta para a vulva.


== Estrutura ==



=== Anatomia geral ===


A vagina humana é um canal elástico e muscular que se estende da vulva ao colo do útero.

A abertura da vagina encontra-se no triângulo urogenital.

O triângulo urogenital é o triângulo frontal do períneo e também consiste na abertura uretral e partes associadas da genitália externa.

O canal vaginal viaja para cima e para trás, entre a uretra na frente e o reto na parte de trás.

Perto da parte superior da vagina, o colo do útero se projeta para dentro da vagina em sua superfície frontal em um ângulo de aproximadamente 90 graus.

As aberturas vaginais e uretrais são protegidas pelos lábios. Quando não sexualmente excitada, a vagina é um tubo colapsado, com as paredes anterior e posterior colocadas juntas.

As paredes laterais, especialmente sua área intermediária, são relativamente mais rígidas.

Por causa disso, a vagina colapsada tem uma seção transversal em forma de H.

Atrás, a vagina superior é separada do reto pela bolsa reto-uterina, a vagina média por tecido conjuntivo frouxo e a vagina inferior pelo corpo perineal.

Onde o lúmen vaginal circunda o colo do útero, ele é dividido em quatro regiões contínuas (fórnices vaginais); estes são os fórnices anterior, posterior, lateral direito e lateral esquerdo.

O fórnice posterior é mais profundo que o fórnice anterior. Sustentando a vagina estão seus músculos e ligamentos do terço superior, médio e inferior.

O terço superior são os músculos elevadores do ânus e os ligamentos transcervical, pubocervical e sacrocervical.

É sustentado pelas porções superiores dos ligamentos cardinais e pelo paramétrio.

O terço médio da vagina envolve o diafragma urogenital.

É sustentado pelos músculos elevadores do ânus e pela porção inferior dos ligamentos cardinais.

O terço inferior é sustentado pelo corpo perineal ou pelos diafragmas urogenital e pélvico.

O terço inferior também pode ser descrito como sendo sustentado pelo corpo perineal e pela parte pubovaginal do músculo elevador do ânus.


==== Abertura vaginal e hímen ====
A abertura vaginal está na extremidade posterior do vestíbulo vulvar, atrás da abertura uretral.

A abertura da vagina é normalmente obscurecida pelos pequenos lábios (lábios vaginais), mas pode ser exposta após o parto vaginal. O hímen é uma fina camada de tecido mucoso que envolve ou cobre parcialmente a abertura vaginal.

Os efeitos da relação sexual e do parto no hímen são variáveis.

Onde está quebrado, pode desaparecer completamente ou remanescentes conhecidos como carunculae myrtiformes podem persistir.

Caso contrário, por ser muito elástico, pode voltar à sua posição normal.

Além disso, o hímen pode ser lacerado por doença, lesão, exame médico, masturbação ou exercício físico.

Por estas razões, a virgindade não pode ser definitivamente determinada pelo exame do hímen.


==== Variações e tamanho ====

O comprimento da vagina varia entre as mulheres em idade fértil.

Devido à presença do colo do útero na parede frontal da vagina, há uma diferença de comprimento entre a parede frontal, com aproximadamente 7,5 cm (2,5 a 3 pol.) de comprimento, e a parede posterior, com aproximadamente 9 cm (3,5 pol.) de comprimento. .

Durante a excitação sexual, a vagina se expande em comprimento e largura.

Se a mulher ficar de pé, o canal vaginal aponta para cima e para trás e forma um ângulo de aproximadamente 45 graus com o útero.

A abertura vaginal e o hímen também variam em tamanho; em crianças, embora o hímen geralmente apareça em forma de meia-lua, muitas formas são possíveis.


=== Desenvolvimento ===


A placa vaginal é a precursora da vagina.

Durante o desenvolvimento, a placa vaginal começa a crescer onde as extremidades fundidas dos ductos paramesonéfricos (ductos de Müller) entram na parede posterior do seio urogenital como tubérculo sinusal.

À medida que a placa cresce, separa significativamente o colo do útero e o seio urogenital; eventualmente, as células centrais da placa se quebram para formar o lúmen vaginal.

Isso geralmente ocorre por volta da vigésima a vigésima quarta semana de desenvolvimento.

Se o lúmen não for formado ou estiver incompleto, membranas conhecidas como septos vaginais podem se formar ao longo ou ao redor do trato, causando obstrução do trato de saída mais tarde na vida. vagina.

As duas pregas urogenitais do tubérculo genital formam os pequenos lábios, e os inchaços labioescrotais aumentam para formar os grandes lábios. Há opiniões conflitantes sobre a origem embriológica da vagina.

A visão majoritária é a descrição de Koff de 1933, que postula que os dois terços superiores da vagina se originam da parte caudal do ducto de Müller, enquanto a parte inferior da vagina se desenvolve a partir do seio urogenital.

Outros pontos de vista são a descrição de Bulmer em 1957 de que o epitélio vaginal deriva exclusivamente do epitélio do seio urogenital e a pesquisa de Witschi em 1970, que reexaminou a descrição de Koff e concluiu que os bulbos sinovaginais são os mesmos que as porções inferiores dos ductos de Wolff.

A visão de Witschi é apoiada pela pesquisa de Acién et al., Bok e Drews.

Robboy et ai. revisaram as teorias de Koff e Bulmer e apoiaram a descrição de Bulmer à luz de suas próprias pesquisas.

Os debates decorrem da complexidade dos tecidos inter-relacionados e da ausência de um modelo animal que corresponda ao desenvolvimento vaginal humano.

Por causa disso, o estudo do desenvolvimento vaginal humano está em andamento e pode ajudar a resolver os dados conflitantes.


=== Microanatomia ===


A parede vaginal do lúmen para fora consiste primeiramente em uma mucosa de epitélio escamoso estratificado não queratinizado, com uma lâmina própria (uma fina camada de tecido conjuntivo) embaixo dela.

Em segundo lugar, há uma camada de músculo liso com feixes de fibras circulares internas às fibras longitudinais (aquelas que correm longitudinalmente).

Por último, é uma camada externa de tecido conjuntivo chamada adventícia.

Alguns textos listam quatro camadas contando as duas subcamadas da mucosa (epitélio e lâmina própria) separadamente. A camada muscular lisa dentro da vagina tem uma força de contração fraca que pode criar alguma pressão no lúmen da vagina; força de contração muito mais forte, como durante o parto, vem dos músculos do assoalho pélvico que estão ligados à adventícia ao redor da vagina. A lâmina própria é rica em vasos sanguíneos e canais linfáticos.

A camada muscular é composta por fibras musculares lisas, com uma camada externa de músculo longitudinal, uma camada interna de músculo circular e fibras musculares oblíquas entre elas.

A camada externa, a adventícia, é uma camada fina e densa de tecido conjuntivo e se mistura com tecido conjuntivo frouxo contendo vasos sanguíneos, vasos linfáticos e fibras nervosas que estão entre os órgãos pélvicos.

A mucosa vaginal está ausente de glândulas.

Forma dobras (sulcos transversais ou rugas), que são mais proeminentes no terço externo da vagina; sua função é fornecer à vagina maior área de superfície para extensão e alongamento.

O epitélio da ectocérvice (a porção do colo uterino que se estende até a vagina) é uma extensão e faz fronteira com o epitélio vaginal.

O epitélio vaginal é constituído por camadas de células, incluindo as células basais, as células parabasais, as células planas escamosas superficiais e as células intermediárias.

A camada basal do epitélio é a mais mitoticamente ativa e reproduz novas células.

As células superficiais se desprendem continuamente e as células basais as substituem.

O estrogênio induz as células intermediárias e superficiais a se encherem de glicogênio.

As células da camada basal inferior passam da atividade metabólica ativa para a morte (apoptose).

Nessas camadas intermediárias do epitélio, as células começam a perder suas mitocôndrias e outras organelas.

As células retêm um nível geralmente alto de glicogênio em comparação com outros tecidos epiteliais no corpo. Sob a influência do estrogênio materno, a vagina de um recém-nascido é revestida por epitélio escamoso estratificado espesso (ou mucosa) por duas a quatro semanas após o nascimento.

Entre então e a puberdade, o epitélio permanece fino com apenas algumas camadas de células cubóides sem glicogênio.

O epitélio também tem poucas rugas e é de cor vermelha antes da puberdade.

Quando a puberdade começa, a mucosa engrossa e novamente se torna epitélio escamoso estratificado com células contendo glicogênio, sob a influência dos níveis crescentes de estrogênio da menina.

Finalmente, o epitélio afina a partir da menopausa e eventualmente deixa de conter glicogênio, devido à falta de estrogênio. As células escamosas achatadas são mais resistentes tanto à abrasão quanto à infecção.

A permeabilidade do epitélio permite uma resposta eficaz do sistema imunológico, uma vez que os anticorpos e outros componentes imunológicos podem chegar facilmente à superfície.

O epitélio vaginal difere do tecido semelhante da pele.

A epiderme da pele é relativamente resistente à água porque contém altos níveis de lipídios.

O epitélio vaginal contém níveis mais baixos de lipídios.

Isso permite a passagem de água e substâncias hidrossolúveis através do tecido. A queratinização ocorre quando o epitélio é exposto à atmosfera externa seca.

Em circunstâncias anormais, como no prolapso de órgãos pélvicos, a mucosa pode ficar exposta ao ar, tornando-se seca e queratinizada.


=== Suprimento sanguíneo e nervoso ===

O sangue é fornecido à vagina principalmente através da artéria vaginal, que emerge de um ramo da artéria ilíaca interna ou da artéria uterina.

As artérias vaginais se anastomosam (se unem) ao longo do lado da vagina com o ramo cervical da artéria uterina; isso forma a artéria ázigos, que se situa na linha média da vagina anterior e posterior.

Outras artérias que irrigam a vagina incluem a artéria retal média e a artéria pudenda interna, todos ramos da artéria ilíaca interna.

Três grupos de vasos linfáticos acompanham essas artérias; o grupo superior acompanha os ramos vaginais da artéria uterina; um grupo médio acompanha as artérias vaginais; e o grupo inferior, drenando a linfa da área fora do hímen, drena para os linfonodos inguinais.

Noventa e cinco por cento dos canais linfáticos da vagina estão a 3 mm da superfície da vagina. Duas veias principais drenam o sangue da vagina, uma à esquerda e outra à direita.

Estes formam uma rede de veias menores, o plexo venoso vaginal, nas laterais da vagina, conectando-se com plexos venosos semelhantes do útero, bexiga e reto.

Em última análise, estes drenam para as veias ilíacas internas. A inervação da parte superior da vagina é fornecida pelas áreas simpática e parassimpática do plexo pélvico.

A vagina inferior é suprida pelo nervo pudendo.


== Função ==



=== Secreções ===


As secreções vaginais são principalmente do útero, colo do útero e epitélio vaginal, além da minúscula lubrificação vaginal das glândulas de Bartholin na excitação sexual.

É preciso pouca secreção vaginal para tornar a vagina úmida; as secreções podem aumentar durante a excitação sexual, no meio ou um pouco antes da menstruação, ou durante a gravidez.

A menstruação (também conhecida como "período" ou "mensal") é a descarga regular de sangue e tecido mucoso (conhecido como menstruação) do revestimento interno do útero através da vagina.

A membrana mucosa vaginal varia em espessura e composição durante o ciclo menstrual, que é a mudança natural e regular que ocorre no sistema reprodutor feminino (especificamente o útero e os ovários) que possibilita a gravidez.

Diferentes produtos de higiene como tampões, copos menstruais e absorventes higiênicos estão disponíveis para absorver ou capturar o sangue menstrual. algumas gotas de muco.

A lubrificação vaginal é fornecida principalmente pela infiltração de plasma conhecida como transudato das paredes vaginais.

Isso se forma inicialmente como gotículas semelhantes ao suor e é causado pelo aumento da pressão do fluido no tecido da vagina (vasocongestão), resultando na liberação de plasma como transudato dos capilares através do epitélio vaginal. Antes e durante a ovulação, as glândulas mucosas dentro do colo do útero secretam diferentes variações de muco, o que proporciona um ambiente alcalino e fértil no canal vaginal que é favorável à sobrevivência dos espermatozoides.

Após a menopausa, a lubrificação vaginal diminui naturalmente.


=== Atividade sexual ===


As terminações nervosas na vagina podem proporcionar sensações prazerosas quando a vagina é estimulada durante a atividade sexual.

As mulheres podem obter prazer de uma parte da vagina ou de uma sensação de proximidade e plenitude durante a penetração vaginal.

Como a vagina não é rica em terminações nervosas, as mulheres muitas vezes não recebem estimulação sexual suficiente, ou orgasmo, apenas pela penetração vaginal.

Embora a literatura comumente cite uma maior concentração de terminações nervosas e, portanto, maior sensibilidade próximo à entrada vaginal (o terço externo ou terço inferior), alguns exames científicos de inervação da parede vaginal indicam que não existe uma única área com maior densidade de terminações nervosas.

Outras pesquisas indicam que apenas algumas mulheres apresentam maior densidade de terminações nervosas na parede vaginal anterior.

Devido ao menor número de terminações nervosas na vagina, a dor do parto é significativamente mais tolerável. O prazer pode ser obtido da vagina de várias maneiras.

Além da penetração peniana, o prazer pode vir da masturbação, dedilhado, sexo oral (cunnilingus) ou posições sexuais específicas (como a posição do missionário ou a posição sexual das colheres).

Casais heterossexuais podem se envolver em cunilíngua ou dedilhado como formas de preliminares para incitar a excitação sexual ou como atos de acompanhamento, ou como um tipo de controle de natalidade, ou para preservar a virgindade.

Menos comumente, eles podem usar atos sexuais não peniano-vaginais como meio primário de prazer sexual.

Em contraste, lésbicas e outras mulheres que fazem sexo com mulheres geralmente se envolvem em cunilíngua ou digitação como principais formas de atividade sexual.

Algumas mulheres e casais usam brinquedos sexuais, como vibrador ou vibrador, para o prazer vaginal.

O Kama Sutra – um antigo texto hindu escrito por Vātsyāyana, que inclui várias posições sexuais – também pode ser usado para aumentar o prazer sexual, com ênfase especial na satisfação sexual feminina. A maioria das mulheres requer estimulação direta do clitóris para o orgasmo.

O clitóris desempenha um papel na estimulação vaginal.

É um órgão sexual de estrutura multiplanar contendo uma abundância de terminações nervosas, com ampla fixação ao arco púbico e extenso tecido de suporte aos lábios.

Pesquisas indicam que forma um aglomerado de tecidos com a vagina.

Este tecido é talvez mais extenso em algumas mulheres do que em outras, o que pode contribuir para os orgasmos experimentados pela vagina. Durante a excitação sexual, e particularmente a estimulação do clitóris, as paredes da vagina lubrificam.

Isso começa após dez a trinta segundos de excitação sexual, e aumenta em quantidade quanto mais tempo a mulher estiver excitada.

Reduz o atrito ou lesão que pode ser causada pela inserção do pênis na vagina ou outra penetração da vagina durante a atividade sexual.

A vagina se alonga durante a excitação e pode continuar a se alongar em resposta à pressão; à medida que a mulher fica totalmente excitada, a vagina se expande em comprimento e largura, enquanto o colo do útero se retrai.

Com os dois terços superiores da vagina se expandindo e alongando, o útero sobe para a pelve maior e o colo do útero é elevado acima do assoalho vaginal, resultando em tenting do plano médio-vaginal.

Isso é conhecido como o efeito de tenda ou balonismo.

À medida que as paredes elásticas da vagina se esticam ou se contraem, com o apoio dos músculos pélvicos, para envolver o pênis inserido (ou outro objeto), isso cria atrito para o pênis e ajuda a fazer com que o homem experimente o orgasmo e a ejaculação, que em sua vez permite a fertilização. Uma área na vagina que pode ser uma zona erógena é o ponto G.

É tipicamente definido como localizado na parede anterior da vagina, a alguns ou poucos centímetros da entrada, e algumas mulheres experimentam prazer intenso e, às vezes, um orgasmo, se essa área for estimulada durante a atividade sexual.

Um orgasmo do ponto G pode ser responsável pela ejaculação feminina, levando alguns médicos e pesquisadores a acreditar que o prazer do ponto G vem das glândulas de Skene, um homólogo feminino da próstata, e não de qualquer ponto específico na parede vaginal; outros pesquisadores consideram fraca a conexão entre as glândulas de Skene e a área do ponto G.

A existência do ponto G (e existência como uma estrutura distinta) ainda está em disputa porque os relatos de sua localização podem variar de mulher para mulher, parece ser inexistente em algumas mulheres, e supõe-se que seja uma extensão do clitóris e portanto, a razão para orgasmos experimentados por via vaginal.


=== Parto ===


A vagina é o canal de parto para o parto de um bebê.

Quando o trabalho de parto (um processo fisiológico que antecede o parto) se aproxima, vários sinais podem ocorrer, incluindo corrimento vaginal e a ruptura das membranas (quebra de água) que pode resultar em um jorro de líquido amniótico ou um fluxo irregular ou pequeno de líquido da vagina.

A ruptura da água ocorre mais comumente durante o trabalho de parto; no entanto, pode ocorrer antes do trabalho de parto (conhecido como ruptura prematura de membranas) e isso acontece em 10% dos casos.

As contrações de Braxton Hicks também são um sinal de aproximação do trabalho de parto, mas nem todas as mulheres as notam.

Entre as mulheres que dão à luz pela primeira vez, as contrações de Braxton Hicks são confundidas com contrações reais e geralmente são muito fortes nos dias que antecedem o trabalho de parto. , e começa a abrir.

Isso permite que o feto se acomode ou "caia" na pelve.

À medida que o feto se instala na pelve, pode ocorrer dor dos nervos ciáticos, aumento do corrimento vaginal e aumento da frequência urinária.

Embora esses sintomas sejam mais prováveis ​​de ocorrer após o início do trabalho de parto para mulheres que deram à luz antes, eles podem ocorrer dez a quatorze dias antes do parto em mulheres que estão experimentando o parto pela primeira vez. O feto começa a perder o apoio do colo do útero quando as contrações começam .

Com a dilatação cervical atingindo um diâmetro de mais de 10 cm (4 pol) para acomodar a cabeça do feto, a cabeça se move do útero para a vagina.

A elasticidade da vagina permite que ela se estique até muitas vezes seu diâmetro normal para dar à luz. Os partos vaginais são mais comuns, mas se houver risco de complicações, uma cesariana (cesariana) pode ser realizada.

A mucosa vaginal apresenta acúmulo anormal de líquido (edematosa) e é fina, com poucas rugas, logo após o nascimento.

A mucosa engrossa e as rugas retornam em aproximadamente três semanas, uma vez que os ovários recuperam a função normal e o fluxo de estrogênio é restaurado.

A abertura vaginal fica escancarada e relaxada, até retornar ao seu estado pré-gestacional aproximado seis a oito semanas após o parto, conhecido como período pós-parto; no entanto, a vagina continuará a ser maior em tamanho do que antes. .


=== Microbiota vaginal ===


A flora vaginal é um ecossistema complexo que muda ao longo da vida, desde o nascimento até a menopausa.

A microbiota vaginal reside na camada mais externa do epitélio vaginal.

Este microbioma consiste em espécies e gêneros que normalmente não causam sintomas ou infecções em mulheres com imunidade normal.

O microbioma vaginal é dominado por espécies de Lactobacillus.

Essas espécies metabolizam o glicogênio, quebrando-o em açúcar.

Os lactobacilos metabolizam o açúcar em glicose e ácido lático.

Sob a influência de hormônios, como estrogênio, progesterona e hormônio folículo-estimulante (FSH), o ecossistema vaginal sofre alterações cíclicas ou periódicas.


== Significado clínico ==



=== Exames pélvicos ===


A saúde vaginal pode ser avaliada durante um exame pélvico, juntamente com a saúde da maioria dos órgãos do sistema reprodutor feminino.

Esses exames podem incluir o teste de Papanicolau (ou esfregaço cervical).

Nos Estados Unidos, o exame de Papanicolau é recomendado a partir dos 21 anos de idade até os 65 anos.

No entanto, outros países não recomendam o teste de Papanicolau em mulheres não sexualmente ativas.

As orientações sobre a frequência variam de três a cinco anos.

O exame pélvico de rotina em mulheres adultas que não estão grávidas e não apresentam sintomas pode ser mais prejudicial do que benéfico.

Um achado normal durante o exame pélvico de uma mulher grávida é um tom azulado na parede vaginal. Os exames pélvicos são realizados com mais frequência quando há sintomas inexplicáveis ​​de corrimento, dor, sangramento inesperado ou problemas urinários.

Durante um exame pélvico, a abertura vaginal é avaliada quanto à posição, simetria, presença do hímen e forma.

A vagina é avaliada internamente pelo examinador com dedos enluvados, antes da inserção do espéculo, para observar a presença de qualquer fraqueza, caroços ou nódulos.

Inflamação e descarga são observadas, se presentes.

Durante esse tempo, as glândulas de Skene e Bartolin são palpadas para identificar anormalidades nessas estruturas.

Após a conclusão do exame digital da vagina, o espéculo, um instrumento para visualizar as estruturas internas, é cuidadosamente inserido para tornar o colo do útero visível.

O exame da vagina também pode ser feito durante uma busca na cavidade. Lacerações ou outras lesões na vagina podem ocorrer durante a agressão sexual ou outro abuso sexual.

Estes podem ser lágrimas, contusões, inflamações e escoriações.

A agressão sexual com objetos pode danificar a vagina e o exame de raios-X pode revelar a presença de objetos estranhos.

Se o consentimento for dado, um exame pélvico faz parte da avaliação de agressão sexual.

Os exames pélvicos também são realizados durante a gravidez, e as mulheres com gestações de alto risco fazem exames com mais frequência.


=== Medicamentos ===

A administração intravaginal é uma via de administração em que o medicamento é inserido na vagina como um creme ou comprimido.

Farmacologicamente, isso tem a vantagem potencial de promover efeitos terapêuticos principalmente na vagina ou estruturas próximas (como a porção vaginal do colo do útero) com efeitos adversos sistêmicos limitados em comparação com outras vias de administração.

Medicamentos usados ​​para amadurecer o colo do útero e induzir o parto são comumente administrados por essa via, assim como estrogênios, agentes contraceptivos, propranolol e antifúngicos.

Os anéis vaginais também podem ser usados ​​para administrar medicamentos, incluindo controle de natalidade em anéis vaginais contraceptivos.

Estes são inseridos na vagina e fornecem níveis de droga contínuos, baixos e consistentes na vagina e em todo o corpo. nervo.

Como o nervo pudendo transporta fibras motoras e sensoriais que inervam os músculos pélvicos, um bloqueio do nervo pudendo alivia a dor do parto.

O medicamento não prejudica a criança e não apresenta complicações significativas.


=== Infecções, doenças e sexo seguro ===


Infecções ou doenças vaginais incluem infecção por fungos, vaginite, infecções sexualmente transmissíveis (DSTs) e câncer.

Lactobacillus gasseri e outras espécies de Lactobacillus na flora vaginal fornecem alguma proteção contra infecções por sua secreção de bacteriocinas e peróxido de hidrogênio.

A vagina saudável de uma mulher em idade fértil é ácida, com pH normalmente variando entre 3,8 e 4,5.

O baixo pH proíbe o crescimento de muitas cepas de micróbios patogênicos.

O equilíbrio ácido da vagina também pode ser afetado pela gravidez, menstruação, diabetes ou outras doenças, pílulas anticoncepcionais, certos antibióticos, má alimentação e estresse (como a falta de sono).

Qualquer uma dessas alterações no equilíbrio ácido da vagina pode contribuir para a infecção por fungos.

Um pH elevado (superior a 4,5) do fluido vaginal pode ser causado por um crescimento excessivo de bactérias, como na vaginose bacteriana, ou na infecção parasitária tricomoníase, ambas com vaginite como sintoma.

A flora vaginal povoada por várias bactérias diferentes características da vaginose bacteriana aumenta o risco de resultados adversos na gravidez.

Durante um exame pélvico, amostras de fluidos vaginais podem ser coletadas para detectar infecções sexualmente transmissíveis ou outras infecções. Como a vagina é autolimpante, geralmente não precisa de higiene especial.

Os médicos geralmente desencorajam a prática de duchas para manter a saúde vulvovaginal.

Como a flora vaginal oferece proteção contra doenças, uma perturbação desse equilíbrio pode levar à infecção e corrimento anormal.

O corrimento vaginal pode indicar uma infecção vaginal pela cor e odor, ou pelos sintomas resultantes do corrimento, como irritação ou queimação.

Corrimento vaginal anormal pode ser causado por DSTs, diabetes, duchas, sabonetes perfumados, banhos de espuma, pílulas anticoncepcionais, infecção por fungos (geralmente como resultado do uso de antibióticos) ou outra forma de vaginite.

Enquanto a vaginite é uma inflamação da vagina e é atribuída a infecções, problemas hormonais ou irritantes, o vaginismo é um aperto involuntário dos músculos da vagina durante a penetração vaginal que é causado por um reflexo condicionado ou doença.

O corrimento vaginal devido à infecção por fungos geralmente é espesso, de cor cremosa e inodoro, enquanto o corrimento devido à vaginose bacteriana é de cor cinza-esbranquiçada e o corrimento devido à tricomoníase é geralmente de cor cinza, consistência fina e odor de peixe.

A descarga em 25% dos casos de tricomoníase é verde-amarelada. HIV/AIDS, papilomavírus humano (HPV), herpes genital e tricomoníase são algumas DSTs que podem afetar a vagina, e fontes de saúde recomendam práticas de sexo seguro (ou método de barreira) para prevenir transmissão dessas e de outras ISTs.

O sexo seguro geralmente envolve o uso de preservativos e, às vezes, preservativos femininos (que dão às mulheres mais controle).

Ambos os tipos podem ajudar a evitar a gravidez, evitando que o sêmen entre em contato com a vagina.

Há, no entanto, pouca pesquisa sobre se os preservativos femininos são tão eficazes quanto os preservativos masculinos na prevenção de DSTs, e são ligeiramente menos eficazes do que os preservativos masculinos na prevenção da gravidez, o que pode ser porque o preservativo feminino se encaixa menos firmemente do que o masculino ou porque ele pode entrar na vagina e derramar sêmen. Os linfonodos vaginais geralmente prendem células cancerosas que se originam na vagina.

Esses nódulos podem ser avaliados quanto à presença de doença.

A remoção cirúrgica seletiva (em vez da remoção total e mais invasiva) dos linfonodos vaginais reduz o risco de complicações que podem acompanhar cirurgias mais radicais.

Esses linfonodos seletivos atuam como linfonodos sentinela.

Em vez de cirurgia, os linfonodos em questão são algumas vezes tratados com radioterapia administrada aos linfonodos pélvicos, inguinais ou ambos. O câncer vaginal e o câncer vulvar são muito raros e afetam principalmente mulheres mais velhas.

O câncer cervical (que é relativamente comum) aumenta o risco de câncer vaginal, razão pela qual há uma chance significativa de que o câncer vaginal ocorra ao mesmo tempo ou após o câncer cervical.

Pode ser que suas causas sejam as mesmas.

O câncer do colo do útero pode ser prevenido pelo exame de Papanicolau e vacinas contra o HPV, mas as vacinas contra o HPV cobrem apenas os tipos 16 e 18 do HPV, a causa de 70% dos cânceres do colo do útero.

Alguns sintomas de câncer cervical e vaginal são dispareunia e sangramento vaginal anormal ou corrimento vaginal, especialmente após a relação sexual ou menopausa.

No entanto, a maioria dos cânceres cervicais são assintomáticos (não apresentam sintomas).

A braquiterapia intracavitária vaginal (VBT) é usada para tratar câncer de endométrio, vagina e colo do útero.

Um aplicador é inserido na vagina para permitir a administração de radiação o mais próximo possível do local do câncer.

As taxas de sobrevivência aumentam com VBT quando comparadas à radioterapia externa.

Ao usar a vagina para colocar o emissor o mais próximo possível do crescimento canceroso, os efeitos sistêmicos da radioterapia são reduzidos e as taxas de cura do câncer vaginal são maiores.

A pesquisa não é clara sobre se o tratamento do câncer do colo do útero com radioterapia aumenta o risco de câncer vaginal.


=== Efeitos do envelhecimento e do parto ===

A idade e os níveis hormonais correlacionam-se significativamente com o pH da vagina.

Estrogênio, glicogênio e lactobacilos afetam esses níveis.

Ao nascimento, a vagina é ácida com pH de aproximadamente 4,5, e deixa de ser ácida por volta de três a seis semanas de idade, tornando-se alcalina.

O pH vaginal médio é de 7,0 em meninas pré-púberes.

Embora haja um alto grau de variabilidade no tempo, meninas com aproximadamente sete a doze anos de idade continuarão a ter desenvolvimento labial à medida que o hímen engrossa e a vagina se alonga até aproximadamente 8 cm.

A mucosa vaginal engrossa e o pH vaginal torna-se ácido novamente.

As meninas também podem experimentar um corrimento vaginal fino e branco chamado leucorréia.

A microbiota vaginal de meninas adolescentes de 13 a 18 anos é semelhante às mulheres em idade reprodutiva, que têm um pH vaginal médio de 3,8 a 4,5, mas a pesquisa não é tão clara sobre se isso é o mesmo para meninas pré-menarca ou perimenarca.

O pH vaginal durante a menopausa é de 6,5 a 7,0 (sem terapia de reposição hormonal) ou 4,5 a 5,0 com terapia de reposição hormonal.

Após a menopausa, o corpo produz menos estrogênio.

Isso causa vaginite atrófica (afinamento e inflamação das paredes vaginais), que pode levar a coceira vaginal, queimação, sangramento, dor ou secura vaginal (diminuição da lubrificação).

A secura vaginal pode causar desconforto por conta própria ou desconforto ou dor durante a relação sexual.

As ondas de calor também são características da menopausa.

A menopausa também afeta a composição das estruturas de suporte vaginal.

As estruturas vasculares diminuem com o avançar da idade.

Colágenos específicos tornam-se alterados em composição e proporções.

Pensa-se que o enfraquecimento das estruturas de suporte da vagina se deve às alterações fisiológicas neste tecido conjuntivo. o Femring, ou outras terapias de reposição hormonal, mas existem riscos (incluindo efeitos adversos) associados à terapia de reposição hormonal.

Cremes vaginais e anéis vaginais de estrogênio podem não ter os mesmos riscos que outros tratamentos de reposição hormonal.

A terapia de reposição hormonal pode tratar a secura vaginal, mas um lubrificante pessoal pode ser usado para remediar temporariamente a secura vaginal especificamente para relações sexuais.

Algumas mulheres têm um aumento no desejo sexual após a menopausa.

Pode ser que as mulheres na menopausa que continuam a praticar atividade sexual regularmente experimentem lubrificação vaginal semelhante a níveis em mulheres que não entraram na menopausa e podem desfrutar plenamente da relação sexual.

Podem ter menos atrofia vaginal e menos problemas na relação sexual. As alterações vaginais que ocorrem com o envelhecimento e o parto incluem redundância da mucosa, arredondamento da face posterior da vagina com encurtamento da distância da extremidade distal do canal anal até a abertura vaginal , diástase ou ruptura dos músculos pubococcígeos causada por reparo inadequado de uma episiotomia e bolhas que podem se projetar além da área da abertura vaginal.

Outras alterações vaginais relacionadas ao envelhecimento e ao parto são incontinência urinária de esforço, retocele e cistocele.

As alterações físicas resultantes da gravidez, parto e menopausa muitas vezes contribuem para a incontinência urinária de esforço.

Se uma mulher tiver um suporte muscular fraco do assoalho pélvico e danos nos tecidos devido ao parto ou cirurgia pélvica, a falta de estrogênio pode enfraquecer ainda mais os músculos pélvicos e contribuir para a incontinência urinária de esforço.

O prolapso de órgãos pélvicos, como retocele ou cistocele, é caracterizado pela descida dos órgãos pélvicos de suas posições normais para colidir com a vagina.

Uma redução no estrogênio não causa retocele, cistocele ou prolapso uterino, mas o parto e a fraqueza nas estruturas de suporte pélvico podem.

O prolapso também pode ocorrer quando o assoalho pélvico é lesionado durante uma histerectomia, tratamento de câncer ginecológico ou levantamento de peso.

Os exercícios do assoalho pélvico, como os exercícios de Kegel, podem ser usados ​​para fortalecer os músculos do assoalho pélvico, prevenindo ou interrompendo a progressão do prolapso.

Não há evidências de que fazer exercícios de Kegel isotonicamente ou com alguma forma de peso seja superior; há maiores riscos com o uso de pesos, uma vez que um objeto estranho é introduzido na vagina. Durante a terceira fase do trabalho de parto, enquanto o bebê está nascendo, a vagina sofre mudanças significativas.

Um jorro de sangue da vagina pode ser visto logo antes do bebê nascer.

As lacerações na vagina que podem ocorrer durante o parto variam em profundidade, gravidade e quantidade de envolvimento dos tecidos adjacentes.

A laceração pode ser tão extensa a ponto de envolver o reto e o ânus.

Este evento pode ser especialmente angustiante para uma nova mãe.

Quando isso ocorre, a incontinência fecal se desenvolve e as fezes podem sair pela vagina.

Cerca de 85% dos partos vaginais espontâneos desenvolvem algum tipo de lacrimejamento.

Destes, 60-70% requerem sutura.

As lacerações do trabalho de parto nem sempre ocorrem.


=== Cirurgia ===

A vagina, incluindo a abertura vaginal, pode ser alterada como resultado de cirurgias como episiotomia, vaginectomia, vaginoplastia ou labioplastia.

As que se submetem à vaginoplastia geralmente são mais velhas e deram à luz.

Um exame completo da vagina antes de uma vaginoplastia é padrão, bem como o encaminhamento a um uroginecologista para diagnosticar possíveis distúrbios vaginais.

Com relação à labioplastia, a redução dos pequenos lábios é rápida sem impedimentos, as complicações são pequenas e raras, podendo ser corrigidas.

Qualquer cicatriz do procedimento é mínima, e problemas de longo prazo não foram identificados. Durante uma episiotomia, uma incisão cirúrgica é feita durante o segundo estágio do trabalho de parto para ampliar a abertura vaginal para a passagem do bebê.

Embora seu uso rotineiro não seja mais recomendado, e a não realização de episiotomia tenha melhores resultados do que uma episiotomia, é um dos procedimentos médicos mais comuns realizados em mulheres.

A incisão é feita através da pele, epitélio vaginal, gordura subcutânea, corpo perineal e músculo transverso superficial do períneo e se estende da vagina ao ânus.

As episiotomias podem ser dolorosas após o parto.

As mulheres geralmente relatam dor durante a relação sexual até três meses após o reparo da laceração ou uma episiotomia.

Algumas técnicas cirúrgicas resultam em menos dor do que outras.

Os dois tipos de episiotomias realizadas são a incisão medial e a incisão médio-lateral.

A incisão mediana é um corte perpendicular entre a vagina e o ânus e é a mais comum.

A incisão médio-lateral é feita entre a vagina em um ângulo e não é tão provável que rasgue até o ânus.

O corte médio-lateral leva mais tempo para cicatrizar do que o corte mediano. A vaginectomia é uma cirurgia para remover toda ou parte da vagina e geralmente é usada para tratar malignidade.

A remoção de alguns ou de todos os órgãos reprodutivos e genitais pode resultar em danos aos nervos e deixar cicatrizes ou aderências.

A função sexual também pode ser prejudicada como resultado, como no caso de algumas cirurgias de câncer do colo do útero.

Essas cirurgias podem afetar a dor, elasticidade, lubrificação vaginal e excitação sexual.

Isso geralmente se resolve após um ano, mas pode levar mais tempo. As mulheres, especialmente aquelas mais velhas e que tiveram partos múltiplos, podem optar por corrigir cirurgicamente a frouxidão vaginal.

Esta cirurgia foi descrita como aperto vaginal ou rejuvenescimento.

Embora uma mulher possa experimentar uma melhora na auto-imagem e no prazer sexual ao se submeter ao aperto vaginal ou ao rejuvenescimento, existem riscos associados aos procedimentos, incluindo infecção, estreitamento da abertura vaginal, aperto insuficiente, diminuição da função sexual (como dor durante a relação sexual). relação sexual) e fístula retovaginal.

As mulheres que se submetem a este procedimento podem, sem saber, ter um problema médico, como um prolapso, e uma tentativa de corrigir isso também é feita durante a cirurgia. A cirurgia na vagina pode ser eletiva ou cosmética.

As mulheres que procuram a cirurgia estética podem ter condições congênitas, desconforto físico ou desejam alterar a aparência de seus genitais.

Preocupações com a aparência ou medidas genitais médias são amplamente indisponíveis e dificultam a definição de um resultado bem-sucedido para essa cirurgia.

Várias cirurgias de mudança de sexo estão disponíveis para pessoas trans.

Embora nem todas as condições intersexuais exijam tratamento cirúrgico, algumas optam pela cirurgia genital para corrigir condições anatômicas atípicas.


=== Anomalias e outros problemas de saúde ===


Anomalias vaginais são defeitos que resultam em uma vagina anormal ou ausente.

A anomalia vaginal obstrutiva mais comum é um hímen imperfurado, uma condição na qual o hímen obstrui o fluxo menstrual ou outras secreções vaginais.

Outra anomalia vaginal é um septo vaginal transverso, que bloqueia parcial ou completamente o canal vaginal.

A causa precisa de uma obstrução deve ser determinada antes de ser reparada, uma vez que a cirurgia corretiva difere dependendo da causa.

Em alguns casos, como agenesia vaginal isolada, a genitália externa pode parecer normal. Aberturas anormais conhecidas como fístulas podem fazer com que urina ou fezes entrem na vagina, resultando em incontinência.

A vagina é suscetível à formação de fístulas devido à sua proximidade com os tratos urinário e gastrointestinal.

As causas específicas são múltiplas e incluem trabalho de parto obstruído, histerectomia, malignidade, radiação, episiotomia e distúrbios intestinais.

Um pequeno número de fístulas vaginais são congênitas.

Vários métodos cirúrgicos são empregados para reparar fístulas.

Não tratadas, as fístulas podem resultar em incapacidade significativa e ter um impacto profundo na qualidade de vida. a vagina.

Vários tipos de cistos vaginais podem se desenvolver na superfície do epitélio vaginal ou em camadas mais profundas da vagina e podem atingir até 7 cm.

Muitas vezes, eles são um achado incidental durante um exame pélvico de rotina.

Os cistos vaginais podem imitar outras estruturas que se projetam da vagina, como retocele e cistocele.

Os cistos que podem estar presentes incluem cistos de Müller, cistos do ducto de Gartner e cistos epidermóides.

Um cisto vaginal é mais provável de se desenvolver em mulheres entre 30 e 40 anos.

Estima-se que 1 em cada 200 mulheres tenha um cisto vaginal.

O cisto de Bartholin é de origem vulvar e não vaginal, mas apresenta-se como um nódulo na abertura vaginal.

É mais comum em mulheres mais jovens e geralmente não apresenta sintomas, mas pode causar dor se um abscesso se formar, bloquear a entrada do vestíbulo vulvar se for grande e impedir a caminhada ou causar relações sexuais dolorosas.


== Sociedade e cultura ==



=== Percepções, simbolismo e vulgaridade ===


Várias percepções da vagina existiram ao longo da história, incluindo a crença de que ela é o centro do desejo sexual, uma metáfora para a vida através do nascimento, inferior ao pênis, desagradável à vista ou ao olfato ou vulgar.

Essas visões podem ser atribuídas em grande parte às diferenças de sexo e como elas são interpretadas.

David Buss, um psicólogo evolucionista, afirmou que, como o pênis é significativamente maior que o clitóris e é facilmente visível enquanto a vagina não é, e os machos urinam pelo pênis, os meninos são ensinados desde a infância a tocar seus pênis, enquanto as meninas são frequentemente ensinadas que eles não devem tocar sua própria genitália, o que implica que há dano em fazê-lo.

Buss atribuiu isso como a razão pela qual muitas mulheres não estão tão familiarizadas com sua genitália, e que os pesquisadores supõem que essas diferenças sexuais explicam por que os meninos aprendem a se masturbar antes das meninas e o fazem com mais frequência. confuso sobre a anatomia da vagina e pode não saber que ela não é usada para urinar.

Isso é exacerbado por frases como "meninos têm pênis, meninas têm vagina", o que faz com que as crianças pensem que as meninas têm um orifício na região pélvica.

A autora Hilda Hutcherson afirmou: "Como muitas [mulheres] foram condicionadas desde a infância por meio de sinais verbais e não verbais para pensar em [seus] genitais como feios, fedorentos e impuros, [elas] não são capazes de desfrutar plenamente de encontros íntimos" por causa de medo de que seu parceiro não goste da visão, cheiro ou sabor de seus genitais.

Ela argumentou que as mulheres, ao contrário dos homens, não tiveram experiências de vestiário na escola onde compararam os genitais umas das outras, o que é uma das razões pelas quais muitas mulheres se perguntam se seus genitais são normais.

A estudiosa Catherine Blackledge afirmou que ter uma vagina significava que ela normalmente seria tratada menos bem do que suas contrapartes sem vagina e sujeita a desigualdades (como a desigualdade no trabalho), que ela classificou como sendo tratada como uma cidadã de segunda classe.

As visões negativas da vagina são simultaneamente contrastadas por visões de que ela é um símbolo poderoso da sexualidade, espiritualidade ou vida feminina.

A autora Denise Linn afirmou que a vagina "é um poderoso símbolo de feminilidade, abertura, aceitação e receptividade.

É o espírito do vale interior." Sigmund Freud atribuiu um valor significativo à vagina, postulando o conceito de que o orgasmo vaginal é separado do orgasmo clitoriano e que, ao atingir a puberdade, a resposta adequada das mulheres maduras é uma mudança para os orgasmos vaginais (ou seja, orgasmos sem qualquer estimulação do clitóris).

Essa teoria fez com que muitas mulheres se sentissem inadequadas, já que a maioria das mulheres não consegue atingir o orgasmo apenas com a relação vaginal.

Em relação à religião, o útero representa um símbolo poderoso como o yoni no hinduísmo que representa "a potência feminina", e isso pode indicar o valor que a sociedade hindu deu à sexualidade feminina e à capacidade da vagina de gerar vida; no entanto, yoni como uma representação de "útero" não é a denotação primária. Enquanto, nos tempos antigos, a vagina era muitas vezes considerada equivalente (homóloga) ao pênis, com os anatomistas Galeno (129 dC – 200 dC) e Vesalius (1514– 1564) considerando os órgãos como estruturalmente iguais, exceto pela inversão da vagina, estudos anatômicos nos últimos séculos mostraram que o clitóris era o equivalente peniano.

Outra percepção da vagina era que a liberação de fluidos vaginais curaria ou remediaria uma série de doenças; vários métodos foram usados ​​ao longo dos séculos para liberar "semente feminina" (via lubrificação vaginal ou ejaculação feminina) como um tratamento para sufocatio ex semine retento (sufocação do útero, literalmente 'sufocação de semente retida'), doença verde e possivelmente para a histeria feminina.

Os métodos relatados de tratamento incluíram uma parteira esfregando as paredes da vagina ou a inserção do pênis ou objetos em forma de pênis na vagina.

Os sintomas do diagnóstico de histeria feminina – um conceito que não é mais reconhecido pelas autoridades médicas como um distúrbio médico – incluíam desmaio, nervosismo, insônia, retenção de líquidos, peso no abdômen, espasmo muscular, falta de ar, irritabilidade, perda de apetite por comida ou sexo, e uma propensão para causar problemas.

Pode ser que as mulheres que foram consideradas sofrendo de condição de histeria feminina às vezes se submetessem a "massagem pélvica" - estimulação dos genitais pelo médico até que a mulher experimentasse "paroxismo histérico" (ou seja, orgasmo).

Nesse caso, o paroxismo era considerado um tratamento médico, e não uma liberação sexual. A vagina e a vulva receberam muitos nomes vulgares, três dos quais são boceta, buceta e buceta.

Cunt também é usado como um epíteto depreciativo referindo-se a pessoas de ambos os sexos.

Este uso é relativamente recente, datando do final do século XIX.

Refletindo diferentes usos nacionais, cunt é descrito como "uma pessoa desagradável ou estúpida" no Compact Oxford English Dictionary, enquanto o Merriam-Webster usa o termo como "geralmente depreciativo e obsceno: mulher", observando que é usado em os Estados Unidos como "uma forma ofensiva de se referir a uma mulher".

Random House o define como "um homem desprezível, desprezível ou tolo".

Algumas feministas da década de 1970 buscaram eliminar termos depreciativos como boceta.

Twat é amplamente usado como um epíteto depreciativo, especialmente no inglês britânico, referindo-se a uma pessoa considerada desagradável ou estúpida.

Buceta pode indicar "covardia ou fraqueza" e "a vulva ou vagina humana" ou, por extensão, "relação sexual com uma mulher".

No inglês contemporâneo, o uso da palavra pussy para se referir a mulheres é considerado depreciativo ou degradante, tratando as pessoas como objetos sexuais.


=== Na literatura e arte contemporânea ===


A vagina loquens, ou "vagina falante", é uma tradição significativa na literatura e na arte, que remonta aos antigos motivos folclóricos da "buceta falante".

Esses contos geralmente envolvem vaginas falando devido ao efeito de magia ou encantos, e muitas vezes admitindo sua falta de castidade.

Outros contos populares relacionam a vagina como tendo dentes – vagina dentata (latim para "vagina dentada").

Estes carregam a implicação de que a relação sexual pode resultar em lesão, emasculação ou castração para o homem envolvido.

Essas histórias eram frequentemente contadas como histórias de advertência sobre os perigos de mulheres desconhecidas e para desencorajar o estupro. Em 1966, a artista francesa Niki de Saint Phalle colaborou com o artista dadaísta Jean Tinguely e Per Olof Ultvedt em uma grande instalação de escultura intitulada katedral" (também escrito "Hon-en-Katedrall", que significa "ela-uma catedral") para Moderna Museet, em Estocolmo, Suécia.

A forma externa é uma gigantesca escultura reclinada de uma mulher na qual os visitantes podem entrar através de uma abertura vaginal do tamanho de uma porta entre as pernas abertas. discurso.

É composto por um número variável de monólogos lidos por várias mulheres.

Inicialmente, Ensler executou todos os monólogos, com apresentações subsequentes com três atrizes; as últimas versões apresentam uma atriz diferente para cada papel.

Cada um dos monólogos trata de um aspecto da experiência feminina, abordando assuntos como atividade sexual, amor, estupro, menstruação, mutilação genital feminina, masturbação, nascimento, orgasmo, os vários nomes comuns para a vagina, ou simplesmente como aspecto do corpo.

Um tema recorrente em todas as peças é a vagina como ferramenta de empoderamento feminino e a personificação final da individualidade.


=== Influência na modificação ===


Visões sociais, influenciadas pela tradição, falta de conhecimento sobre anatomia ou sexismo, podem afetar significativamente a decisão de uma pessoa de alterar sua própria genitália ou a de outra pessoa.

As mulheres podem querer alterar sua genitália (vagina ou vulva) porque acreditam que sua aparência, como o comprimento dos pequenos lábios que cobrem a abertura vaginal, não é normal, ou porque desejam uma abertura vaginal menor ou uma vagina mais apertada.

As mulheres podem querer permanecer jovens na aparência e na função sexual.

Esses pontos de vista são frequentemente influenciados pela mídia, incluindo pornografia, e as mulheres podem ter baixa auto-estima como resultado.

Eles podem ter vergonha de ficar nus na frente de um parceiro sexual e podem insistir em fazer sexo com as luzes apagadas.

Quando a cirurgia de modificação é realizada puramente por razões estéticas, muitas vezes é mal vista, e alguns médicos compararam essas cirurgias à mutilação genital feminina (MGF). A mutilação genital feminina, também conhecida como circuncisão feminina ou corte genital feminino, é a modificação genital sem benefícios para a saúde.

A forma mais grave é a MGF Tipo III, que é a infibulação e envolve a remoção total ou parcial dos lábios e o fechamento da vagina.

Um pequeno orifício é deixado para a passagem da urina e do sangue menstrual, e a vagina é aberta para a relação sexual e o parto. em nome dos direitos humanos, afirmando que é "uma violação dos direitos humanos de meninas e mulheres" e "reflete a desigualdade profundamente enraizada entre os sexos".

A mutilação genital feminina existiu em um ponto ou outro em quase todas as civilizações humanas, mais comumente para exercer controle sobre o comportamento sexual, incluindo a masturbação, de meninas e mulheres.

É realizado em vários países, especialmente na África, e em menor grau em outras partes do Oriente Médio e Sudeste Asiático, em meninas de alguns dias até a adolescência, muitas vezes para reduzir o desejo sexual em um esforço para preservar virgindade vaginal.

Comfort Momoh afirmou que pode ser que a mutilação genital feminina fosse "praticada no antigo Egito como um sinal de distinção entre a aristocracia"; há relatos de que vestígios de infibulação estão em múmias egípcias. Costume e tradição são os motivos mais citados para a prática da mutilação genital feminina.

Algumas culturas acreditam que a mutilação genital feminina faz parte da iniciação de uma menina na vida adulta e que não realizá-la pode atrapalhar a coesão social e política.

Nessas sociedades, uma menina geralmente não é considerada adulta, a menos que tenha sido submetida ao procedimento.


== Outros animais ==


A vagina é uma estrutura de animais em que a fêmea é fertilizada internamente, e não por inseminação traumática utilizada por alguns invertebrados.

A forma da vagina varia entre os diferentes animais.

Em mamíferos placentários e marsupiais, a vagina leva do útero para o exterior do corpo feminino.

As fêmeas dos marsupiais têm duas vaginas laterais, que levam a úteros separados, mas ambas se abrem externamente pelo mesmo orifício; um terceiro canal, que é conhecido como vagina mediana, e pode ser transitório ou permanente, é usado para o parto.

A hiena-malhada fêmea não possui uma abertura vaginal externa.

Em vez disso, a vagina sai pelo clitóris, permitindo que as fêmeas urinem, copulem e parem pelo clitóris.

A vagina da fêmea coiote se contrai durante a cópula, formando um laço copulatório. Aves, monotremados e alguns répteis têm uma parte do oviduto que leva à cloaca.

As galinhas têm uma abertura vaginal que se abre a partir do ápice vertical da cloaca.

A vagina se estende para cima a partir da abertura e se torna a glândula ovo.

Em alguns peixes sem mandíbula, não há oviduto nem vagina e, em vez disso, o ovo viaja diretamente pela cavidade do corpo (e é fertilizado externamente como na maioria dos peixes e anfíbios).

Em insetos e outros invertebrados, a vagina pode fazer parte do oviduto (ver sistema reprodutor de insetos).

As aves têm uma cloaca na qual o trato urinário, reprodutivo (vagina) e o trato gastrointestinal se esvaziam.

As fêmeas de algumas espécies de aves aquáticas desenvolveram estruturas vaginais chamadas sacos sem saída e espirais no sentido horário para se protegerem da coerção sexual. A falta de pesquisas sobre a vagina e outros órgãos genitais femininos, especialmente para diferentes animais, reprimiu o conhecimento sobre a anatomia sexual feminina.

Uma explicação para o motivo pelo qual a genitália masculina é mais estudada inclui os pênis serem significativamente mais simples de analisar do que as cavidades genitais femininas, porque os genitais masculinos geralmente se projetam e, portanto, são mais fáceis de avaliar e medir.

Por outro lado, os genitais femininos são mais frequentemente escondidos e requerem mais dissecção, o que, por sua vez, requer mais tempo.

Outra explicação é que a principal função do pênis é fecundar, enquanto os genitais femininos podem alterar sua forma na interação com os órgãos masculinos, especialmente para beneficiar ou prejudicar o sucesso reprodutivo. -primatas humanos compartilham características fisiológicas como resultado da evolução.

Embora a menstruação esteja fortemente associada às fêmeas humanas, e elas tenham a menstruação mais pronunciada, também é típica de parentes de macacos e macacos.

Macacas fêmeas menstruam, com um ciclo de duração comparável ao das fêmeas humanas.

Estrogênios e progestagênios nos ciclos menstruais e durante a pré-menarca e pós-menopausa também são semelhantes em humanos e macacos; entretanto, somente em macacos ocorre a queratinização do epitélio durante a fase folicular.

O pH vaginal dos macacos também difere, com valores médios quase neutros a levemente alcalinos e é amplamente variável, o que pode ser devido à falta de lactobacilos na flora vaginal.

Esta é uma razão pela qual, embora os macacos sejam usados ​​para estudar a transmissão do HIV e testar microbicidas, os modelos animais não são frequentemente usados ​​no estudo de infecções sexualmente transmissíveis, como a tricomoníase.

Outra é que as causas de tais condições estão inextricavelmente ligadas à composição genética dos humanos, tornando os resultados de outras espécies difíceis de aplicar aos humanos.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vagina

;;;FR;;;



VAGIN


Chez les mammifères, le vagin est la partie élastique et musculaire du tractus génital féminin.

Chez l'homme, il s'étend du vestibule au col de l'utérus.

L'ouverture vaginale externe est normalement partiellement recouverte d'une fine couche de tissu muqueux appelée hymen.

À l'extrémité profonde, le col de l'utérus (col de l'utérus) fait saillie dans le vagin.

Le vagin permet les rapports sexuels et l'accouchement.

Il canalise également le flux menstruel, qui se produit chez les humains et les primates étroitement apparentés dans le cadre du cycle menstruel.
Bien que la recherche sur le vagin fasse particulièrement défaut pour différents animaux, son emplacement, sa structure et sa taille sont documentés comme variant selon les espèces.

Les mammifères femelles ont généralement deux ouvertures externes dans la vulve; ce sont l'ouverture urétrale pour les voies urinaires et l'ouverture vaginale pour les voies génitales.

Ceci est différent des mammifères mâles, qui ont généralement une seule ouverture urétrale pour la miction et la reproduction.

L'ouverture vaginale est beaucoup plus grande que l'ouverture urétrale à proximité, et les deux sont protégées par les lèvres chez l'homme.

Chez les amphibiens, les oiseaux, les reptiles et les monotrèmes, le cloaque est la seule ouverture externe des voies gastro-intestinale, urinaire et reproductive.
Pour permettre une pénétration plus douce du vagin pendant les rapports sexuels ou toute autre activité sexuelle, l'humidité vaginale augmente pendant l'excitation sexuelle chez les femmes humaines et d'autres mammifères femelles.

Cette augmentation de l'humidité fournit une lubrification vaginale, ce qui réduit la friction.

La texture des parois vaginales crée une friction pour le pénis lors des rapports sexuels et le stimule vers l'éjaculation, permettant la fécondation.

En plus du plaisir et des liens, le comportement sexuel des femmes avec d'autres (qui peut inclure des activités sexuelles hétérosexuelles ou lesbiennes) peut entraîner des infections sexuellement transmissibles (IST), dont le risque peut être réduit par des pratiques sexuelles sûres recommandées.

D'autres problèmes de santé peuvent également affecter le vagin humain.
Le vagin et la vulve ont suscité de fortes réactions dans les sociétés à travers l'histoire, notamment des perceptions et un langage négatifs, des tabous culturels et leur utilisation comme symboles de la sexualité féminine, de la spiritualité ou de la régénération de la vie.

Dans le langage courant, le mot vagin est souvent utilisé pour désigner la vulve ou les organes génitaux féminins en général.

Par son dictionnaire et ses définitions anatomiques, cependant, le vagin se réfère exclusivement à la structure interne spécifique, et la compréhension de la distinction peut améliorer la connaissance des organes génitaux féminins et faciliter la communication en matière de soins de santé.


== Étymologie et définition ==

Le terme vagin vient du latin et signifie « gaine » ou « fourreau » ; le pluriel de vagin est soit vaginae, soit vagins.

Le vagin peut également être appelé canal de naissance dans le contexte de la grossesse et de l'accouchement.

Bien que par son dictionnaire et ses définitions anatomiques, le terme vagin se réfère exclusivement à la structure interne spécifique, il est utilisé familièrement pour désigner la vulve ou à la fois le vagin et la vulve. L'utilisation du terme vagin pour signifier "vulve" peut poser des problèmes médicaux ou juridiques. confusion; par exemple, l'interprétation d'une personne de son emplacement peut ne pas correspondre à l'interprétation d'une autre de l'emplacement.

Médicalement, le vagin est le canal entre l'hymen (ou les restes de l'hymen) et le col de l'utérus, tandis que, légalement, il commence à la vulve (entre les lèvres).

Il se peut que l'utilisation incorrecte du terme vagin soit due à une moindre réflexion sur l'anatomie des organes génitaux féminins que sur l'étude des organes génitaux masculins, et que cela ait contribué à l'absence d'un vocabulaire correct pour les organes génitaux externes. organes génitaux féminins auprès du grand public et des professionnels de la santé.

Parce qu'une meilleure compréhension des organes génitaux féminins peut aider à combattre les dommages sexuels et psychologiques en ce qui concerne le développement féminin, les chercheurs approuvent une terminologie correcte pour la vulve.


== Structure ==



=== Anatomie brute ===


Le vagin humain est un canal musculaire élastique qui s'étend de la vulve au col de l'utérus.

L'ouverture du vagin se situe dans le triangle urogénital.

Le triangle urogénital est le triangle avant du périnée et comprend également l'ouverture urétrale et les parties associées des organes génitaux externes.

Le canal vaginal se déplace vers le haut et vers l'arrière, entre l'urètre à l'avant et le rectum à l'arrière.

Près de la partie supérieure du vagin, le col de l'utérus fait saillie dans le vagin sur sa face avant à un angle d'environ 90 degrés.

Les ouvertures vaginales et urétrales sont protégées par les lèvres. Lorsqu'il n'est pas sexuellement excité, le vagin est un tube effondré, avec les parois avant et arrière placées ensemble.

Les parois latérales, en particulier leur zone médiane, sont relativement plus rigides.

Pour cette raison, le vagin effondré a une section transversale en forme de H.

Derrière, le vagin supérieur est séparé du rectum par la poche recto-utérine, le vagin moyen par du tissu conjonctif lâche et le vagin inférieur par le corps périnéal.

Là où la lumière vaginale entoure le col de l'utérus, elle est divisée en quatre régions continues (fornices vaginaux) ; ce sont les culs-de-sac antérieur, postérieur, latéral droit et latéral gauche.

Le cul-de-sac postérieur est plus profond que le cul-de-sac antérieur. Le vagin est soutenu par ses muscles et ligaments du tiers supérieur, moyen et inférieur.

Le tiers supérieur comprend les muscles releveurs de l'anus et les ligaments transcervicaux, pubocervicaux et sacrocervicaux.

Il est soutenu par les parties supérieures des ligaments cardinaux et le paramètre.

Le tiers médian du vagin implique le diaphragme urogénital.

Il est soutenu par les muscles releveurs de l'anus et la partie inférieure des ligaments cardinaux.

Le tiers inférieur est soutenu par le corps périnéal, ou les diaphragmes urogénital et pelvien.

Le tiers inférieur peut également être décrit comme étant soutenu par le corps périnéal et la partie pubovaginale du muscle releveur de l'anus.


==== Orifice vaginal et hymen ====
L'ouverture vaginale est à l'extrémité postérieure du vestibule vulvaire, derrière l'ouverture urétrale.

L'ouverture du vagin est normalement masquée par les petites lèvres (lèvres vaginales), mais peut être exposée après l'accouchement vaginal. L'hymen est une fine couche de tissu muqueux qui entoure ou recouvre partiellement l'ouverture vaginale.

Les effets des rapports sexuels et de l'accouchement sur l'hymen sont variables.

Là où il est cassé, il peut disparaître complètement ou des restes connus sous le nom de carunculae myrtiformes peuvent persister.

Sinon, étant très élastique, il peut revenir à sa position normale.

De plus, l'hymen peut être lacéré par une maladie, une blessure, un examen médical, la masturbation ou un exercice physique.

Pour ces raisons, la virginité ne peut pas être définitivement déterminée en examinant l'hymen.


==== Variations et taille ====

La longueur du vagin varie selon les femmes en âge de procréer.

En raison de la présence du col de l'utérus dans la paroi avant du vagin, il existe une différence de longueur entre la paroi avant, d'environ 7,5 cm (2,5 à 3 po) de long, et la paroi arrière, d'environ 9 cm (3,5 po) de long .

Pendant l'excitation sexuelle, le vagin se dilate à la fois en longueur et en largeur.

Si une femme se tient debout, le canal vaginal pointe vers le haut et vers l'arrière et forme un angle d'environ 45 degrés avec l'utérus.

L'ouverture vaginale et l'hymen varient également en taille; chez les enfants, bien que l'hymen apparaisse généralement en forme de croissant, de nombreuses formes sont possibles.


=== Développement ===


La plaque vaginale est le précurseur du vagin.

Au cours du développement, la plaque vaginale commence à se développer là où les extrémités fusionnées des canaux paramésonéphriques (canaux de Müller) pénètrent dans la paroi arrière du sinus urogénital en tant que tubercule sinusal.

Au fur et à mesure que la plaque grandit, elle sépare considérablement le col de l'utérus et le sinus urogénital; finalement, les cellules centrales de la plaque se décomposent pour former la lumière vaginale.

Cela se produit généralement entre la vingt et la vingt-quatrième semaine de développement.

Si la lumière ne se forme pas ou est incomplète, des membranes appelées cloisons vaginales peuvent se former à travers ou autour du tractus, provoquant une obstruction du tractus de sortie plus tard dans la vie. Au cours de la différenciation sexuelle, sans testostérone, le sinus urogénital persiste en tant que vestibule du vagin.

Les deux plis urogénitaux du tubercule génital forment les petites lèvres et les gonflements labioscrotaux s'élargissent pour former les grandes lèvres. Il existe des points de vue contradictoires sur l'origine embryologique du vagin.

L'opinion majoritaire est la description de Koff de 1933, qui postule que les deux tiers supérieurs du vagin proviennent de la partie caudale du canal de Müller, tandis que la partie inférieure du vagin se développe à partir du sinus urogénital.

D'autres points de vue sont la description de Bulmer en 1957 selon laquelle l'épithélium vaginal dérive uniquement de l'épithélium du sinus urogénital, et la recherche de Witschi en 1970, qui a réexaminé la description de Koff et a conclu que les bulbes sinovaginaux sont les mêmes que les parties inférieures des canaux de Wolff.

Le point de vue de Witschi est soutenu par les recherches d'Acién et al., Bok et Drews.

Robboy et al. ont passé en revue les théories de Koff et Bulmer et appuient la description de Bulmer à la lumière de leurs propres recherches.

Les débats découlent de la complexité des tissus interdépendants et de l'absence d'un modèle animal correspondant au développement vaginal humain.

Pour cette raison, l'étude du développement vaginal humain est en cours et peut aider à résoudre les données contradictoires.


=== Microanatomie ===


La paroi vaginale de la lumière vers l'extérieur est constituée d'abord d'une muqueuse d'épithélium pavimenteux stratifié non kératinisé, avec une lamina propria (une fine couche de tissu conjonctif) en dessous.

Deuxièmement, il y a une couche de muscle lisse avec des faisceaux de fibres circulaires internes aux fibres longitudinales (celles qui s'étendent dans le sens de la longueur).

Enfin, se trouve une couche externe de tissu conjonctif appelée adventice.

Certains textes énumèrent quatre couches en comptant séparément les deux sous-couches de la muqueuse (épithélium et lamina propria). La couche musculaire lisse à l'intérieur du vagin a une faible force de contraction qui peut créer une certaine pression dans la lumière du vagin ; une force de contraction beaucoup plus forte, comme lors de l'accouchement, provient des muscles du plancher pelvien qui sont attachés à l'adventice autour du vagin. La lamina propria est riche en vaisseaux sanguins et en canaux lymphatiques.

La couche musculaire est composée de fibres musculaires lisses, avec une couche externe de muscle longitudinal, une couche interne de muscle circulaire et des fibres musculaires obliques entre elles.

La couche externe, l'adventice, est une fine couche dense de tissu conjonctif qui se mélange avec du tissu conjonctif lâche contenant des vaisseaux sanguins, des vaisseaux lymphatiques et des fibres nerveuses qui se trouvent entre les organes pelviens.

La muqueuse vaginale est dépourvue de glandes.

Il forme des plis (crêtes transversales ou rugae), qui sont plus proéminents dans le tiers externe du vagin ; leur fonction est de fournir au vagin une surface accrue pour l'extension et l'étirement.

L'épithélium de l'exocol (la partie du col utérin s'étendant dans le vagin) est une extension de l'épithélium vaginal et partage une frontière avec celui-ci.

L'épithélium vaginal est constitué de couches de cellules, dont les cellules basales, les cellules parabasales, les cellules plates squameuses superficielles et les cellules intermédiaires.

La couche basale de l'épithélium est la plus active sur le plan mitotique et reproduit de nouvelles cellules.

Les cellules superficielles muent continuellement et les cellules basales les remplacent.

L'oestrogène incite les cellules intermédiaires et superficielles à se remplir de glycogène.

Les cellules de la couche basale inférieure passent de l'activité métabolique active à la mort (apoptose).

Dans ces couches intermédiaires de l'épithélium, les cellules commencent à perdre leurs mitochondries et d'autres organites.

Les cellules conservent généralement un niveau élevé de glycogène par rapport aux autres tissus épithéliaux du corps. Sous l'influence des œstrogènes maternels, le vagin d'un nouveau-né est tapissé d'un épais épithélium squameux stratifié (ou muqueuse) pendant deux à quatre semaines après la naissance.

Entre la puberté et la puberté, l'épithélium reste mince avec seulement quelques couches de cellules cuboïdes sans glycogène.

L'épithélium a également peu de rugosités et est de couleur rouge avant la puberté.

Lorsque la puberté commence, la muqueuse s'épaissit et redevient un épithélium squameux stratifié avec des cellules contenant du glycogène, sous l'influence de l'augmentation des taux d'œstrogène de la fille.

Enfin, l'épithélium s'amincit à partir de la ménopause et finit par cesser de contenir du glycogène, en raison du manque d'œstrogène. Les cellules squameuses aplaties sont plus résistantes à la fois à l'abrasion et à l'infection.

La perméabilité de l'épithélium permet une réponse efficace du système immunitaire puisque les anticorps et autres composants immunitaires peuvent facilement atteindre la surface.

L'épithélium vaginal diffère du tissu similaire de la peau.

L'épiderme de la peau est relativement résistant à l'eau car il contient des taux élevés de lipides.

L'épithélium vaginal contient des niveaux inférieurs de lipides.

Cela permet le passage de l'eau et des substances solubles dans l'eau à travers le tissu. La kératinisation se produit lorsque l'épithélium est exposé à l'atmosphère extérieure sèche.

Dans des circonstances anormales, telles que le prolapsus des organes pelviens, la muqueuse peut être exposée à l'air, devenant sèche et kératinisée.


=== Apport sanguin et nerveux ===

Le sang est amené au vagin principalement par l'artère vaginale, qui émerge d'une branche de l'artère iliaque interne ou de l'artère utérine.

Les artères vaginales anastomosent (sont jointes) le long du côté du vagin avec la branche cervicale de l'artère utérine; cela forme l'artère azygos, qui se trouve sur la ligne médiane du vagin antérieur et postérieur.

Les autres artères qui irriguent le vagin comprennent l'artère rectale moyenne et l'artère pudendale interne, toutes des branches de l'artère iliaque interne.

Trois groupes de vaisseaux lymphatiques accompagnent ces artères ; le groupe supérieur accompagne les branches vaginales de l'artère utérine ; un groupe moyen accompagne les artères vaginales ; et le groupe inférieur, drainant la lymphe de la zone située à l'extérieur de l'hymen, se draine vers les ganglions lymphatiques inguinaux.

Quatre-vingt-quinze pour cent des canaux lymphatiques du vagin se trouvent à moins de 3 mm de la surface du vagin. Deux veines principales drainent le sang du vagin, une à gauche et une à droite.

Celles-ci forment un réseau de veines plus petites, le plexus veineux vaginal, sur les côtés du vagin, se connectant avec des plexus veineux similaires de l'utérus, de la vessie et du rectum.

Ceux-ci finissent par se drainer dans les veines iliaques internes. L'innervation du vagin supérieur est assurée par les zones sympathiques et parasympathiques du plexus pelvien.

Le vagin inférieur est alimenté par le nerf pudendal.


== Fonction ==



=== Sécrétions ===


Les sécrétions vaginales proviennent principalement de l'utérus, du col de l'utérus et de l'épithélium vaginal, en plus de la minuscule lubrification vaginale des glandes de Bartholin lors de l'excitation sexuelle.

Il faut peu de sécrétions vaginales pour rendre le vagin humide ; les sécrétions peuvent augmenter pendant l'excitation sexuelle, au milieu ou un peu avant les menstruations, ou pendant la grossesse.

Les menstruations (également appelées "règles" ou "mensuelles") sont l'écoulement régulier de sang et de tissus muqueux (appelés règles) de la paroi interne de l'utérus à travers le vagin.

La membrane muqueuse vaginale varie en épaisseur et en composition au cours du cycle menstruel, qui est le changement naturel et régulier qui se produit dans le système reproducteur féminin (en particulier l'utérus et les ovaires) qui rend la grossesse possible.

Différents produits d'hygiène tels que les tampons, les coupes menstruelles et les serviettes hygiéniques sont disponibles pour absorber ou capturer le sang menstruel. Les glandes de Bartholin, situées près de l'ouverture vaginale, étaient à l'origine considérées comme la principale source de lubrification vaginale, mais un examen plus approfondi a montré qu'elles quelques gouttes de mucus.

La lubrification vaginale est principalement assurée par une infiltration de plasma connue sous le nom de transsudat des parois vaginales.

Cela se forme initialement sous forme de gouttelettes ressemblant à de la sueur et est causé par une pression accrue du liquide dans les tissus du vagin (vasocongestion), entraînant la libération de plasma sous forme de transsudat des capillaires à travers l'épithélium vaginal. Avant et pendant l'ovulation, les glandes muqueuses dans le col de l'utérus sécrètent différentes variations de mucus, ce qui fournit un environnement alcalin et fertile dans le canal vaginal, favorable à la survie des spermatozoïdes.

Après la ménopause, la lubrification vaginale diminue naturellement.


=== Activité sexuelle ===


Les terminaisons nerveuses du vagin peuvent procurer des sensations agréables lorsque le vagin est stimulé pendant l'activité sexuelle.

Les femmes peuvent tirer du plaisir d'une partie du vagin, ou d'une sensation de proximité et de plénitude lors de la pénétration vaginale.

Parce que le vagin n'est pas riche en terminaisons nerveuses, les femmes ne reçoivent souvent pas une stimulation sexuelle suffisante, ou un orgasme, uniquement par pénétration vaginale.

Bien que la littérature cite généralement une plus grande concentration de terminaisons nerveuses et donc une plus grande sensibilité près de l'entrée vaginale (le tiers externe ou tiers inférieur), certains examens scientifiques de l'innervation de la paroi vaginale n'indiquent aucune zone unique avec une plus grande densité de terminaisons nerveuses.

D'autres recherches indiquent que seules certaines femmes ont une plus grande densité de terminaisons nerveuses dans la paroi vaginale antérieure.

En raison du nombre réduit de terminaisons nerveuses dans le vagin, la douleur de l'accouchement est nettement plus tolérable. Le plaisir peut être dérivé du vagin de différentes manières.

En plus de la pénétration pénienne, le plaisir peut provenir de la masturbation, du doigté, du sexe oral (cunnilingus) ou de positions sexuelles spécifiques (comme la position missionnaire ou la position sexuelle des cuillères).

Les couples hétérosexuels peuvent se livrer au cunnilingus ou au doigté comme formes de préliminaires pour inciter à l'excitation sexuelle ou comme actes d'accompagnement, ou comme type de contrôle des naissances, ou pour préserver la virginité.

Moins fréquemment, ils peuvent utiliser des actes sexuels non péno-vaginaux comme principal moyen de plaisir sexuel.

En revanche, les lesbiennes et les autres femmes ayant des rapports sexuels avec des femmes pratiquent généralement le cunnilingus ou le doigté comme principales formes d'activité sexuelle.

Certaines femmes et certains couples utilisent des jouets sexuels, comme un vibromasseur ou un gode, pour le plaisir vaginal.

Le Kama Sutra - un ancien texte hindou écrit par Vātsyāyana, qui comprend un certain nombre de positions sexuelles - peut également être utilisé pour augmenter le plaisir sexuel, avec un accent particulier sur la satisfaction sexuelle féminine. La plupart des femmes ont besoin d'une stimulation directe du clitoris jusqu'à l'orgasme.

Le clitoris joue un rôle dans la stimulation vaginale.

C'est un organe sexuel de structure multiplanaire contenant une abondance de terminaisons nerveuses, avec une large attache à l'arc pubien et un tissu de soutien étendu aux lèvres.

La recherche indique qu'il forme un amas de tissus avec le vagin.

Ce tissu est peut-être plus étendu chez certaines femmes que chez d'autres, ce qui peut contribuer aux orgasmes ressentis par voie vaginale. Lors de l'excitation sexuelle, et notamment de la stimulation du clitoris, les parois du vagin se lubrifient.

Cela commence après dix à trente secondes d'excitation sexuelle et augmente en quantité plus la femme est excitée.

Il réduit la friction ou les blessures qui peuvent être causées par l'insertion du pénis dans le vagin ou toute autre pénétration du vagin pendant l'activité sexuelle.

Le vagin s'allonge pendant l'excitation et peut continuer à s'allonger en réponse à la pression ; au fur et à mesure que la femme devient complètement excitée, le vagin se dilate en longueur et en largeur, tandis que le col de l'utérus se rétracte.

Avec les deux tiers supérieurs du vagin en expansion et en allongement, l'utérus monte dans le grand bassin et le col de l'utérus est élevé au-dessus du plancher vaginal, ce qui entraîne une tente du plan médio-vaginal.

C'est ce qu'on appelle l'effet de tente ou de montgolfière.

Lorsque les parois élastiques du vagin s'étirent ou se contractent, avec le soutien des muscles pelviens, pour s'enrouler autour du pénis inséré (ou d'un autre objet), cela crée une friction pour le pénis et aide à provoquer l'orgasme et l'éjaculation chez l'homme, ce qui en son tour permet la fécondation. Une zone du vagin qui peut être une zone érogène est le point G.

Il est généralement défini comme étant situé sur la paroi antérieure du vagin, à quelques centimètres de l'entrée, et certaines femmes éprouvent un plaisir intense, et parfois un orgasme, si cette zone est stimulée pendant l'activité sexuelle.

Un orgasme du point G peut être responsable de l'éjaculation féminine, amenant certains médecins et chercheurs à croire que le plaisir du point G provient des glandes de Skene, un homologue féminin de la prostate, plutôt que d'un point particulier sur la paroi vaginale ; d'autres chercheurs considèrent que la connexion entre les glandes de Skene et la zone du point G est faible.

L'existence du point G (et son existence en tant que structure distincte) est toujours contestée car les rapports sur son emplacement peuvent varier d'une femme à l'autre, il semble être inexistant chez certaines femmes et on suppose qu'il s'agit d'une extension du clitoris et donc la raison des orgasmes vécus par voie vaginale.


=== Accouchement ===


Le vagin est le canal de naissance pour l'accouchement d'un bébé.

À l'approche du travail (un processus physiologique précédant l'accouchement), plusieurs signes peuvent survenir, notamment des pertes vaginales et la rupture des membranes (rupture de l'eau) pouvant entraîner un jaillissement de liquide amniotique ou un écoulement irrégulier ou faible de liquide du vagin.

La rupture de l'eau se produit le plus souvent pendant le travail; cependant, cela peut se produire avant le travail (appelé rupture prématurée des membranes) et cela se produit dans 10% des cas.

Les contractions de Braxton Hicks sont également un signe d'approche du travail, mais toutes les femmes ne les remarquent pas.

Chez les femmes qui accouchent pour la première fois, les contractions de Braxton Hicks sont confondues avec des contractions réelles et sont généralement très fortes dans les jours précédant le travail. Alors que le corps se prépare à l'accouchement, le col de l'utérus se ramollit, s'amincit, avance pour faire face à l'avant , et commence à s'ouvrir.

Cela permet au fœtus de s'installer ou de "tomber" dans le bassin.

Au fur et à mesure que le fœtus s'installe dans le bassin, des douleurs des nerfs sciatiques, une augmentation des pertes vaginales et une augmentation de la fréquence urinaire peuvent survenir.

Bien que ces symptômes soient plus susceptibles de se produire après le début du travail chez les femmes qui ont déjà accouché, ils peuvent survenir dix à quatorze jours avant le travail chez les femmes qui accouchent pour la première fois. Le fœtus commence à perdre le soutien du col de l'utérus lorsque les contractions commencent .

Avec une dilatation cervicale atteignant un diamètre de plus de 10 cm (4 po) pour accueillir la tête du fœtus, la tête se déplace de l'utérus vers le vagin.

L'élasticité du vagin lui permet de s'étirer jusqu'à plusieurs fois son diamètre normal afin de mettre au monde l'enfant. Les accouchements vaginaux sont plus fréquents, mais s'il existe un risque de complications, une césarienne (césarienne) peut être pratiquée.

La muqueuse vaginale présente une accumulation anormale de liquide (oedémateux) et est fine, avec peu de rugosités, peu après la naissance.

La muqueuse s'épaissit et les rugosités reviennent en environ trois semaines une fois que les ovaires retrouvent leur fonction habituelle et que le flux d'œstrogène est rétabli.

L'ouverture vaginale est bâilleuse et détendue, jusqu'à ce qu'elle revienne à son état pré-grossissant approximatif six à huit semaines après l'accouchement, connue sous le nom de période post-partum ; cependant, le vagin continuera d'être plus gros qu'auparavant. Après l'accouchement, il y a une phase de pertes vaginales appelées lochies qui peuvent varier considérablement en termes de perte et de durée, mais qui peuvent durer jusqu'à six semaines. .


=== Microbiote vaginal ===


La flore vaginale est un écosystème complexe qui évolue tout au long de la vie, de la naissance à la ménopause.

Le microbiote vaginal réside dans et sur la couche la plus externe de l'épithélium vaginal.

Ce microbiome se compose d'espèces et de genres qui ne provoquent généralement pas de symptômes ou d'infections chez les femmes ayant une immunité normale.

Le microbiome vaginal est dominé par les espèces de Lactobacillus.

Ces espèces métabolisent le glycogène, le décomposant en sucre.

Les lactobacilles métabolisent le sucre en glucose et en acide lactique.

Sous l'influence d'hormones telles que l'œstrogène, la progestérone et l'hormone folliculo-stimulante (FSH), l'écosystème vaginal subit des changements cycliques ou périodiques.


== Signification clinique ==



=== Examens pelviens ===


La santé vaginale peut être évaluée lors d'un examen pelvien, ainsi que la santé de la plupart des organes du système reproducteur féminin.

Ces examens peuvent inclure le test Pap (ou frottis cervical).

Aux États-Unis, le dépistage par test Pap est recommandé à partir de 21 ans environ jusqu'à 65 ans.

Cependant, d'autres pays ne recommandent pas le test Pap chez les femmes non sexuellement actives.

Les lignes directrices sur la fréquence varient de tous les trois à cinq ans.

L'examen pelvien de routine chez les femmes adultes qui ne sont pas enceintes et qui ne présentent pas de symptômes peut être plus nocif que bénéfique.

Une constatation normale lors de l'examen pelvien d'une femme enceinte est une teinte bleuâtre de la paroi vaginale. Les examens pelviens sont le plus souvent effectués lorsqu'il y a des symptômes inexpliqués de pertes, de douleurs, de saignements inattendus ou de problèmes urinaires.

Lors d'un examen pelvien, l'ouverture vaginale est évaluée pour la position, la symétrie, la présence de l'hymen et la forme.

Le vagin est examiné en interne par l'examinateur avec des doigts gantés, avant l'insertion du spéculum, pour noter la présence de toute faiblesse, masse ou nodule.

L'inflammation et la décharge sont notées si elles sont présentes.

Pendant ce temps, les glandes de Skene et de Bartolin sont palpées pour identifier des anomalies dans ces structures.

Une fois l'examen digital du vagin terminé, le spéculum, un instrument permettant de visualiser les structures internes, est soigneusement inséré pour rendre le col visible.

L'examen du vagin peut également être effectué lors d'une fouille des cavités. Des lacérations ou d'autres blessures au vagin peuvent survenir lors d'agressions sexuelles ou d'autres abus sexuels.

Il peut s'agir de déchirures, d'ecchymoses, d'inflammations et d'abrasions.

L'agression sexuelle avec des objets peut endommager le vagin et l'examen aux rayons X peut révéler la présence d'objets étrangers.

Si le consentement est donné, un examen pelvien fait partie de l'évaluation de l'agression sexuelle.

Des examens pelviens sont également effectués pendant la grossesse, et les femmes ayant des grossesses à haut risque subissent des examens plus souvent.


=== Médicaments ===

L'administration intravaginale est une voie d'administration où le médicament est inséré dans le vagin sous forme de crème ou de comprimé.

Sur le plan pharmacologique, cela présente l'avantage potentiel de favoriser les effets thérapeutiques principalement dans le vagin ou les structures voisines (telles que la partie vaginale du col de l'utérus) avec des effets indésirables systémiques limités par rapport aux autres voies d'administration.

Les médicaments utilisés pour faire mûrir le col de l'utérus et induire le travail sont couramment administrés par cette voie, tout comme les œstrogènes, les agents contraceptifs, le propranolol et les antifongiques.

Les anneaux vaginaux peuvent également être utilisés pour administrer des médicaments, y compris le contrôle des naissances dans les anneaux vaginaux contraceptifs.

Ceux-ci sont insérés dans le vagin et fournissent des niveaux de médicament continus, faibles et constants dans le vagin et dans tout le corps. Avant que le bébé ne sorte de l'utérus, une injection pour le contrôle de la douleur pendant l'accouchement peut être administrée à travers la paroi vaginale et près du pudendal nerf.

Parce que le nerf pudendal transporte des fibres motrices et sensorielles qui innervent les muscles pelviens, un bloc du nerf pudendal soulage la douleur à la naissance.

Le médicament ne nuit pas à l'enfant et est sans complications importantes.


=== Infections, maladies et rapports sexuels protégés ===


Les infections ou maladies vaginales comprennent l'infection à levures, la vaginite, les infections sexuellement transmissibles (IST) et le cancer.

Lactobacillus gasseri et d'autres espèces de Lactobacillus de la flore vaginale offrent une certaine protection contre les infections par leur sécrétion de bactériocines et de peroxyde d'hydrogène.

Le vagin sain d'une femme en âge de procréer est acide, avec un pH compris normalement entre 3,8 et 4,5.

Le faible pH interdit la croissance de nombreuses souches de microbes pathogènes.

L'équilibre acide du vagin peut également être affecté par la grossesse, les menstruations, le diabète ou d'autres maladies, les pilules contraceptives, certains antibiotiques, une mauvaise alimentation et le stress (comme le manque de sommeil).

N'importe lequel de ces changements dans l'équilibre acide du vagin peut contribuer à l'infection à levures.

Un pH élevé (supérieur à 4,5) du liquide vaginal peut être causé par une prolifération de bactéries comme dans la vaginose bactérienne ou dans l'infection parasitaire trichomonase, qui ont toutes deux une vaginite comme symptôme.

La flore vaginale peuplée d'un certain nombre de bactéries différentes caractéristiques de la vaginose bactérienne augmente le risque d'issue défavorable de la grossesse.

Lors d'un examen pelvien, des échantillons de sécrétions vaginales peuvent être prélevés pour dépister les infections sexuellement transmissibles ou d'autres infections. Parce que le vagin est autonettoyant, il n'a généralement pas besoin d'hygiène particulière.

Les cliniciens découragent généralement la pratique des douches vaginales pour maintenir la santé vulvo-vaginale.

Étant donné que la flore vaginale protège contre les maladies, une perturbation de cet équilibre peut entraîner une infection et un écoulement anormal.

Les pertes vaginales peuvent indiquer une infection vaginale par la couleur et l'odeur, ou les symptômes de pertes qui en résultent, tels qu'une irritation ou une sensation de brûlure.

Des pertes vaginales anormales peuvent être causées par des IST, le diabète, des douches vaginales, des savons parfumés, des bains moussants, des pilules contraceptives, une infection à levures (généralement due à l'utilisation d'antibiotiques) ou une autre forme de vaginite.

Alors que la vaginite est une inflammation du vagin et est attribuée à une infection, à des problèmes hormonaux ou à des irritants, le vaginisme est un resserrement involontaire des muscles du vagin pendant la pénétration vaginale qui est causé par un réflexe conditionné ou une maladie.

Les pertes vaginales dues à une infection à levures sont généralement épaisses, de couleur crémeuse et inodores, tandis que les pertes dues à la vaginose bactérienne sont de couleur gris-blanc et les pertes dues à la trichomonase sont généralement de couleur grise, de consistance fine et ont une odeur de poisson.

La décharge dans 25 % des cas de trichomonase est jaune-vert. Le VIH/SIDA, le virus du papillome humain (VPH), l'herpès génital et la trichomonase sont des IST qui peuvent affecter le vagin, et les sources de santé recommandent des pratiques sexuelles sûres (ou méthode de barrière) pour prévenir la transmission de ces IST et d'autres IST.

Les rapports sexuels protégés impliquent généralement l'utilisation de préservatifs, et parfois de préservatifs féminins (qui donnent aux femmes plus de contrôle).

Les deux types peuvent aider à éviter une grossesse en empêchant le sperme d'entrer en contact avec le vagin.

Il existe cependant peu de recherches pour savoir si les préservatifs féminins sont aussi efficaces que les préservatifs masculins pour prévenir les IST, et ils sont légèrement moins efficaces que les préservatifs masculins pour prévenir la grossesse, ce qui peut être dû au fait que le préservatif féminin est moins serré que le préservatif masculin ou parce que il peut se glisser dans le vagin et répandre du sperme. Les ganglions lymphatiques vaginaux emprisonnent souvent les cellules cancéreuses qui proviennent du vagin.

Ces nœuds peuvent être évalués pour la présence de la maladie.

L'ablation chirurgicale sélective (plutôt que l'ablation totale et plus invasive) des ganglions lymphatiques vaginaux réduit le risque de complications qui peuvent accompagner des chirurgies plus radicales.

Ces ganglions sélectifs agissent comme des ganglions lymphatiques sentinelles.

Au lieu d'une intervention chirurgicale, les ganglions lymphatiques concernés sont parfois traités par radiothérapie administrée aux ganglions lymphatiques pelviens, inguinaux ou les deux. Le cancer du vagin et le cancer de la vulve sont très rares et touchent principalement les femmes âgées.

Le cancer du col de l'utérus (qui est relativement courant) augmente le risque de cancer du vagin, c'est pourquoi il existe un risque important que le cancer du vagin survienne en même temps que le cancer du col de l'utérus ou après.

Il se peut que leurs causes soient les mêmes.

Le cancer du col de l'utérus peut être prévenu par le dépistage par test de Pap et les vaccins contre le VPH, mais les vaccins contre le VPH ne couvrent que les types de VPH 16 et 18, la cause de 70 % des cancers du col de l'utérus.

Certains symptômes du cancer du col de l'utérus et du vagin sont la dyspareunie et des saignements vaginaux anormaux ou des pertes vaginales, en particulier après des rapports sexuels ou la ménopause.

Cependant, la plupart des cancers du col de l'utérus sont asymptomatiques (ne présentent aucun symptôme).

La curiethérapie vaginale intracavitaire (VBT) est utilisée pour traiter les cancers de l'endomètre, du vagin et du col de l'utérus.

Un applicateur est inséré dans le vagin pour permettre l'administration du rayonnement aussi près que possible du site du cancer.

Les taux de survie augmentent avec la VBT par rapport à la radiothérapie externe.

En utilisant le vagin pour placer l'émetteur le plus près possible de la croissance cancéreuse, les effets systémiques de la radiothérapie sont réduits et les taux de guérison du cancer du vagin sont plus élevés.

La recherche n'est pas claire quant à savoir si le traitement du cancer du col de l'utérus par radiothérapie augmente le risque de cancer du vagin.


=== Effets du vieillissement et de l'accouchement ===

L'âge et les niveaux d'hormones sont significativement corrélés avec le pH du vagin.

Les œstrogènes, le glycogène et les lactobacilles ont un impact sur ces niveaux.

À la naissance, le vagin est acide avec un pH d'environ 4,5 et cesse d'être acide à l'âge de trois à six semaines, devenant alcalin.

Le pH vaginal moyen est de 7,0 chez les filles prépubères.

Bien qu'il existe un degré élevé de variabilité dans le moment, les filles âgées d'environ sept à douze ans continueront à avoir un développement labial à mesure que l'hymen s'épaissit et que le vagin s'allonge à environ 8 cm.

La muqueuse vaginale s'épaissit et le pH vaginal redevient acide.

Les filles peuvent également avoir des pertes vaginales fines et blanches appelées leucorrhée.

Le microbiote vaginal des adolescentes âgées de 13 à 18 ans est similaire à celui des femmes en âge de procréer, qui ont un pH vaginal moyen de 3,8 à 4,5, mais la recherche n'est pas aussi claire pour savoir s'il en est de même pour les filles préménarchées ou périménarchées.

Le pH vaginal pendant la ménopause est de 6,5 à 7,0 (sans hormonothérapie substitutive) ou de 4,5 à 5,0 avec hormonothérapie substitutive.

Après la ménopause, le corps produit moins d'œstrogène.

Cela provoque une vaginite atrophique (amincissement et inflammation des parois vaginales), qui peut entraîner des démangeaisons vaginales, des brûlures, des saignements, des douleurs ou une sécheresse vaginale (diminution de la lubrification).

La sécheresse vaginale peut causer de l'inconfort en soi ou de l'inconfort ou de la douleur lors des rapports sexuels.

Les bouffées de chaleur sont également caractéristiques de la ménopause.

La ménopause affecte également la composition des structures de soutien vaginal.

Les structures vasculaires deviennent moins nombreuses avec l'âge.

Des collagènes spécifiques sont modifiés dans leur composition et leurs proportions.

On pense que l'affaiblissement des structures de soutien du vagin est dû aux changements physiologiques de ce tissu conjonctif. le Femring ou d'autres thérapies de substitution hormonale, mais il existe des risques (y compris des effets indésirables) associés à la thérapie de substitution hormonale.

Les crèmes vaginales et les anneaux vaginaux d'œstrogène peuvent ne pas présenter les mêmes risques que les autres traitements hormonaux de substitution.

L'hormonothérapie substitutive peut traiter la sécheresse vaginale, mais un lubrifiant personnel peut être utilisé pour remédier temporairement à la sécheresse vaginale spécifiquement pour les rapports sexuels.

Certaines femmes ont une augmentation du désir sexuel après la ménopause.

Il se peut que les femmes ménopausées qui continuent à se livrer à une activité sexuelle connaissent régulièrement une lubrification vaginale similaire à celle des femmes qui ne sont pas entrées en ménopause et puissent profiter pleinement des rapports sexuels.

Elles peuvent avoir moins d'atrophie vaginale et moins de problèmes concernant les rapports sexuels. Les changements vaginaux qui surviennent avec le vieillissement et l'accouchement comprennent la redondance muqueuse, l'arrondi de la face postérieure du vagin avec un raccourcissement de la distance entre l'extrémité distale du canal anal et l'ouverture vaginale. , diastasis ou perturbation des muscles pubococcygiens causée par une mauvaise réparation d'une épisiotomie, et bulles pouvant dépasser de la zone de l'ouverture vaginale.

D'autres changements vaginaux liés au vieillissement et à l'accouchement sont l'incontinence urinaire d'effort, la rectocèle et la cystocèle.

Les changements physiques résultant de la grossesse, de l'accouchement et de la ménopause contribuent souvent à l'incontinence urinaire d'effort.

Si une femme a un faible soutien des muscles du plancher pelvien et des lésions tissulaires causées par un accouchement ou une chirurgie pelvienne, un manque d'œstrogène peut affaiblir davantage les muscles pelviens et contribuer à l'incontinence urinaire d'effort.

Le prolapsus des organes pelviens, comme une rectocèle ou une cystocèle, est caractérisé par la descente des organes pelviens de leur position normale pour empiéter sur le vagin.

Une réduction des œstrogènes ne provoque pas de rectocèle, de cystocèle ou de prolapsus utérin, mais l'accouchement et la faiblesse des structures de soutien pelviennes le peuvent.

Un prolapsus peut également survenir lorsque le plancher pelvien est blessé lors d'une hystérectomie, d'un traitement contre le cancer gynécologique ou du levage de charges lourdes.

Les exercices du plancher pelvien tels que les exercices de Kegel peuvent être utilisés pour renforcer les muscles du plancher pelvien, empêchant ou arrêtant la progression du prolapsus.

Il n'y a aucune preuve que faire des exercices de Kegel de manière isotonique ou avec une forme de poids soit supérieur ; les risques liés à l'utilisation de poids sont plus grands puisqu'un objet étranger est introduit dans le vagin. Au cours de la troisième phase du travail, pendant la naissance du nourrisson, le vagin subit des changements importants.

Un jet de sang du vagin peut être vu juste avant la naissance du bébé.

Les lacérations du vagin qui peuvent survenir pendant l'accouchement varient en profondeur, en gravité et en degré d'atteinte des tissus adjacents.

La lacération peut être si étendue qu'elle implique le rectum et l'anus.

Cet événement peut être particulièrement pénible pour une nouvelle mère.

Lorsque cela se produit, une incontinence fécale se développe et les selles peuvent sortir par le vagin.

Près de 85 % des accouchements vaginaux spontanés développent une forme de déchirure.

Parmi ceux-ci, 60 à 70% nécessitent une suture.

Les lacérations dues au travail ne se produisent pas toujours.


=== Chirurgie ===

Le vagin, y compris l'ouverture vaginale, peut être altéré à la suite d'interventions chirurgicales telles qu'une épisiotomie, une vaginectomie, une vaginoplastie ou une labiaplastie.

Celles qui subissent une vaginoplastie sont généralement plus âgées et ont accouché.

Un examen approfondi du vagin avant une vaginoplastie est standard, ainsi qu'une référence à un urogynécologue pour diagnostiquer d'éventuels troubles vaginaux.

En ce qui concerne la labiaplastie, la réduction des petites lèvres est rapide et sans entrave, les complications sont mineures et rares, et peuvent être corrigées.

Toute cicatrisation de la procédure est minime et les problèmes à long terme n'ont pas été identifiés. Au cours d'une épisiotomie, une incision chirurgicale est pratiquée au cours de la deuxième étape du travail pour agrandir l'ouverture vaginale pour le passage du bébé.

Bien que son utilisation de routine ne soit plus recommandée et que l'absence d'épisiotomie donne de meilleurs résultats qu'une épisiotomie, il s'agit de l'une des procédures médicales les plus courantes pratiquées sur les femmes.

L'incision est faite à travers la peau, l'épithélium vaginal, la graisse sous-cutanée, le corps périnéal et le muscle périnéal transverse superficiel et s'étend du vagin à l'anus.

Les épisiotomies peuvent être douloureuses après l'accouchement.

Les femmes signalent souvent des douleurs pendant les rapports sexuels jusqu'à trois mois après la réparation d'une lacération ou une épisiotomie.

Certaines techniques chirurgicales entraînent moins de douleur que d'autres.

Les deux types d'épisiotomies réalisées sont l'incision médiale et l'incision médio-latérale.

L'incision médiane est une coupe perpendiculaire entre le vagin et l'anus et est la plus courante.

L'incision médio-latérale est faite entre le vagin à un angle et n'est pas aussi susceptible de se déchirer jusqu'à l'anus.

La coupe médio-latérale prend plus de temps à guérir que la coupe médiane. La vaginectomie est une intervention chirurgicale visant à retirer tout ou partie du vagin et est généralement utilisée pour traiter une tumeur maligne.

L'ablation de tout ou partie des organes reproducteurs et des organes génitaux peut endommager les nerfs et laisser des cicatrices ou des adhérences.

La fonction sexuelle peut également être altérée en conséquence, comme dans le cas de certaines chirurgies du cancer du col de l'utérus.

Ces chirurgies peuvent avoir un impact sur la douleur, l'élasticité, la lubrification vaginale et l'excitation sexuelle.

Cela se résout souvent après un an, mais peut prendre plus de temps. Les femmes, en particulier celles qui sont plus âgées et qui ont eu plusieurs naissances, peuvent choisir de corriger chirurgicalement la laxité vaginale.

Cette chirurgie a été décrite comme un resserrement vaginal ou un rajeunissement.

Bien qu'une femme puisse ressentir une amélioration de l'image de soi et du plaisir sexuel en subissant un resserrement ou un rajeunissement vaginal, il existe des risques associés aux procédures, notamment une infection, un rétrécissement de l'ouverture vaginale, un resserrement insuffisant, une diminution de la fonction sexuelle (comme des douleurs pendant les rapports sexuels). rapport sexuel) et la fistule recto-vaginale.

Les femmes qui subissent cette procédure peuvent sans le savoir avoir un problème médical, tel qu'un prolapsus, et une tentative de correction est également faite pendant la chirurgie. La chirurgie du vagin peut être élective ou cosmétique.

Les femmes qui recherchent la chirurgie esthétique peuvent avoir des conditions congénitales, un inconfort physique ou souhaiter modifier l'apparence de leurs organes génitaux.

Les préoccupations concernant l'apparence ou les mesures génitales moyennes sont largement indisponibles et rendent difficile la définition d'un résultat réussi pour une telle chirurgie.

Un certain nombre de chirurgies de changement de sexe sont disponibles pour les personnes transgenres.

Bien que toutes les conditions intersexuées ne nécessitent pas un traitement chirurgical, certaines choisissent la chirurgie génitale pour corriger des conditions anatomiques atypiques.


=== Anomalies et autres problèmes de santé ===


Les anomalies vaginales sont des défauts qui se traduisent par un vagin anormal ou absent.

L'anomalie vaginale obstructive la plus courante est un hymen imperforé, une condition dans laquelle l'hymen obstrue le flux menstruel ou d'autres sécrétions vaginales.

Une autre anomalie vaginale est une cloison vaginale transversale, qui obstrue partiellement ou complètement le canal vaginal.

La cause précise d'une obstruction doit être déterminée avant sa réparation, car la chirurgie corrective diffère selon la cause.

Dans certains cas, tels que l'agénésie vaginale isolée, les organes génitaux externes peuvent sembler normaux. Des ouvertures anormales appelées fistules peuvent faire pénétrer l'urine ou les matières fécales dans le vagin, entraînant une incontinence.

Le vagin est sensible à la formation de fistules en raison de sa proximité avec les voies urinaires et gastro-intestinales.

Les causes spécifiques sont multiples et comprennent le travail dystocique, l'hystérectomie, la malignité, la radiothérapie, l'épisiotomie et les troubles intestinaux.

Un petit nombre de fistules vaginales sont congénitales.

Diverses méthodes chirurgicales sont employées pour réparer les fistules.

Non traitées, les fistules peuvent entraîner une invalidité importante et avoir un impact profond sur la qualité de vie. L'éviscération vaginale est une complication grave d'une hystérectomie vaginale et survient lorsque la manchette vaginale se rompt, permettant à l'intestin grêle de sortir du vagin. Les kystes peuvent également affecter le vagin.

Divers types de kystes vaginaux peuvent se développer à la surface de l'épithélium vaginal ou dans les couches plus profondes du vagin et peuvent atteindre 7 cm.

Souvent, il s'agit d'une découverte fortuite lors d'un examen pelvien de routine.

Les kystes vaginaux peuvent imiter d'autres structures qui dépassent du vagin telles qu'une rectocèle et une cystocèle.

Les kystes qui peuvent être présents comprennent les kystes de Müller, les kystes du canal de Gartner et les kystes épidermoïdes.

Un kyste vaginal est plus susceptible de se développer chez les femmes âgées de 30 à 40 ans.

On estime qu'une femme sur 200 a un kyste vaginal.

Le kyste de Bartholin est d'origine vulvaire plutôt que vaginale, mais il se présente comme une masse à l'ouverture vaginale.

Il est plus fréquent chez les jeunes femmes et est généralement asymptomatique, mais il peut provoquer des douleurs si un abcès se forme, bloquer l'entrée du vestibule vulvaire s'il est volumineux et gêner la marche ou provoquer des rapports sexuels douloureux.


== Société et culture ==



=== Perceptions, symbolisme et vulgarité ===


Diverses perceptions du vagin ont existé à travers l'histoire, y compris la croyance qu'il est le centre du désir sexuel, une métaphore de la vie via la naissance, inférieur au pénis, désagréable à voir ou à sentir, ou vulgaire.

Ces opinions peuvent en grande partie être attribuées aux différences entre les sexes et à la manière dont elles sont interprétées.

David Buss, un psychologue évolutionniste, a déclaré que parce qu'un pénis est nettement plus gros qu'un clitoris et qu'il est facilement visible alors que le vagin ne l'est pas, et que les hommes urinent à travers le pénis, les garçons apprennent dès l'enfance à toucher leur pénis tandis que les filles apprennent souvent que ils ne doivent pas toucher leurs propres organes génitaux, ce qui implique qu'il y a un mal à le faire.

Buss a attribué cela à la raison pour laquelle de nombreuses femmes ne connaissent pas aussi bien leurs organes génitaux, et que les chercheurs supposent que ces différences sexuelles expliquent pourquoi les garçons apprennent à se masturber avant les filles et le font plus souvent. Le mot vagin est généralement évité dans les conversations, et de nombreuses personnes sont confus au sujet de l'anatomie du vagin et peut ignorer qu'il n'est pas utilisé pour uriner.

Ceci est exacerbé par des phrases telles que "les garçons ont un pénis, les filles ont un vagin", ce qui fait croire aux enfants que les filles ont un orifice dans la région pelvienne.

L'auteure Hilda Hutcherson a déclaré : "Parce que de nombreuses [femmes] ont été conditionnées depuis l'enfance par des signaux verbaux et non verbaux à penser que [leurs] organes génitaux sont laids, malodorants et impurs, [elles] ne sont pas capables de profiter pleinement des rencontres intimes" à cause de peur que leur partenaire n'aime pas la vue, l'odeur ou le goût de leurs organes génitaux.

Elle a fait valoir que les femmes, contrairement aux hommes, n'avaient pas d'expériences dans les vestiaires à l'école où elles se comparaient les organes génitaux, ce qui est l'une des raisons pour lesquelles tant de femmes se demandent si leurs organes génitaux sont normaux.

La chercheuse Catherine Blackledge a déclaré qu'avoir un vagin signifiait qu'elle serait généralement moins bien traitée que ses homologues sans vagin et soumise à des inégalités (telles que l'inégalité d'emploi), qu'elle a classées comme étant traitées comme une citoyenne de seconde zone.

Les opinions négatives sur le vagin sont simultanément contrastées par des opinions selon lesquelles il est un symbole puissant de la sexualité, de la spiritualité ou de la vie féminine.

L'auteur Denise Linn a déclaré que le vagin "est un puissant symbole de féminité, d'ouverture, d'acceptation et de réceptivité.

C'est l'esprit de la vallée intérieure." Sigmund Freud a accordé une valeur significative au vagin, postulant le concept que l'orgasme vaginal est séparé de l'orgasme clitoridien, et que, à la puberté, la réponse appropriée des femmes matures est un passage aux orgasmes vaginaux (c'est-à-dire orgasmes sans aucune stimulation clitoridienne).

Cette théorie a fait que de nombreuses femmes se sentaient inadéquates, car la majorité des femmes ne peuvent pas atteindre l'orgasme via des rapports vaginaux seuls.

En ce qui concerne la religion, l'utérus représente un symbole puissant comme le yoni dans l'hindouisme qui représente "la puissance féminine", et cela peut indiquer la valeur que la société hindoue a donnée à la sexualité féminine et à la capacité du vagin à donner la vie ; cependant, yoni en tant que représentation de "utérus" n'est pas la dénotation principale. Alors que, dans les temps anciens, le vagin était souvent considéré comme équivalent (homologue) au pénis, avec les anatomistes Galien (129 après JC - 200 après JC) et Vésale (1514- 1564) considérant les organes comme structurellement identiques à l'exception du vagin qui est inversé, des études anatomiques au cours des derniers siècles ont montré que le clitoris était l'équivalent du pénis.

Une autre perception du vagin était que la libération de sécrétions vaginales guérirait ou remédierait à un certain nombre de maux; diverses méthodes ont été utilisées au cours des siècles pour libérer la «semence femelle» (via la lubrification vaginale ou l'éjaculation féminine) comme traitement de la suffocatio ex semine retento (suffocation de l'utérus, lit. «suffocation par la graine retenue»), la maladie verte et peut-être pour l'hystérie féminine.

Les méthodes de traitement signalées comprenaient une sage-femme frottant les parois du vagin ou l'insertion du pénis ou d'objets en forme de pénis dans le vagin.

Les symptômes du diagnostic d'hystérie féminine - un concept qui n'est plus reconnu par les autorités médicales comme un trouble médical - comprenaient l'évanouissement, la nervosité, l'insomnie, la rétention d'eau, la lourdeur de l'abdomen, les spasmes musculaires, l'essoufflement, l'irritabilité, la perte d'appétit pour la nourriture ou le sexe, et une propension à causer des ennuis.

Il se peut que les femmes considérées comme souffrant d'hystérie féminine subissent parfois un "massage pelvien" - une stimulation des organes génitaux par le médecin jusqu'à ce que la femme subisse un "paroxysme hystérique" (c'est-à-dire un orgasme).

Dans ce cas, le paroxysme était considéré comme un traitement médical et non comme une libération sexuelle. Le vagin et la vulve ont reçu de nombreux noms vulgaires, dont trois sont chatte, chatte et chatte.

Cunt est également utilisé comme épithète péjorative faisant référence aux personnes des deux sexes.

Cet usage est relativement récent, datant de la fin du XIXe siècle.

Reflétant différents usages nationaux, la chatte est décrite comme "une personne désagréable ou stupide" dans le Compact Oxford English Dictionary , alors que le Merriam-Webster utilise le terme comme "généralement dénigrant et obscène: femme", notant qu'il est utilisé dans aux États-Unis comme "une manière offensante de désigner une femme".

Random House le définit comme "un homme méprisable, méprisable ou insensé".

Certaines féministes des années 1970 ont cherché à éliminer les termes désobligeants tels que chatte.

Twat est largement utilisé comme épithète désobligeante, en particulier en anglais britannique, faisant référence à une personne considérée comme odieuse ou stupide.

La chatte peut indiquer "la lâcheté ou la faiblesse", et "la vulve ou le vagin humain" ou par extension "un rapport sexuel avec une femme".

En anglais contemporain, l'utilisation du mot pussy pour désigner les femmes est considérée comme désobligeante ou dégradante, traitant les gens comme des objets sexuels.


=== Dans la littérature et l'art contemporains ===


Le vagin loquens, ou « vagin qui parle », est une tradition importante dans la littérature et l'art, remontant aux anciens motifs folkloriques de la « chatte qui parle ».

Ces contes impliquent généralement des vagins parlant sous l'effet de la magie ou des charmes, et admettant souvent leur manque de chasteté.

D'autres contes populaires racontent que le vagin a des dents - vagina dentata (latin pour "vagin denté").

Celles-ci impliquent que les rapports sexuels peuvent entraîner des blessures, une émasculation ou une castration pour l'homme impliqué.

Ces histoires étaient fréquemment racontées comme des récits édifiants mettant en garde contre les dangers des femmes inconnues et décourageant le viol. En 1966, l'artiste française Niki de Saint Phalle a collaboré avec l'artiste dadaïste Jean Tinguely et Per Olof Ultvedt sur une grande installation de sculpture katedral" (également orthographié "Hon-en-Katedrall", qui signifie "elle-une cathédrale") pour le Moderna Museet, à Stockholm, en Suède.

La forme extérieure est une sculpture géante et allongée d'une femme dans laquelle les visiteurs peuvent entrer par une ouverture vaginale de la taille d'une porte entre ses jambes écartées. discours.

Il est composé d'un nombre variable de monologues lus par plusieurs femmes.

Au départ, Ensler a interprété elle-même chaque monologue, avec des performances ultérieures mettant en vedette trois actrices; ces dernières versions présentent une actrice différente pour chaque rôle.

Chacun des monologues traite d'un aspect de l'expérience féminine, abordant des sujets tels que l'activité sexuelle, l'amour, le viol, les menstruations, les mutilations génitales féminines, la masturbation, la naissance, l'orgasme, les différents noms communs du vagin, ou simplement comme un aspect du corps.

Un thème récurrent dans toutes les pièces est le vagin en tant qu'outil d'autonomisation des femmes et incarnation ultime de l'individualité.


=== Influence sur la modification ===


Les opinions sociétales, influencées par la tradition, un manque de connaissances sur l'anatomie ou le sexisme, peuvent avoir un impact significatif sur la décision d'une personne de modifier ses propres organes génitaux ou ceux d'une autre personne.

Les femmes peuvent vouloir modifier leurs organes génitaux (vagin ou vulve) parce qu'elles pensent que son apparence, comme la longueur des petites lèvres recouvrant l'ouverture vaginale, n'est pas normale, ou parce qu'elles souhaitent une ouverture vaginale plus petite ou un vagin plus serré.

Les femmes peuvent vouloir rester jeunes en apparence et en fonction sexuelle.

Ces points de vue sont souvent influencés par les médias, y compris la pornographie, et les femmes peuvent en conséquence avoir une faible estime d'elles-mêmes.

Ils peuvent être gênés d'être nus devant un partenaire sexuel et peuvent insister pour avoir des relations sexuelles avec les lumières éteintes.

Lorsque la chirurgie de modification est pratiquée uniquement pour des raisons esthétiques, elle est souvent mal perçue et certains médecins ont comparé ces chirurgies aux mutilations génitales féminines (MGF). Les mutilations génitales féminines, également appelées circoncision féminine ou excision génitale féminine, sont des avantages pour la santé.

La forme la plus grave est la MGF de type III, qui est l'infibulation et consiste à retirer tout ou partie des lèvres et à fermer le vagin.

Un petit trou est laissé pour le passage de l'urine et du sang menstruel, et le vagin est ouvert pour les rapports sexuels et l'accouchement. au nom des droits de l'homme, déclarant qu'il s'agit « d'une violation des droits fondamentaux des filles et des femmes » et « qu'il reflète une inégalité profondément enracinée entre les sexes ».

Les mutilations génitales féminines ont existé à un moment ou à un autre dans presque toutes les civilisations humaines, le plus souvent pour exercer un contrôle sur le comportement sexuel, y compris la masturbation, des filles et des femmes.

Elle est pratiquée dans plusieurs pays, notamment en Afrique, et dans une moindre mesure dans d'autres parties du Moyen-Orient et de l'Asie du Sud-Est, sur des filles âgées de quelques jours à la mi-adolescence, souvent pour réduire le désir sexuel dans un effort pour préserver virginité vaginale.

Comfort Momoh a déclaré qu'il se peut que les mutilations génitales féminines aient été "pratiquées dans l'Égypte ancienne comme un signe de distinction parmi l'aristocratie"; on rapporte que des traces d'infibulation se trouvent sur des momies égyptiennes. La coutume et la tradition sont les raisons les plus fréquemment citées pour la pratique des mutilations génitales féminines.

Certaines cultures croient que les mutilations génitales féminines font partie de l'initiation d'une fille à l'âge adulte et que ne pas les pratiquer peut perturber la cohésion sociale et politique.

Dans ces sociétés, une fille n'est souvent pas considérée comme une adulte à moins qu'elle n'ait subi l'intervention.


== Autres animaux ==


Le vagin est une structure d'animaux dans laquelle la femelle est fécondée en interne, plutôt que par insémination traumatique utilisée par certains invertébrés.

La forme du vagin varie selon les animaux.

Chez les mammifères placentaires et les marsupiaux, le vagin mène de l'utérus à l'extérieur du corps féminin.

Les marsupiaux femelles ont deux vagins latéraux, qui conduisent à des utérus séparés, mais tous deux s'ouvrent vers l'extérieur par le même orifice; un troisième canal, connu sous le nom de vagin médian, et qui peut être transitoire ou permanent, est utilisé pour la naissance.

La hyène tachetée femelle n'a pas d'ouverture vaginale externe.

Au lieu de cela, le vagin sort par le clitoris, permettant aux femelles d'uriner, de copuler et d'accoucher par le clitoris.

Le vagin du coyote femelle se contracte pendant la copulation, formant un lien copulatoire. Les oiseaux, les monotrèmes et certains reptiles ont une partie de l'oviducte qui mène au cloaque.

Les poulets ont une ouverture vaginale qui s'ouvre à partir de l'apex vertical du cloaque.

Le vagin s'étend vers le haut à partir de l'ouverture et devient l'ovule.

Chez certains poissons sans mâchoires, il n'y a ni oviducte ni vagin et à la place l'œuf se déplace directement à travers la cavité corporelle (et est fécondé de l'extérieur comme chez la plupart des poissons et des amphibiens).

Chez les insectes et autres invertébrés, le vagin peut faire partie de l'oviducte (voir système reproducteur des insectes ).

Les oiseaux ont un cloaque dans lequel se vident l'appareil urinaire, l'appareil reproducteur (vagin) et le tractus gastro-intestinal.

Les femelles de certaines espèces de sauvagine ont développé des structures vaginales appelées sacs sans issue et bobines dans le sens des aiguilles d'une montre pour se protéger de la coercition sexuelle. Un manque de recherche sur le vagin et d'autres organes génitaux féminins, en particulier pour différents animaux, a étouffé les connaissances sur l'anatomie sexuelle féminine.

Une explication de la raison pour laquelle les organes génitaux masculins sont davantage étudiés est que les pénis sont beaucoup plus simples à analyser que les cavités génitales féminines, car les organes génitaux masculins dépassent généralement et sont donc plus faciles à évaluer et à mesurer.

En revanche, les organes génitaux féminins sont plus souvent cachés et nécessitent plus de dissection, ce qui nécessite plus de temps.

Une autre explication est qu'une fonction principale du pénis est d'imprégner, tandis que les organes génitaux féminins peuvent changer de forme lors de l'interaction avec les organes masculins, en particulier pour favoriser ou entraver le succès de la reproduction. Les primates non humains sont des modèles optimaux pour la recherche biomédicale humaine parce que les humains et les non -les primates humains partagent des caractéristiques physiologiques à la suite de l'évolution.

Bien que les menstruations soient fortement associées aux femmes humaines et qu'elles aient les menstruations les plus prononcées, elles sont également typiques des parents des singes et des singes.

Les macaques femelles ont leurs règles, avec une durée de cycle au cours d'une vie comparable à celle des femmes humaines.

Les œstrogènes et les progestatifs dans les cycles menstruels et pendant la préménarche et la postménopause sont également similaires chez les femmes humaines et les macaques; cependant, ce n'est que chez les macaques que la kératinisation de l'épithélium se produit pendant la phase folliculaire.

Le pH vaginal des macaques diffère également, avec des valeurs médianes quasi neutres à légèrement alcalines et est très variable, ce qui peut être dû à son absence de lactobacilles dans la flore vaginale.

C'est l'une des raisons pour lesquelles, bien que les macaques soient utilisés pour étudier la transmission du VIH et tester les microbicides, les modèles animaux ne sont pas souvent utilisés dans l'étude des infections sexuellement transmissibles, telles que la trichomonase.

Une autre est que les causes de ces conditions sont inextricablement liées à la constitution génétique humaine, ce qui rend les résultats d'autres espèces difficiles à appliquer aux humains.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vagin
